Myth in Primitive Psychology (Bronislaw Malinowski, 1926)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (archive.org/details/rcin.org.pl.WA004_20187_U6900_Malinowski-Myth_31582). Malinowski's functionalist charter of myth - myth as the charter of belief and social order among the Trobrianders.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

PSYCHE MINIATURES 
General Series No. 6 

MYTH 
IN 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PSYCHE MINIATURES 
Each 2/6 Net 

MEDICAL SERIES 

Migraine . G. Crookshank, M.D., F.R.C.P. 
Aphasia S. ae Wilson, M.D., F.R.C.P. 
Rheumatic Diseases M. B. Ray, D.S.O., M.D. 
*The Troubled Conscience Professor C. Blondel 

*Types of Mind and Body E. Miller, M.B.,M.R.C.S.,D.P.M. 
* Dermatological Neurone 
W. J. O'Donovan, C.B.E., M.D., M.R.C.P. 

*Tics—Mental and Physical A. F. Hurst, M.D., F.R.C.P. 
*The Intelligence of the Normal Child Professor Réné Cruchet 
*Idiosyncrasies Sir Humphry Rolleston, Bt., K.C.B., F.R.C.P. 

GENERAL 

Science and Poetry I. A. Richards 
Over-Population P. Sargant Florence 
Man Not A Machine Eugenio Rignano 
The Hunter in Our Midst R. Lowe Thompson 
Fee, Fi, Fo, Fum H.J. ingham 
Myth in Primitive: Psychology B. Malinowski 
*Economics and Social Psychology P. Sargant Florence 
*The Alchemy of Light and Colour Oliver L. Reiser 
*The Father in Primitive Psychology B. Malinowski 
*The Literary Uses of Type Adelyne More 
*The Mind of a Chimpanzee C. K. Ogden 

* In preparation 

PUBLISHED IN CONNECTION WITH 

PSYCHE 

A QUARTERLY JOURNAL OF GENERAL AND 
APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY 

http://rcin.org.pl 

6900 
MYTH 

IN 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

BY 

BRONISLAW_ MALINOWSKI 
Ph.D., D.Sc. 

Reader in Social Anthropology in the 
University of London 

Author of 
‘* The Father in Primitive Psychology "’ 

L+A23264 

LONDON: 

KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co. Ltd. 
BROADWAY HOUSE, CARTER LANE, E.C. 
1926 

http://rcin.org.pl 

Se 
~ Rr À 
f. 
a 

\ o> ut. 
$ CON 4 

a neal 

U.6900 

Printed in Great Britain by 
R. I. SEVERS, CAMBRIDGE. 

http://rcin.org.pl 

DEDICATION 
TO SIR JAMES FRAZER 

If I had the power of evoking the past, 
I should like to lead you back some 
twenty years to an old Slavonic uni- 
versity town—I mean the town of 
Cracow, the ancient capital of Poland 
and the seat of the oldest university in 
eastern Europe. I could then show 
you a student leaving the medieval 
college buildings, obviously im some 
distress of mind, hugging, however, under 
his arm, as the only solace of his troubles, 
three green volumes with the well-known 
golden imprint, a beautiful conventiona- 
lized design of mistletoe—the symbol of 
“The Golden Bough’. 

I had just then been ordered to 
abandon for a time my physical and 
chemical research because of ill-health, 
but I was allowed to follow up a favourite 
side-line of study, and I decided to make 

5 

http://rcin.org.pl 

DEDICATION 

my first attempt to read an English 
masterpiece in the original. Perhaps 
my mental distress would have been 
lessened, had I been allowed to look into 
the future and to foresee the present 
occasion, on which I have the great 
privilege of delivering an address in 
honour of Sir James Frazer to a 
distinguished audience, in the language 
of ‘ The Golden Bough’ itself. 

For no sooner had I begun to read 
this great work, than I became immersed 
in it and enslaved by it. I realized 
then that anthropology, as presented by 
Sir James Frazer, is a great science, 
worthy of as much devotion as any of 
her elder and more exact sister-studtes, and 
I became bound to the service of Frazerian 
anthropology. 

We are gathered here to celebrate the 
annual totemic festival of ‘The Golden 
Bough’; to revive and strengthen the 
bonds of anthropological union; to 
commune with the source and symbol 
of our anthropological interest and 
affection. I am but your humble spokes- 

6 

http://rcin.org.pl 

DEDICATION 

man, in expressing our joint admiration 
to the great writer and his classical 
works ; ‘The Golden Bough’, ‘ Totemism 
and Exogamy’, ‘ Folklore in the Old 
Testament’, ‘ Psyche’s Task’, and 
‘The Belief in Immortality’. As a 
true officiating magician in a savage 
tribe would have to do, I have to recite 
the whole list, so that the spirit of the 
works (their ‘ mana’) may dwell among 
us. 
In all this, my task is pleasant and in a 
way easy, for implicit in whatever I 
may say is a tribute to him, whom I 
have always regarded as the ‘ Master’. 
On the other hand this very circumstance 
also makes my task difficult, for having 
received so much, I fear I may not have 
enough to show in return. I have 
therefore decided to keep my peace even 
while I am addressing you—to let 
another one speak through my mouth, 
another one who has been to Sir James 
Frazer an inspiration and a lifelong 
friend, as Sir James has been to us. 
This other one, I need hardly tell you, 

7 

http://rcin.org.pl 

DEDICATION 

is the modern representative of primitive 
man, the contemporary savage, whose 
thoughts, whose feelings, whose very 
life-breath pervades all that Frazer has 
written. 

In other words, I shall not try to serve 
up any theories of my own, but instead 
I shall lay before you some results of my 
anthropological field-work, carried out 
in northwest Melanesia. I shall re- 
strict myself, moreover, to a subject upon 
which Sir James Frazer has not directly 
concentrated his attention, but in which, 
as I shall try to show you, his influence 
is as fruitful as in those many subjects 
that he has made his own. 

[The above formed the opening passages 
of an address delivered in honour of Sir James 
Frazer at the University of Liverpool, in 
November, 1925.] 

http://rcin.org.pl 

I 

II 

CONTENTS 

PAGE 

THE Rote oF MYTH IN 
LIFE . 3 : 5 Aah eo 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN š +, AG 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND THE 
RECURRENT CYCLE OF LIFE 80 

Mytus oF MAGIC $ E iay 

CONCLUSION ; 5 T a8 

9 

http://rcin.org.pl 

I 
THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

By the examination of a typical 
Melanesian culture and by a survey 
of the opinions, traditions, and 
behaviour of these natives, I propose 
to show how deeply the sacred tradition, 
the myth, enters into their pursuits, 
and how strongly it controls their 
moral and social behaviour. In other 
words, the thesis of the present work 
is that an intimate connection exists 
between the word, the mythos, the . 
sacred tales of a tribe, on the one hand, 
and their ritual acts, their moral deeds, 
their social organization, and even 
their practical activities, on the other. 

In order to gain a background for 
our description of the Melanesian facts, 
I shall briefly summarize the present 
state of the science of mythology. 

II 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Even a superficial survey of the 
literature would reveal that there is no 
monotony to complain of as regards the 
variety of opinions or the acrimony of 
polemics. To take only the recent 
up-to-date theories advanced in 
explanation of the nature of myth, 
legend, and fairy-tale, we should have 
to head the list, at least as regards 
output and self-assertion, by the so- 
called school of Nature-mythology 
which flourishes mainly in Germany. 
The writers of this school maintain 
that primitive man is highly interested 
' in natural phenomena, and that his 
interest is predominantly of a theoreti- 
cal, contemplative, and poetical 
character. In trying to express and 
interpret the phases of the moon, or 
the regular and yet changing path of 
the sun across the skies, primitive man 
constructs symbolic personified rhapso- 
dies. To writers of this school every 
myth possesses as its kernel or ultimate 
reality some natural phenomenon or 
' other, elaborately woven into a tale 

I2 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

to an extent which sometimes almost 
masks and obliterates it. There is not 
much agreement among these students 
as to what type of natural phenomenon 
lies at the bottom of most mythological 
productions. There are extreme lunar 
mythologists so completely moonstruck 
with their idea that they will not admit 
that any other phenomenon could lend 
itself to a savage rhapsodic interpreta- 
tion except that of earth’s nocturnal 
satellite. The Society for the Com- 
parative Study of Myth, founded in 
Berlin in 1906, and counting among 
its supporters such famous scholars as 
Ehrenreich, Siecke, Winckler, and many 
others, carried on their business under 
the sign of the moon. Others, like 
Frobenius for instance, regard the sun 
as the only subject around which 
primitive man has spun his symbolic 
tales. Then there is the school of 
meteorological interpreters who regard 
wind, weather, and colours of the skies 
as the essence of myth. To this 
belonged such well-known writers of 

13 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

the older generation as Max Miiller and 
Kuhn. Some of these departmental 
mythologists fight fiercely for their 
heavenly body or principle ; others have 
a more catholic taste, and prepare to 
agree that primeval man has made his 
mythological brew from all the heavenly 
bodies taken together. 

I have tried to state fairly and 
plausibly this naturalistic interpreta- 
tion of myths, but as a matter of fact 
this theory seems to me to be one of the 
most extravagant views ever advanced 
by an anthropologist or humanist—and 
that meansagreatdeal. It hasreceived 
an absolutely destructive criticism 
from the great psychologist Wundt, 
and appears absolutely untenable in 
the light of any of Sir James Frazer’s 
writings. From my own study of 
living myths among savages, I should 
say that primitive man has to a very 
limited extent the purely artistic or 
scientific interest in nature; there is but 
little room for symbolism in his ideas 
and tales; and myth,in fact,is not an 

14 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

idle rhapsody, not an aimless outpour- 
ing of vain imaginings, but a hard- 
working, extremely important cultural . 
force. Besides ignoring the cultural 
function of myth, this theory imputes | 
to primitive man a number of imaginary 
interests, and it confuses several clearly 
distinguishable types of story, the 
fairy tale, the legend, the saga, and the - 
sacred tale or myth. 

In strong contrast to this theory 
which makes myth naturalistic, sym- 
bolic, and imaginary, stands the theory 
which regards a sacred tale as a true > 
historical record of the past. This 
view, recently supported by the so- 
called Historical School in Germany 
and America, and represented in Eng- 
land by Dr. Rivers, covers but part of 
the truth. There is no denying that 
history, as well as natural environment, 
must have left a profound imprint on 
all cultural achievements, hence also 
on myths. But to take all mythology 
as mere chronicle is as incorrect as to 
regard it as the primitive naturalist’s 

15 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

musings. It also endows primitive 
man with a sort of scientific impulse 
and desire for knowledge. Although 
the savage has something of the anti- 
quarian as well as of the naturalist in 
his composition, he is, above all, 
actively engaged in a number of 
practical pursuits, and has to struggle 
with various difficulties ; all his interests 
are tuned up to this general pragmatic 
outlook. Mythology, the sacred lore of 
` the tribe, is, as we shall see, a powerful 
means of assisting primitive man, of 
allowing him to make the two ends of 
his cultural patrimony meet. We shall 
see, moreover, that the immense 
services to primitive culture performed 
by myth are done in connection with 
religious ritual, moral influence, and 
sociological principle. Now religion 
and morals draw only to a very limited 
extent upon an interest in science or in 
past history, and myth is thus based 
upon an entirely different mental 
attitude. 

The close connection between religion 

16 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

and myth which has been overlooked 
by many students has been recognized 
by others. Psychologists like Wundt, 
sociologists like Durkheim, Hubert, and 
Mauss, anthropologists like Crawley, 
classical scholars like Miss Jane 
Harrison have all understood the 
intimate association between myth and 
ritual, between sacred tradition and the . 
norms of social structure. All of these 
writers have been to a greater or lesser 
extent influenced by the work of Sir 
James Frazer. In spite of the fact 
that the great British anthropologist, 
as well as most of his followers, have a 
clear vision of the sociological and 
ritual importance of myth, the facts 
which I shall present will allow us to 
clarify and formulate more precisely 
the main principles of a sociological 
theory of myth. 

I might present an even more 
extensive survey of the opinions, 
divisions, and controversies of learned 
mythologists. The science of mythol- 
ogy has been the meeting-point of 

17 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

various scholarships: the classical 
humanist must decide for himself 
whether Zeus is the moon, or the sun, 
or a strictly historical personality ; 
and whether his ox-eyed spouse is the 
morning star, or a cow, or a personifi- 
cation of the wind—the loquacity of 
wives being proverbial. - Then all these 
questions have to be re-discussed upon 
the stage of mythology by the various 
tribes of archeologists, Chaldean and 
Egyptian, Indian and Chinese, Peruvian 
and Mayan. The historian and the 
sociologist, the student of literature, 
the grammarian, the Germanist and the 
Romanist, the Celtic scholar and the 
Slavist discuss, each little crowd 
among themselves. Nor is mythology 
quite safe from logicians and psy- 
chologists, from the metaphysician 
and the epistemologist—to say nothing 
of such visitors as the theosophist, the 
modern astrologist, and the Christian 
Scientist. Finally, we have the psycho- 
analyst who has come at last to teach 
us that the myth is a day-dream of the 

18 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

race, and that we can only explain it by 
turning our back upon nature, history, 
and culture, and diving deep into the 
dark pools of the sub-conscious, where 
at the bottom there lie the usual 
paraphernalia and symbols of psycho- 
analytic exegesis. So that when at 
last the poor anthropologist and student 
of folk-lore come to the feast, there are 
hardly any crumbs left for them ! 

If I have conveyed an impression of 
chaos and confusion, if I have inspired a 
sinking feeling towards the incredible 
mythological controversy with all the 
dust and din which it raises, I have 
achieved exactly what I wanted. For 
I shall invite my readers to step 
outside the closed study of the theorist 
into the open air of the anthropological 
field, and to follow me in my mental 
flight back to the years which I spent 
among a Melanesian tribe of New 
Guinea. There, paddling on the lagoon, 
watching the natives under the blazing 
sun at their garden-work, following 
them through the patches of jungle, and 

19 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

on the winding beaches¥andjreefs, we 
shall learn about their life. Andagain, 
. observing their ceremonies in the cool 
of the afternoon or in the shadows of 
the evening, sharing their meals round 
their fires, we shall be able to listen to 
their stories. 

For the anthropologist—one and only 
among the many participants in the 
mythological contest—has the unique 
advantage of being able to step back 
behind the savage whenever he feels 
that his theories become involved and 
the flow of his argumentative eloquence 
runs dry. The anthropologist is not 
bound to the scanty remnants of 
culture, broken tablets, tarnished texts, 
or fragmentary inscriptions. He need 
not fill out immense gaps with 
voluminous, but conjectural, comments. 
The anthropologist has the myth-maker 
at his elbow. Not only can he take 
down as full a text as exists, with all 
its variations, and control it over and 
over; he has also a host of authentic 
commentators to draw upon; still more 

20 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

he has the fulness of life itself 
from which the myth has been born. ' 
And as we shall see, in this live 
context there is as much to be learned 
about the myth as in the narrative - 
itself. 

Myth as it exists in a savage com- 
munity, that is, in its living primitive 
form, is not merely a story told but a — 
reality lived. It is not of the nature 
of fiction, such as we read to-day in a 
novel, but it is a living reality, believed 
to have once happened in primeval 
times, and continuing ever since to . 
influence the world and human des- 
tinies. This myth is to the savage 
what, to a fully believing Christian, is 
the Biblical story of Creation, of the 
Fall, of the Redemption by Christ’s 
Sacrifice on the Cross. As our sacred 
story lives in our ritual, in our morality, 
as it governs our faith and controls our 
conduct, even so does his myth for the 
savage. 

The limitation of the study of myth 
to the mere examination of texts has 

2I 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

been fatal to a proper understanding of 
its nature. The forms of myth which 
come to us from classical antiquity 
and from the ancient sacred books of the 
East and other similar sources have 
come down to us without the context of 
living faith, without the possibility 
of obtaining comments from true 
believers, without the concomitant 
knowledge of their social organization, 
their practised morals, and their popu- 
lar customs—at least without the full 
information which the modern field- 
worker can easily obtain. Moreover, 
there is no doubt that in their present 
literary form these tales have suffered 
a very considerable transformation at 
the hands of scribes, commentators, 
learned priests, and theologians. It is 
necessary to go back to primitive 
mythology in order to learn the secret 
of its life in the study of a myth which 
is still alive—before, mummified in 
priestly wisdom, it has been enshrined 
in the indestructible but lifeless re- 
pository of dead religions. 

22 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

Studied alive, myth, as we shall see, 
is not symbolic, but a direct expression 
of its subject-matter; it is not an 
explanation in satisfaction of a scientific 
interest, but a narrative resurrection 
of a primeval reality, told in satisfaction 
of deep religious wants, moral cravings, 
social submissions, assertions, even 
practical requirements. Myth fulfils 
in primitive culture an indispensable 
function: it expresses, enhances, and 
codifies belief; it safeguards and en- 
forces morality; it vouches for the 
efficiency of ritual and contains practi- 
cal rules for the guidance of man. 
Myth is thus a vital ingredient of human 
civilization ; it is not an idle tale, but a 
hard-worked active force; it is not an 
intellectual explanation or an artistic 
imagery, but a pragmatic charter of 
primitive faith and moral wisdom. 

I shall try to prove all these conten- 
tions by the study of various myths; 
but to make our analysis conclusive 
it will first be necessary to give an 
account not merely of myth, but also of 

23 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

fairy tale, legend, and historical record. 

Let us then float over in spirit to 
the shores of a Trobriand? lagoon, and 
penetrate into the life of the natives 
—see them at work, see them at play, 
and listen to their stories. Late in 
November the wet weather is setting in. 
There is little to do in the gardens, the 
fishing season is not in full swing as yet, 
overseas sailing looms ahead in the 
future, while the festive mood still 
lingers after the harvest dancing and 
feasting. Sociability is in the air, 

1 The Trobriand Islands are a coral 
archipelago lying to the northeast of New 
Guinea. The natives belong to the Papuo- 
Melanesian race, and in their physical appear- 
ance, mental equipment, and social organiza- 
tion they show a combination of the Oceanic 
characteristics mixed with some features of 
the more backward Papuan culture from the 
mainland of New Guinea. 

For a full account of the Northern 
Massim, of which the Trobrianders form a 
section, see the classical treatise of Pro- 
fessor C. G. Seligman, Melanesians of British 
New Guinea (Cambridge, 1910). This book 
shows also the relation of the Trobrianders 
to the other races and cultures on and 
around New Guinea. A short account will 

also be found in Argonauts of the Western 
Pacific, by the present author (London, 1922). 

24 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

time lies on their hands, while bad 
weather keeps them often at home. 
Let us step through the twilight of 
the approaching evening into one of 
their villages and sit at the fireside, 
where the flickering light draws more and 
more people as the evening falls and the 
conversation brightens. Sooner or later 
a man will be asked to tell a story, 
for this is the season of fairy tales. If 
he is a good reciter, he will soon 
provoke laughter, rejoinders, and in- 
terruptions, and his tale will develop 
into a regular performance. 

At this time of the year folk-tales 
of a special type called kukwanebu 
are habitually recited in the villages. 
There is a vague belief, not very 
seriously taken, that their recital has a 
beneficial influence on the new crops 
recently planted in the gardens. In 
order to produce this effect, a short 
ditty in which an allusion is made to 
some very fertile wild plants, the 
kasiyena, must always be recited at the 
end. 

25 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Every story is ‘ owned ’ by a member 
of the community. Each story, though 
known by many, may be recited only 
by the ‘owner’; he may, however, 
present it to someone else by teaching 
that person and authorizing him to 
retell it. But not all the ‘owners’ 
know how to thrill and to raise a 
hearty laugh, which is one of the main 
ends of such stories. A good raconteur 
has to change his voice in the dialogue, 
chant the ditties with due temperament, 
gesticulate, and in general play to the 
gallery. Some of these tales are cer- 
tainly ‘smoking-room’ stories, of others 
I will give one or two examples, 

Thus there is the maiden in distress 
and the heroic rescue. Two women 
go out in search of birds’ eggs. One 
discovers a nest under a tree, the other 
warns her: “ These are eggs of a snake, 
don’t touch them.” “Oh,no! They 
are eggs of a bird,” she replies and 
carries them away. The mother snake 
comes back, and finding the nest empty 
starts in search of the eggs. She 

26 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

enters the nearest village and sings a 
ditty :— 

“ I wend my way as I wriggle along, 

The eggs of a bird it is licit to eat ; 

The eggs of a friend are forbidden to 

touch.” 

This journey lasts long, for the snake is 
traced from one village to the other and 
everywhere has to sing her ditty. 
Finally, entering the village of the two 
women, she sees the culprit roasting 
the eggs, coils around her, and enters 
her body. The victim is laid down 
helpless and ailing. But the hero is 
nigh; a man from a_ neighbouring 
village dreams of the dramatic situation, 
arrives on the spot, pulls out the snake, 
cuts it to pieces, and marries both 
women, thus carrying off a double 
prize for his prowess. 

In another story we learn of a happy 
family, a father and two daughters, 
who sail from their home in the northern 
coral archipelagoes, and run to the 
southwest till they come to the wild 
steep slopes of the rock island Gumasila. 

27 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

The father lies down on a platform and 
falls asleep. An ogre comes out of the 
jungle, eats the father, captures and 
ravishes one of the daughters, while the 
other succeeds in escaping. The sister 
from the woods supplies the captive 
one with a piece of lawyer-cane, and 
when the ogre lies down and falls 
asleep they cut him in half and escape. 

A woman lives in the village of 
Okopukopu at the head of a creek with 
her five children. A monstrously big 
stingaree paddles up the creek, flops 
across the village, enters the hut, and 
to the tune of a ditty cuts off the 
woman’s finger. One son tries to kill 
the monster and fails. Every day the 
same performance is repeated till on 
the fifth day the youngest son succeeds 
in killing the giant fish. 

A louse and a butterfly embark on a 
bit of aviation, the louse as a passenger, 
the butterfly as aeroplane and pilot. 
In the middle of the performance, while 
flying over-seas just between the beach 
of Wawela and the island of Kitava, 

28 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

the louse emits a loud shriek, the 
butterfly is shaken, and the louse falls 
off and is drowned. 

A man whose mother-in-law is a 
cannibal is sufficiently careless to go 
away and leave her in charge of his 
three children. Naturally she tries 
to eat them; they escape in time, 
however, climb a palm, and keep her 
(through a somewhat lengthy story) at 
bay, until the father arrives and kills 
her. There is another story about a 
visit to the Sun, another about an ogre 
devastating gardens, another about a 
woman who was so greedy that she 
stole all food at funeral distributions, 
and many similar ones. 

In this place, however, we are not so 
much concentrating our attention on 
the text of narratives, as on their 
sociological reference. The text, of 
course, is extremely important, but 
without the context it remains lifeless. 
As we have seen, the interest of the 
story is vastly enhanced and it is given 
its proper character by the manner in 

29 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

which it is told. The whole nature of 
the performance, the voice and the 
mimicry, the stimulus and the response 
of the audience mean as much to the 
natives as the text ; and the sociologist 
should take his cue from the natives. 
The performance, again, has to be placed 
in its proper time-setting—the hour of 
the day, and the season, with the 
background of the sprouting gardens 
awaiting future work, and slightly 
influenced by the magic of the fairy 
tales. We must also bear in mind 
the sociological context of private 
ownership, the sociable function and the 
cultural réle of amusing fiction. All 
these elements are equally relevant; 
all must be studied as well as the text. 
The stories live in native life and not on 
paper, and when a scholar jots them 
down without being able to evoke 
the atmosphere in which they flourish 
he has given us but a mutilated bit 
of reality. 

I pass now to another class of stories. 
These have no special season, there is 

30 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

no stereotyped way of telling them, 
and the recital has not the character 
of a performance, nor has it any 
magical effect. And yet these tales 
are more important than the foregoing 
class; for they are believed to be true, 
and the information which they con- 
tain is both more valuable and more 
relevant than that of the kukwanebu. 
When a party goes on a distant visit or 
sails on an expedition, the younger 
members, keenly interested in the 
landscape, in new communities, in 
new people, and perhaps even new 
customs, will express their wonder and 
make enquiries. The older and more 
experienced will supply them with 
information and comment, and this 
always takes the form of a concrete 
narrative. An old man will perhaps 
tell his own experiences about fights 
and expeditions, about famous magic 
and extraordinary economic achieve- 
ments. With this he may mix the 
reminiscences of his father, hearsay 
tales and legends, which have passed 

31 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

through many generations. Thus 
memories of great droughts and 
devastating famines are conserved for 
many years, together with the des- 
criptions of the hardships, struggles, 
and crimes of the exasperated popula- 
tion. 

A number of stories about sailors 
driven out of their course and landing 
among cannibals and hostile tribes 
are remembered, some of them set to 
song, others formed into historic legends. 
A famous subject for song and story is 
the charm, skill, and performance of 
famous dancers. There are tales about 
distant volcanic islands; about hot 
springs in which once a party of unwary 
bathers were boiled to death; about 
mysterious countries inhabited by en- 
tirely different men or women; about 
strange adventures which have happen- 
ed to sailors in distant seas; monstrous 
fish and octopi, jumping rocks and 
disguised sorcerers. Stories again are 
told, some recent, some ancient, about 
seers and visitors to the land of the 

32 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

dead, enumerating their most famous 
and significant exploits. There are 
also stories associated with natural 
phenomena; a petrified canoe, a man 
changed into a rock, and a red patch 
on the coral rock left by a party who 
ate too much betel nut. 

We have here a variety of tales 
which might be subdivided into his- 
torical accounts directly witnessed by 
the narrator, or at least vouched for 
by someone within living memory; 
legends, in which the continuity of 
testimony is broken, but which fall 
within the range of things ordinarily 
experienced by the tribesmen; and 
hearsay tales about distant countries 
and ancient happenings of a time which 
falls outside the range of present-day 
culture. To the natives, however, all 
these classes imperceptibly shade into 
each other; they are designated by the 
same name, libwogwo; they are all 
regarded as true; they are not recited 
as a performance, nor told for amuse- 
ment at a special season. Their 

33 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

subject-matter also shows a substantial 
unity. They all refer to subjects 
intensely stimulating to the natives; 
they all are connected with activities 
such as economic pursuits, warfare, 
adventure, success in dancing and in 
ceremonial exchange. Moreover, since 
they record singularly great achieve- 
ments in all such pursuits, they redound 
to the credit of some individual and 
his descendants or of a whole commun- 
ity; and hence they are kept alive by 
the ambition of those whose ancestry 
they glorify. The stories told in 
explanation of peculiarities of features 
of the landscape frequently have a 
sociological context, that is, they 
enumerate whose clan or family 
performed the deed. When this is not 
the case, they are isolated fragmentary 
comments upon some natural feature, 
clinging to it as an obvious survival. , 

In all this it is once more clear that 
we can neither fully grasp the meaning 
of the text, nor the sociological nature 
of the story, nor the natives’ attitude 

34 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

towards it and interest in it, if we study 
the narrative on paper. These tales 
live in the memory of man, in the way 
in which they are told, and even more 
in the complex interest which keeps 
them alive, which makes the narrator 
recite with pride or regret, which 
makes the listener follow eagerly, 
wistfully, with hopes and ambitions 
roused. Thus the essence of a legend, 
even more than that of a fairy tale, is 
not to be found in a mere perusal of 
the story, but in the combined study of 
the narrative and its context in the 
social and cultural life of the natives. 
But it is only when we pass to the 
third and most important class of 
tales, the sacred tales or myths, and 
contrast them with the legends, that 
the nature of all three classes comes 
into relief. This third class is called 
by the natives liliu, and I want to 
emphasize that I am reproducing 
prima facie the natives’ own classifica- 
tion and nomenclature, and limiting 
myself to a few comments on its 

35 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

accuracy. The third class of stories 
stands very much apart from the other 
two. If the first are told for amuse- 
ment, the second to make a serious 
statement and satisfy social ambition, 
the third are regarded, not merely as 
true, but as venerable and sacred, and 
they play a highly important cultural 
part. The folk-tale, as we know, is a 
seasonal performance and an act of 
sociability. The legend, provoked by 
contact with unusual reality, opens up 
past historical vistas. The myth comes 
into play when rite, ceremony, or a 
social or moral rule demands justifica- 
tion, warrant of antiquity, reality, and 
sanctity. 

In the subsequent chapters of this 
book we will examine a number of 
myths in detail, but for the moment 
let us glance at the subjects of some 
typical myths. Take, for instance, the 
annual feast of the return of the 
dead. Elaborate arrangements are 
made for it, especially an enormous 
display of food. When this feast 

36 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

approaches, tales are told of how death 
began to chastise man, and how the 
power of eternal rejuvenation was lost. 
It is told why the spirits have to leave 
the village and do not remain at the 
fireside, finally why they return once 
in a year. Again, at certain seasons 
in preparation for an overseas ex- 
pedition, canoes are overhauled and 
new ones built to the accompaniment 
of a special magic. In this there are 
mythological allusions in the spells, and 
even the sacred acts contain elements 
which are only comprehensible when 
the story of the flying canoe, its ritual, 
and its magic are told. In connection 
with ceremonial trading, the rules, 
the magic, even the geographical 
routes are associated with corresponding 
mythology. There is no important 
magic, no ceremony, no ritual without 
belief; and the belief is spun out into 
accounts of concrete precedent. The 
union is very intimate, for myth is not 
only looked upon as a commentary of 
additional information, but it is a 

37 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

warrant, a charter, and often even a 
practical guide to the activities with 
which it is connected. On the other 
hand the rituals, ceremonies, customs, 
and social organization contain at 
times direct references to myth, and 
they are regarded as the results of 
mythical event. The cultural fact is a 
monument in which the myth is 
embodied; while the myth is believed 
to be the real cause which has brought 
about the moral rule, the social group- 
ing, the rite, or the custom. Thus 
these stories form an integral part of 
culture. Their existence and influence 
not merely transcend the act of telling 
the narrative, not only do they draw 
their substance from life and its 
interests—they govern and control 
many cultural features, they form the 
dogmatic backbone of primitive 
civilization. 

This is perhaps the most important 
point of the thesis which I am urging : 
I maintain that there exists a special 
class of stories, regarded as sacred, 

38 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

embodied in ritual, morals, and social 
organization, and which form an 
integral and active part of primitive 
culture. These stories live not by 
idle interest, not as fictitious or even 
as true narratives; but are to the 
natives a statement of a primeval, 
greater, and more relevant reality, by 
which the present life, fates, and 
activities of mankind are determined, 
the knowledge of which supplies man 
with the motive for ritual and moral 
actions, as well as with indications as 
to how to perform them. 

In order to make the point at issue 
quite clear, let us once more compare 
our conclusions with the current views 
of modern anthropology, not in order 
idly to criticize other opinions, but so 
that we may link our results to the 
present state of knowledge, give due 
acknowledgment for what we have 
received, and state where we have to 
differ clearly and precisely. 

It will be best to quote a condensed 
and authoritative statement, and I 

39 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

shall choose for this purpose the 
definition and analysis given in Notes 
and Queries on Anthropology, by the 
late Miss C. S. Burne and Professor 
J. L. Myres. Under the heading 
“ Stories, Sayings, and Songs”, we are 
informed that ‘‘ this section includes 
many intellectual efforts of peoples... .” 
which “ represent the earliest attempts 
to exercise reason, imagination, and 
memory.” With some apprehension 
we ask where is left the emotion, 
the interest, and ambition, the social 
rôle of all the stories, and the deep 
connection with cultural values of the 
more serious ones? After a_ brief 
classification of stories in the usual 
manner we read about the sacred 
tales: “ Myths are stories which, how- 
ever marvellous and improbable to us, 
are nevertheless related in all good 
faith, because they are intended, or 
believed by the teller, to explain by 
means of something concrete and in- 
telligible an abstract idea or such 
vague and difficult conceptions as 

40 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

Creation, Death, distinctions of race 
or animal species, the different occupa- 
tions of men and women; the origins 
of rites and customs, or striking natural 
objects or prehistoric monuments; the 
meaning of the names of persons or 
places. Such stories are sometimes 
described as etiological, because their 
purpose is to explain why something 
exists or happens.” 1 

Here we have in a nutshell all that 
modern science at its best has to say 
upon the subject. Would our Melane- 
sians agree, however, with this opinion ? 
Certainly not. They do not want to 
‘explain’, to make ‘intelligible’ any- 
thing which happens in their myths— 
above all not an abstract idea. Of 
that there can be found to my know- 
ledge no instance either in Melanesia 
or in any other savage community. 
The few abstract ideas which the 
natives possess carry their concrete 
commentary in the very word which 

1 Quoted from Notes and Queries on 
Anthropology, pp. 210 and 211. 

4I 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

expresses them. When being is des- 
cribed by verbs to lie, to sit, to stand, 
when cause and effect are expressed 
by words signifying foundation and 
the past standing upon it, when various 
concrete nouns tend towards the mean- 
ing of space, the word and the relation 
to concrete reality make the abstract 
idea sufficiently ‘intelligible’. Nor 
would a Trobriander or any other native 
agree with the view that ‘Creation, 
Death, distinctions of race or animal 
species, the different occupations of 
men and women” are “‘ vague and 
difficult conceptions”. Nothing is more 
familiar to the native than the different 
occupations of the male and female 
sex; there is nothing to be explained 
about it. But though familiar, such 
differences are at times irksome, un- 
pleasant, or at least limiting, and there 
is the need to justify them, to vouch for 
their antiquity and reality, in short to 
buttress their validity. Death, alas, 
is not vague, or abstract, or difficult to 
grasp for any human being. It is only 

42 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

too hauntingly real, too concrete, too 
easy to comprehend for anyone who 
has had an experience affecting his near 
relatives or a personal foreboding. 
If it were vague or unreal, man would 
have no desire so much as to mention 
it; but the idea of death is fraught 
with horror, with a desire to remove its 
threat, with the vague hope that it 
may be, not explained, but rather 
explained away, made unreal, and 
actually denied. Myth, warranting the 
belief in immortality, in eternal youth, 
in a life beyond the grave, is not an 
intellectual reaction upon a puzzle, but 
an explicit act of faith born from the 
innermost instinctive and emotional 
reaction to the most formidable and 
haunting idea. Nor are the stories 
about “ the origins of rites and customs” 
told in mere explanation of them. 
They never explain in any sense of the 
word; they always state a precedent 
which constitutes an ideal and a warrant 
for its continuance, and sometimes 
practical directions for the procedure. 

43 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

We have, therefore, to disagree on 
every point with this excellent though 
concise statement of present-day 
mythological opinion. This definition 
would create an imaginary, non- 
existent class of narrative, the etio- 
logical myth, corresponding to a non- 
existent desire to explain, leading a 
futile existence as an ‘ intellectual effort’, 
and remaining outside native culture 
and social organization with their 
pragmatic interests. The whole treat- 
ment appears to us faulty, because 
myths are treated as mere stories, 
because they are regarded as a primi- 
tive intellectual arm-chair occupation, 
because they are torn out of their life- 
context, and studied from what they look 
like on paper, and not from what they 
do in life. Such a definition would 
make it impossible either to see clearly 
the nature of myth or to reach a satis- 
factory classification of folk-tales. In fact 
we would also have to disagree with the 
definition of legend and of fairy tale 
given subsequently by the writers in 

44 

http://rcin.org.pl 

THE ROLE OF MYTH IN LIFE 

Notes and Queries on Anthropology. 

But above all, this point of view would 
be fatal to efficient field-work, for it 
would make the observer satisfied with 
the mere writing down of narratives. 
The intellectual nature of a story is 
exhausted with its text, but the 
functional, cultural, and pragmatic as- 
pect of any native tale is manifested 
as much in its enactment, embodiment, 
and contextual relations as in the text. 
It is easier to write down the story 
than to observe the diffuse, complex 
ways in which it enters into life, or to 
study its function by the observation 
of the vast social and cultural realities 
into which it enters. And this is the 
reason why we have so many texts and 
why we know so little about the very 
nature of myth. 

We may, therefore, learn an im- 
portant lesson from the Trobrianders, 
and to them let us now return. 
We will survey some of their myths in 
detail, so that we can confirm our 
conclusions inductively, yet precisely. 

45 

http://rcin.org.pl 

II 
MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

We may best start with the beginning 
of things, and examine some of the 
myths of origin. The world, say the 
natives, was originally peopled from 
underground. Humanity had there led 
an existence similar in all respects to 
the present life on earth. Underground, 
men were organized in villages, clans, 
districts ; they had distinctions of rank, 
they knew privileges and had claims, 
they owned property, and were versed 
in magic lore. Endowed with all 
this, they emerged, establishing by 
this very act certain rights in land 
and citizenship, in economic prerog- 
ative and magical pursuit. They 
brought with them all their culture 
to continue it upon this earth. 

There are a number of special spots 

46 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

—grottoes, clumps of trees, stone 
heaps, coral outcrops, springs, heads of 
creeks—called ‘ holes’ or ‘ houses’ by 
the natives. From such ‘holes’ 
the first couples (a sister as the head of 
the family and the brother as her 
guardian) came and took possession 
of the lands, and gave the totemic, 
industrial, magical, and. sociological 
character to the communities thus begun. 

The problem of rank which plays a 
great réle in their sociology was 
settled by the emergence from one special 
hole, called Obukula, near the village 
of Laba’i. This event was notable 
in that, contrary to the usual course 
(which is: one original ‘hole’, one 
lineage), from this hole of Laba’i there 
emerged representatives of the four 
main clans one after the other. Their 
arrival, moreover, was followed by an 
apparently trivial but, in mythical 
reality, a most important event. First 
there came the Kaylavasi (iguana), the 
animal of the Lukulabuta clan, which 
scratched its way through the earth as 

47 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

iguanas do, then climbed a tree, and 
remained there as a mere onlooker, 
following subsequent events. Soon 
there came out the Dog, totem of the 
Lukuba clan, who originally had the 
highest rank. As a third came the 
Pig, representative of the Malasi clan, 
which now holds the highest rank. 
Last came the Lukwasisiga totem, 
represented in some versions by the 
Crocodile, in others by the Snake, in 
others by the Opossum, and sometimes 
completely ignored. The Dog and Pig 
ran round, and the Dog, seeing the 
fruit of the noku plant, nosed it, and 
then ate it. Said the Pig: ‘‘ Thou 
eatest noku, thou eatest dirt; thou 
art a low-bred, a commoner; the chief, 
the guya’u, shallbe I.” And ever since, 
the highest sub-clan of the Malasi clan, 
the Tabalu, have been the real chiefs. 

In order to understand this myth, it 
is not enough to follow the dialogue 
between the Dog and the Pig which 
might appear pointless or even trivial. 
Once you know the native sociology, 

48 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

the extreme importance of rank, the 
fact that food and its limitations (the 
taboos of rank and clan) are the main 
index of man’s social nature, and 
finally the psychology of totemic 
identification—you begin to understand 
how this incident, happening as it did 
when humanity was in statu nascendi, 
settled once for all the relation between 
the two rival clans. To understand 
this myth you must have a good know- 
ledge of their sociology, religion, cus- 
toms, and outlook. Then, and only 
then, can you appreciate what this 
story means to the natives and how it 
can live in their life. If you stayed 
among them and learned the language 
you would constantly find it active in 
discussion and squabbles in reference 
to the relative superiority of the various 
clans, and in the discussions about the 
various food taboos which frequently 
raise fine questions of casuistry. Above 
all, if you were brought into contact 
with communities where the historical 
process of the spread of influence of 

49 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

the Malasi clan is still in evolution, you 
would be brought face to face with 
this myth as an active force. 

Remarkably enough the first and last 
animals to come out, the iguana and 
the Lukwasisiga totem, have been from 
the beginning left in the cold: thus 
the numerical principle and the logic 
of events is not very strictly observed in 
the reasoning of the myth. 

If the main myth of Laba’i about 
the relative superiority of the four 
clans is very often alluded to throughout 
the tribe, the minor local myths are not 
less alive and active, each in its own 
community. When a party arrives 
at some distant village they will be 
told not only the legendary historical 
tales, but above all the mythological 
charter of that community, its magical 
proficiencies, its occupational charac- 
ter, its rank and placein totemic organ- 
ization. Should there arise land-quarrels, 
encroachment in magical matters, fish- 
ing rights, or other privileges the testi- 
mony of myth would be referred to. 

50 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

Let me show concretely the way in 
which a typical myth of local origins 
would be retailed in the normal run 
of native life. Let us watch a party 
of visitors arriving in one or the other 
of the Trobriand villages. They would 
seat themselves in front of the head- 
man’s house, in the central place of 
the locality. As likely as not the spot 
of origins is near by, marked by a 
coral outcrop or a heap of stones. 
This spot would be pointed out, the 
names of the brother and sister 
ancestors mentioned, and perhaps it 
would be said that the man built his 
house on the spot of the present head- 
man’s dwelling. The native listeners 
would know, of course, that the sister 
lived in a different house near by, for 
she could never reside within the same 
walls as her brother. 

As additional information, the 
visitors might be told that the ancestors 
had brought with them the substances 
and paraphernalia and methods of 
local industry. In the village of 

51 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Yalaka, for instance, it would be the 
processes for burning lime from 
shells. In Okobobo, Obweria, and 
Obowada the ancestors brought the 
knowledge and the implements for 
polishing hard stone. In Bwoytalu the 
carver’s tool, the hafted shark tooth, 
and the knowledge of the art came out 
from underground with the original 
ancestors. In most places the econo- 
mic monopolies are thus traced to the 
autochthonous emergence. In villages 
of higher rank the insignia of hereditary 
dignity were brought; in others some 
animal associated with the local sub- 
clan came out. Some communities 
started on their political career of 
standing hostility to one another from 
the very beginning. The most im- 
portant gift to this world carried from 
the one below is always magic ; but this 
will have to be treated later on and 
more fully. 

If a European bystander were there 
and heard nothing but the information 
given from one native to the other, it 

52 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

would mean very little to him. In 
fact, it might lead him into serious 
misunderstandings. Thus the simul- 
taneous emergence of brother and 
sister might make him suspicious 
either of a mythological allusion to 
incest, or else would make him look 
for the original matrimonial pair and 
enquire about the sister’s husband. 
The first suspicion would be entirely 
erroneous, and would shed a false 
light over the specific relation between 
brother and sister, in which the former 
is the indispensable guardian, and the 
second, equally indispensable, is respon- 
sible for the transmission of the line. 
Only a full knowledge of matrilineal 
ideas and institutions gives body and 
meaning to the bare mention of the 
two ancestral names, so significant toa 
native listener. If the European were 
to inquire who was the sister’s husband 
and how she came to have children, 
he would soon find himself once more 
confronted by an entirely foreign set 
of ideas—the sociological irrelevance 

53 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

of the father, the absence of any ideas 
about physiological procreation, and the 
strange and complicated system of 
marriage, matrilineal and patrilocal 
at the same time. 1 

The sociological relevance of these 
accounts of origins would become clear 
only to a European inquirer who had 
grasped the native legal ideas about 
local citizenship and the hereditary 
rights to territory, fishing grounds, and 
local pursuits. For according to the 
legal principles of the tribe all such 
rights are the monopolies of the local 
community, and only people descend- 
ent in the female line from the original 
ancestress are entitled to them. 
If the European were told further that, 

1 For a full statement of the psychology 
and sociology of kinship and descent see 
articles on “The Psychology of Sex and the 
Foundations of Kinship in Primitive Soc- 
ieties ”, ‘‘ Psycho-analysis and Anthropology”, 
“‘Complex and Myth in Mother Right”, all 
three in the psychological journal, Psyche, Oct. 
1923, April, 1924, and Jan. 1925. The first 
article is included in The Father in Primitive 
Psychology (Psyche Miniature, 1926). 

54 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

besiides the first place of emergence, 
there are several other ‘ holes’ in the same 
village, he would become still more 
baffled until, by a careful study of 
comcrete details and the principles of 
native sociology, he became acquainted 
with the idea of compound village 
communities, i.e. communities in which 
seweral sub-clans have merged. 

It is clear, then, that the myth 
comveys much more to the native than 
is contained in the mere story; that 
the story gives only the really relevant 
concrete local differences; that the real 
meaning, in fact the full account, is 
contained in the traditional founda- 
tions of social organization; and that 
this the native learns, not by listening 
to the fragmentary mythical stories, 
but by living within the social texture 
of his tribe. In other words, it is the 
comtext of social life, it is the gradual 
realization by the native of how every- 
thing which he is told to do has its 
precedent and pattern in bygone times, 
which brings home to him the full 

55 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

account and the full meaning of his 
myths of origin. 

For an observer, therefore, it is 
necessary to become fully acquainted 
with the social organization of the 
natives if he wants really to grasp its 
traditional aspect. The short accounts, 
such as those which are given about 
local origins, will then become perfectly 
plain to him. He will also clearly 
see that each of them is only a part, 
and a rather insignificant one, of a much 
bigger story, which cannot be read 
except from native life. What really 
matters about such a story is its social 
function. It conveys, expresses, and 
strengthens the fundamental fact of the 
local unity and of the kinship unity of 
the group of people descendent from a 
common ancestress. Combined with 
the conviction that only common 
descent and emergence from the soil 
give full rights to it, the story of origin 
literally contains the legal charter of 
the community. Thus, even when the 
people of a vanquished community were 

56 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

driven from their grounds by a hostile 
neighbour their territory always remain- 
ed intact for them ; and they werealways, 
after a lapse of time and when their 
peace ceremony had been concluded, 
allowed to return td the original site, 
rebuild their village, and cultivate their 
gardens once more.! The traditional 
feeling of a real and intimate connection 
with the land ; the concrete reality of see- 
ing the actual spot of emergence in the 
middle of the scenes of daily life; the 
historical continuity of privileges, oc- 
cupations, and distinctive characters 
running back into the mythological 
first beginnings—all this obviously 
makes for cohesion, for local patriotism, 
for a feeling of union and kinship in the 
community. But although the narra- 
tive of original emergence integrates 
and welds together the historical tradi- 
tion, the legal principles, and the 

1 Cf. the account given of these facts 
in the article on “ War and Weapons among 
the Trobriand Islanders”, Man, Jan. 1918; 

and in Professor Seligman’s Melanesians, 
pp. 663-668. 

57 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

various customs, it must also be 
clearly kept in mind that the original 
myth is but a small part of the whole 
complex of traditional ideas. Thus on 
the one hand the reality of myth lies 
in its social function; on the other 
hand, once we begin to study the social 
function of myth, and so to recon- 
struct its full meaning, we are gradually 
led to build up the full theory of native 
social organization. 

One of the most interesting phenom- 
ena connected with traditional precedent 
and charter is the adjustment of myth 
and mythological principle to cases in 
which the very foundation of such 
mythology is flagrantly violated. This 
violation always takes place when the 
local claims of an autochthonous clan, 
i.e. a clan which has emerged on the 
spot, are over-ridden by an immigrant 
clan. Then a conflict of principles is 
created, for obviously the principle 
that land and authority belong to those 
who are literally born out of it does not 
leave room for any newcomers. On the 

58 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

other hand, members of a sub-clan of high 
rank who choose to settle down in a new 
locality cannot very well be resisted by 
the autochthons—using this word again 
in the literal native mythological sense. 
The result is that there come into 
existence a special class of mythological 
stories which justify and account for the 
anomalous state of affairs. The 
strength of the various mythological 
and legal principles is manifested in 
that the myths of justification still 
contain the antagonistic and logically 
irreconcilable facts and points of view, 
and only try to cover them by facile 
reconciliatory incident, obviously manu- 
factured ad hoc. The study of such 
stories is extremely interesting, both 
because it gives us a deep insight into 
the native psychology of tradition, and 
because it tempts us to reconstruct 
the past history of the tribe, though 
we must yield to the temptation with 
due caution and scepticism. 

In the Trobriands we find that the 
higher the rank of a totemic sub-clan, 

59 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

the greater its power of expansion. 
Let us first state the facts and then 
proceed to their interpretation. The 
sub-clan of the highest rank, the 
Tabalu sub-clan of the Malasi clan, are 
found now ruling over a number of 
villages: Omarakana, their main 
capital; Kasanayi, the twin village 
of the capital; and Olivilevi, a village 
founded some three ‘ reigns’ ago after 
a defeat of the capital. Two villages, 
Omlamwaluwa, now extinct, and 
Dayagila, no longer ruled by the 
Tabalu, also once belonged to them. 
The same sub-clan, bearing the same 
name and claiming the same descent, 
but not keeping all the taboos of 
distinction and not entitled to all the 
insignia, is found ruling in the villages 
of Oyweyowa, Gumilababa, Kavataria, 
and Kadawaga, all in the western part 
of the archipelago, the last mentioned 
on the small island Kayleula. The 
village of Tukwa’ukwa was but recently 
taken over by the Tabalu some five 
‘reigns’ ago. Finally, a sub-clan of 

60 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

the same name and claiming affinity 
rules over the two big and powerful 
communities of the South, Sinaketa 
and Vakuta. 

The second fact of importance re- 
ferring to these villages and their rulers 
is that the ruling clan does not pretend 
to have emerged locally in any of those 
communities in which its members own 
territory, carry on local magic, and 
wield power. They all claim to have 
emerged, accompanied by the original 
pig, from the historical hole of Obukula 
on the northwestern shore of the island 
near the village of Laba’i. From there 
they have, according to their traditions, 
spread all over the district. 1 

In the traditions of this clan there 
are certain definitely historical facts 
which must be clearly disentangled and 
registered : the foundation of the village 
of Olivilevi three ‘reigns’ ago, the 
settlement of the Tabalu in 

1 The reader who wants to grasp these 
historical and geographical details should 
consult the vy facing p. 51 of the writer’s 
Argonauts of the Western Pacific. 

61 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Tukwa’ukwa five ‘reigns’ ago, the 
taking over of Vakuta some seven or 
eight ‘reigns’ ago. By ‘reign’ I 
mean the life-rule of one individual 
chief. Since in the Trobriands, as no 
doubt in most matrilineal tribes, a 
man is succeeded by his younger 
brother, the average ‘ reign ’ is obvious- 
ly much shorter than the span of a 
generation and also much less reliable 
as a measure of time, since in many 
cases it need not be shorter. These 
particular historical tales, giving a full 
account of how, when, by whom, and 
in what manner the settlement was 
effected, are sober matter-of-fact state- 
ments, Thus it is possible to obtain 
from independent informants the de- 
tailed account of how, in the time of 
their fathers or grandfathers respec- 
tively, the chief Bugwabwaga of 
Omarakana, after an unsuccessful 
war, had to flee with all his community 
far south, to the usual spot where a 
temporary village was erected. After 
a couple of years he returned to perform 

62 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

the peace-making ceremony and to 
rebuild Omarakana. His younger 
brother, however, did not return with 
him, but erected a permanent village, 
Olivilevi, and remained there. The 
account, which can be confirmed in 
the minutest detail from any intelligent 
adult native in the district, is obviously 
as reliable an historical statement as 
one can obtain in any savage com- 
munity. The data about Tukwa’ukwa, 
Vakuta, and so on are of similar nature. 

What lifts the trustworthiness of 
such accounts above any suspicion 
is their sociological foundation. The 
flight after defeat is a general rule of 
tribal usage; and the manner in which 
the other villages become the seat of 
the highest rank people, i.e. inter- 
marriage between Tabalu women and 
head men of other villages, is also 
characteristic of their social life. The 
technique of this proceeding is of 
considerable importance and must be 
described in detail. Marriage is patri- 
local in the Trobriands, so that the 

63 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

woman always moves to her husband’s 
community. Economically, marriage 
entails the standing exchange of food 
given by the wife’s family for valuables 
supplied by the husband. Food is 
especially plentiful in the central plains 
of Kiriwina, ruled over by the chiefs 
of highest rank from Omarakana. 
The valuable shell ornaments, coveted 
by the chiefs, are produced in the 
coastal districts to the west and south. 
Economically, therefore, the tendency 
always has been, and still is, for women 
of high rank to marry influential 
headmen in such villages as Gumilababa, 
Kavataria, Tukwa’ukwa, Sinaketa, 
and Vakuta. 

So far everything happens according 
to the strict letter of tribal law. But 
once a Tabalu woman has settled in 
her husband’s village, she overshadows 
him by rank and very often by influence. 
If she has a son or sons these are, until 
puberty, legal members of their father’s 
community. They are the most im- 
portant males in it. The father, as 

64 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

things are in the Trobriands, always 
wishes to keep them even after puberty 
for reasons of personal affection; the 
community feels that their whole 
status is being raised thereby. The 
majority desire it; and the minority, 
the rightful heirs to the headmen, 
his brothers and his sisters’ sons, do not 
dare to oppose. If, therefore, the sons 
of high rank have no special reasons 
for returning to their rightful village, 
that of their mother, they remain in 
the father’s community and rule it. 
If they have sisters these may also 
remain, marry within the village, and 
thus start a new dynasty. Gradually, 
though perhaps not at once, they suc- 
ceed to all the privileges, dignities, 
and functions vested till then in the 
local headman. They are styled 
‘ masters’ of the village and of its 
lands, they preside over the formal 
councils, they decide upon all communal 
matters where a decision is needed, and 
above all they take over the control of 
local monopolies and local magic. 

65 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

All the facts I have just reviewed 
are strictly empirical observations; let 
us now look at the legends adduced to 
cover them. According to one story 
two sisters, Botabalu and Bonumakala, 
came out of the original hole near 
Laba’i. They went at once to the 
central district of Kiriwina, and both 
settled in Omarakana. Here they were 
welcomed by the local lady in charge 
of magic and all the rights, and thus 
the mythological sanction of their 
claims to the capital was established. 
(To this point we shall have to return 
again.) After a time they had a 
quarrel about some banana leaves 
pertaining to the beautiful fibre petti- 
coats used for dress. The elder sister 
then ordered the younger to go, which 
among the natives is a great insult. 
She said: “ I shall remain here and keep 
all the strict taboos. You go and 
eat bush-pig, katakayluva fish.” This 
is the reason why the chiefs in the 
coastal districts, though in reality 
they have the same rank, do not keep 

66 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

the same taboos. The same story is 
told by natives of the coastal villages 
with the difference, however, that it is 
the younger sister who orders her 
senior to remain in Omarakana and 
keep all the taboos, while she herself 
goes to the west. 

According to a Sinaketan version, 
there were three original women of the 
Tabalu sub-clan, the eldest remained 
in Kiriwina, the second settled in 
Kuboma, the youngest came to 
Sinaketa and brought with her the 
Kaloma shell discs, which started the 
local industry. 

All these observations refer only to 
one sub-clan of the Malasi clan. The 
other sub-clans of this clan, of which 
I have some dozen on record, are all 
of low rank; are all local, that is have 
not immigrated into their present 
territory; and some of them, those of 
Bwoytalu, belong to what might be 
called the pariah or specially despised 
category of people. Although they all 
bear the same generic name, have the 

67 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

same common totem, and on ceremonial 
occasions would range themselves side 
by side with the people of the highest 
rank, they are regarded by the natives 
as belonging to an entirely different 
class. i 

Before I pass to the re-interpretation 
or historical reconstruction of these 
facts, I shall present the facts referring 
to the other clans. The Lukuba clan 
is perhaps the next in importance. 
They count among their sub-clans two 
or three which immediately follow in 
rank the Tabalu of Omarakana. The 
ancestors of these sub-clans are called 
Mwauri, Mulobwaima, and Tudava; 
and they all three came out from the 
same main hole near Laba’i, out of 
which the four totemic animals emerged, 
They moved afterwards to certain 
important centres in Kiriwina and in 
the neighbouring islands of Kitava and 
Vakuta. As we have seen, according 
to the main myth of emergence, the 
Lukuba clan had the highest rank at 
first, before the dog and pig incident 

68 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

reversed the order. Moreover, most 
mythological personalities or animals 
belong to the Lukuba clan. The great 
mythological culture hero Tudava, 
reckoned also as ancestor by the 
sub-clan of that name, is a Lukuba. 
The majority of the mythical heroes in 
connection with the inter-tribal rela- 
tions and the ceremonial forms of 
trading belong also to the same clan.? 
Most of the economic magic of the tribe 
also belongs to people of this clan. In 
Vakuta, where they have been recently 
overshadowed, if not displaced, by the 
Tabalu, they are still able to assert 
themselves ; they have still retained the 
monopoly in magic; and, taking their 
stand upon mythological tradition, the 
Lukuba still affirm their real superiority 
to the usurpers. There are far fewer 
sub-clans of low rank among them than 
among the Malasi. 

About the third large totemic 
division, the Lukwasisiga, there is much 

1 Cf. Argonauts of the Western Pacific, 
p- 321. 

69 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

less to be said as regards mythology 
and cultural or historic réle. In the 
main emergence myth they are either 
completely left out, or else their 
ancestral animal or person is made to 
play an entirely insignificant part. 
They do not own any specially impor- 
tant forms of magic and are conspicious- 
ly absent from any mythological 
reference. The only important part 
which they play is in the great Tudava 
cycle in which the ogre Dokonikan is 
made to belong to the Lukwasisiga 
totem. To this clan belongs the head- 
man of the village Kabwaku, who 
is also the chief of the district of 
Tilataula. This district was always in 
a relation of potential hostility to the 
district of Kiriwina proper, and the 
chiefs of Tilataula were the political 
rivals of the Tabalu, the people of the 
highest rank. From time to time the 
two would wage war. No matter which 
side was defeated and had to fly, peace 
was always restored by a ceremonial 
reconciliation, and the same relative 

70 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

status once more obtained between the 
two provinces. The chiefs of 
Omarakana always retained superiority 
of rank and a sort of general control 
over the hostile district, even after this 
had been victorious. The chiefs of 
Kabwaku were to a certain extent 
bound to execute their orders; and 
more especially if a direct capital 
punishment had to be meted out in 
olden days the chief of Omarakana 
would delegate his potential foe to 
carry it out. The real superiority 
of the chiefs of Omarakana was due 
to their rank. But to a great extent 
their power and the fear with which 
they inspired all the other natives was 
derived from the important sun and 
rain magic which they wielded. Thus 
members of a sub-clan of the 
Lukwasisiga were the potential foes and 
the executive vassals, but in war the 
equals, of the highest chiefs. For, 
as in peace times the supremacy of the 
Tabalu would remain unchallenged, 
so in war the Toliwaga of Kabwaku 

7I 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

were considered generally the more 
efficient and redoubtable. The Luk- 
wasisiga clan were also on the whole 
regarded as land-lubbers (kulita’odila). 
One or two other sub-clans of this clan 
were of rather high rank and inter- 
married rather frequently with the 
Tabalu of Omarakana. 

The fourth clan, the Lukulabuta, 
includes only sub-clans of low rank 
among its numbers. They are the 
least numerous clan, and the only magic 
with which they are associated is 
sorcery. 

When we come to the historical 
interpretation of these myths a funda- 
mental question meets us at the 
outset: must we regard the sub-clans 
which figure in legend and myth as 
representing merely the local branches 
of a homogeneous culture, or can we 
ascribe to them a more ambitious 
significance and regard them as standing 
for representatives of various cultures, 
that is as units of different migration 
waves? If the first alternative is 

72 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

accepted then all the myths, historical 
data, and sociological facts refer simply 
to small internal movements and 
changes, and there is nothing to be 
added to them except what we have 
said. 

In support of the more ambitious 
hypothesis, however, it might be urged 
that the main legend of emergence 
places the origins of the four clans in a 
very suggestive spot. Laba’i lies on 
the northwestern beach, the only 
place open to sailors who would have 
come from the direction of the pre- 
vailing monsoon winds. Moreover, in 
all the myths the drift of a migration, 
the trend of cultural influence, the 
travels of culture heroes, take place 
from north to south and generally, 
though less uniformly, from west to 
east. This is the direction which 
obtains in the great cycle of Tudava 
stories ; this is the direction which we 
have found in the migration myths ; 
this is the direction which obtains in the 
majority of the Kula legends. Thus the 

73 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

assumption is plausible that a cultural 
influence has been spreading from the 
northwestern shores of the archipelago, 
an influence which can be traced as 
far east as Woodlark Island, and as 
far south as the D’Entrecasteaux 
Archipelago. This hypothesis is sug- 
gested by the conflict element in some 
of the myths, such as that between the 
dog and the pig, between Tudava and 
Dokonikan, and between the cannibal 
and non-cannibal brother. If we then 
accept this hypothesis for what it is 
worth, the following scheme emerges. 
The oldest layer would be represented 
by the Lukwasisiga and Lukulabuta 
clans. The latter is the first to emerge 
mythologically; while both are relative- 
ly autochthonous in that they are not 
sailors, their communities usually lie 
inland, and their occupation is mainly 
agriculture. The generally hostile atti- 
tude of the main Lukwasisiga sub-clan, 
the Toliwaga, to what would be 
obviously the latest immigrants, the 
Tabalu, might also be made to fit into 

74 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

this hypothesis. It is again plausible 
that the cannibal monster who is fought 
by the innovator and cultural hero, 
Tudava, belongs to the Lukwasisiga clan. 

I have expressly stated that the 
sub-clans and not the clans must be 
regarded as migration units. For it 
is an incontrovertible fact that the big 
clan, which comprises a number of 
sub-clans, is but a loose social unit, 
split by important cultural rifts. The 
Malasi clan, for instance, includes 
the highest sub-clan, the Tabalu, as 
well as the most despised sub-clans, 
Wabu’a and Gumsosopa of Bwoytalu. 
The historical hypothesis of migratory 
units would still have to explain the 
relation between sub-clans and clan. 
It seems to me that the minor sub-clans 
must also have been of a previous 
arrival, and that their totemic assimila- 
tion is a by-product of a general process 
of sociological reorganization which 
took place after the strong and in- 
fluential immigrants of the Tudava 
and Tabalu type had arrived. 

75 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

The historical reconstruction requires, 
therefore, a number of auxiliary hypoth- 
eses, each of which must be regarded as 
plausible, but must remain arbitrary; 
while each assumption adds a consider- 
able element of uncertainty. The 
whole reconstruction is a mental game, 
attractive and absorbing, often spon- 
taneously obtruding itself upon a 
field-worker, but always remaining 
outside the field of observation and 
sound conclusion—that is, if the field- 
worker keeps his powers of observation 
and his sense of reality under control. 
The scheme which I have here 
developed is the one into which the 
facts of Trobriand sociology, myth, 
and custom naturally arrange them- 
selves. Nevertheless, I do not attach 
any serious importance to it, and I do 
not believe that even a very exhaustive 
knowledge of a district entitles the 
ethnographer to anything but tentative 
and cautious reconstructions. Perhaps 
a much wider collation of such schemes 
might show their value, or else prove 

76 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

their utter futility. It is only perhaps 
as working hypotheses, stimulating 
to more careful and minute collection 
of legend, of all tradition, and of 
sociological difference, that such 
schemes possess any importance what- 
ever. 

As far as the sociological theory of 
these legends goes the historical re- 
construction is irrelevant. Whatever 
the hidden reality of their unrecorded 
past may be, myths serve to cover 
certain inconsistencies created by his- 
torical events, rather than to record 
these events exactly. The myths asso- 
ciated with the spread of the powerful 
sub-clans show on certain points a 
fidelity to life in that they record 
facts inconsistent with one another. 
The incidents by which this inconsis- 
tency is obliterated, if not hidden, are 
most likely fictitious; we have seen 
certain myths vary according to the 
locality in which they are told. 
In other cases the incidents bolster 
up non-existent claims and rights. 

77 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

The historical consideration of myth 
is interesting, therefore, in that it 
shows that myth, taken as a whole, 
cannot be sober dispassionate history, 
since it is always made ad hoc to fulfil 
a certain sociological function, to 
glorify a certain group, or to justify 
an anomalous status. These considera- 
tions show us also that to the native 
mind immediate history, semi-historic 
legend, and unmixed myth flow into one 
another, form a continuous sequence, 
and fulfil really the same sociological 
function. 

And this brings us once more to our 
original contention that the really 
important thing about the myth is 
its character of a retrospective, ever- 
present, live actuality. It is to a 
native neither a fictitious story, nor an 
account of a dead past ; it is a statement 
of a bigger reality still partially alive. 
It is alive in that its precedent, its law, 
its moral, still rule the social life of the 
natives. Itis clear that myth functions 
especially where there is a sociological 

78 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF ORIGIN 

strain, such as in matters of great 
difference in rank and power, matters 
of precedence and subordination, and 
unquestionably where profound his- 
torical changes have taken place. So 
much can be asserted as a fact, though 
it must always remain doubtful how 
far we can carry out historical re- 
construction from the myth. 

We can certainly discard all 
explanatory as well as all symbolic 
interpretations of these myths of origin. 
The personages and beings which 
we find in them are what they appear 
to be on the surface, and not symbols 
of hidden realities. As to any explana- 
tory function of these myths, there is 
no problem which they cover, no 
curiosity which they satisfy, no theory 
which they contain. 

79 

http://rcin.org.pl 

II 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND OF THE 
RECURRENT CYCLE OF LIFE 

In certain versions of origin myths 
the existence of humanity underground 
is compared to the existence of human 
spirits after death in the present-day 
spirit-world. Thus a mythological 
rapprochement is made between the 
primeval past and the immediate 
destiny of each man, another of those 
links with life which we find so 
important in the understanding of the 
psychology and the cultural value of 
myth. 
The parallel between primeval and 
spiritual existence can be drawn even 
further. The ghosts of the deceased 
move after death to the island of Tuma. 
There they enter the earth through a 
special hole—a sort of reversed pro- 

80 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

ceeding to the original emergence. 
Even more important is the fact that 
after a span of spiritual existence in 
Tuma, the nether world, an individual 
grows old, grey, and wrinkled; and 
that then he has to rejuvenate by 
sloughing his skin. Even so did human 
beings in the old primeval times, when 
they lived underground. When they 
first came out on the surface they had 
not yet lost this ability; men and 
women could live eternally young. 
They lost the faculty, however, by 
an apparently trivial, yet important 
and fateful event. Once upon a time 
there lived in the village of Bwadela an 
old woman who dwelt with her daughter 
and grand-daughter; three generations 
of genuine matrilineal descent. The 
grandmother and grand-daughter went 
out one day to bathe in the tidal creek. 
The girl remained on the shore, while 
the old woman went away some 
distance out of sight. She took off her 
skin, which, carried by the tidal 
current, floated along the creek until 

8I 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

it stuck on a bush. Transformed into 
a young girl, she came back to her 
grand-daughter. The latter did not 
recognize her; she was afraid of her, 
and bade her begone. The old woman, 
mortified and angry, went back to her 
bathing place, searched for her old skin, 
put it on again, and returned to her 
grand-daughter. This time she was 
recognized and thus greeted: “A 
young girl came here; I was afraid; 
I chased her away.” Said the grand- 
mother: ‘‘No, you didn’t want to 
recognize me. Well, you will become 
old—I shall die.” They went home to 
where the daughter was preparing the 
meal. The old woman spoke to her 
daughter: “I went to bathe; the 
tide carried my skin away; your 
daughter did not recognise me; she 
chased me away. I shall not slough 
my skin. We shall all become old. 
We shall all die.” 

After that men lost the power of chang- 
ing their skin and of remaining youthful. 
The only animals who have retained 

82 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

the power of changing the skin are 
the ‘animals of the below ’—snakes, 
crabs, iguanas, and lizards: this is 
because men also once lived under the 
ground. These animals come out of 
the ground and they still can change 
their skin. Had men lived above, 
the ‘animals of the above ’—birds, 
flying-foxes, and insects—would also be 
able to change their skins and renew 
their youth. 

Here ends the myth as it is usually 
told. Sometimes the natives will add 
other comments drawing parallels be- 
tween spirits and primitive humanity ; 
sometimes they will emphasize the 
regeneration motive of the reptiles; 
sometimes tell only the bare incident 
of the lost skin. The story is, in itself, 
trivial and unimportant; and it would 
appear so to anyone who did not 
study it against the background of the 
various ideas, customs, and rites asso- 
ciated with death and future life. The 
myth is obviously but a developed and 
dramatized belief in the previous 

83 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

human power of rejuvenation and in its 
subsequent loss. 

Thus, through the conflict between 
grand-daughter and grandmother, 
human beings, one and all, had to sub- 
mit to the process of decay and debility 
brought on by old age. This, however, 
did not yet involve the full incidence 
of the inexorable fate which is the 
present lot of man; for old age, bodily 
decay, and debility do not spell death 
to the natives. In order to under- 
stand the full cycle of their beliefs it 
is necessary to study the factors of 
illness, decay, and death. The native 
of the Trobriands is definitely an 
optimist in his attitude to health and 
illness. Strength, vigour, and bodily 
perfection are to him the natural status 
which can only be affected or upset 
by an accident or by a supernatural 
cause. Small accidents such as ex- 
cessive fatigue, sunstroke, over-eating, 
or exposure may cause minor and 
temporary ailments. By a spear in 
battle, by poison, by a fall from a rock 

84 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

or a tree a man may be maimed or 
killed. Whether these accidents and 
others, such as drowning and the attack 
of a crocodile or a shark, are entirely 
free from sorcery is ever a debatable 
question to a native. But there is no 
doubt whatever to him that all serious 
and especially all fatal illnesses are due 
to various forms and agencies of 
witchcraft. The most prevalent of 
these is the ordinary sorcery practised 
by wizards, who can produce by their 
spells and rites a number of ailments 
covering well nigh the whole domain of 
ordinary pathology, with the exception 
of very rapid fulminating diseases and 
epidemics. 

The source of witchcraft is always 
sought in some influence coming trom 
the south. There are two points in 
the Trobriand Archipelago at which 
sorcery is said to have originated, or 
rather to have been brought over from 
the D’Entrecasteaux Archipelago. One 
of these is the grove of Lawaywo 
between the villages of Ba’u and 

85 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Bwoytalu, and the other is the southern 
island of Vakuta. Both these districts 
are still considered the most redoubt- 
able centres of witchcraft. 

The district of Bwoytalu occupies 
a specially low social position in the 
island, inhabited as it is by the best 
wood-carvers, the most expert fibre- 
plaiters, and the eaters of such abomina- 
tions as stingaree and bush-pig. These 
natives have been endogamous for a 
long time, and they probably represent 
the oldest layer of indigenous culture 
in the island. To them sorcery was 
brought from the southern archipelago 
by a crab. This animal is either 
depicted as emerging out of a hole in 
the Lawaywo grove, or else as travelling 
by the air and dropping from above at 
the same place. About the time of its 
arrival a man and a dog went out. 
The crab was red, for it had the 
sorcery within it. The dog saw it 
and tried to bite it. Then the crab 
killed the dog, and having done this, 
proceeded to kill the man. But looking 

86 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 
at him the crab became sorry, ‘its 
belly was moved’, and it brought him 
back to life. The man then offered 
his murderer and saviour a large 
payment, a pokala, and asked the 
crustacean to give him the magic. 
This was done. The man immediately 
made use of his sorcery to kill his 
benefactor, the crab. He then pro- 
ceeded to kill, according to a rule 
observed or believed to be observed 
until now, a near maternal relative. 
After that he was in full possession 
of witchcraft. The crabs at present 
are black, for sorcery has left them; 
they are, however, slow to die for once 
they were the masters of life and of 
death. 

A similar type of myth is told in 
the southern island of Vakuta. They 
tell how a malicious being of human 
shape, but not of human nature, went 
into a piece of bamboo somewhere on 
the northern shore of Normanby Island. 
The piece of bamboo drifted northwards 
till it was washed ashore near the 

87 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

promontory of Yayvau or Vakuta. 
A man from the neighbouring village 
of Kwadagila heard a voice in the 
bamboo and he opened it. The demon 
came out and taught him sorcery. 
This, according to the informants in the 
south, is the real starting point of 
black magic. It went to the district 
of Ba’u in Bwoytalu from Vakuta 
and not directly from the southern 
archipelagoes. Another version of the 
Vakuta tradition maintains that the 
tauva’u came to Vakuta not in a bamboo 
but by a grander arrangement. At 
Sewatupa on the northern shore of 
Normanby Island there stood a big 
tree in which many of the malignant 
beings used to reside. It was felled, 
and it tumbled right across the sea, 
so that while its base remained on 
Normanby Island the trunk and the 
branches came across the sea and the 
top touched Vakuta. Hence sorcery 
is most rampant in the southern 
archipelago; the intervening sea is 
full of fish who live in the branches 

88 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

and boughs of the tree; and the place 
whence sorcery came to the Trobriands 
is the southern beach of Vakuta. For 
in the top of the tree there were three 
malignant beings, two males and a 
female, and they gave some magic to 
the inhabitants of the island. 

In these mythical stories we have 
but one link in the chain of beliefs 
which surround the final destiny 
of human beings. The mythical in- 
cidents can be understood and their 
importance realized only in connection 
with the full beliefs in the power and 
nature of witchcraft, and with the 
feelings and apprehensions regarding 
it. The explicit stories about the 
advent of sorcery do not quite exhaust 
or account for all the supernatural 
dangers. Rapid and sudden disease 
and death are, in native belief, brought 
about, not by the male sorcerers, but 
by flying witches who act differently 
and possess altogether a more super- 
natural character. I was unable to find 
any initial myth about the origin of 

89 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

this type of witchcraft. On the other 
hand, the nature and the whole pro- 
ceedings of these witches are sur- 
rounded by a cycle of beliefs which 
form what might be called a standing 
or current myth. I shall not repeat 
them with detail, for I have given a 
full account in my book, the Argonauts 
of the Western Pacific. But it is 
important to realize that the halo of 
supernatural powers surrounding in- 
dividuals who are believed to be 
witches gives rise to a continuous 
flow of stories. Such stories can be 
regarded as minor myths generated by 
the strong belief in the supernatural 
powers. Similar stories are also told 
told about the male sorcerers, the 
bwaga’u. 

Epidemics, finally, are ascribed to the 
direct action of the malignant spirits, 
the tauva’u, who, as we saw, are mytho- 
logically often regarded as the source 
of all witchcraft. These malignant 

1 Chap. X, passim: especially pp. 236- 
248, also pp. 320, 321, 393. 

go 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

beings have a permanent abode in the 
south. Occasionally they will move 
to the Trobriand Archipelago, and, 
invisible to ordinary human beings, 
they walk at night through the villages 
rattling their lime-gourds and clanking 
their wooden sword clubs. Wherever 
this is heard fear falls upon the in- 
habitants, for those whom the tauva’u 
strike with their wooden weapons die, 
and such an invasion is always asso- 
ciated with death in masses. Leria, 
epidemic disease, obtains then in the 
villages. The malignant spirits can 
sometimes change into reptiles and 
then become visible to human eyes. 
It is not easy to distinguish such a 
reptile from an ordinary one, but it 
is very important to do so, for a 
tauva’u, injured or ill-treated, revenges 
himself by death. 

Here, again, around this standing 
myth, around this domestic tale of a 
happening which is not placed in the 
past but still occurs, there cluster 
innumerable concrete stories. Some 

gI 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

of them even occurred while I was in 
the Trobriands; there was a severe 
dysentery once, and the first outbreak 
of what probably was Spanish influenza 
in 1918. Many natives reported having 
heard the tauva’u. A giant lizard was 
seen in Wawela; the man who killed 
it died soon after, and the epidemic 
broke out in the village. While I was 
in Oburaku, and sickness was rife in the 
village, a real tauva’u was seen by the 
crew of the boat in which I was being 
paddled; a large multi-coloured snake 
appeared on a mangrove, but vanished 
mysteriously as we came near. It was 
only through my short-sightedness, 
and perhaps also my ignorance of how 
to look for a tauva’u, that I failed to 
observe this miracle myself. Such 
and similar stories can be obtained by 
the score from natives in all localities. 
A reptile of this type should be put on a 
high platform and valuables placed in 
front of it; and I have been assured 
by natives who have actually witnessed 
it that this is not infrequently done, 

92 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

though I never have seen this*myself. 
Again, a number of women witches are 
said to have had intercourse with 
tauva’u, and of one living at present this 
is positively affirmed. 

In the case of this belief we see how 
minor myths are constantly generated 
by the big schematic story. Thus 
with regard to all the agencies of disease 
and death the belief, and the explicit 
narratives which cover part of it, the 
small concrete supernatural events 
constantly registered by the natives, 
form one organic whole. These beliefs 
are obviously not a theory or explana- 
tion. On the one hand, they are the 
whole complex of cultural practices, 
for sorcery is not only believed to be 
practised, but actually is practised, at 
least in its male form. On the other 
hand, the complex under discussion 
covers the whole pragmatic reaction 
of man towards disease and death; it 
expresses his emotions, his forebodings ; 
it influences his behaviour. The nature 
of myth again appears to us as some- 

93 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

thing very far removed from a mere 
intellectual explanation. 

We are now in full possession of the 
native ideas about the factors which 
in the past cut short man’s power of 
rejuvenation, and which at present 
cut short his very existence. The 
connection, by the way, between the 
two losses is only indirect. The natives 
believe that although any form of 
sorcery can reach the child, the youth, 
or the man in the prime of life, as well 
as the aged, yet old people are more 
easily stricken. Thus the loss of re- 
juvenation at least prepared the ground 
for sorcery. 

But although there was a time when 
people grew old and died, and thus 
became spirits, they yet remained in 
the villages with the survivors—even 
as now they stay around the dwellings 
when they return to their village 
during the annual feast of the milamala. 
But one day an old woman-spirit who 
was living with her people in the house 
crouched on the floor under one of the 

94 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

bedstead platforms. Her daughter, 
who was distributing food to the 
members of the family, spilled some 
broth out of the coconut cup and 
burnt the spirit, who expostulated and 
reprimanded her daughter. The latter 
replied: “I thought you had gone 
away ; I thought you were only coming 
back at one time in the year during 
the milamala.” The spirit’s feelings 
were hurt. She replied: “ I shall go 
to Tuma and live underneath.” She 
then took up a coconut, cut it in half, 
kept the half with the three eyes, and 
gave her daughter the other. “I am 
giving you the half which is blind, and 
therefore you will not see me. I am 
taking the half with the eyes, and I shall 
see you when I come back with other 
spirits.” This is the reason why the 
spirits are invisible, though they them- 
selves can see human beings. 

This myth contains a reference to 
the seasonal feast of milamala, the 
period at which the spirits return to 
their villages while festive celebrations 

95 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

take place. A more explicit myth 
gives an account of how the milamala 
was instituted. A woman of Kitava 
died leaving a pregnant daughter 
behind her. A son was born, but his 
mother had not enough milk to feed 
him. As a man of a neighbouring 
island was dying, she asked him to take 
a message to her own mother in the 
land of spirits, to the effect that the 
departed one should bring food to her 
grandson. The spirit-woman filled her 
basket with spirit-food and came back 
wailing as follows : “ Whose food am I 
carrying? That of my grandson to 
whom I am going to give it; I am 
going to give him his food.” She 
arrived on Bomagema beach in the 
island of Kitava and put down the 
food. She spoke to her daughter : 
“ I bring the food; the man told me 
I should bring it. But I am weak; 
I fear that people may take me for a 
witch.” She then roasted one of the 
yams and gave it to her grandson. 
She went into the bush and made a 

96 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

garden for her daughter. When she 
came back, however, her daughter 
received a fright for the spirit looked 
like a sorceress. She ordered her to go 
away saying: “‘ Return to Tuma, to the 
spirit-land; people will say that you 
are a witch.” The spirit-mother com- 
plained: ‘‘Why do you chase me 
away? I thought I would stay with 
you and make gardens for my grand- 
child.” The daughter only replied: 
“Go away, return to Tuma!” The 
old woman then took up a coconut, 
split it in half, gave the blind half to 
her daughter, and kept the half with 
eyes. She told her that once a year, 
she and other spirits would come back 
during the milamala and look at the 
people in the villages, but remain 
invisible to them. And this is how 
the annual feast came to be what it is. 

In order to understand these mytho- 
logical stories, it is indispensable to 
collate them with native beliefs about 
the spirit-world, with the practices 
during the milamala season, and with 

97 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

the relations between the world of 
the living and the world of the dead, 
such as exist in native forms of spirit- 
ism.1 After death every spirit goes 
to the nether world in Tuma. He has 
to pass at the entrance Topileta, the 
guardian of the spirit world. The 
new-comer offers some valuable gift, 
the spiritual part of the valuables with 
which he had been bedecked at the 
time of dying. When he arrives among 
the spirits he is received by his friends 
and relatives who have previously 
died, and he brings the news from the 
upper world. He then settles down to 
spirit-life, which is similar to earthly 
existence, though sometimes its des- 
cription is coloured by hopes and 
desires and made into a sort of real 
Paradise. But even those natives who 
describe it thus never show any 
eagerness to reach it. 

1 An account of these facts has been 
already given in an article on “ Baloma; 
Spirits of the Dead in the Trobriand Islands” 

in the Journal of the Royal Anthropological 
Institute, 1916, 

98 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

Communication between spirits and 
the living is carried out in several 
ways. Many people have seen spirits 
of their deceased relatives or friends, 
especially in or near the island of Tuma. 
Again, there are now, and seem to have 
been from time immemorial, men and 
women who in trances, or sometimes 
in sleep, go on long expeditions to the 
nether world. They take part in the 
life of the spirits, and carry back and 
forth news, items of information, and 
important messages. Above all they 
are always ready to convey gifts of 
food and valuables from the living to 
the spirits. These people bring home 
to other men and women the reality 
of the spirit world. They also give 
a great deal of comfort to the survivors 
who are ever eager to receive news from 
their dear departed. 

During the annual feast of the 
milamala, the spirits return from Tuma 
to their villages. A special high plat- 
form is erected for them to sit upon, 
from which they can look down upon 

99 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

the doings and amusements of their 
brethren. Food is displayed in big 
quantities to gladden their hearts, 
as well as those of the living citizens of 
the community. During the day val- 
uables are placed on mats in front of 
the headman’s hut and the huts of 
important and wealthy people. A 
number of taboos are observed in the 
village to safeguard the invisible spirits 
from injury. Hot fluids must not be 
spilled, as the spirits might be burned 
like the old woman in the myth. No 
native may sit, cut wood within the 
village, play about with spears or 
sticks, or throw missiles, for fear of 
injuring a Baloma, a spirit. The 
spirits, moreover, manifest their 
presence by pleasant and unpleasant 
signs, and express their satisfaction or 
the reverse. Slight annoyance is some- 
times shown by unpleasant smells, 
more serious ill-humour is displayed 
in bad weather, accidents, and damage 
to property. On such occasions—as 
well as when an important medium 

I00 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

goes into a trance, or someone is near 
to death—the spirit-world seems very 
near and real to the natives. It is clear 
that myth fits into these beliefs as an 
integral part of them. There is a close 
and direct parallel between, on the one 
hand, the relations of man to spirit, as 
expressed in present-day religious be- 
liefs and experiences, and, on the other 
hand, the various incidents of the myth. 
Here again the myth can be regarded as 
constituting the furthest background 
of a continuous perspective which 
ranges from an individual’s personal 
concerns, fears, and sorrows at the one 
end, through the customary setting 
of belief, through the many concrete 
cases told from personal experience 
and memory of past generations, right 
back inte the epoch where a similar 
fact is imagined to have occurred for 
the first time. 

I have presented the facts and told 
the myths in a manner which 
implies the existence of an ex- 
tensive and coherent scheme of beliefs. 

IOI 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

This scheme does not exist, of¢course, 
in any explicit form in the{{native 
folk-lore. But it does correspond toa 
definite cultural reality, for all the 
concrete manifestations of the natives’ 
beliefs, feelings, and forebodings with 
reference to death and after-life hang 
together and form a great organic unit. 
The various stories and ideas just 
summarized shade into one another, 
and the natives spontaneously point 
out the parallels and bring out the 
connections between them. Myths, 
religious beliefs, and experiences in 
connection with spirits and the super- 
natural are really all parts of the 
same subject; the corresponding prag- 
matic attitude is expressed in 
conduct by the attempts to commune 
with the nether world. The myths are 
but a part of the organic whole; they 
are an explicit development into narra- 
tive of certain crucial points in native 
belief. When we examine the subjects 
which are thus spun into stories we 
find that they all refer to what might 

102 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

be called the specially¥ unpleasant or 
negative truths: the loss of rejuvena- 
tion, the onset of disease, the loss of 
life by sorcery, the withdrawal of the 
spirits from permanent contact with 
men, and finally the partial communi- 
cation re-established with them. We 
see also that the myths of this cycle are 
more dramatic, they also form a more 
consecutive, yet complex, account than 
was the case with the myths of origins. 
Without labouring the point, I think 
that this is due to a deeper metaphysical 
reference, in other words, to'a stronger 
emotional appeal in stories which deal 
with human destiny, as compared with 
sociological statements or charters. 

In any case we see that the point 
where myth enters in these subjects 
is not to be explained by any greater 
amount of curiosity or any more 
problematic character, but rather by 
emotional colouring and pragmatic 
importance. We have found that the 
ideas elaborated by myth and spun 
out into narrative are especially painful. 

103 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

In one of the stories, that of the institu- 
tion of the milamala and the periodical 
return of the spirits, it is the ceremonial 
behaviour of man, and the taboos 
observed with regard to the spirits, 
which are in question. The subjects 
developed in these myths are clear 
enough in themselves; there is no need 
to ‘explain’ them, and the myth does 
not even partially perform this function. 
What it actually does is to transform 
an emotionally overwhelming fore- 
boding, behind which, even for a 
native, there lurks the idea of an 
inevitable and ruthless fatality. Myth 
presents, first of all, a clear realization 
of this idea. In the second place, it 
brings down a vague but great appre- 
hension to the compass of a trivial, 
domestic reality. The longed-for power 
of eternal youth and the faculty of 
rejuvenation which gives immunity 
from decay and age, have been lost by 
a small accident which it would have 
been in the power of a child and a 
woman to prevent. The separation 

104 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF DEATH AND LIFE 

from the beloved ones after death is 
conceived as due to the careless 
handling of a coconut cup and to a 
small altercation. Disease, again, is 
conceived as something which came out 
of a small animal, and originated 
through an accidental meeting of a 
man, a dog, and a crab. Elements of 
human error, of guilt, and of mischance 
assume great proportions. Elements 
of fate, of destiny, and of the inevitable 
are, on the other hand, brought down 
to the dimension of human mistakes. 
In order to understand this, it is 
perhaps well to realize that in his 
actual emotional attitude towards death, 
whether his own or that of his loved 
ones, the native is not completely 
guided by his belief and his mythologi- 
cal ideas. His intense fear of death, 
his strong desire to postpone it, and his 
deep sorrow at the departure of beloved 
relatives belie the optimistic creed 
and the easy reach of the beyond which 
is inherent in native customs, ideas, 
and ritual. After death has occurred, 

105 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

or at a time when death is threatening, 
there is no mistaking the dim division 
of shaking faith. In long conversations 
with several seriously ill natives, and 
especially with my consumptive friend 
Bagido’u, I felt, half-expressed and 
roughly formulated, but still unmistak- 
able in them all, the same melancholy 
sorrow at the transience of life and all 
its good things, the same dread of the 
inevitable end, and the same question- 
ing as to whether it could be staved off 
indefinitely or at least postponed for 
some little time. But again, the same 
people would clutch at the hope given 
to them by their beliefs. They would 
screen, with the vivid texture of their 
myths, stories, and beliefs about the 
spirit world, the vast emotional void 
gaping beyond them. 

106 

http://rcin.org.pl 

IV 
MYTHS OF MAGIC 

Let me discuss in more detail 
another class of mythical stories, those 
connected with magic. Magic, from 
many points of view, is the most im- 
portant and the most mysterious 
aspect of primitive man’s pragmatic 
attitude towards reality. It is one of 
the problems which are engaging at 
present the most vivid and most con- 
troversial interests of anthropologists. 
The foundations of this study have been 
laid by Sir James Frazer who has also 
erected a magnificent edifice thereon 
in his famous theory of magic. 

Magic plays such a great part in 
northwest Melanesia that even a super- 
ficial observer must soon realize its 
enormous sway. Its incidence, how- 
ever, is not very clear at first sight. 

107 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Although it seems to crop up every- 
where, there are certain highly im- 
portant and vital activities from which 
magic is conspicuously absent. 

No native would ever make a yam or 
taro garden without magic. Yet cer- 
tain important types of planting, such 
as the raising of the coco-nut, the 
cultivation of the banana, of the mango, 
and of the bread-fruit, are devoid of 
magic. Fishing, the economic activity 
only second in importance to 
agriculture, has in some of its forms a 
highly developed magic. Thus the 
dangerous fishing of the shark, the 
pursuit of the uncertain kalala or of the 
to’ulam are smothered in magic. The 
equally vital, but easy and reliable 
method of fishing by poison has no 
magic whatever. In the construction 
of the canoe—an enterprise surrounded 
with technical difficulties, requiring 
organized labour, and leading to an 
ever-dangerous pursuit—the ritual is 
complex, deeply associated with the 
work, and regarded as absolutely 

108 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF MAGIC 

indispensable. In the construction of 
houses, technically quite as difficult 
a pursuit, but involving neither danger, 
nor chance, nor yet such complex 
forms of co-operation as the canoe, 
there is no magic whatever associated 
with the work. Wood-carving, an 
industrial activity of the greatest 
importance, is carried on in certain 
communities as a universal trade, 
learnt in childhood, and practised by 
everyone. In these communities there 
is no magic of carving at all. A differ- 
ent type of artistic sculpture in ebony 
and hardwood, practised only by 
people of special technical and artistic 
ability all over the district, has, on the 
other hand, its magic, which is con- 
sidered as the main source of skill and 
inspiration. In trade, a ceremonial 
form of exchange known as the Kula 
is surrounded by important magical 
ritual; while on the other hand, certain 
minor forms of barter of a purely 
commercial nature are without any 
magic at all. Pursuits such as war and 

109 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

love, as well as certain forces of destiny 
and nature such as disease, wind, and 
weather are in native belief almost 
completely governed by magical forces. 

Even this rapid survey leads us to 
an important generalization which will 
serve as a convenient starting-point. 
We find magic wherever the elements of 
chance and accident, and the emotional 
play between hope and fear have a wide 
and extensive range. We do not find 
magic wherever the pursuit is certain, 
reliable, and well under the control of 
rational methods and technological 
processes. Further, we find magic 
where the element of danger is con- 
spicuous. We do not find it wherever 
absolute safety eliminates any elements 
of foreboding. This is the psychologi- 
cal factor. But magic also fulfils 
another and highly important socio- 
logical function. As I have tried to 
show elsewhere, magic is an active 
element in the organization of labour 
and in its systematic arrangement. 
It also provides the main controlling 

IIO 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF MAGIC 

power in the pursuit of game. The 
integral cultural function of magic, 
therefore, consists in the bridging-over 
of gaps and inadequacies in highly 
important activities not yet completely 
mastered by man. In order to achieve 
this end, magic supplies primitive man 
with a firm belief in his power of 
succeeding ; it provides him also with a 
definite mental and pragmatic tech- 
nique wherever his ordinary means 
fail him. It thus enables man to 
carry out with confidence his most 
vital tasks, and to maintain his poise 
and his mental integrity under cir- 
cumstances which, without the help 
of magic, would demoralize him by 
despair and anxiety, by fear and 
hatred, by unrequited love and im- 
potent hate. 

Magic is thus akin to science in that 
it always has a definite aim intimately 
associated with human instincts, needs, 
and pursuits. The magic art is directed 
towards the attainment of practical 
ends; like any other art or craft it is 

III 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

also governed by theory, and by a 
system of principles which dictate 
the manner in which the act has to be 
performed in order to be effective. 
Thus magic and science show a number 
of similarities, and, with Sir James 
Frazer, we can appropriately call 
magic a pseudo-science. 

Let us look more closely at the 
nature of the magic art. Magic, in all 
its forms, is composed of three essential 
ingredients. In its performance there 
always enter certain words, spoken or 
chanted; certain ceremonial actions 
are always carried out; and there is 
always an officiating minister of the 
ceremony. In analysing, therefore, the 
nature of magic, we have to distinguish 
the formula, the rite, and the condition 
of the performer. It may be said at 
once that in the part of Melanesia 
with which we are concerned, the spell 
is by far the most important constituent 
of magic. To the natives, knowledge 
of magic means the knowledge of the 
spell; and in any act of witchcraft 

II2 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF MAGIC 

the ritual centres round the utterance 
of the spell. The rite and the com- 
petence of the performer are merely 
conditioning factors which serve for 
the proper preservation and launching 
of the spell. This is very important 
from the point of view of our present 
discussion, for the magical spell stands 
in close relation to traditional lore and 
more especially to mythology. + 

In the case of almost all types of 
magic we find some story accounting 
for its existence. Such a story tells 
when and where that particular magical 
formula entered the possession of man, 
how it became the property of a local 
group, how it passed from one to 
another. But such a story is not the 
story of magical origins. Magic never 
‘ originated ’; it never was created or 
invented. All magic simply was from 
the beginning, as an essential adjunct 

1 See Argonauts of the Western Pacific 
pP: 329, 401, et hana and pp. 69-78 of “ Magic, 
cience and Religion” in Science, Religion 

and Reality, Essays by Various Authors 
(1925). 

113 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

to all those things and processes which 
vitally interest man and yet elude his 
normal rational efforts. The spell, 
the rite, and the object which they 
govern are coeval. 

Thus the essence of all magic is 
its traditional integrity. Magic can 
only be efficient if it has been transmit- 
ted without loss and without flaw from 
one generation to the other, till it has 
come down from primeval times to the 
present performer. Magic, therefore, 
requires a pedigree, a sort of traditional 
passport in its travel across time. 
This is supplied by the myth of magic. 
The manner in which myth endows the 
performance of magic with worth and 
validity, in which myth blends with 
the belief in magical efficiency, will 
be best illustrated by a concrete 
example. 

As we know, love and the attractions 
of the other sex play an important 
réle in the life of these Melanesians. 
Like many races of the South Seas they 
are very free and easy in their conduct, 

II4 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF MAGIC 

especially before marriage. Adultery, 
however, is a punishable offence, and 
relations within the same totemic clan 
are strictly forbidden. But the 
greatest crime in the eyes of the natives 
is any form of incest. Even the bare 
idea of such a trespass between brother 
and sister fills them with violent 
horror. Brother and sister, united 
by the nearest bond of kinship in this 
matriarchal society, may not even 
converse freely, must never joke or 
smile at one another, and any allusion 
to one of them in the presence of the 
other is considered extremely bad 
taste. Outside the clan, however, free- 
dom is great, and the pursuit of love 
assumes a variety of interesting and 
even attractive forms. 

All sexual attraction and all power 
of seduction are believed to reside in 
the magic of love. This magic the 
natives regard as founded in a dramatic 
occurrence of the past, told in a strange, 
tragic myth of brother and sister 
incest, to which I can only refer 

i II5 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

briefly here.! The two young people 
lived in a village with their mother, 
and by an accident the girl inhaled a 
strong love decoction, prepared by her 
brother for someone else. Mad with 
passion, she chased him and seduced him 
ona lonely beach. Overcome by shame 
and remorse, they forsook food and 
drink, and died together in a grotto. 
An aromatic herb grew through their 
inlaced skeletons, and this herb forms 
the most powerful ingredient in the 
substances compounded together and 
used in love magic. 

It can be said that the myth of 
magic, even more than the other types 
of savage myth, justifies the socio- 
logical claims of the wielder, shapes 
the ritual, and vouches for the truth of 
the belief in supplying the pattern of 
the subsequent miraculous confirmation. 

Our discovery of this cultural func- 
tion of magical myth fully endorses 

1 For the complete account of this myth 
see the author’s Sex and Repression in Prim- 
itive Society (1926), where its full sociological 
bearings are discussed. 

116 

http://rcin.org.pl 

MYTHS OF MAGIC 

the brilliant theory of the origins of 
power and kingship developed by Sir 
James Frazer in the early parts of his 
Golden Bough. According to Sir James, 
the beginnings of social supremacy are 
due primarily to magic. By showing 
how the efficacy of magic is associated 
with local claims, sociological affilia- 
tion, and direct descent, we have been 
able to forge another link in the chain 
of causes which connect tradition, 
magic, and social power. 

117 

http://rcin.org.pl 

V 
CONCLUSION 

Throughout this book I have 
attempted to prove that myth is above 
all a cultural force; but it is not only 
that. It is obviously also a narrative, 
and thus it has its literary aspect—an 
aspect which has been unduly empha- 
sized by most scholars, but which, 
nevertheless, should not be completely 
neglected. Myth contains germs of 
the future epic, romance, and tragedy ; 
and it has been used in them by the 
creative genius of peoples and by the 
conscious art of civilization. We have 
seen that some myths are but dry and 
succinct statements with scarcely any 
nexus and no dramatic incident ; others, 
like the myth of love or the myth of 
canoe magic and of overseas sailing, 
are eminently dramatic stories. Did 

118 

http://rcin.org.pl 

CONCLUSION 

space permit, I could repeat a long and 
elaborate saga of the culture hero 
Tudava, who slays an ogre, avenges 
his mother, and carries out a number of 
cultural tasks.1 Comparing such 
stories, it might be possible to show 
why myth lends itself in certain of its 
forms to subsequent literary elabora- 
tion, and why certain other of its 
forms remain artistically sterile. Mere 
sociological precedence, legal title, and 
vindication of lineage and local claims 
do not lead far into the realm of 
human emotions, and therefore lack 
the elements of literary value. Belief, 
on the other hand, whether in magic or 
in religion, is closely associated with the 
deepest desires of man, with his fears 
and hopes, with his passions and 
sentiments. Myths of love and of 
death, stories of the loss of immor- 
tality, of the passing of the Golden 
Age, and of the banishment from 

1 For one of the main episodes of the 
myth of Tudava, see pp. 209-210 of the 
author’s “Complex and Myth in Mother- 
right” in Psyche, Vol. V., Jan. 1925. 

11g 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Paradise, myths of incest and of sorcery 
play with the very elements which 
enter into the artistic forms of tragedy, 
of lyric, and of romantic narrative. 
Our theory, the theory of the cultural 
function of myth, accounting as it does 
for its intimate relation to belief and 
showing the close connection between 
ritual and tradition, could help us to 
deepen our understanding of the literary 
possibilities of savage story. But this 
subject, however fascinating, cannot be 
further elaborated here. 

In our opening remarks two current 
theories of myth were discredited and 
discarded: the view that myth is a 
thapsodic rendering of natural pheno- 
mena, and Andrew Lang’s doctrine 
that myth is essentially an explanation, 
a sort of primitive science. Our treat- 
ment has shown that neither of these 
mental attitudes is dominant in primi- 
tive culture; that neither can explain 
the form of primitive sacred stories, 
their sociological context, or their 
cultural function. But once we have 

I20 

http://rcin.org.pl 

CONCLUSION 

realized that myth serves principally to 
establish a sociological charter, or a 
retrospective moral pattern of be- 
haviour, or the primeval supreme 
miracle of magic—it becomes clear 
that elements both of explanation and 
of interest in nature must be found in 
sacred legends. For a precedent ac- 
counts for subsequent cases, though 
it does so through an order of ideas 
entirely different from the scientific 
relation of cause and effect, of motive 
and consequence. The interest in 
nature, again, is obvious if we realize 
how important is the mythology of 
magic, and how definitely magic clings 
to the economic concerns of man. In 
this, however, mythology is very far 
from a disinterested and contemplative 
rhapsody about natural phenomena. 
Between myth and nature two links 
must be interpolated : man’s pragmatic 
interest in certain aspects of the outer 
world, and his need of supplementing 
rational and empirical control of certain 
phenomena by magic. 

I2I 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

Let me state once more that I have 
dealt in this book with savage myth, 
and not with the myth of culture. 
I believe that the study of 
mythology as it functions and works 
in primitive societies should anticipate 
the conclusions drawn from the material 
of higher civilizations. Some of this 
material has come down to us only in 
isolated literary texts, without its 
setting in actual life, without its social 
context. Such is the mythology of the 
ancient classical peoples and of the 
dead civilizations of the Orient. In the 
study of myth the classical scholar must 
learn from the anthropologist. 

The science of myth in living higher 
cultures, such as the present civiliza- 
tions of India, Japan, China, and last 
but not least, our own, might well be 
inspired by the comparative study of 
primitive folk-lore; and in its turn 
civilized culture could furnish important 
additions and explanations to savage 
mythology. This subject is very much 
beyond the scope of the present study. 

122 

http://rcin.org.pl 

CONCLUSION 

I do, however, want to emphasize the 
fact that anthropology should be not 
only the study of savage custom in 
the light of our mentality and our 
culture, but also the study of our 
own mentality in the distant perspective 
borrowed from Stone Age man. By 
dwelling mentally for some time among 
people of a much simpler culture than 
our own, we may be able to see ourselves 
from a distance, we may be able to 
gain a new sense of proportion with 
regard to our own institutions, beliefs, 
and customs. If anthropology could 
thus inspire us with some sense of 
proportion, and supply us with a finer 
sense of humour, it might justly claim 
to be a very great science. 

I have now completed the survey of 
facts and the range of conclusions; 
it only remains to summarize them 
briefly. I have tried to show that 
folk-lore, the stories handed on in a 
native community, live in the cultural 
context of tribal life and not merely 
in narrative. By this I mean that the 

123 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

ideas, emotions, and desires associated 
with a given story are experienced not 
only when the story is told, but also 
when in certain customs, moral rules, 
or ritual proceedings, the counterpart 
of the story is enacted. And here a 
considerable difference is discovered 
between the several types of story. 
While in the mere- fireside tale the 
sociological context is narrow, the 
legend enters much more deeply into 
the tribal life of the community, 
and the myth plays a most important 
function. Myth, as a statement of 
primeval reality which still lives in 
present-day life and as a justification 
by precedent, supplies a retrospective 
pattern of moral values, sociological 
order, and magical belief. It is, there- 
fore, neither a mere narrative, nor a 
form of science, nor a branch of art 
or history, nor an explanatory tale. 
It fulfils a function sui generis closely 
connected with the nature of tradition, 
with the continuity of culture, with the 
relation between age and youth, and 

124 

http://rcin.org.pl 

ee 

CONCLUSION 

with the human attitude towards the 
past. The function of myth, briefly, 
is to strengthen tradition and endow it 
with a greater value and prestige by 
tracing it back to a higher, better, 
more supernatural reality of initial 
events. 

Myth is, therefore, an indispensable 
ingredient of all culture. It is, as we 
have seen, constantly regenerated; 
every historical change creates its 
mythology, which is, however, but 
indirectly related to historical fact. 
Myth is a constant by-product of living 
faith, which is in need of miracles; 
of sociological status, which demands 
precedent ; of moral rule, which requires 
sanction. 

We have made, perhaps, a too 
ambitious attempt to give a new 
definition of myth. Our conclusions 
imply a new method of treating the 
science of folk-lore, for we have shown 
that it cannot be independent of 
ritual, of sociology, or even of material 
culture. Folk-tales, legends, and myths 

125 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

must be lifted from their flat existence 
on paper, and placed in the three- 
dimensional reality of full life. As 
regards anthropological field-work, we 
are obviously demanding a new method 
of collecting evidence. The an- 
thropologist must relinquish his com- 
fortable position in the long chair on 
the verandah of the missionary com- 
pound, Government station, or planter’s 
bungalow, where, armed with pencil 
and notebook and at times with a 
whisky and soda, he has been accus- 
tomed to collect statements from 
informants, write down stories, and 
fill out sheets of paper with savage 
texts. He must go out into the villages, 
and see the natives at work in gardens, 
on the beach, in the jungle; he must 
sail with them to distant sandbanks 
and to foreign tribes, and observe 
them in fishing, trading, and ceremonial 
overseas expeditions. Information 
must come to him full-flavoured from 
his own observations of native life, and 
not be squeezed out of reluctant in- 

126 

http://rcin.org.pl 

CONCLUSION 

formants as a trickle of talk. Field- 
work can be done first-or second-hand 
even among savages, in the middle of 
pile-dwellings, not far from actual 
cannibalism and head-hunting. Open- 
air anthropology, as opposed to hearsay 
note-taking, is hard work, but it is 
also great fun. Only such anthropology 
can give us the all-round vision of 
primitive man and of primitive culture. 
Such anthropology shows us, as regards 
myth, that far from being an idle 
mental pursuit, it is a vital ingredient 
of practical relation to the environment. 

The claims and the merits, however, 
are not mine, but are due once more to 
Sir James Frazer. The Golden Bough 
contains the theory of the ritual and 
sociological function of myth, to which 
I have been able to make but a small 
contribution, in that I could test, 
prove, and document it in my field- 
work. This theory is implied in 
Frazer’s treatment of magic; in his 
masterly exposition of the great im- 
portance of agricultural rites; in the 

127 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PRIMITIVE PSYCHOLOGY 

central place which the cults of vegeta- 
tion and fertility occupy in the volumes 
of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, and in 
those on the Spirits of the Corn and of 
the Wild. In these works, asin so many 
of his other writings, Sir James Frazer 
has established the intimate relation 
between the word and the deed in 
primitive faith; he has shown that the 
words of the story and of the spell, and 
the acts of ritual and of ceremony are 
the two aspects of primitive belief. 
The deep philosophic query propounded 
by Faust, as to the primacy of the 
word or of the deed, appears to us 
fallacious. The beginning of man is 
the beginning of articulate thought and 
of thought put into action. Without 
words, whether framed in sober rational 
conversation, or launched in magical 
spells, or used to entreat superior 
divinities, man would not have been 
able to embark upon his great Odyssey 
of cultural adventure and achievement. 

FINIS 

128 

http://rcin.org.pl 

PO YC HE 

AN ANNUAL REVIEW 
OF GENERAL AND APPLIED PSYCHOLOGY 

Edited by C. K. OGDEN, M.A. 

(Bditer yi ‘The International Library of Ps chology, 
hilosophy, and Scientific Method F 

RECENT CONTRIBUTORS INCLUDE: 

Dr. Altred Adler 

Prof. Charles Baudouin 
J. D. Bernal 

Dr. William Brown 
Prof. S. Buchanan 
Prof. E. Bugnion 

Dr. Trigant Burrow 
Prof. Cyril Burt 

Prof. Rudolf Carnap 
Dr. F. G. Crookshank 
E. J. Dingwall 

Prot. Auguste Forel 
Prof. M. Ginsberg 

Dr. R. G. Gordon 

Dr. E. C. Graham 

Dr. H. Hartridge 

Prof. Lancelot Hogben 
Prof. Pierre Janet 
Prof. Otto Jespersen 
Dr. Ernest Jones 

Prot. K. Koftka 

Prof. Laignel-Lavastine 

Miss L. W. Lockhart 
William McDougall, F.R.S. 
Prof. Bronislaw Malinowski 
Dr. E. Miller 

Dr. T. W. Mitchell 

Dr. C. S. Myers, F.R.S. 
Dr. Oscar Oeser 

Prof. F. Paulhan 

Prot. T. H. Pear 

Prof. H. Piéron 

Dr. I. A. Richards 
Bertrand Russell, F.R.S. 
Prof. Sante De Sanctis 
Prof. E. Sapir 

Dr. Paul Schilder 

Sir Grafton Elliot Smith 
Vilhjalmur Stefansson 
Baron von Uexküll 

Dr. John B. Watson 
Prot. W. M. Wheeler 
Dr. Edgar Wind 

Dr. William A. White 

Price 10- 

A few bound sets of PSYCHE, Vols. I—XIV, 1920—1934, are 
still available, price £17 the set 

PSYCHE 

10, KING'S PARADE, CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND 

http://rcin.org.pl 

BASIC ENGLISH 

Basic English 
A general account, with Word-list and Rules 
The Basic Words 
A full account of the 850, with all special uses 
The A BC of Basic English 
A simple account, step by step, for learners and teachers. 
The Basic Dictionary 
Putting into Basic the 7,500 words most used in Normal English, 
Debabelization 
The argument for Basic as the international language of the future. 
Brighter Basic 
For young persons of taste and feeling. Not a book for teachers. 
Basic for Business 
A complete system for international trade, with examples of letters. 
Basic English Applied : Science 
Chemistry, Physics, and Biology are here covered. 
Basic for Economics 
Covering economic theory; with examples from representative writers, 
A Basic Astronomy. 
The story of the stars in everyday language. 

EXAMPLES 
Basic by Examples. Every Basic word with its different uses. 
Everyday Basic. Simple examples for all purposes. 
The Gold Insect. Poe's “Gold Bug” put into Basic, 
Gulliver in Lilliput. The first of Gulliver's journeys. 
Robinson Crusoe. His story in Basic. 
Wise Words of an Early American, Benjamin Franklin. 
Stories from France. From the prose of Perrault 
Stories for the Young. And for the notso young. By Tolstoi. 
Keäwe’s Bottle. Stevenson's “ The Bottle Imp ” in Basic. 
Julius Caesar. From North’s Plutarch (with “ Brutus "’). 
Japanese Stories. From Lafcadio Hearn. 
That Night. Tumura’s “ Sono Yo” in Basic. 
The Organization of Peace. By Maxwell Garnett, 
International Talks. By Wickham Steed ; with Basic parallel, 
Lamb's Stories from Shakespeare. A Basic selection. 
Stories from the Bible. A selection from the coming Basic Bible 
The Basic St. Mark. The first complete unit, 
The Chemical History of a Candle. Faraday in Basic. 
Science and Well-Being. A selection from J. B. S. Haldane. 
The Outlook of Science. A furtherselection from Prof, Halda: 
Black Beauty. Anna Sewell’s story. For school use. 
Death in High Society. Strange stories by Inez Holden. 
Carl and Anna. Leonhard Frank's story. Not for school use. 

THE ORTHOLOGICAL INSTITUTE 
10, KING'S PARADE, CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND 

LONDON : KAANID: Ah. 6toGSRTER LANE, E.C.
