Principles of Political Economy
T. R. Malthus (1820)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): T. R. Malthus's 'Principles of Political Economy considered with a view to their practical application' (London, 1820). Scan via Internet Archive (Bayerische Staatsbibliothek). The scan's garbled title-page fragments are trimmed; the hosted text begins with the Introduction and runs complete through the index and the edition's 'END'. The digitizer's catalogue block at the back is trimmed. This 1820 edition is in the public domain.

========================================================================

OF


POLITICAL ECONOMY.


INTRODUCTION.


Ir has been said, and perhaps with truth, that the
conclusions of Political Economy partake more
of the certainty of the stricter sciences than those _
of most of the other branches of human know-
ledge. Yet we should fall into a serious error if

' we were to suppose that any propositions, the prac-
" tical results of which depend upon the agency of
so variable a being as man, and the qualities of so
variable a compound as the soil, can ever admit
of the same kinds of proof, or lead to the same cer-
tain conclusions, as those which relate to figure
and number. There are indeed in political eco-
nomy great general principles, to which exceptions
are of the most rare occurrence, and prominent
land-marks which may almost always be depended
upon as safe guides; but even these, when ex-

_ amined, will be found to resemble in most par-
: ticulars the great general rules in morals and poli-

B


\
Loe eae
PRINCIPLES


Q- INTRODUCTION.


tics founded upon the known passions and pro-
pensities of human nature : and whether we advert
to the qualities of man, or of the earth he is des-
tined to cultivate, we shall be compelled to ac-
knowledge, that the science of political economy
bears a nearer resemblance to the science of morals
and politics than to that of mathematics.

This conclusion, which could hardly fail to be
formed merely from a view of the subjects about
which political economy is conversant, is further
strengthened by the differences of opinion which
have prevailed among those who have directed a
large share of talent and attention to this study.

During the prevalence of the mercantile system,
the interest which the subject excited was con-
fined almost exclusively to those who were en-
gaged in the details of commerce, or expected
immediate benefit from its results. The differences
which prevailed among merchants aud statesmen,


which were differences rather in practice than ~


principle, were not calculated to attract much at-
tention. But no sooner was the subject raised into
a science by the works of. the Economists and of
Adam Smith, than a memorable schism divided,
for a considerable time, the students of this new
branch of knowledge, on the fundamental ques-
tions—What is wealth? and from what source or
sources,is it derived ? °
_ Happily for the interests of the science anil its
usefulness to society, the Economists and Adam
Smith entirely agreed on some of those great
general principles which lead to the most impor-
q


ile 2d


INTRODUCTION. 3


tant practical conclusions; such as the freedom


of tradé, and the leaving every person, while he
adheres to the rules of justice, to pursue his own
interest his own way, together with some others :
and unquestionably their agreement on these prin-
ciples affords the strongest presumption of their
truth. Yet the differences of the Economists and
Adam Smith were not mere differences in theory ;
they were not different interpretations of the same
phenomena, which would have no influence on
practice; but they involved such views of the
nature and origin of wealth, as, if adopted, would
lead, in almost every country, to great practical
changes, particularly on the very important sub-
ject of taxation.

Since the wra of these distinguished writers, the
subject has gradually attracted the attention of a
greater number of persons, particularly during the
last twenty or thirty years. All the main propo-
sitions of the science have been examined, and the


events which have since occurred, tending either


to illustrate or confute them, have been repeatedly
discussed. The result of this examination and
discussion seems to be, that on some very impor-
tant points there are still great differences of
opinion. Among these, perhaps, may be reckoned
—The definitions of wealth and of productive
labour—The nature and measures of value—The
nature and extent of the principles of demand and
supply—The origin and progress of rent—The
causes which determine the wages of labour
and the profits of stock—The causes which prac-
tically retard and limit the progress of wealth—
B2


4 INTRODUCTION.


The level of the precious metals in different,
countries—The principles of taxation, &c. On
all these points, and many others among the
numerous subjects which belong to political
economy, differences have prevailed among per-
sons. whose opinions are entitled to attention.
Some of these questions are to a certain degree
theoretical; and the solution of them, though
obviously necessary to the improvement of the
science, might not essentially affect its practical
rules; but others are of such a nature, that the
determination of them one way or the other will
necessarily influence the conduct both of indivi-
duals and of governments ; and their correct deter-
mination therefore must be a matter of the highest
practical importance.

In a science such as that of political economy,
it is not to be expected that an universal assent
should be obtained to all its important propositions ;
but, in order to give them their proper weight and
justify their being acted upon, it is extremely de-
sirable, indeed almost necessary, that a considerable
majority of those who, from their attention to the
subject, are considered by the public as likely to
be the most competent judges, should agree in the
truth of them. .

Among those writers who have treated the sub-
ject scientifically, there is not perhaps, at the pre-
sent moment, so general an agreement as would.
be desirable to give effect to their conclusions ;
and the writers who peculiarly call themselves
practical, either draw no general inferences, or are
so much influenced by narrow, partial, and some-


INTRODUCTION. 5


times interested views, that no reliance can be
placed on them for the establishment of general
rules. The last twenty or thirty years have be-
sides been marked by a train of events of a most
extraordinary kind ; and there has hardly yet been
time so to arrange and examine them as to see to
what extent they confirm or invalidate the re-
ceived principles of the science to which they
relate. .

The present period, therefore, seems to be un-
propitious to the publication of a new systematic
treatise on political economy. The treatise which
we already possess is still of the very highest
value; and till a more general agreement shall be
found to take place, both with respect to the con-
troverted points of Adam Smith’s work, and the
nature and extent of the additions to it, which the
more advanced stage of the science has rendered —
necessary, it is obviously more advisable that the
different subjects which admit of doubt should be


treated separately. When these discussions have


been for some time before the public, and a sufti-
cient opportunity has been given, by the collision
of different opinions and an appeal to experience,
to separate what is true from what is false, the
different parts may then be combined into a con-
sistent whole, and may be expected to carry with
it such weight and authority as to produce the
most useful practical results.

The principal cause of error, and of the differ-
,ences which preyail at present among the scientific
writers on political economy, appears to me to be

B3


6 INTRODUCTION.


a precipitate attempt to simplify and generalize ;
and while their more practical opponents draw too
hasty inferences from a frequent appeal to partial
facts, these writers run into a contrary extreme,
and do not sufficiently try their theories by a
reference to that enlarged and comprehensive ex-
perience which, on so complicated a subject, can
alone establish their truth and utility.

To minds of a certain cast there is nothing so
captivating as simplification and generalization.
It is indeed the desirable and legitimate object of
genuine philosophy, whenever it can be effected
consistently with truth ; and for this very reason,
the natural tendency towards it has, in almost
every science with which we are acquainted, led
to crude and premature theories.

In political economy the desire to simplify has
occasioned an unwillingness to acknowledge the
operation of more causes ; than one in the production
of particular effects ; and if one cause would account
for a considerable portion of a certain class of phe-
nomena, the whole has been ascribed to it without
sufficient attention to the facts, which would not
admit of being so solved. I have always thought
that the late controversy on the bullion question
presented a signal instance of this kind of error.
Each party being possessed of a theory which
would account for an unfavourable exchange, and
an excess of the market price above the mint price
of bullion, adhered to that single view of the ques-
tion, which it had been accustomed to consider as
correct; and scarcely one writer seemed willing to


\


INTRODUCTION. 7


to admit of the operation of both theories, the com-

bination of which, sometimes acting in conjunction
and sometimes in opposition, could alone ade-
quately account for the variable and complicated
phenomena observable.*

It is certain that we cannot too highly respect
and venerate that admirable rule of Newton, not
to admit more causes than are necessary to the so-
lution of the phenomena we are considering, but
the rule itself implies, that those which really are
necessary must be admitted. Before the shrine of
truth, as discovered by facts and experience, the
fairest theories and the most beautiful classifica-
tions must fall. The chemist of thirty years ago |
may be allowed to regret, that new discoveries in
the science should disturb and confound his pre-
vious systems and arrangements; but he is not
entitled to the name of philosopher, if he does not
give them up without a struggle, as soon as the
experiments which refute them are fully estab-
lished.

_ The same tendency to simplify and generalize,
produces a still greater disinclination to allow of
modifications, limitations, and exceptions to any
tule or proposition, than to admit the operation of


- more causes than one.. Nothing indeed is so un-


satisfactory, and gives so unscientific and unmas-


* It must be allowed, however, that the theory of the Bullion-
ists, though too exclusive, accounted for much the largest propor-
tion of the phenomena in question; and perhaps it may be said
with truth that the Bullion Report itself was more free from the
error I have adverted to than any other work that appeared.


BA


ia


8 INTRODUCTION.


terly an air to a proposition as to be obliged to
make admissions of this kind; yet there is no truth


‘of which I feel a stronger conviction than that


there are many important propositions in political
economy which absolutely require limitations and
vexceptions ; and it may be confidently stated that
the frequent combination of complicated causes,
the action and reaction of cause and effect on each
other, and the necessity of limitations and excep-
tions ina considerable number of important propo-
sitions, form the main pe of the science, and
occasion those frequent mistakes which it must be
allowed are made in the prediction of results.

To explain myself by an instance. Adam Smith
hs stated, that capitals are increased by parsimo-
any, that every frugal man is a public benefactor,*
-and that the increase of wealth depends upon the
balance of, produce above consumption.t That
these. propositions are true to a great extent is
perfectly unquestionable. No considerable and
continued increase of wealth could possibly take
place without that degree of frugality which occa-
sions, annually, the conversion of some revenue
into capital, and creates a balance of produce above
consur n; but it is quite obvious that they are
not truetoan indefinite extent, and that the principle
of saving, pushed to excess, would destroy the mo-
tive to production. If every person were satisfied
“with the simplest food, the poorest clothing, and
the meanest houses, it is certain that no other sort


* Wealth of Nations, Book II. c. iii. pp. 15—18. 6th edit,
+ Book IV. c. iii, p. 250.


»


rile


INTRODUCTION. 9


of food, clothing, and lodging would be in exist-
-ence; and as there would be no adequate motive
‘to the proprietors of land to cultivate well, not
only the wealth derived from conveniences and
luxuries would be quite at an end, but if the same
divisions of land continued, the production of food
would be prematurely checked, and ‘population
would come to a stand long before the soil had


duction, the capital of the country must be dimi-
nished, and its wealth must be gradually destroyed
from its want of power to produce ; if production
be ina great excess above consumption, the motive
to accumulate and produce must cease from the
want of will to ynsume. The two patnemmpayare
obvious ; and it follows that there must be some
intermediate point, though the resources of politi-
cal economy may not be able to ascertain it, abe
taking into consideration both the power to pro-
duce and the will to consume, the encouragement
to the increase of wealth is the greatest.

The division of landed property presents another
obvious instance of the same kind. No person
has ever for a moment doubted that the divi

such immense tracts of land as were form
possession of the great feudal proprietors
favourable to industry and production. It is equally
difficult to doubt that a division of landed property
e may be carried to such an extent as to destroy all
the benefits to be derived from the accumulation
of capital and the division of labour, and to occa-
sion the most extended poverty. There is here


€


been well cultivated: If consumption exceed pro-.


i


10 INTRODUCTION.


then a point as well as in the other instance,
though we may not know how to place it, where
the division of property is best suited to the actual
circumstances of the society, and calculated to
give the best stimulus to production and to the in-
crease of wealth and population. It follows clearly
that no general rule can be laid down respecting
the advantage to be derived from saving, or the
division of property, without limitations and ex-
ceptions ; and it is particularly worthy of attention
that in cases of this kind, where the extremes are
obvious and striking, but the most advantageous
mean cannot be marked, that in the progress of
society effects may be produced by an unnoticed
approximation to this middle point, which are
attributed to other causes, and lead to false con-
clusions.

The tendency to premature generalization occa-
sions also, in some of the principal writers on politi-
cal economy, an unwillingness to bring their theo-
ries to the test of experience. I should be the last
person to lay an undue stress upon isolated facts,
or to think that a consistent theory, which would
se for the great mass of phenomena observ-
able, was immediately invalidated by a few dis-
cordant appearances, the reality and the bearings
of which, there might not have been an oppor-
tunity of fully examining. But certainly no
theory can have any pretension to be accepted
as correct, which is inconsistent with general
experience. Such inconsistency appears to me at
once a full and sufficient reason for its rejection.


INTRODUCTION. 1l


Under such circumstances it must be either
radically false, or essentially incomplete ; and in


either case, it can neither be adopted as a satisfac-


tory solution of existing phenomena, nor acted
upon with any degree of safety for the future.
The first business of philosophy is to account for
things as they are; and till our theories will do
this, they ought not to be the ground of any prac-
tical conclusion. I should never have had that
steady and unshaken confidence in the theory of
population which I have invariably felt, if it had
not appeared to me to be confirmed, in the most
remarkable manner, by the state of society as it
actually exists in every country with which we
are acquainted. To this test I appealed in laying
it down ; and a frequent appeal to this sort of ex-
perience is pre-eminently necessary in most of the
subjects of political economy, where various and
complicated causes are often in operation, the pre-


-sence of which can only be ascertained in this way.


A theory may appear to be correct, and may really
be correct under given premises; it may further
appear that these premises are the same as those
under which the theory is about to be applied; but
a difference, which might before have been unob-
served, may shew itself in the differencé of the
results from those which were expected; and the
theory may justly be considered as failing, whe-
ther this failure arises from an original error in its
formation, or from its general inapplicability, or
specific misapplication, to actual circumstances.
Where unforeseen causes may possibly be in ope-


12 INTRODUCTION.


‘ration, and the causes that are foreseen are liable
to great variations in their strength and efficacy,
an accurate yet comprehensive attention to facts
is necessary, both to prevent the multiplication of
erroneous theories, and to confirm and sanction
those that are just.

‘The science of political economy is essentially
practical, and applicable to the common business of
human life. There are few branches of human
knowledge where false views may do more harm,
or just views more good. I cannot agree, there-
fore, with a writer in one of our most popular
critical journals, who considers the subjects of po-
pulation, bullion, and corn laws in thd same light
as the scholastic questions of the middle ages, and
puts marks of admiration to them expressive of his
utter astonishment that such perishable stuff should
engage any portion of the public attention.*

In the very practical science of political eco-
nomy perhaps it might be difficult to mention three
subjects more; practical than those unfortunately
selected for a comparison with scholastic questions.
But in fact, most of the subjects which belong to
it are peculiarly applicable to the common con-
cerns Panakind. What shall we say of all the
questions relating to taxation, various and exten-
sive as they are? It will hardly be denied that
they come home to the business and bosoms, of
mankind. , What shall we say of the laws which
regulate exchangeable value, or every act of pur-


* Quarterly Review, No. xxix. Art. viil.


' INTRODUCTION, 18+


chase and exchange which takes place in our
markets? What of the, laws which regulate the
profits of stock, the interest of money, the rent of
land, the value of the precious metals in different
countries, the rates of exchange, &c. &c. ?

The study of the laws of nature is, in all its
branches, interesting. Even those physical laws
by which the more distant parts of the universe
are governed, and over which, of course, it is im-
possible for man to have the slightest influence,
are yet noble and rational objects of curiosity ;
but the laws which regulate the movements of
human society have an infinitely stronger claim
to our attention, both because they relate to ob-
jects about which we are daily and hourly con-
versant, and because their effects are continually
modified by human interference.

There are some eminent persons so strongly at-
tached to the received general rules of political
economy, that, though they are aware that in
practice some exceptions to them may occasionally
occur; yet they do not think it wise and. politic
to notice them, for fear of directing the public
attention too much and too Sotancnitli to excep-
tions, and thus weakening the force and utility of
the general. rules.

_ It is, for instance, one of the most general rules
in political economy, that governments should not
interfere in the direction of capital and industry,
but leave every person, so long as he obeys the
laws of justice, to pursue his own interest in his
own way, as the best: security for the constant


14 INTRODUCTION.


and equable supply of the national wants. Though
to this rule they allow that exceptions may possi-
bly occur; yet thinking that the danger from the
officious meddling of governments is somuch greater
than any which could arise from the neglect of
such exceptions, they would be inclined to make
the rule universal.

In this, however, I cannot agree. Though
I should most readily allow that altogether more
evil is likely to arise from governing too much,
than from a tendency to the other extreme ;
yet, still, if the consequences of not attending to
these exceptions were of sufficient magnitude and
frequency to be conspicuous to the public, I should
be decidedly of opinion, that the cause of general
' principles was much more likely to lose than to
gain by concealment. Nothing can tend so
strongly to bring theories and general principles
into discredit as the occurrence of consequences,
from particular measures, which have not been
foreseen. Though in reality such an event forms
no just objection to theory, in the general and
proper sense of the term; yet it forms a most
valid objection to the specific theory in question,
as proving it in some way or other wrong; and
with the mass of mankind this will pass for an
impeachment of general principles, and of the
knowledge or good faith of those who are in the
habit of inculcating them. It appears to me, I
confess, that the most perfect sincerity, together
with the greatest degree of accuracy attainable,
founded upon the most comprehensive view of all


INTRODUCTION. 15


the circumstances of the case, are necessary to
give that credit and circulation to general prin-
ciples which is so desirable. And no views of
temporary advantage, nor, what is more likely to
operate, the fear of destroying the simplicity of a
general rule, should ever tempt us to deviate from
the strict line of truth, or to conceal or overlook
any circumstances that may interfere with the
universality of the principle.

_ There is another class of persons who set a very
high value upon the received general rules of
political economy, as of the most extensive prac-
tical use. They have seen the errors of the mer-
cantile system refuted and replaced by a more
philosophical and correct view of the subject ; and
_ having made themselves masters of the question
' so far, they seem to be satisfied with what they
_ have got, and do not look with a favorable eye on
_ new and further inquiries, particularly if they do
not see at once clearly and distinctly to what be-
neficial effects they lead.

__. This indisposition to innovation, even in science,
may possibly have its use, by tending to check
crude and premature theories; but it is obvious
that, if carried too far, it strikes at the root of all
improvement. It is impossible to observe the
great events of the last twenty-five years in their
relation to subjects belonging to political econo-
my, and sit down satisfied with what has been
already done im the science. But if the science
be manifestly incomplete, and yet of the highest
importance, it would surely be most unwise to


16. - INTRODUCTION. —


restrain inquiry, conducted upon just principles, 1
even where the immediate practical utility of it
was not visible. In mathematics, chemistry, and

every branch.of natural philosophy, how many are

the inquiries necessary to their improvement and
completion, which, taken separately, do not appear

to lead to any specifically advantageous purpose! :
How many useful inventions, and how much valu-
able and improving knowledge would have been
lost, if a rational curiosity and a mere love of in-
formation had not generally been allowed to be a
sufficient motive for the search after truth !

I should not, therefore, consider it as by any
means conclusive against further inquiries in po-
litical economy, if they would not always bear
the rigid application. of the test of cui bono? But
such, in fact, is the nature of the science, so inti- |
mately is it connected with the ‘business of man-
kind, that I really believe more of its propositions
will bear this test than those of any other depart-
ment of human knowledge.

To trace distinctly the operations of that circle
of causes and effects in political economy which are’
acting and re-acting on each other, so as to foresee
their results, and lay down general rules according-
ly, is, in many cases, a task of very great difficulty.
But there is scarcely a single inquiry belonging
to these subjects, however abstruse and remote it
may at first sight appear, which in some point or
other does not bear directly upon practice. It is
unquéstionably desirable, therefore, both with a
view to the improvement and completion of the


a *
il


> . INTRODUCTION. 1


science, and the practical advantages which: may °
be expected from it, that such inquiries should
be pursued ; and. no common difficulty or obscurity
should be allowed to deter those who have leisure
and ability for such researches.
In many cases, indeed, it may not be possible to
predict results with certainty, on account of the
complication of the causes in action, the different
degrees of strength and efficacy with which they
may operate, and the number of unforeseen cir-
cumstances which are likely to interfere; but it is
surely knowledge of the highest importance to’ be
able to draw a line, with tolerable precision, be-
tween those cases where the expected results are
certain, and those where they are doubtful; and:
_ further to be able satisfactorily to explain, in the
latter case, the reasons of such uncertainty.

To know what can be done, and how to do it,
is, beyond a doubt, the most valuable species of
information. The next to it is, to know what
cannot be done, and why we cannot do it. The
first enables us to attain a positive good, to in-
crease Our powers, and augment our happiness :
the second saves us from the evil of fruitless at-
tempts, and the loss and misery occasioned by
perpetual failure.

But these inquiries demand more time and
application than the practical statesman, whom of
all others they most nearly concern, can give to
them. In the public measures of every state all
are, no doubt, interested ; but a peculiar responsi-
bility, as well as. interest, must be felt by those

c


ay


18 INTRODUCTION.


who are the principal advisers of them, and have
the greatest influence in their enactment ; and if
they have not leisure for such researches them-
selves, they should not be unwilling, under the
guidance of a sound discretion, to make use of the
advantages which may be afforded by the leisure
of others. They will not indeed be justified in
taking any decided steps, if they do not themselves
see, or at least think they see, the way they are
going; but they may be fairly expected to make
use of all the lights which are best calculated to
illumine their way, and enable them to reach the
object which they have in view.

It may perhaps be thought that, if the great
principle so ably maintained by Adam Smith be
true, namely, that the best way of advancing a
people towards wealth and prosperity is not to in-
terfere with them, the business of government, in
matters relating to political economy, must be
most simple and easy.

But it is to be recollected, in the first place, that
there is a class of duties connected with these sub-
jects, which, it is universally acknowledged, belongs
to the Sovereign ; and though the line appears to
be drawn with tolerable precision, when it is con-
sidered generally ; yet when we come to particu-
lars; doubts may arise, and certainly in many in-
stances have arisen, as to the subjects to be in-
cluded in this classification. To what extent edu-
cation and the support of the poor should be public
concerns? What share the Government should
take in the construction and maintenance of roads,


INTRODUCTION. — 19


canals, public docks? What course it should adopt
with regard to colonization and emigration, and in
the support of forts and establishments in foreign
countries? On all these questions, and many
others, there may be differences of opinion; and
on all these questions the sovereign and his minis-
ters are called upon to decide.

Secondly, every actual government has to ad-
minister a body of laws relating to agriculture,
manufactures, and commerce, which was formed at
a period comparatively unenlightened, and many
of which, therefore, it must be desirable to repeal :
but to see fully the amount of partial evil arising
from present change, and the extent of general
good to be effected by it, so as to warrant active
interference, requires no inconsiderable share of
knowledge and judgment; while to remain inac-


tive under such circumstances, can only be justi-


fied by a conviction, founded on the best grounds,
that in any specific change contemplated, taken in
all its consequences, the balance of evil will pre-
ponderate.

Thirdly, there is one cause in every state which
absolutely impels the government to action, and
puts an end to the possibility of letting things alone.
This is the necessity of taxation; and as taxes can-
not, in the nature of things, be imposed without in-
terfering with individual industry and wealth, it
becomes a matter of the very highest importance to
know how they may take place with the least pos-
sible prejudice to the prosperity of the state, and
the happiness of individuals.

sce


20 INTRODUCTION.


With regard to this latter subject indeed, it bears
on so many points, that the truth or falsehood of
the theories on all the principal questions in poli-
tical economy would occasion, or at least ought
to occasion, a practical difference in the mode of
raising some of the actual taxes. It is well known
that, if the theory of the Economists were true, all
taxes should be laid on the land; and it depends en-
tirely upon the general laws which regulate the
wages of labour, the profits of stock, the rent of
land, exchangeable value, the currencies of differ-
ent countries, the production and distribution of
wealth, &c. &c. whether any existing system of
taxation be the best, or whether it might be altered
for the better.

It is obviously, therefore, impossible for a go-
vernment strictly to let things take their natural
course; and to recommend such a line of conduct,
without limitations and exceptions, could not fail
to bring disgrace upon general principles, as totally
inapplicable to practice.

It may, however, safely be asserted, that a pro-
pensity to govern too much is a certain indication
of ignorance and rashness. ~The ablest physicians
are the most sparing in the use of medicine, and
the most inclined to trust to the healing power of
nature. The statesman, in like manner, who knows
the most of his business, will be the most un-
willing to interrupt the natural direction of indus-
try and capital. But both are occasionally called
upon to interfere, and the more science they re-
spectively possess, the more judiciously will they


;


INTRODUCTION. 21


do it ; nor will the acknowledged propriety of in-
terfering but little supersede, in any degree, the
use of the most extensive professional knowledge
in both cases.

One of the specific objects of the present work
is to prepare the general rules of political economy
for practical application, by a frequent reference
to experience, and by taking as comprehensive a
view as I can of all the causes that concur in the
production of particular phenomena.

I am sufficiently aware, that in this mode of con-
ducting inquiry, there is a chance of falling into
errors of an opposite kind to those which arise
from a tendency to simplification. Certain ap-
pearances, which are merely co-existent and inci-
dental, may be mistaken for causes ; and a theory
formed upon this mistake will unite the double dis-
advantage of being both complex and incorrect. I
am inclined to think that Adam Smith occasionally
fell into this error, and drew inferences from actual
appearances, not warranted by general principles.
From the low price of wheat, for instance, du-
ring the’ first half of the last century, he seems
to infer that wheat is generally cheaper in rich
than in poor countries ; and from the small quan-
tity of corn actually imported during that period,
even in the scarcest years, he infers generally, that
the quantity imported can never be such as to in-
terfere with the home growth. The actual state
of things at a subsequent period, and particularly
during the last twenty-five years, has sufficiently
shewn that these appearances were merely inci-

cs


92 INTRODUCTION.


dental; that a very rich country may have its corn
extremely dear, as we should naturally expect ;
and that importation in England has amounted to
more than ;4, instead of ;+,* part of the crop raised
in the country ; and may, therefore, essentially in-
terfere with the home growth.

Aware, however, of my liability to this error on
the one side, and to the error of not referring suf-
ficiently to experience on the other, my aim will
be to pursue, as far as I am able, a just mean be- ~
tween the two extremes, and to approach, as near
I can, to the great object of my research—the
truth.

Many of the doctrines of Adam Smith, which had
been considered as settled, have lately been called
in question by writers entitled to great attention ;
but they have often failed, as it appears to me, to
make good their objections ; and in all such cases
I have thought it desirable to examine anew, with
reference to such objections, the grounds on which
his doctrines are founded.

It has been my wish to avoid giving to my
work a controversial air. Yet to free it entirely
from controversy, while one of my professed ob-
jects is to discuss controverted opinions, and to try
their truth by a reference to an enlarged experi-
ence, is obviously not possible. There is one mo-
dern work, in particular, of very high reputation,
some of the fundamental principles of which have
appeared to me, after the most mature deliberation,
to be erroneous; and I should not have done jus-


/
* Wealth of Nations, B. IV. c. ii. p. 190. 6th edit.


INTRODUCTION. 23


tice to the ability with which it is written, to the
high authority of the writer, and the interests of
the science of which it treats, if it had not specifi-
cally engaged a considerable portion of my atten-
tion. I allude to Mr. Ricardo’s work, “ On the
Principles of Political Economy and Taxation.”

I have so very high an opinion of Mr. Ricardo’s
talents as a political economist, and so entire a
conviction of his perfect sincerity and love of
truth, that I frankly own I have sometimes felt
almost staggered by his authority, while I have
remained unconvinced by his reasonings. I have
thought that I must unaccountably have overlooked
some essential points, either in my own view of
the subject, or in his ; and this kind of doubt has
been the principal reason of my delay in publishing
the present volume. But I shall hardly be sus-
pected of not thinking for myself on these subjects,
or of not feeling such a degree of confidence in
my own conclusions, after having taken full time
to form them, as to be afraid of submitting them
to the decision of the public.

To those who are not acquainted with Mr.
Ricardo’s work, and do not properly appreciate the
ingenuity and consistency of the system which it
maintains and developes with so much ability, I
am apprehensive that I shall appear to have dwelt
too long upon some of the points on which we
differ. But as they are, for the most part, of great
importance both theoretically and practically, and
as it appeared to me extremely desirable, with a
view to the interests of the science, that they

C4


24, INTRODUCTION.


should, if possible, be settled, I did not feel myself
justified in giving less time to the consideration of
them.

- Lam far from saying that I may, not be wrong
in the conclusions at which I have arrived, in op-
position to those of Mr. Ricardo.. But Iam con-
scious that I have taken all the means to be right,
which patient investigation and a sincere desire to
get at the truth can give to the actual powers of
my understanding. And with this consciousness,
both with respect to the opinions I have opposed,
and those which I have attempted to establish, I
feel no reluctance in committing the results to the
decision of the public.


T. R. MALTHUS,
East India College, i
Dec. 1, 1819.


br (1 B50)


CHAPTER I.


* ON THE DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH AND PRO-
DUCTIVE LABOUR.


SECTION I.
On the Definitions of Wealth.


Or the subjects which have given rise to differ-
ences of opinion among political economists, the
definition of wealth is not the least remarkable.
Such differences could hardly have taken place, if
the definition had been obvious and easy ; but, in
reality, the more the subject is considered; the
more it will appear difficult, if not impossible, to
fix on one not liable to some objection. In a
work, however, ‘on a science the great object of
which is, to inquire into the causes which influence
the progress of wealth, it seems natural to look
for'some definition of those objects, the increase or
decrease of which we are about to estimate; and
if we cannot arrive at perfect accuracy; so as to
embrace all we wish and exclude all we wish in
some short description, it seems desirable to ap-
proach as near to such a description as we can.
It is known not to be very easy to draw a distinct
line between the animal, vegetable, and mineral
kingdoms ; yet the advantage of such a classifica-
tion is universally acknowledged ; and no one, on


26 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [cH. I.


account of a difficulty in a few cases of little con-
sequence, would refuse to make use of so conve-
nient an arrangement.

It has sometimes been said that every writer is
at liberty to define his terms as -he pleases, pro-
vided he always uses them strictly in the sense
proposed. Such a liberty, however, may be fairly
doubted ; at least it must be allowed that if a per-
son chooses to give a very inadequate or unusual
definition in reference to the subject on which he
proposes to treat, he may at once render his in-
quiries completely futile.. If, for instance, a writer,
professing to treat of the wealth of nations, were
to define wealth to consist exclusively of broad
cloth, it is obvious that, however consistent he
might be in the use of his.terms, or however valu-
able a treatise he might produce on this one article,
he would evidently have given but very little in-
formation to those who were looking for a treatise
on wealth, according to the common acceptation
of the term.

So important, indeed, is an appropriate definition,
that perhaps it is not going too far to say, that the
comparative merits of the systems of the Econo-
mists and Adam Smith depend mainly upon their
different definitions of wealth and of productive
labour. If the definitions which the Economists
have given of wealth and of productive labour be
correct, their system has the advantage: if the
definitions which Adam Smith has given of wealth
and of productive labour be the most correct, his
system is superior.


oes


SEC.1.] | AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. o7


Of those writers who have either given a regu-
lar definition of wealth, or have left the sense in
which they understand the term to be collected
from their works, some appear to have confined it
within too narrow limits, and others to have ex-
tended it greatly too far. In the former class the
Economists stand pre-eminent. They have con-
fined wealth, or riches, to the neat produce derived
from the land ; and in so doing they have greatly
diminished the value of their inquiries, in reference
to the most familiar and accustomed sense in which
the term wealth is understood.

Among the definitions which have extended the
meaning of the term wealth too far, Lord Lauder-
dale’s may be taken as an example. He defines
wealth to be, “ All that man desires as useful and
delightful to him.” *

This definition obviously includes every thing,
whether material or intellectual, whether tangible
or otherwise, which contributes to the advantage
or pleasure of mankind, and, of course, includes
the benefits and gratifications derived from religion,
from morals, from political and civil liberty, from
oratory, from instructive and agreeable conver-
sation, from music, dancing, acting, and other
similar sources. But an inquiry into the nature
and causes of these kinds of wealth would evi-
dently extend beyond the bounds of any single
science. If we wish to attain any thing like pre-
cision in our inquiries, when we treat of wealth,


* Inquiry into the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth, c. ii.
p- 57. 2d edit.


ae


28 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [CH. I.


we must narrow the field of inquiry, and draw
some line, which will leave us only those objects,
the increase or decrease of which is capable of
being estimated with more.accuracy.

The line, which it seems most natural to draw,
is that which separates material from immaterial
objects, or those which are capable of accumula-
tion and definite valuation, from those which rarely
admit of these processes, and never in such a de-
gree as to afford useful practical conclusions.

Adam Smith has no where given a very regular
and formal definition of wealth; but that the
meaning which he attaches to the term is confined
to material objects, is, throughout his work, suffi-
ciently manifest. His prevailing description of
wealth may be said to be, “the annual produce
of land and labour.” The objections to it, as a
definition, are, that it refers to the sources of
wealth before we are told what wealth is, and that
it is besides not sufficiently discriminate, as it
would include all the useless products of the earth,
as well as those which are appropriated and en-
joyed by man.

To avoid these objections, and to keep at an
equal distance from a too confined or too indis-
criminate sense of the term, I should define wealth
to be, those material objects which are necessary,
useful, or agreeable to mankind. And I am in-
clined to believe, that the definition, thus limited,
includes nearly all the objects which usually enter
into our conceptions when we speak of wealth or
riches ; an advantage of considerable importance,


SEC. I1.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 29


so long as we retain these terms both in common
use, and, in the vocabulary of political economy.

It is obviously, indeed, rather a metaphorical
than a strict use of the word wealth, to apply it to
every benefit or gratification of which man is sus-
ceptible; and we should hardly be prepared to
acknowledge the truth of the proposition which
affirmed, that riches were the sole source of human
happiness.

It may fairly, therefore, I think, be said, that
the wealth spoken of, in the science of political
economy, is confined to material objects.

A country will therefore be rich or poor accord-
ing to the abundance or scarcity with which these
_ material objects are supplied, compared with the
extent of territory; and the people will be rich
or poor according to the abundance with which
they are supplied, compared with the population.


SECTION II.
* On Productive and Unproductive Labour.


Tue question of productive labour is closely con-
nected with the definition of wealth. Both the
Economists and Adam Smith have uniformly ap-
plied the term productive to that species of labour
which produces what they call wealth, accord-
ing to their several views of its nature and origin.
The Economists, therefore, who confine wealth to
the products of the soil, mean by productive labour
that labour alone which is employed upon the land.


30 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [cH. I,


Adam Smith, who considers all the material objects
which are useful to man as wealth, means by pro-
ductive labour, that labour which realizes itself
either in the production or increased value of such
material objects.

This mode of applying the term, povaisiaign la-
bour, to the labour which is productive of wealth,
however wealth may be defined, is obviously useful,
and, with a view to clearness and consistency in the
use of the terms of political economy, should al-
ways be adhered to. But as some writers have not
used the terms in this way, and as those who have
been disposed so to use them have not agreed in
their definitions of wealth, it was to be expected .
that the term productive labour should give rise to
great differences of opinion.

The doctrine laid down by Adam Smith on 1 this
subject has been controverted by two opposite
parties, one of which has imputed to him an incor-
rect and unphilosophical extension of the term
productive to objects which it ought not to in-
clude, and others have accused him of a similar
want of precision for attempting to establish a dis-
~ tinction between different sorts of labour where no
distinction is to be found,

In proceeding to give my reasons for adopting
the opinion of Adam Smith, I shall first endeavour
to shew that some such classification of the differ-
ent kinds of labour is really called for in an in-
quiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of
nations, and that a considerable degree of confusion
would be introduced into the science of political —


SEC. 1I.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 31


economy by an attempt to proceed without it.
We shall be less disposed to be disturbed by plau-
sible cavils, or even by a few just exceptions to
the complete accuracy of a definition, if we are
convinced that the want of precision which is im-
puted to it, is beyond comparison less in amount
and importance than the want of precision which
would result from the rejection of it.

In the first place then, it will readily be granted
that as capital, in whatever way it may be defined,
is absolutely necessary to the division of labour
and the use of machinery, its powerful influence
on the progress of national wealth must be con-
sidered as incontrovertibly established. But in
tracing the cause of the different effects of pro-
duce employed as capital, and of produce con-
sumed as revenue, we shall find that it arises from
the different kinds of labour maintained by each ;


- and in speaking, therefore, and treating of capital,


it seems quite necessary to have some term for
the kind of labour which it generally employs,
in contradistinction to the kind of labour gene-
rally employed by revenue, in order to explain
its nature and operation, and the causes of its
increase.

Secondly, it is stated by Adam Smith, and it
must be allowed to be stated justly, that the pro-
duce which is annually saved is as regularly con-
sumed as that which is annually spent, but that it
is consumed by a different set of people. If this


- be the case, and if saving be allowed to be the im-


mediate cause of the increase of capital, it must


32 . DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH. [CH. 1.


be absolutely necessary, in all discussions relating
to the progress of wealth, to distinguish by some
particular title a set of people who appear to act
so important a part in accelerating this progress.
Almost all the lower classes of people of every so-
ciety are employed in some way or other, and it
there were no grounds of distinction in their em-
ployments, with reference to their effects on the
national wealth, it is difficult to conceive what
would be the use of saving from revenue to add to
capital, as it would be merely employing one set
of people in preference to another, when, accord-
ing to the hypothesis, there is no essential difference
between them. ‘How then are we to explain the
nature of saving, and the different effects of parsi-
mony and extravagance upon the national capital ?
No political economist of the present day can by
‘saving mean mere hoarding ; and beyond this con-
tracted: and inefficient proceeding, no use of the
term, in reference to national wealth, can well be
imagined, but that which must:arise from a differ-
ent application of what is saved, founded upon a
‘real distinction between the different kinds of la-
bour which may be maintained by it.

If the labour of menial servants be as productive.
of wealth as the labour of manufacturers, why
should not savings be employed in their mainte-
nance, not only without being dissipated, but with
a constant increase of iinet But menial servants,
lawyers, or physicians, who save from their salaries,
are fully aware that their savings would be immedi-
ately dissipated again if they were advanced to


SEC. II.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR, $3


themselves instead of being employed in the main-
tenance of persons of a different description. To
consider the expenditure of the unproductive la-
bourers of Adam Smith, as advances made to them-
selves, and of the same nature as the advances of
the master-manufacturer to his workmen, would
be at once to confound the very useful and just
distinction between those who live upon wages
and a who live upon profits, and would render
it quite impossible to explain the frequent and im-
portant operations of saving from revenue to add
to’ capital, so absolutely necessary to the continued
increase of wealth.*

It is not the question at present whether saving
may or may not be carried too far (a point which
will be considered in its proper place); but whether
we can talk intelligibly of saving and accumulation, —
and discuss their effects on national wealth without
allowing some distinction in the different kinds
of labour.

Thirdly, it has been stated by Adam Smith, and
stated truly, that there is a balance very different
from the balance of trade, which, according as it
happens to be favourable or unfavourable, occa-
sions the prosperity or decay of every nation: this


* One of the most able impugners of the doctrine of Adam
Smith respecting productive Jabour is Mr. Ganilh, in his valuable
Work on the various Systems of Political Economy ; but he ap-
pears-tome to fail entirely, when he attempts to shew that savings
are preserved instead of being destroyed, when consumed by the
idle classes. I cannot understand in what sense it can be said that
menial servants annually reproduce the capital by which they are
fed. Book III. c. ii.

D


34 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [en. I.


is the balance of the annual produce and consump-
tion. If in given periods the produce of a country
exceeds its consumption, the means of increasing
its capital will be provided, its population will soon
increase, or the actual numbers will be better ac-
commodated, and probably both. If the consump-
tion in such periods fully equals the produce, no
means of increasing the capital will be afforded,
and the society will be nearly at a stand. If the
consumption exceeds the produce, every succeed-
ing period will see the society worse supplied, and
its prosperity and population will be evidently on
the decline.

But if this balance be so important, if upon it
depends the progressive, stationary, or declining
state of a society, surely it must be of importance
to distinguish those who mainly contribute to ren-
der this balance favourable from those who chiefly
contribute to make the other scale preponderate.

Without some such distinction we shall not be able

to trace the causes why one nation is thriving and

another is declining; and the superior ‘riches of
those countries where merchants and manufac-
turers abound, compared with those in which the
retainers of a court and an overgrown aristocracy
predominate, will not admit of an intelligible ex-
planation.

If a taste for idle retainers and a profusion of me-
nial servants had continued among the great land-
holders of Europe from the feudal times to the
present, the wealth of its different kingdoms would
have been very different from what it now is.


i atin


SEC. 11.] | AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 35


Adam Smith has justly stated that the growing
taste of our ancestors for material conveniences
and luxuries, instead of personal services, was the
main cause of the change. Personal services neither
require nor generate capital ; and while they conti-


. nue the predominant taste, must necessarily di-


vide the great mass of society into two classes,
the een of land and their servants, the rich
and the poor, one of which is in a state of abject
dependance upon the other. But a taste for ma-
terial objects, however frivolous, almost always
requires for its gratification the accumulation of
capital, and the existence of manufacturers or mer-
chants, wholesale dealers and retail dealers. The
face of society is thus wholly changed. A middle
class of persons, living upon the profits of stock,
rises into wealth and consequence. And an in-
creasing accumulation of capital almost exclusively’
derived from the mercantile and manufacturing
classes effects, to a considerable extent, the divi-
sion and alienation of those immense landed pro-—
perties, which, if the fashion of personal services.
had continued, might have remained to this time
nearly in their former state, and prevented the in-
crease of wealth on the land as well as elsewhere.
I am hardly aware how the causes of the increas-
ing riches and prosperity of Europe since the feudal
times could be traced, if we were to consider per-
sonal services as equally productive of wealth with
the labours of merchants and manufacturers.
Surely then some distinction between the dif-
ferent kinds of labour, with reference to their dif-
a,


=... DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [CH. I.


ferent effects on national wealth, must be admitted
to be not only useful but necessary ; and if so, the
next question is, what this distinction should be,
and where the line between productive and un-
productive labour should be drawn.

The opinion that the term, productive labour,
should be exclusively confined to the labour em-
ployed upon the land has been maintained by the
Economists and. their followers. As another
opportunity will occur of discussing the general
merits of their system, it will only be necessary to
observe here that, whatever advantages their defi-.
nition may boast in point of precision and consis-
tency, yet for the practical and useful purposes of
comparing different countries together, with re-
gard to all those objects which usually enter into
our conceptions when we speak of wealth, it is
much too confined. Two countries of the same
territory and population might possess the same
number of agricultural labourers, and even direct
the same quantity of skill and capital to the culti-
vation of the soil; and yet, if a considerable portion
of the remaining population in one of them con-
sisted of manufacturers and merchants, and in the
other of menial servants and soldiers, the former
might have all the indications of wealth, and the
latter all the symptoms of poverty. The number
of agricultural labourers, therefore, cannot alone
determine the national wealth. We evidently
want some definition of productiveness, which
shall refer to the effects of manufacturing and
mercantile capital and skill; and unless we con-


#9


SEC. 1.| | AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 37


sider the labour which produces these most im-
portant results as productive of riches, we shall
find it quite impossible to trace the causes of those
different appearances in different nations, which
all persons, whatever may be their theories, uni-
versally agree in attributing to ape degrees
of wealth.

The opinion which goes to the opposite extreme
of the one here noticed, and calls all labour equally
productive, has already been almost sufficiently
considered in the endeavour to shew, that a dis-
tinction between the different kinds of labour is
really wanted in an inquiry into the nature and
causes of the wealth of nations.

I shall only add here, that some such distinction
must be considered as so clearly the corner-stone
of Adam Smith’s work, and the foundation on
which the main body of his reasonings rests, that,
if it be denied, the superstructure which he has
raised upon it must fall to the ground. Of course
Ido not mean to say, that his reasonings should
not fall if they are erroneous ; but it appears to


‘me in some degree inconsistent, in those who allow


of no distinction in the different kinds of labour,
to attribute any considerable value to an Inquiry
into the nature and causes of the Wealth of Nations,
in which the increase of the quantity and skill of
what is called productive labour is the main hinge
on which the progress of national opulence and
prosperity is made to turn.

There js, indeed, another way of considering


_ the subject, which though different from that of


D3


38 _DEFINITIONS. OF WEALTH [cH. 1.


Adam Smith, would not invalidate his reasonings,

_ and would merely require a slight alteration in
the terms used. i

If we do not confine notth to tangible and ma-


terial objects, we ‘might call all labour productive, ©


but productive in different degrees ; ; and the only
change that would be required in Adam Smith’s
work, on account of this mode of considering the
subject, would be, the substitution of the terms
more productive and ‘less productive, for those of
productive and unproductive.

All labour, for instance, might be stated to be
productive of value to the amount of the value
paid for it, and in proportion to the degree in which
the produce of the different kinds of labour, when
sold at the price of free competition, exceeds in
value the price of the labour employed upon them.

Upon this principle the labours of agriculture
would, generally speaking, be the most productive;
because the produce of nearly all the land actually
in use is not only of sufficient exchangeable value
to pay the labourers employed upon it, but the
profits of the stock advanced by the farmers, and
the rents of the land let by the proprietors. Next
to the labours of agriculture, those labours would
in general be most productive the operations of
which were most assisted by capital or the results
of previous labour, as in all those cases the ex-
changeable value produced would most exceed the
value of the labour employed in the production,
and would support, in the shape of profits, the


greatest number of additional persons, and tend


most to the accumulation of capital.


sr


re


Pe ar


a
P=


| wees


> .
\"


s mage 2 5 Ayal nis

— i) “sp monveniva LABOUR. 59
“The labo 1 least productive of wealth would be

‘that, the of which were only equal in ex-


changeable value to the value paid for such labour,


‘ which would support therefore no other classes of


society b he labourers actually employed, would
lace little or no capital, and tend the least di-
“effectively towards that kind of accu-


ie


; pte, which facilitates future production. In


this last division of productive labour would, of
course, be found. all the unproductive labourers of
yea Smith. _

‘This mode of considering the subject has, per-
haps, some adyantages ‘in particular points over
that of Adam Smith. It would establish a useful
and tolerably accurate scale of productiveness, in-
stead of dividing labour only into two kinds, and
drawing a hard line of distinction between them.
It would determine, in the very definition, the
natural pre-eminence of agriculture, which Adam
Smith is obliged to explain afterwards, and, at the
same time, shew the numerous cases where an in-


 erease of manufacturing and mercantile labour


would be more productive, both to the state and
to individuals, than an increase of agriculture; as
in all’ those where, from a greater demand for
manufactured and mercantile products, compared
with the produce of the land, the profits of manu-
facturing and mercantile capital were greater than
both the rent and profits combined of labour em-
ployed upon new and less fertile land. |
It would answer sufficiently to all the reason-
ings of Adam Smith on the accumulation of capi-
D4


40 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [CH. 1.


tal, the distinction between capital and revenue,
the nature and effects of saving, and the balance
of produce and consumption, merely by using
the terms more and less productive, for pro-
ductive and unproductive; and would have the
additional advantage of keeping more constantly
in view the necessary union of capital and skill
with the more productive kinds of labour; and
thus shew the reason why all the labourers of a
savage nation might, according to Adam Smith,
be productive, and yet the nation increase very
slowly in wealth and population, while a rapid
increase of both might be taking place im an im-
proved country under a proportion of productive
labourers very much inferior.

With regard to the kinds of labour which Adam
Smith has called unproductive, and for which
classification his theory has been most objected to,
their productiveness to the amount of their worth
in the estimation of the society, varying, of course,
according to the different degrees of skill acquired,
and the different degrees of plenty or scarcity in
which they are found, would be fully allowed,
though they would still always be distinguished
from those more productive kinds of labour which
support other classes of the society besides the
labourers themselves,

Agricultural labour would stand in the first
rank, for this simple reason, that its gross produce
is sufficient to maintain a portion of all the three
great classes of society; those who live upon rent,
those who live upon profits, and. those who live


SEC, 11.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 41


upon wages. Manufacturing and mercantile la- |
bour would stand in the next rank; because the
value of its produce will support a portion of two
of these orders of society. And the unproductive
labourers of Adam Smith would stand in the third
rank of productiveness ; because their labours di-
rectly support no other classes but themselves.

_ This seems to bea simple and obvious classifica-


tion, and places the different kinds of labour in a
~ natural order with regard to productiveness, with-
out interfering in any respect with their mutual


dependance on each other as stimulants to each
other’s increase.

The great objection to this scale of productive-
ness is that, at its first setting out, it makes the
circumstance of the payment made for any par-
ticular kind of exertion, instead of the quality of
the produce, the criterion of its being productive.
According to Adam Smith, the exertion which
produces a pair of stockings is productive labour,
whether they are knit by a lady for her amuse-
ment, or made by a regular stocking-weaver; but,
according to the present theory, as no payment
has been made for them, they cannot be considered
as wealth. Upon the same principle the song of
a strolling actress, or the declamation of a speaker
at the Westminster Forum, would be the result of
productive labour, because paid for ; while a very
superior song by a lady, or a speech in the House
of Commons from the first orator of the age,


abounding in eloquence and information, would be


unproductive,


42 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [cH. 1.


And yet, if we once desert matter, and still
make no distinction of this kind, with reference to
payment, we are at once thrown upon a field so
wide, as utterly to confound all attempts to esti-
mate the comparative quantity of productive la-
bour in different countries, If the exertion which
produces a song, whether paid for or not, be pro-
ductive labour,. why should the exertion which
produces the more yaluable result of instructive
and agreeable conversation be excluded? why
should we exclude the efforts necessary to dis-
cipline our passions, and become obedient to all
the laws of God and man, the most valuable of all
labours? why, indeed, should we exclude any ex-
ertion, the object of which is to obtain happiness
or avoid pain, either present or future? and yet
under this description may be comprehended the
exertions of every human being during every mo-
ment of his existence. It is quite clear, therefore,
that, with any view to the use which may be made
of the term, it must be more confined.

It may be said, indeed, with regard to the term
labour, that it seems to imply valuation and pay-
ment, and has nothing to do with unbought, volun-
tary exertions. But the whole difficulty returns
in the definition of riches; and if we do not con-
fine them to material objects, and yet wish to make
some practical use of the term in comparing dif-
ferent countries together, we must include in our
definition only those personal services which are
bought; and thus draw the line which separates
what ought to be called riches from what ought


F
|


SEC.II.] | AND, PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 43


not to be so denominated, between objects which
may in all respects be precisely the same, except
that one is the result of paid labour, and the other
of unbought exertions.

If, for instance, we were to define wealth to be
whatever has value in exchange, it is obvious that
acting, dancing, singing, and oratory would some- *
times be wealth and sometimes not; and even
with regard to food and the most essential neces-


~~ saries of life, excessive plenty or the custom of


producing without exchanging, would render the
definition nugatory.

If, in: denominating personal services wealth, we
do not look to the quality of what is produced,
but merely to the effect of the payment received
for it in stimulating other wealth, this is intro-
ducing a new and separate consideration, which
has no relation to the direct production of wealth.
In this view it will be seen that I attach very great
importance to the unproductive labourers of Adam
Smith ; but this is evidently not as producers them-
selves, but as stimulating others to produce, by the
power which they possess of making a demand in
proportion to the payment they have received. In
this sense the mortgagee and public creditor are
productive labourers to the amount of what they
receive. | But though the division of property
occasioned by these classes of society may be use-
ful, and tend indirectly to stimulate the produc-
tion of wealth by increasing demand, it would be
confounding all natural distinctions to call them
productive labourers. It would be equally incor-


44 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH (cH. I.


rect to assert that the unproductive labourers of
Adam Smith necessarily create the wealth which
pays them. It is true that the desire to enjoy the
convenience or parade of personal attendance and
the benefit of medical advice has a strong tendency
to stimulate industry ; but they are both purchased
in large quantities by persons who have no means
of increasing their incomes in consequence of this
expenditure, and sometimes they are bought by _
the actual destruction of capital, and the positive
diminution of the power of production. Though
we allow, therefore, fully their tendency to act as
a stimulus to the production of wealth, yet they
can never be said necessarily to create it; and
even under the circumstances most favourable to
their influence, their operation is poconaigag’ indi-
rect, and not immediate.

When we consider then the difficulties which pre-
sent themselves on every supposition we can make,
it may fairly be doubted whether it is probable that
we shall be able to find a distinction more useful
for practical purposes, and, on the whole, less ob-
jectionable in point of precision, than that of Adam
Smith; which draws the line that distinguishes
riches from other kinds of value, between what is
matter and what is not matter, between what has
duration and what has no duration, between what
is susceptible of accumulation and definite valua-
tion, and what is without either one or both of
these essential properties.

Some degree of duration, and a consequent sus-
ceptibility of accumulation, seems to be’ essential


hed
~


SEC. If.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 45


to our usual conceptions of wealth, not only be-


cause produce of this kind seems to be alone capa-
ble of forming those accumulations which tend so
much to facilitate future production, but because
they alone contribute to increase that store reserved
for consumption, which is certainly one of the most
distinguishing marks of riches compared with po-
verty. The characteristic of poverty seems to be


to live from hand to mouth. The characteristic of -


eK 4


riches is to have a store to apply to for the com-
modities wanted for immediate consumption. But


in every case of productive labour, as explained by


Adam Smith, there is always a period, though in
some cases it may be very short, when either the
stock destined to replace a capital, or the stock re-
served for immediate consumption is distinctly
augmented by it; and to this quality of adding to
the national stock, the term, enriching or produc-
tive of riches seems to be peculiarly appropriate.
But it is not enough that it should be suscepti-
ble of accumulation, and of adding to the national
stock, to entitle it to be called productive accord-
ing to the general meaning of Adam Smith. In
order to make the term useful for practical pur-
poses, the kind of labour to which it refers should
be susceptible of some sort of definite valuation.
The laws of the legislator, the precepts of the mo-
ralist, and the conclusions of the natural philoso-
pher, may certainly be said to be susceptible of
aceumulation and of receiving assistance from past
labour; but how is it possible to estimate them, or
to say to what amount the country has been en-


| 46 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH fen. 1.


gidtied by them? ‘whereas the anbioue which is the
necessary condition of the supply of material ob-
jects is estimated in the price at which they are
sold, and may fairly be presumed to add to the
wealth of the country an amount at least equal to
the value paid for such labour. And probably,
_ with few or no exceptions, it is only the kind of
labour which is realized upon material’ products
that is at once susceptible of accumulation and de-
finite valuation.
It has been observed by Monsieur Garnier in
his valuable edition of the Wealth of Nations, that
_it seems very strange and inconsistent to denomi-
nate musical instruments riches, and the labour
which produces them productive, while the music
which they yield, and which is the sole object for
which they are made, is not to be considered in the
same light; and the performers, who can alone put
them to their proper use, are called unproductive
labourers.* But the difference between material
products and those which are not matter suffici-
ently warrants the distinction in point of precision
and consistency; and the utility of it is immedi-
ately obvious from the facility of giving a definite
valuation to the instruments, and the absolute im-
possibility of giving such a valuation to all the
tunes which may be played upon them.
It has also been observed by the same authority
that it is still more inconsistent to denominate the
clerk of a merchant a productive labourer, and a


‘ ‘ * Vol. V. Note xx.


r


——


,
| - : '
| ao

'

i


“J


SEC.11.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 47.


clerk employed by the government, who may in
some cases have precisely the same kind of busi-
ness to do, an unproductive labourer.* To this,


. however, it may be replied, that in all business


e


‘
i


r


conducted with a view to the profit of individuals,
it may fairly be presumed that there are no more
clerks or labourers of any kind employed, nor with
higher salaries, than necessary. But the same pre~

sumption cannot be justly entertained with regard
to the business of government; and as the results
of the labours of its servants are not brought to
market, nor their salaries distributed with the same
rigid attention to the exchangeable value of their


services, no just criterion is afforded for determin-


ing this value.

At the same time it may be remarked, that if a
servant of government performs precisely the same
kind of labour in the preparation or superintend-
ance of material products as the servant of a mer-


‘chant, he ought to be considered as a productive


labourer, and one among the numerous instances
which are always occurring of productive labourers,
or labourers occasionally productive, to be found
among those classes of. society which, with regard
to the great mass of their exertions, may with pro-
ptiety be characterized as unproductive. This kind
of exception must of course frequently happen,
not only among the servants of government, but
throughout the whole range of menial service, and
in every other situation in society. Almost every


* Vol. V. Note xx.


4


*


hy


48 ' ‘DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH [cH. f.


person indeed must occasionally do some produc-
tive labour; and the line of separation which
Adam Smith has drawn between productive and
unproductive labour may be perfectly distinct, al-
though the denomination which he has given to the
different classes of society, founded on their gene-
ral character, must unavoidably be inaccurate with
regard to the exertions of some individuals.

It should also be*recollected that Adam Smith
fully allows the value and importance of many
sorts of labour which he calls unproductive. From
the enumeration indeed which he has made of
these different sorts, he must be aware that some
of them produce a value with which the results of —
the labour employed in making ribbands and laces,
or indeed of any other labour but that which di-
rectly supplies our most pressing physical wants,
cannot for a moment be compared. Indirectly in-
deed and remotely, there cannot be a doubt that
even the supply of these physical wants is most
powerfully promoted by the labours of the moralist,
the legislator, and those who have exerted them-
selves to obtain a good government; but the main


‘value of these labours evidently depends upon the


encouragement which they give to the full deve-
lopment of talents and industry, and their conse-
quent invariable tendency to increase the quantity
of material wealth. So far, therefore, as they con-
tribute to promote this supply, their general effect,
though not its precise amount, will be estimated in
the quantity of those material objects which the
country can command; and so far as they contri-


>»


SEC. I1.] AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR. 49


“bute to other sources of happiness besides those
which are derived from matter, it may be more


correct to consider them as belonging to a class of
objects, many of which cannot, without the greatest
confusion, be made to enter into the gross calcula-
tions which relate to national wealth. To estimate
the value of Newton’s discoveries or the delight
communicated by Shakspeare and Milton by the


price at which their works have sold, would be but


a poor measure of the degree in which they: have
elevated and enchanted their country ; nor would
it be less groveling and incongruous to estimate the
benefit which the country has derived from the
Revolution of 1688 by the pay of the soldiers, and
all other payments concerned in effecting it.

On the whole, therefore, allowimg that the la-
bours of the moralist and the ean adctades, the
legislator and the lacemaker, the agriculturist and


_ the vocal performer, have all for their object the


gratification of some want or wish of mankind, it
may still be the most natural, useful, and correct
classification which the subject will admit, first to
separate, under the name of wealth or riches, every
thing which gratifies the wants of man by means
of material objects, and then to denominate pro-
ductive, every kind of labour which is directly pro-
ductive of wealth, that is, so directly, as to be esti-
mated in the value of the objects produced.

The reader will see that I have not introduced
this discussion with a view to the establishment of
any nice.and subtle distinctions without a practical
object. My purpose is to shew that there is really

E


50 DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH. [cH. 1.


some difficulty in the definition of wealth, and of
productive labour; but that this difficulty should
not deter us from adopting any classifications which
are:really useful in conducting inquiry; that in
treating of the nature and causes of the wealth of
nations a distinction between the different sources
of gratification and the different kinds-of labour
seems to be not only highly useful, but almost ab-
solutely necessary; and consequently that weshould
be satisfied with the best classification which we ©
‘can get on these subjects, although it may not in
all its parts be unobjectionable.


( 51)


CHAPTER II.


H ON THE NATURE AND MEASURES OF VALUE.


SECTION I.
Of the different Sorts of Value.


Mosr writers in treating of the nature of value,
have considered it as having two different mean-
ings, one, value in use, and the other, value in ex-
change. It may be questioned whether in fact we
are in the habit of using the term in the first of
these two senses. We do not often hear of the
value of air and water, although they are bodies in
the highest degree useful, and indeed essentially
necessary to the life and happiness of the human
race. It may beadmitted, however, that the term,
taken perhaps in a metaphorical rather than a lite-
ral sense, may imply, and is sometimes used to im-
ply, whatever is necessary or beneficial to us, and
in this sense may apply, without impropriety, to a
clear spring of water or to a fine air, although no
question could arise respecting their value in ex-
change.

As this meaning, therefore, of the word value
has already been admitted by many writers into
the vocabulary of political economy, and, although
not much sanctioned by custom, is justifiable in a
metaphorical if not in a literal sense, it may not be

E2


52 ON THE NATURE AND [cu. 11.


worth while to reject it; and it need only be ob-
served that as the application of the word value in
this way is very much less frequent than in the
other, it should never appear alone, but should al-
ways be marked by the addition, in use.

Value in exchange is founded, as the term seems
to imply, on the will and power to exchange one
commodity for another. It does not depend merely
upon the scarcity in which commodities exist, nor
upon the inequality of their distribution ; but upon
the circumstance of their not being distributed ac-
cording to the wills and powers of individuals, or
in such quantities to each, as the wills and powers
of individuals will enable them ultimately to effect
by means of exchanges. attt
_ Hf nature were to distribute, in the first instance,
all her goods precisely as they are ultimately dis-
tributed previous to consumption, there would be
no question of exchanges or exchangeable value,
and yet the mass of commodities would both exist
in a degree of scarcity and be very unequally di-
vided. '

In this distribution one man might have only
bread, and another venison and claret in addition to
bread, . The man who had only bread might wish
to make an exchange, but would not have the
power, and the man who had venison and, claret
besides bread would have the power to make an
exchange, but not the wish. Under these circum-
stances the commodities possessed by each would
not be brought into contact, and the relative value
of bread and venison would never be determined.

To determine this, it is necessary that the posses-


SEC. 1.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 53


sors of venison should want bread, as well as that the
possessors of bread should want venison, and when,
this. was the case, venison and bread would soon be
_ brought into comparison with each other, and the
~ means afforded of ascertaining their relative values.

Every exchange, therefore, must imply, not

only the power and will to give some article in ex-
change for one more wanted, but a reciprocal de-
mand in the party possessing the article wanted,
for the article proposed to be exchanged for it.
When this reciprocal demand exists, the rate at
which the exchange is made, or the portion of one
commodity which is given for an assigned portion
of the other, will depend upon the relative estima-
tion in which they are held by the parties, founded
on the desire to possess, and the difficulty or faci-
lity of procuring possession.

Owing to the necessary difference of the desires
and. powers of individuals, it is probable that the
contracts thus made were in the first instance very
different from each other. Among some indivi-
duals it might be agreed to give six pounds of
bread for a pound of venison, and among others
only two. But the man who was ready and will-
ing to give six pounds of bread for a pound of
venison, if he heard of a person at a little distance
who would take two pounds for the same quantity,
would of course not continue to give six; and the
man who would consent to give a pound of veni-
son for only two pounds of bread, if he could any
where else obtain six, would not continue to make
an exchange from which he derived only two.


<


Ev


54 ON THE NATURE AND __ [CH.1II.


After a certain time it might be expected that
an average would be formed, founded upon all the
offers of bread, compared with all the offers of
venison. And thus, as is very happily described
by Turgot, a current value of all commodities in
frequent use would be established.*

It would be known, not only that a pound of
venison was worth four pounds of bread, but that
it was also worth perhaps a pound of cheese, a
quarter of a peck of wheat, a quart of wine, a cer-
tain portion of leather, &c. &c. oper of an average
quality. ;

Each commodity would in this way measure the
exchangeable value of all others, and would, in its
turn, be measured by any one of them. Each com-
modity would also be arepresentativeof value. The
possessor of a quart of wine might consider himself
in possession of a value equal to four pounds of
bread, a pound of cheese, a certain portion of
leather, &c. &c. and thus each commodity would,
with more or less accuracy and convenience, pos-
sess two essential properties of money, that of be-
ing both a representative and measure of value,

But long before it is conceivable that this ge-
neral valuation of commodities, with’ regard to
each other, should have taken place to any consi-
derable extent, or with any tolerable degree of ac-
curacy, a great difficulty in the estimation of rela-
tive value would be constantly recurring, from the
want of a reciprocal demand. The possessor of


* Formation et Distribution des Richesses, § xxxv.
+ Id. § xii.


- SEC. 1.] | MEASURES OF VALUE. 55


venison might want bread, but the possessor of
bread to whom he applies may not want venison,
or by no. means that quantity which the owner
would wish to part with. This want of reciprocal
demand must occasion, in many instances, and in
places not very remote from each other, the most
unequal exchanges, and except in large fairs or
markets, where a great quantity and variety of
commodities were brought together, would seem
almost to preclude the possibility of any thing like
such a general average valuation of commodities as
has been just described.

Every man, therefore, in order to secure this re-
ciprocal demand, would endeavour, as is justly
stated by Adam Smith,* so to carry on his busi-
ness as to have by him, besides the produce of his
own particular trade, some commodity for which
there was so’ general and constant a demand, that
it would scarcely ever be refused in exchange for
what he wanted. In order that each individual
ima society should be furnished with that share of
its whole produce to which he is entitled by his
wants and powers, it is not only necessary that
there should be some measure of this share, but
some medium by which he can obtain it in the
quantity and at the time best suited to him.

The constantly ‘recurring want of some such
medium occasioned the use of various commodities
for this purpose in the early periods of society.

Of these, cattle seem to have been the most
general. Among pastoral nations cattle are not


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. c. iv.
E4


56 SON THE NATUREAND  — [GH


only kept without difficulty or loss by those who
may receive them, but as they form the principal
possessions and wealth of society in this stage
of its progress, they must naturally have been the
subject of frequent exchanges, and their exchange-
able-value, in ccnsequence, compared with other
commodities, would be pretty generally known.
 It:seems to be quite necessary indeed, that the
commodity, chosen for a medium of exchange
should, in addition to the other qualities which
may fit it for that purpose, be in such frequent
use, as that its current value should be tolerably
well established, ri
» Acurious and striking silent of this, is that, not-
withstanding the peculiar aptitude of the precious
metals to perform the functions of a medium,of
exchange, they had not been used for that purpose
in Mexico at the period of its conquest by the
Spaniards, although these metals were in some de-
gree of plenty as ornaments, and although the want
of some medium of exchange was clearly evinced
by the use of the nuts of cacao for that purpose.*
It is probable that as the practice of smelting and
refining the ores of the precious metals had not yet
been resorted to, the supply of them was not suffi-
ciently steady, nor was the use of them sufficiently
general to fit them for the purpose required.

In Peru, where the precious metals were found by
the Spaniards in much greater abundance, the prac-
tice of smelting and refining the richest ores had
begun to prevail, although no shafts had been sunk


* Robertson’s America, Vol. ILI, Book yii. p. 215,


SEC, I.] MBASURES OF VALUE. 57


to any depth in the earth.* But in Peru the state
of. property was so peculiar, and so nearly ap-
proaching to aconimunity of goods, that a medium
of exchange seems not to have been called for, at
least, there is no account of the use of either of the
precious metals or of any other cit in the
wae of money.

» Inthe Old World, the art of smelting and refin-
dns: the ores of gold, silver, and copper, seems to
haye:-been known to some of the most improved
nations of which we have accounts, from the ear-
liest ages; and as soon as the annual accumulations
of these metals.and the means used to obtain them
had, rendered their supply to a certain degree
steady, and they had been introduced into com-
mon use in the shape of ornaments, instruments,
and utensils, their other peculiar and appropriate
qualities, such as their durability, divisibility, uni-
formity of substance, and great value in a small
compass, would naturally point them out as the
best.commodity that could be selected to answer
the purpose of a measure of value and medium of
exchange.

But when they were adopted as the. general
measure of value, it would follow of course that
all commodities would be most frequently com-
pared with this measure. The precious metals
would be, on almost all occasions, the commodity
named, and might properly, therefore, be called the
nominal value of the commodities to the measure
of which they were applied. ;


* Robertson’s America, Vol. III. Book vii. p. 252,


58 ON THE NATURE AND . few. in.


‘This sort’ of value has sometimes been exclu-
sively designated by the name of price; and
though it is not uncommon to speak of the price
of a commodity in labour, or in other commodities,
and the term when so used is sufficiently intelli-
gible, yet it would certainly be better to confine it
strictly to the value of commodities estimated in
the precious metals, or in the currencies of differ-
ent countries which profess to represent them ;
and, indeed, when used without the above addi-
tions, this is what the term is always understood
to mean. Price then may be considered as a more
confined term than value, and as representing one,
and one only of the senses in which the more
general term is used.

 Theintroduction of a measure which determined
the nominal and relative value of commodities,
and of a medium which would be accepted at all
times in exchange for them, was a most important
step in the progress of society, and tended to facili-
tate exchanges and stimulate production to an
extent which, without such an instrument, —
have been perfectly impossible.

(It is very justly observed by Adam Smith, that
itis the nominal value of goods, or their prices
only, which enter imto the consideration of the


_ merchant. It matters very little to him whether


a hundred pounds, or the goods which he purchases
with this sum, will command more or less of the
necessaries and conveniences of life in Bengal than
in London. What he wants is an instrument by
which he.can obtain the commodities in which he


SEC. I.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 59


deals and: éstimate the relative values of his sales


‘and purchases. His returns come to him wherever


he lives; and whether it be in London or Calcutta,
his gains will be in proportion to the excess of the
amount at which he sells his goods compared with
the amount which they cost him to bring to mar-
ket, estimated in the precious metals.

But though the precious metals answer. very
effectually the most important purposes of a mea-
sure of value, in the encouragement they give. to
the distribution and production of wealth; yet. it
is quite obvious that they fail as a measure of the
exchangeable value of objects in different, coun-
tries, or at different periods in the same country,

If we are told that the wages of day-labour in
a particular country are, at the present time, four-
pence a day; or that the revenue of a particular
sovereign, 700 or 800 years ago, was 400,000/. a
year; these statements of nominal value convey no
sort of information respecting the condition of the
lower classes of people, in the one case, or the re-


-sources of the sovereign, in the other. Without


further knowledge on the subject, we should. be
quite at a.los$.to say, whether the labourers in the
country mentioned were starving, or living in great
plenty; whether the king in question might be
considered as haying a very inadequate revenue,


or whether the sum mentioned was so great as to
be incredible.*


* Hume very reasonably doubts av possibility of William the
Conqueror’s revénue being £400,000 2 year, as represented by an
ancient historian, and adopted by subsequent writers.


60 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. 1.


It is quite obvious that in cases of this kind,
and they are of constant recurrence, the value of
wages, incomes, or commodities estimated in the
precious metals, will be of little use to us alone.
What we want further is some estimate of a kind
which may be denominated real value in exchange,
implying the quantity of the necessaries and con-
veniences of life which those wages, incomes, or
commodities will enable the possessor of them to
command. Without this knowledge, the nominal
values above mentioned may lead us to the most
erroneous conclusions ; and in contradistinction to
such values, which often imply an increase or de-
crease of wealth merely in name, the term. real
value in exchange seems to be just and appropriate,
as implying an increase or decrease in the power
of commanding real wealth, or the most substan-
tial goods of life.

That a correct measure of real value in exchange
would be very desirable cannot be doubted, as it
would at once enable us to form a just estimate
and comparison of wages, incomes, and commodi-
ties; in all countries and at all periods; but when
we consider what a measure of real value in ex-
change implies, we shall feel doubtful whether any —
one commodity exists, or can easily be supposed
to exist, with such properties, as would qualify it
to become a standard measure of this kind. | What-
ever article, or even mass of articles, we refer to,
must itself be subject to change ; and all that we
can hope for is an approximation to the measure
which is the object of our search.


SEC. 1.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 61


We are not however justified, on this account,
in giving a different definition of real value in ex-
change, if the definition already adopted be at
once the most usual and the most useful: - We
have the power indeed -arbitrarily to call the labour
which has been employed upon a commodity its
real value ;' but in so doing we use words in a dif-
ferent sense from that:in which they are custom-
arily used ; we confound at once the very impor-
tant distinction between cost and value ; and render
it almost impossible to explain, with clearness, the
main stimulus to the production of wealth, which,
in fact, depends upon this distinction.

- The right of making definitions must evidently
be limited by their propriety, and their use in the
science to which they are applied. - After we have
made a full allowance for the value of commodities
in use, or their intrinsic capacities for satisfying
the wants of mankind, every other interpretation
of the term value seems to refer to some power in
exchange ; and if it do not refer to the power of
an article in exchange for some one “commodity
named, such as money, it must refer to its power
in exchange for 3 or 4, 5 or 6, 8 or 10 together,
to thé mass of commodities combined, or to its
power of commanding labour which most nearly
represents this mass.

There can be no question of the propriety and
usefulness of a distinction between the power of a
commodity in commanding the precious metals,
and its power of commanding the necessaries and
conyeniences of life, including labour. Itvis a


“y


62 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. In.


distinction absolutely called for, whenever we are
comparing the wealth of two nations together, or
whenever we are estimating the value of the pre-
cious metals in different states and at different
periods of time. And till it has been shewn that
some other interpretation of the term real value in
exchange, either agrees better with the sense in.


‘which the words are generally applied, or is de-


cidedly more useful in an inquiry into the nature
and causes of the wealth of nations, I shall con-


tinue to think, that the most proper definition of


real value in exchange, in contradistinction to no-
minal value in exchange, is, the power of com-
manding the necessaries and conveniences of life,
including labour, as distinguished from the power
of commanding the precious metals.

If then we continue to apply the term value in
the first sense mentioned, we shall have three sorts
of value—

1. Value in use; which may be defined to be
the intrinsic utility of an object.

2. Nominal value in exchange ; which may be
defined to be the value of commodities in the pre-
cious metals.

3. Real value in exchaiige ; which may be de-
fined to be the power of an object to command in
exchange the necessaries and conveniences of life,
including labour.

The distinctions here made between the differ-
ent kinds of value are, in the main, those of Adam
Smith ; though it must be acknowledged that he
has not been sufficiently careful to keep them al-


‘


SEC. I1.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 63


ways separate. In speaking of the value of corn,
he has sometimes left us in doubt whether he
means value in use, or real value in exchange ;*
and he sometimes, as I shall have occasion to no-
tice further on, confounds the cost of a commodity
in labour with its value in commanding labour,
which are essentially different.

These instances however may, perhaps, be fairly
considered in the light of inadvertences. At the
end of the third chapter of his first book he has
explained value in use in the same manner as it
has been explained here; and in part of the suc-
ceeding chapter, on the real and nominal prices of
commodities, he has made exactly the same dis-
tinction between real and nominal value, the pro-
priety of which, as it has been controverted, it has
been my endeavour to establish. To these dis-
tinctions he has, in the main, adhered; they pro-
perly belong to his system ; and he has only devi-
ated from them when, from.some cause or other,
he was not fully aware of the inconsistency of
such deviation.


‘


SECTION II.
Of Demand and Supply, as they affect Exchangeable Value.


Tue terms Demand and Supply are so familiar
to the ear of every reader, and their application in


* Wealth of Nations, Book IV. Chap. v. p. 278. 6th Edit.
+ Id. Book I. Chap. v.


64 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. I.


single instances so fully understood, that in the
slight use which has hitherto been made of them,
it has not been thought necessary to interrupt the
course of the reasoning by explanations and defi-
nitions. These terms, however, though in con-
stant use, are by no means applied with precision.
And before we proceed farther, itmay be advisable
to clear this part of the ground as much as possible,
that we may be certain of the footing on which
we stand. This will appear to be the more neces-
sary, as it must be allowed, that of all the principles
in political economy, there is none which bears so
‘large a share in the phenomena which come under
its consideration as the principle of naga and
demand.

It has been sane stated, that all value in ex-
change depends upon the power and will to ex-
change one commodity for another; and when, by
the introduction of a general measure of value and
medium. of exchange, society has been divided, in
common language, into buyers and sellers, demand
may be defined to be, the will combined with the
power to purchase, and supply, the production of
commodities combined with the intention to sell
them. In this state of things, the relative values of
commodities in money, or their prices, are deter-
mined by the relative demand for them, compared
with the supply of them ; and this law appears to
be so general, that probably not a single instance
of a change of price can be found which may not
be satisfactorily traced to some previous change in
the causes which affect the demand or supply.


SEC. I1.] "MEASURES OF VALUE. 65


' In examining the truth of this position we must
constantly bear in mind the terms in which it
is expressed; and recollect that, when prices are
said to be determined by demand and supply, it is
not meant that they are determined either by the
demand alone or the supply alone, but by their
relation to each other.

But how is this relation to be ascettained? It
has been sometimes said that supply is always


equal to demand, because no permanent supply of


any commodity can take place for which there is
not a demand so effective as to take off all that is
offered. In one sense of the terms in which de-
mand and supply have occasionally been used, this
position may be granted. The actual ertent of
the demand, compared with the actual ertent of
the supply, are always on an average proportioned
to eachother. Ifthe supply be ever so small, the
extent of the effective demand cannot be greater ;
and if the supply be ever so great, the extent of
the demand, or the consumption, will either in-
crease in proportion, or a part of it will become
useless and cease to be produced. It cannot,
therefore, be in this sense that a change in the
proportion of demand to supply affects prices ; be-
cause in this sense demand and supply always bear
the same relation to each other... And this uncer-
tainty in the use of these terms renders it an abso-
lutely necessary preliminary in the present inquiry
clearly to ascertain what is the nature of that change
in the mutual relation of demand and supply, on
which the prices of commodities so entirely depend.
F


66 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. II.


The demand for a commodity has been defined
to be, the will combined with the power to
purchase it.

The greater is the degree of this will and power
withregard to any particularcommodity, the greater
or the more intense may be fairly said to be the
demand for it. But however great this will and
power may be among the purchasers of a commo-
dity, none of them will be disposed to give a high
price for it, if they can obtain it at a low one; and
as long as the abilities and competition of the
sellers induce them to bring the quantity wanted
to market at a low price, the real intensity of =
demand will not shew itself.

If a given number of commodities, attainable by
labour alone, were to become more difficult of ac-
quisition, as they would evidently not be obtained
unless by means of increased exertion, we might
surely consider such increased exertion, if applied,
as an evidence of a greater intensity of demand, or
of a power and will to make a greater sacrifice in
_ order to obtain them.

In fact it may be said, that the giving a greater
price for a commodity absolutely and necessarily
implies a greater intensity of demand; and that
the real question is, what are the causes which -
either call forth or render unnecessary the expres-
sion of this intensity of demand ?

It has been justly stated, that the causes which
tend to raise the price of any article estimated in
some commodity named, and supposed for short
periods not essentially to vary, are an increase in


SEC. II. ] MEASURES OF VALUE. 67°


the numberor wants of its purchasers, ora deficiency
in its supply ; and the causes which lower the price
are a diminution in the number or wants of its pur-
- chasers, or an increased abundance in its supply.

The first class of these causes is obviously cal-
culated to call forth the expression of a greater in-
tensity of demand, and the other of a less.

If, for instance, a commodity which had been
habitually demanded and consumed by a thousand


purchasers were suddenly to be wanted by two ~


thousand, it is clear that before this increased ex-
tent of demand could be supplied, some must go
without what they wanted ; and it is scarcely pos-
sible to suppose that the intensity of individual
demand would not increase among a sufficient
number of these two thousand purchasers, to take
off all the commodity produced at an increased
price. At the same time, if we could suppose it
possible that the wills and powers of the purcha-
sers, or the intensity of their demand, would not
admit of increase, it is quite certain that, however
the matter might be settled among the contending
competitors, no rise of price could take place.

In the same manner, if a commodity were to be
diminished one half in quantity, it is scarcely pos-
sible to suppose that a sufficient number of the
former purchasers would not be both willing and
able to take off the whole of the diminished quan-
tity at a higher price ; but if they really would not
or could not do this, the price could not rise.

On the other hand, if the permanent cost of pro-
ducing the commodity were doubled, it is evident

F 2


68 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. H.


that only such a quantity could be permanently
produced as would supply the wants of those who
were able and willing to make a sacrifice for the
attainment of their wishes, equal to double the
amount of what they did before. The quantity of
the commodity which would be brought to market
under these circumstances might be extremely
different. It might be reduced to the supply of a
single individual, or might remain precisely the
same-as before. If it were reduced to the supply
of a single individual, it would bea proof that only
one of all the former purchasers was both able and
willing to make an effective demand for it at the
advanced price. If the supply remained the same,
it would be a proof that all the purchasers were in
this state, but that the expression of this intensity
of demand had not before been rendered necessary.
In the latter case, there would be the same quantity
supplied and the same quantity demanded ;_ but
there would. be a much greater intensity of de-
mand called forth; and this may. be fairly said to
-be ‘a most important change in the relation be-
tween the supply and the demand of these com-
modities ;, because, without the increased intensity
-of demand, which in this case takes place, the com-
‘modity would cease to be produced ; that is, the
‘failure of the supply would be contingent upon
the failure of the power or will to make a greater
sacrifice for the object sought.

‘Upon the same. principles, if a commodity
were to become much more abundant, compared
with the former number, of purchasers, this in-


SEC. 11. ] MEASURES OF VALUE. 69


creased supply’ could not be all sold, unless the
price were lowered. Each seller wishing to dis-
pose of that part of the commodity which he pos-
sessed would go on lowering it till he had effected
his object ; and though the wills and powers of the
old purchasers might remain undiminished, yet as
the commodity could be obtained without the ex-
pression of the same intensity of demand as before,
this demand would of course not then shew itself.

A similar effect would obviously take place from

_the consumers of a commodity requiring a less
quantity of it.

If, instead of a temporary abundance of supply
compared with the demand, the cost of producing
any particular commodity were greatly diminished,
the fall of price would in the same manner be oc-
casioned ‘by an increased abundance of supply,
either actual or contingent. In almost all practical
cases it would be an actual and permanent increase,
because the competition of sellers would lower the
price ; and it very rarely happens that a fall of price
does not’ occasion an increased consumption. On
the supposition, however, of the very rare case that
a definite quantity only of the commodity was re-

quired, whatever might be its price, it is obvious
that from the competition of the producers a greater
quantity would be brought to market than could
be consumed, till the price was reduced in propor-
tion to the increased facility of production; and
this excess of supply would be always contingent
on the circumstance of the price being at any time
higher than the price which returns average profits.
; F3


70 ON THE NATURE AND [ou. 11.


In this case of a fall of prices, as in the other of a
rise of prices, the actual quantity of the commodity
supplied and consumed may possibly, after a short
struggle, be the same as before; yet it cannot be
said that the demand. is the same. It may indeed
exist precisely in the same degree, and the actual
consumers of the commodity might be perfectly
ready to give what they gave before rather than go
without it; but such has been the alteration in
the means of supply compared with the demand,
‘that the competition of the producers renders the
same intensity of demand no longer necessary to
effect the supply required; and not. being neces-
sary, it is of course not called forth, and the price
falls.

It is evidently, therefore, not merely ertent of
actual demand, nor even the extent of actual de-
mand compared with the extent of actual supply,
which raises prices, but such a change in the rela-
tion between supply and demand as renders ne-
cessary the expression of a greater intensity of de-
mand, in order either peaceably to divide any actual
produce, or prevent the future produce of the same
kind from failing.

And, in the same manner, it is not merely
extent of actual supply, nor the extent of the
actual supply compared with the actual demand,
that lowers prices, but such a change in the rela-
tion of the supply, compared with the demand, as
renders a fall of price necessary, in order to take
off a temporary abundance, or to prevent a con-
. Stant excess of supply contingent upon a diminu-


sid


SEC. 11.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 71


tion in the cost of production, without a propor-
tionate diminution in the price of the produce.

If the terms demand and supply be understood
and used in the way here described, there is no
case of price, whether temporary or permanent,
which they will not determine; and in every instance
of bargain and sale it will be perfectly correct to
say that the price will depend upon the ——
of the demand to the supply.

I wish it particularly to be observed: that in this
discussion I have not given any new meaning to
the terms, demand and supply. In the use which
I have occasionally made of the words intense and
intensity as applied to demand, my sole purpose
has been to explain the meaning which has hitherto
always been attached to the term demand when it
is said to raise prices. Mr. Ricardo in his scp’
On the influence of demand and supply on prices,*
observes, that “ the demand for a commodity can-
not be said to increase, if no additional quantity of
it be purchased or consumed.” But it is obvious,
as I have before remarked, that it is not in the
sense of mere extent of consumption that demand
raises prices, because it is almost always when the
prices are the lowest that the extent of consump-
tion is the greatest. This, therefore, cannot be
the meaning hitherto attached to the term, demand,
when it is said to raise prices. Mr. Ricardo, how-
ever, subsequently quotes Lord Lauderdale’s state-
mentsrespecting value,} and allows them to be true,

* Principles of Polit. Econ. chap. xxx. p. 493. 2d edit.


+ Id. p. 495.
: F4


72 '  . ON THE NATUREAND {en. 4.


as applied to monopolized commodities, and the
market prices of all other commodities for a limited
period. He would allow, therefore, that the defi-
ciency of any article in a market would occasion a
great demand for it, compared with the supply, and
raise its price, although in this case less than
usual of the article must be purchased by the con-
sumers, Demand, in this sense, is obviously quite
different from the sense in which Mr. Ricardo had
before used the term. The one implies extent of
consumption, the other intensity of demand, or the
will and power to make a greater sacrifice in order
to obtain the object wanted. It is in this latter
sense alone that demand raises prices; and my sole
. object in this section is to shew that, whenever we
talk of demand and supply as influencing prices,
whether market or natural, the terms should al-
ways be understood in the sense in which Mr. Ri-
cardo and every other person has hitherto under-
stood them, when speaking of commodities bought
and sold ina market.


SECTION III,
Of the Cost of Production as it affects Exchangeable Value.


Ir may be said, perhaps, that even according to
the view given of demand and supply in the pre-
ceding section, the permanent prices ofa great
mass of commodities will be determined by the
cost of their production. This is true, if we in-


* SEC. ILI. ] MEASURES OF VALUE. 73


j clude all»the component parts of price stated by
, Adam Smith, though not if we consider only those
stated by Mr. Ricardo. But, in reality, the two
: systems, one of which accounts for the prices of
the great mass of commodities by the cost of their
production, and the other accounts for the prices
of all commodities, under all circumstances, perma-
nent as well as temporary, by the relation of the
demand to the supply, though they touch each
other necessarily at a greater number of points,
have an essentially different origin, and require,
therefore, to be very carefully distinguished.
Inall the transactions of bargain and sale there
is evidently a principle in constant operation, which
can | determine, and does actually determine, the
prices of commodities, quite independently of any
considerations of cost, or of the quantity of labour
and capital employed upon their production. And
this is found to operate, not only permanently upon
that class of commodities which may be considered
as monopolies, but temporarily and immediately
upon all commodities, and strikingly and pre-emi-
nently so upon all sorts of raw produce.
; It has never been a matter of doubt that the
i _ principle of supply and demand determines ex-
' clusively, and very regularly and accurately, the
prices; of monopolized commodities, without any
reference to the cost of their production ; and our
daily and uniform experience shews us that the
prices of raw products, particularly of those which
are most affected by the seasons, are at the moment
of their sale determined always by’the higgling of


74 | ON THE NATURE AND ~ [cH. 1.


the market, and differ widely in different years
and at different times, while the labour and capital
employed upon them may have been very nearly
the same. This is so obvious, that probably very
few would hesitate to believe what is certainly
true, that, if in the next year we could by any pro-
cess exempt the farmers from all cost in the pro-
duction of their corn and cattle, provided no
change were made in the quantity brought to
market, and the society had the same wants and
the same powers of purchasing, the prices of raw
products would be the same as if they had cost
the usual labour and expense to procure them.

With regard, therefore, to a class of commodities
of the greatest extent, it is acknowledged that the
existing market prices are, at the moment they are
fixed, determined upon a principle quite distinct
from the cost of production, and that these prices
are in reality almost always different from what
they would have been, if this cost had regulated
them.

There is indeed another class of commodities,
such as manufactures, particularly those in which
the raw material is cheap, where the existing market
prices much more frequently coincide with the
cost of production, and may appear, therefore, to
be: exclusively determined by it. Even here,
however, our familiar experience shews us that
any alteration in the demand and supply quite
overcomes for a time the influence of this cost ;
and further, when we come to examine the subject
more closely, we find that the cost of production


ie SEC, I11.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 75


itself only influences the prices of these commodi-
ties as the payment of this cost is. the necessary
condition of their continued supply.

But if this be true, it follows that the great prin-
ciple of demand and supply is called into action to
determine what Adam Smith calls natural prices as


- well as market prices.


It will be allowed without hesitation that no
change can take place in the market prices of com-
modities without some previous change in the re-
‘lation of demand and supply. And the question
is, whether the same position is true in reference to
natural prices? This question must of course be
determined by attending carefully to the nature of
the change which an alteration in the cost of pro-
duction occasions in the state of the demand and
supply, and particularly to the specific and imme-
diate cause by which the change of price that takes
place is effected.

We all allow, that when the cost of production
diminishes, a fall of price is generally the conse-
quence; but what is it, specifically, which forces
down the price of the commodity? It has been
shewn in the preceding section that it is an actual
or contingent excess of supply.

We all allow that, when the cost of production
increases, the prices of commodities generally rise.
But. what is it which specifically forces up. the
price? It has been shewn that it is a contingent
failure of supply. Remove these contingencies,
that is, let the extent of the supply remain exactly
the same, without contingent failure or excess,

_ whether the price of production rises or falls, and


76 ON THE NATURE AND fen, 1.


there is not the slightest ground for supposing that
any variation of price would take place.

If, for instance, all the commodities ‘that are
‘consumed in this country, whether agricultural or
manufactured, could be produced, during the next
ten years, without labour, and yet could only be
supplied exactly in the same quantities as they
would be in a natural state of things; then, sup-
posing the wills and the powers of the purchasers
to remain the same, there cannot be a doubt that
all prices ‘would also remain the same. But, if this”
be allowed, it follows, that the relation of the sup-
ply to the demand, either actual or contingent, is
the dominant principle’ in the detetchitation of
prices whether market or natural, and that the cost
of production can do nothing but in subordination
to it, that is, merely as this cost affects actually or
contingently the’ relation which the te oe bears
to the demand.

It is not however necessary to resort to imagi-
nary cases in order to fortify this conclusion. Ac-
tual experience shews the. principle in the clearest
light.

In the well known instance, noticed by Adam
Smith, of the insufficient pay of curates, notwith-
standing all the efforts of the legislature to raise it,*
a striking proof is afforded that the permanent
price of an article is determined by the demand
and supply, and not by the cost of production.
The real cost of production would, in this’case, be
more likely to be increased than diminished by the


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. c. x. p: 202. 6th edit,


See


SEC, III. MEASURES OF VALUE. 47


subscriptions of benefactors; but being paid by
others and not by the individuals themselves, it


' does not regulate and limit the supply; and this


supply, on account of such encouragement, be-
coming and continuing abundant, the price is and
must always be low, whatever may be the real cost
of the education given.

‘The. effects. of the poor-rates in lowering the
wages of labour present another practical instance
of the same kind. It,is not probable that public
money should. be more economically managed than
the income of individuals. Consequently the cost
of rearing a family cannot be supposed to be di-
minished by parish assistance; but, a part of the
expense being borne by the public, a price of la-
bour adequate to the maintenance of a certain
family .is no longer a necessary condition of its
supply ;.and as, by means of parish rates, this sup-
ply can be obtained without such wages, the real
costs.of supplying labour no longer regulate its |
price.

In fact, in every kind of bounty upon produc-
‘oa, the same effects must necessarily take place ;
and. just in proportion as such bounties tend to
lower prices, they shew that. prices depend upon
the. supply compared with the demand, and not
upon the costs of production.

But the most, striking instance which can well
be conceived to shew that, the cost of production
only influences the prices of commodities as it regu-
lates their supply; is continually before our eyes, in
the artificial value whichis given to Bank notes, by


78 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. IT.


limiting their amount. Mr. Ricardo’s admirable and
_ efficient plan for this purpose proceeds upon the just
principle, that, if you can limit the supply of notes,
so that they shall not exceed the quantity of gold
which would have circulated, if the currency had
been metallic, you will keep the notes always of .
the same value as gold. And I am confident he
would allow that if this limitation could be com-
pletely effected without the paper being exchange-
able for gold, the value of the notes would not be
altered. But, if an article which costs compara-
tively nothing in making, though it performs one
of the most important functions of gold, can be
kept to the value of gold by being supplied in the
same quantity, it is the clearest of all possible
proofs that the value of gold itself no further de-
pends upon the cost of its production, than as this
cost influences its supply, and that if the cost were
to,cease, provided the supply were not increased,
the value of gold in this country would still re-
main the same. f

It does not, however, in any degree follow from
what has been said, that labour and the costs of
production have not a most powerful effect upon
prices. But the true way of considering these
costs is, as the necessary condition of the supply
of the objects wanted.

Although, at the time of the actual exchange of
two commodities, no circumstance affects it but
the relation of the supply to the demand; yet, as
almost all the objects of human desire are obtained
by the instrumentality of human exertion, it is


SEC. 111. | MEASURES OF VALUE. 79


clear that the supply of these objects must be.
regulated—first, by the quantity and direction of
this exertion; secondly, by the assistance which
it may receive from the results of previous labour ;


‘and thirdly, by the abundance or scarcity of the


materials on which it has to work, and of the food
of the labourer. It is of importance, therefore, to
consider the different conditions which must be
fulfilled, in order that any commodity should con-
tinue to be brought to market.

The first condition is, that the labour which has
been expended on it should be so remunerated in
the value of the objects given in exchange, as to
encourage the exertion of a sufficient quantity of
industry in the direction required, as without such
adequate remuneration the supply of the commo-
dity must necessarily fail. If this labour should
be of a very severe kind, few comparatively would
be able or willing to engage in it; and, upon the
common principles of exchangeable value before
explained, it would rise in price. If the work
were of a nature to require an uncommon degree
of dexterity and ingenuity, a rise of price would
take place in a greater degree ; but not certainly,


-as stated by Adam Smith, on account of the esteem


which men have for such talents,* but on account
of their rarity, and the consequent rarity of the
effects produced by them. In all these cases the
remuneration will be regulated, not by the intrinsic
qualities of the commodities produced, but by the
state of the demand for them compared with the
supply, and of course by the demand and supply


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. c. vi. p. 71. 6th edit.


— 80 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. If


of the sort of labour which produced them. — If
the commodities have been obtained by the ex-
ertion of manual labour exclusively, aided at least
only by the unappropriated bounties of nature, the
whole, remuneration will, of course, belong to the
labourer, and the usual value of this remuneration,
in the existing state of the society, would be the
usual price of the commodity.

The second condition to be fulfilled is, that the
assistance which may have been given to the la-
bourer, from, the previous accumulation of objects
which facilitate future production, should be so
remunerated. as to continue the application of this
assistance to the production of the commodities
required. If by means of certain advances to the
labourer of machinery, food, and materials. pre-
viously collected, he can execute eight or ten times
as much work as he could without such assistance,
the person furnishing them might appear, at first,
to be entitled to the difference between the powers
of unassisted labour .and the powers of labour so
assisted. But the prices of commodities do not
depend upon their intrinsic utility, but upon the
supply and the demand. The increased powers of
labour would naturally produce an increased sup-
ply of commodities ; their prices would consequently
fall; and the remuneration for the capital advanced
would soon be reduced to what was necessary, in
the existing state of the society, to bring the ar-
ticles to the production of which they were applied
to market. With regard to the labourers employ-
ed, as neither their exertions nor their skill would


SEC. III. ] MEASURES OF VALUE. =,


necessarily be much greater than if they had
worked unassisted, their remuneration would be
nearly the same as before, and would depend en-
tirely upon the exchangeable value of the kind of
labour they had contributed, estimated in the
usual way by the demand and the supply. It is
not, therefore, quite correct to represent, as Adam
Smith does, the profits of ‘capital as a deduction
from the produce of labour. They are only a fair
remuneration for that part of the production con-
tributed by the capitalist, estimated exactly in the
same way as the contribution of the labourer.

The third condition to be fulfilled is, that the
price of commodities should be such as to effect
the continued supply of the food and raw mate-
Tials used by the labourers and capitalists ; and we
‘know that this price cannot be paid without yield-
ing a rent to the landlord on almost all the land
actually in use. In speaking of the landlords,
Adam Smith’s language is again exceptionable.
‘He represents them, rather invidiously, as loving
to reap where they have never sown, and as obliging


_ the labourer to pay for a licence to obtain those


natural products, which, when land was in com-
mon, cost only the trouble of collecting.* But he
‘would himself be the first to acknowledge that, if
land were not appropriated, its produce would
be, beyond comparison, less abundant, and conse- ~
quently dearer; and, if it be appropriated, some
persons or other must necessarily be the proprie-
tors. It matters not to the society whether these


“* Wealth of Nations, Book I. ch. vi. p. 74, 6th edit.
G


82 ON THE NATURE AND [ou. 1.


persons are the same or different from the actual
Jabourers of the land. The) price of the produce
will be determined by the general supply. com-
‘pared with the general demand, and will be pre-
cisely the same, whether the labourer pays a rent,
or uses the land without rent. The only differ-
ence.is that, in the latter case, what remains of this
price, after paying the labour and capital, will go
to the same person that contributed the labour,
which is almost equivalent to saying, that. the
labourer would be better off, if he were a possessor
of land as well as labour—a fact not to be disputed,
but which by no means implies that the labourer, -
who in,the lottery of human life has not drawn a
prize of land, suffers any hardship or injustice in
being obliged to give something in exchange for
the-use of what belongs to another. The,posses-
sors of land, whoever they may be, conduct them-
selves, with regard to their possessions, exactly in
the same way as the possessors of labour and of capi-
tal, and exchange what they have, foras many other
commodities as the society is willing to give them
for it. ,

The three conditions therefore above specified
must, in every society, be necessarily fulfilled, in
order to obtain the supply of by, far the greater —
part of the commodities which it wants; and the
compensation which fulfils these conditions, or the
price of any exchangeable commodity, may, be
considered.as consisting of three parts—that which
pays the wages of the labourer employed in. its
production; that which pays the profits of capital


SEC. 111. | MEASURES OF VALUE. 83


by which such production has been facilitated ;
and that which pays the rent of land, or. the re-
muneration for the raw materials and food fur-
nished by the landlord ;—the price of each of these
component parts being determined exactly by the
same causes as those which determine the price of
the whole.

The price which fulfils these conditions is pre-
cisely what Adam Smith calls the natural price.
I should be rather more disposed to call it the ne-
‘eessary price, because the term. necessary better
expresses a teference to the conditions of supply,
and is, on that account, susceptible of. a more
simple definition... To explain natural, price, Adam’
Smith is obliged to use a good deal of circumlocu-
tion; and though he makes it on the whole sufii-
ciently clear, yet, as he calls to his assistance two
other terms, each of which might almost as well
have been used as the! one adopted, the definition
is not quite satisfactory.* If, however, we use
the: term suggested, the definition of necessary
price will be) very.easy and simple. It will be,
the price necessary, im the actual circumstances
of the’ society, to bring the commodity regularly
to the market. . This is only a shorter description
of what Adam Smith means by. natural price, as
contradistinguished from market price, or the price
at which commodities actually sell in the market,
which, from the variations of the seasons:.or the
accidental miscalculations of the suppliers, are
sometimes sold higher and sometimes lower than


* Book I. chap. vii.
GQ


84 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. It.


the price which is necessary to fulfil the conditions
of a regular supply. ; ci bro
~ When a commodity is sold at this its: natural
‘price, Adam Smith’ says, it is sold for precisely
what itis worth. But here, I think, he has used
the term worth in an unusual sense. Commodities
are continually said to be worth more than they
jiave cost, ordinary profits: included; and accord-
ing to the customary and proper use of the term
worth, we could never say, that a certain quantity
‘of corn, or any other article, was not worth more
when it was scarce, although no more labour and
capital might have been employed about it. The
worth of a commodity is its market price, not its
natural or necessary price; it is its value in ex-
change, not its cost; and this is one of the instances.
in which Adam Smith has not been sufficiently
careful to keep them separate.*

But if it appear generally that the cost of pro-
‘duction only determines the prices of commodities,
as the payment of it is the necessary condition of
their supply, and that the component parts of this
cost are themselves determined by the same causes
which determine the whole, it is obvious that we
cannot get rid of the principle of demand and supply
by referring to the cost of production. Natural and
necessary prices appear to be regulated by this
principle, as well as market prices; and the only
difference is, that the former are regulated by the
ordinary and average relation of the demand to the
supply, and the latter, when they differ from the


* Book I. chap. vii.


SEC. III. | - MEASURES OF VALUE. 85


former, depend upon. the extraordinary and acci-
dental relations of the demand to the supply.


SECTION IV.


9 the Labour which a yoann has Cost.considered us a
Measure of Exchangeable Value.


‘Adam Smith, in his chapter.on the real and ‘io:
minal price of commodities,* in which he consi-
ders labour as an universal and accurate measure
of value, has introduced some confusion into his
inquiry by not adhering strictly to the same mode
of applying the Wébour which he proposes for a
measure.

‘Sometimes he spehaes of the value of a commo-
dity as being determined by the quantity of labour,
which its production has cost, and sometimes by’
the quantity of labour which it will command im
exchange.

‘These two measures are essentially different;
and, though certainly neither of them can come
under the description of a standard, one of them*is
a very much more useful and accurate measure of
value than the other.

When we consider the degree in which labour
is fitted to be a measure of value in the first sense
used by Adam Smith, that is, in reference to the
quantity of labour which a commodity has cost in
its production, we shall find it radically defective.


* Book I. chap. v.
GS


86 ON THE NATURE AND [eu. If.


In the first place, a moment's consideration will
shew us that it catinot be applied in a positive
sense, It is indeed almost a contradiction in terms
to say that the exchangeable value of a commodity
is proportioned to the quantity of labour employed -
upon it. Exchangeable value, as the term implies,
evidently means value in exchange for some other
commodities; but if, when more labour is employed
upon one commodity, more labour is also employed
on, the others for which it is exchanged, it is quite
obvious that the exchangeable value of the first
commodity cannot be proportioned to the labour
employed upon it. If, for instance, at the same
time that the labour of producing corn increases,
the labour of producing money and many other
commodities increases, there is at once an end of
our being able to say with truth that all things
become more or less valuable in proportion as more
or less labour is employed in their production, In
this case it is obvious that more labour has been
employed upon corn, although a bushel. of corn
may still exchange for no more money nor labour
than before, The exchangeable value of corn,
therefore, has certainly not altered in proportion to
the additional quantity of labour which it has cost
in its production,

_ But, even if we take this measure always in a.re-
lative sense, that is, if we say that the exchange-
able value of commodities is determined by the
comparative quantity of labour expended upon
each, there is no stage of society in which it will
be found correct,


‘SEC. IV.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 87


In the very earliest periods, when not only land
was in common, but scarcely any capital was used
to assist manual exertions, exchanges would be
constantly made with but little reference to the
quantity of labour which: each commodity might
have cost. The greatest part of the objects ex-
changed would be raw products of various kinds,
such as game, fish, fruits, &c. with regard to which,
the effects of labour are always uncertain. One
man might have employed five days’ labour in pro-
curing an object which he would subsequently be
very happy to exchange for some other object
that might have cost a more fortunate labourer
only two, or perhaps one day’s exertion. And this
disproportion between the exchangeable value of
objects and the labour which they had eost in pro-
duction would be of perpetual recurrence.

I cannot, therefore, agree either with Adam
Smith or Mr. Ricardo in thinking that, “in that
mde state of society which precedes both the
accumulation ‘of stock and’ the appropriation of
land, the’ preportion between the quantities of
labour necessary for acquiring different objects
seems to be the only cireumstance which can afford
any rule for exchanging them for one another."™
The rule, which would be acted upon in the ex-
change of commodities, is unquestionably that
which has been so happily described by Turgot,
and which I have stated in the first section of this
chapter. The results of this rule might or might
not agree, on an average, with those of the rule


* Principles of Polit. Econ. c.i. p. 4. 2d edit.
G


88 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. 11.


founded on the quantity,of labour which each ar-
ticle had, cost; but if they, did not, or if commodi-
ties were found by accident, or the labour employed
upon them was utterly unknown when they were
brought, to market, the society would never be at
a loss. fora rule to determine. their exchangeable
value; and it is probable that, the exchanges. ac-
tually made in this stage of society would be less
frequently proportioned to the labour which each
object had, cost than in any other.

But in fact there is scarcely any stage of naciets.
however barbarous, where the cost of production
is,confined exclusively to labour. _ At a very early
period, profits will be found to form an important
part, of this cost, and consequently to enter largely
into the question of exchangeable valueas a neces-
sary condition, of supply. .To make even a bow
and arrow, it is obviously necessary that the wood
and. reed should be properly dried and seasoned;
and the time that these materials must necessarily
be kept by the workman before his work is com-
pleted, introduces at once a new element into the
computation of cost. We may estimate the labour
employed in any sort of capital just upon the same
principle as the labour employed in the immediate
production of the commodity. But, the varying
quickness of the returns is an entirely new element,
which has nothing to do with the quantity of la-
bour employed upon the capital, and yet, in every
period of society, the earliest as well as the latest, is
of the utmost importance in the determination of

prices.


SEC. IV. MEASURES OF VALUE, 89


The fixed capital necessary, to hollow out a
canoe, may consist of little more than,a few stone
hatchets and shell chissels; and the labour necessary
to make. them might not add much to the labour
subsequently employed i in the work, to which, they
were applied; ;but it is likewise necessary, that
the workman should previously cut down the tim-
ber, and employ.a great quantity of labour in va-
rious parts of the process very long before there is
a possibility of his receiving the returns for his
exertions, either in the use of the canoe, or in the
commodities which he might obtain in exchange
for it; and during this time he must of course ad-
vance the whole of his subsistence. But.the provi-
dence, foresight, and. postponement of present en-
joyment. for the sake of future benefit and profit,
which are necessary for this purpose, , have always
been. considered as rare qualities. in the savage;
and it can scarcely admit of a doubt that the arti-
cles, which were of a nature to require this. long
preparation would, be comparatively very scarce,
and. would have a great, exchangeable value in
proportion, to, the quantity of laboug which. had
been actually employed upon them, and on, the
capital necessary to their production. On this ac-
count, I should think it not improbable, thatacanoe
might, in such a state of society, possess double
the exchangeable value of a number of deer, to
produce which successively in the market might
have cost precisely the same number of days’ la-
bour, including the necessary fixed capital of the
bows and arrows, &c. used for killing them; and


90 ON THE NATURE AND [eu. 11.


the great difference of price in this case would
arise from the circumstance that the returns for
the labour of killing each successive deer always
came in within a few days after it was employed,
while the returns for the labour expended on the
€anoe were delayed perhaps beyond a year. What-
ever might be the rate of profits, the comparative
slowness of these returns must tell proportionally
on the price of the article; and, as there is reason
to think that among savages the advances neces-
sary for a work of slow returns would be compara-
tively seldom made, the profits of capital would be
extremely high, and the'difference of exchangeable
value in different commodities which had cost in
their production, and in the production of the ne-
essary eapital, the same quantity of labour, would
be very great.

Tf to this cause of variation we add the exception
noticed by Mr. Ricardo, arising from the greater
or less proportion of fixed capital employed in dif-
ferent commodities, the effects of which would
shew themselves in a very early period of savage
life ; it must be allowed that the rule which de-
clares “ that commodities never vary in value un-
less a greater or less quantity of labour be be-
stowed on their production,” cannot possibly, as
stated by Mr. Ricardo, be “ of universal application
im the early stages of society. ”*

‘In countries advanced in civilization, it is ob-
vious that the same causes of variation in the ex-


* Principles of Polit. Econ. p, 31. 2d edit.


SEC. Iv.] MEASURES OF VALUE. gt


changeable value of commodities, independently

of the labour which they may have cost, must pre-

vail, as in the early periods of society, and as might
be expected some others. Probably indeed the

_ profits of stock will not be so high, and conse-
quently neither the varying proportions of the

fixed capitals, nor the slowness or quickness of the
rétutris will produce the sane proportionate differ-

ence on prices; but to make up for this, the differ-
ence in the quantity of fixed capital employed is

. prodigious, and scarcely the same in any two com-
middities'; and the difference in the returns of \ca-
pital varies sometimes from two ot three ae to
two or three years.

. The proposition of Mr. Ricardo, which shews
that a tise in the priee of labour lowers the price
of a large class of commodities,* has undoubtedly a
very paradoxical air; but it is nevertheless true;
and the appearance of paradox would vanish if it
wore stated more naturally,

Mr. Ricardo would certainly allow that the effect
tie contemplates is produced bya fall of profits, which
he thinks is synonimous with a rise of wages, It is
not necessary here to enter into the question how far
he is right in this respect ; but undoubtedly no one
could have thought the proposition paradoxical, or
even in the slightest degree improbable, if he had
stated that a fall of profits would occasion a fall of
pricein those commiodities, where from the quantity
of fixed capital employed, the profits of that capital

_ had) before formed the principal ingredient’in the

cost of production. But this is what he has in


* Principles of Polit, Econ. pp. 34 and 41, 2d edit.


92 ON THE NATURE AND (cH. 15


substance said. In the particular case which he has
taken to illustrate his proposition, he supposes no
other labour employed than that which has been
applied in the construction of the machine, or fixed
capital used ; and consequently the price of the year-
ly produce of this machine would be formed merely
of the ordinary profits of the £20,000 which jit is
supposed to have cost, together with a slight addi-
tion to replace its’ wear and tear. | Now it is quite
certain that if, from any cause whatever, the ondi-
nary profits of stock should fall, theprice of thecom-
modity so produced would fall. This is sufficiently
obvious. But the effects arising from an opposite
supposition, equally consistent with facts, have not
been sufficiently considered by Mr. Ricardo, and
the general result has been totally overlooked.

The state of the case, in a general view of it, seems
to be this... There is a very large class of commodi.
ties, in the production of which, owing to the quan-
tity of fixed capital used and the long. time that
elapses before the returns of the capital, whether
fixed or circulating, come in, the proportion which
the’ value of the capital bears to the value of the
labour which it yearly employs is, in various degrees,
very considerable. In all these cases it is natural to
suppose, that the fall of price arising from a fall of
profits should, in various degrees, more than coun-
terbalance the rise of price which would naturally
be occasioned by # rise in the price of labour ;.and
consequently on the supposition of a rise in the
money price of labour and a fall in the rate of pro-
fits, all these commodities will, in various degrees,
naturally fall in price.


\


‘SEC. IV.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 93


On the other hand, there is a large class of com-
modities, where, from the absence of fixed capital
and the rapidity of the returns of the circulating
capital from a day to a year, the proportion which
the value of the capital bears to the quantity of
labour which it employs is very small. A capital
of a hundred pounds, which was returned every
week, could employ as much labour annually as
2,600/. the returns of which came ‘in only at the
end of the year; and if the capital were returned
nearly every day, as it is practically, in some few
cases, the advance of little more than the wages
of a man fora single day might pay above 300
days’. labour in the course of a year. Now it is
quite evident, that out of the profits of these tri-
fling capitals it would not only be absolutely im-
possible to take a rise in the price of labour of
seven per cent., but it would be as impossible’ to
take a rise of 4:per cent. On the first supposi-
tion, a rise of only 4 per cent. would, if the price
of the produce continued the same, absorb more
than all the profits of the 100/.; and in the other
case much more than all the capital advanced. If,


_ therefore, the prices of commodities, where the


proportion of labour is very great compared with
the capital which employs it, do not rise upon an
advance in the price of labour, the production of
such commodities must at once be given up. But
they certainly will not be given up. Consequently
upon a rise in the price of labour and fall of
profits, there will bea large class of commodities


which will rise in price ; and it cannot be correct


94 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. II.


to say, “that no commodities whatever are raised
in exchangeable value merely because wages rise ;
they are only so raised when more labour is he-
stowed on their production, when wages fall, or
when the medium, in which they are,estimated falls
in value.”* It is quite certain. that merely. be-
cause wages rise. and profits fall, all that class of
commodities (and it will be a, large class) will rise
in'price, where, from the smallness of the capital
employed, the fallof profits is in various degrees
more than overbalanced by the rise of wages.
There will, however, undoubtedly |be-a class of
commodities which, from the effects of these op-
posite causes, will.remain stationary in price. But
from the very nature of the proposition, this class
must theoretically form little more than a line;
and where, I would ask, is this line to be placed?
Mr. Ricardo, in. order to illustrate his proposition,
has placed it, at a venture, among ‘those commodi-
ties where the advances consist solely in the pay-
ment of labour, and the returns come in exactly
inthe year.f But the cases are extremely rare
where the returns. of a capital are delayed for a
year, and yet no part of this capital is employed —
either in the purchase of materials or machinery ;
and in fact there seems to be no justifiable ground
for pitching upon this peculiar case as precisely —
the one where, under any variation ‘in the price of
labour, the price of the commodity remains the


* Ricardo’s Political Economy, p, 41, 2d.edit.
+ Polit. Econ. p. 33. 2d edit.


‘SEC. Iv.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 95


same, and a rise or fall of wages is exactly com-
pensated by a fall or rise of profits. At all events
it must be allowed, that wherever the line may be
placed, it can embrace but a very small class of
objects ; and upon a rise in the price of labour, all
the rest. will, either fall or rise in price, although
exactly the same quantity of labour continues to
be employed upon them.

What. then becomes of the doctrine, that. the
exchangeable value of commodities is proportioned
to the labour which has been employed upon
them? Instead of their remaining of the same
value while the same quantity of labour is em-
ployed upon them, it appears that, from well: known
_ causes of constant and universal operation, the

prices of all commodities vary when the price,of
labour varies, with very few exceptions; and of
what description, of commodities these few excep-
tions consist, it is scarcely possible to say before-
hand. i

But the different proportions of fixed capital,
and \the varying quickness of the returns of circu-
lating capital, arenot the only causes which, in im-
proved countries, prevent the exchangeable value
of commodities, from being proportioned to the
quantity of labour which has been employed upon
them. Where commerce prevails to any extent,
foreign commodities, not, regulated, it is acknow-
Jedged, by the quantity of labour and capital em-
ployed upon them, form the materials of many
manufactures. In civilized states taxation is every
where making considerable changes in prices with-


96 ON THE NATURE AND fen. Ir.


out any reference to labour. And further, where
all the land is appropriated, the payment of rent is
another condition of the supply of most of the
commodities of home growth and manufacture.

It is unquestionably true, and it is a truth which
involves very important consequences, that the
‘cost of the main vegetable food of civilized and
improved countries, which requires in its produc-
tion a considerable quantity of labour and capital,
is resolvable almost entirely into wages and profits,
as will be more fully explained in the next chapter.
But though it follows that the price of corn is thus
nearly independent of rent, yet as this price, so
determined, does actually pay rent on the great
mass of the lands of the country, it is evident that
the payment of rent, or, what comes to the same
thing, of such a price as will pay rent, is a neces-
sary condition of the supply of the great mass of
commodities.

Adam Smith himself states, that rent “ enters
into the composition of the price of commodities
in a different way from wages and profit.” “ High
or low wages or profit (he says) are the causes of
high or low price ; high or low rent is the effect
of it. It is because high or low wages and profit
must be paid, in order to bring a particular com-
modity to market, that its price is high or low.
But it is because its price is high or low, a great
deal more, or very little more, or no more, than
what is sufficient to pay those wages and profits,
that it affords a high rent, or a low rent, or no rent
at all.”* In this passage Adam Smith distinctly


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. c. xi. p. 226. 6th edit.


‘src. 1V.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 97


allows that rent is a consequence, not a cause of
price ; but he evidently does not consider this ad-
mission as invalidating his general doctrine respect-
ing the component parts of price. Nor in reality
is it mvalidated by this admission. It is still true
that the cost of the great mass of commodities is
resolvable into wages, profits, and rent. Some of
them may cost a considerable quantity of rent, and
a small quantity of labour and capital; others a
great quantity of labour and capital, and a small
quantity of rent; and a very few may be nearly
resolvable into wages and profits, or even wages


‘alone. But, as it is known that the latter class is


confined to a very small proportion of a country’s
products, it follows that the payment of rent is an
absolutely necessary condition of the supply of the ©
great mass of commodities, and may properly be
considered as a component part of price.

Allowing then that the price of the main vege-


table food of an improving country is determined


by the quantity of labour and capital employed to
produce it under the most unfavourable circum-
stances, yet if we allow, at the same time, that an
equal value of produce is raised on rich land with
little labour and capital, we can hardly maintain,
with any propriety of language, the general propo-
sition that the quantity of labour realized in dif-
ferent commodities regulates their exchangeable
value.* On account of the varieties of soil alone
constant exchanges are taking place, which directly


* Ricardo’s Polit. Econ. c. i. p. 5.


98 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. H.


contradict the terms in which the proposition is
expressed; and in whatever way rent may be regu-
lated, it is obviously necessary to retain it as an in-
gredient in the costs of production in reference to
the great mass of commodities; nor will the pro-
priety of thus retaining it be affected by the cir-
cumstance, that the rent paid on commodities of.
the same description is variable, and in some few
cases little or none.

Under the full admission, therefore, just made,
that the price of the main vegetable food of an im-
proving agricultural country is, in reference to the
whole quantity produced, a necessary price, and
coincides with what is required to repay the labour
and capital which is employed under the most un-
favourable circumstances, and pays little or no
rent, we still do not seem justified in altering - the
old language respecting the component parts of
price, or what I should be more disposed to call
the necessary conditions of supply.

But there are some parts of the land and of its
ptoducts which have much more the character of
a monopoly than the main food of an improving
country ; aud it is universally acknowledged that
the exchangeable value of commodities which are
subjected either ‘to strict or partial monopolies can-
not be determined by the labour employed upon
them. The exchangeable value of that vast mass
of property in this country which consists of the
houses in all its towns, is greatly affected by the
strict monopoly of ground rents ; and the necessity
of paying these rents must affect the prices of al


SEC. Iv.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 99


most all the goods fabricated in towns. And though
with regard to the main food of the people it is true
that, if rents were given up, an equal quantity of
corn could not be produced at a less price; yet the
same cannot be said of the cattle of the country.
Of no portion of this species of food is the price
resolvable into labour and capital alone.

All cattle pay rent, and in proportion to their
value not very far from an equal rent. In this re-
spect they are essentially different from corn. By
means of labour and dressing, a good crop of corn
may be obtained from a poor soil, and the rent paid
may be quite trifling compared with the value of
the crop ; but in uncultivated land the rent must
be proportioned to the value of the crop, and,
whether great or small per acre, must be a main
ingredient in the price of the commodity produced.
It may require more than an hundred acres in the
highlands of Scotland to rear the same weight of
mutton as might have been reared on five acres of
good pasture; and something no doubt must be
allowed for the greater labour of attendance and
the greater risk on a poor soil and in an exposed
situation ; but independently of this deduction,
which would probably be inconsiderable, the rent
paid for the same quantity of mutton would be
nearly the same. If this rent were greatly dimi-
nished, there cannot be a doubt that the same
quantity of cattle might be produced in the market
at much lower prices without any diminution of
the profits or wages of any of the persons con-
cerned ; and consequently it is impossible to esti-

H 2


100 ON THE NATURE AND [CH. 11.


mate the value of cattle by the quantity of labour
and capital, and still less by the mere quantity of
labour which has been expended upon them.

It may possibly be said that although rent is
unquestionably paid on all and every part of the.
cattle produced in this country; yet that the rent
of uncultivated land is determined by the price of
cattle; that the price of cattle is determined by the
cost of production on such good natural pastures
or improved land as would yield a considerable
rent if employed in raising corn, because the poor
uncultivated lands of a populous country are never
sufficient to produce all the animal food required ;
that the rents of the different qualities of land |
which must thus be devoted to the rearing of —
cattle depend upon the price of the main food of
the country ; and that the price of the main food of
the country depends upon the labour and capital
necessary to produce it on the worst land actually
so employed. This is to be sure rather a circui-
tous method of proving the intimate connection
between cattle and labour, and certainly will not
justify us in saying that the relative value of sheep
and shirts is proportioned to the comparative quan-
tity of labour expended upon each.

But in fact one of the links in this chain of de-
pendance will not hold, and the connexion be-

_ tween cattle and labour is thus at once broken off.
Though the price of the main food of a country
depends upon the labour and capital necessary to
produce it on the worst land in use; yet the rent
of land, as will be shewn more fully in the next


SEC. 1V.| MEASURES OF VALUE. 101


chapter, is not regulated by the price of produce.
Among the events of the most common occurrence
in all nations, isan improvement in agriculture
which leads to increased produce and increased
population, and after a time to the cultivation of
naturally poorer land, with the same price of pro-
duce, the same price of labour, and the same rate
of profits. But in this case the rents of all the old
lands in tillage must rise, and with them of course
the rents of natural pastures and the price of cattle,
without any change in the price of labour or any
increased difficulty in producing the means of sub-
sistence. :

The statement just made applies to many other
important commodities, besides animal food. In
the first place, it includes wool and raw hides, the
materials of two most important manufactures;
and applies directly to timber and copse wood,
both articles of great consequence. And secondly,
there are some products, such as hops, for instance,
which cannot be grown upon poor soils. Such pro-
ducts it is impossible to obtain without paying a
rent; and if this rent varies, while the quantity of
labour employed in the production of a given
quantity of corn remains the same, there can be
rio ground whatever for asserting that the value
of such products is: regulated by labour.

If it be said that the doctrine which entirely re-
jects rent, and resolves the prices of all commodi-
ties into wages and profits, never refers to articles
which have any connexion with monopoly, it may
be answered, that this exception includes the great

HS


102 ON THE NATURE AND [cM. II.


mass of the articles with which we are acquainted.
The lands which afford the main supply of corn
are evidently as pecies of monopoly, though subject
to different laws and limits from common mono-
polies; and even the last land taken into cultiva-,
tion for corn, if it hasan owner, must.pay the small
rent which it would yield in natural pasture. It
has just been shewn that monopoly must in the
most direct manner affect the price of cattle, the
other great branch of human food; and, with re-
gard to the materials of clothing and lodging, there
are very few that do not actually pay a rent, not
only, on the great mass of each kind, but on those
which are grown on the poorest land actually em-
ployed for their production. To say that the
prices of wool, leather, flax, and timber are deter-
mined by the cost of their production on the land
which pays no rent, is to refer to a criterion which
it is impossible to find. I believe it may be safely
asserted that there is no portion of wool, leather,
flax, and timber produced in this country which
comes from land that can be so described.

We cannot, therefore, get rid of rent in refer-
ence to the great mass of commodities. In the
case where we come the nearest to it, namely, m
the production of the main food of the country,
the attempt to resolve the exchangeable value of
all the different portions of this food into labour
and profits alone, involves a contradiction in terms;
and as no error seems to arise from considering rent
as a component part of price, after we have pro-
perly explained its origin and progress, it appears


a


SEC. Iv.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 103


to me essential, both to correctness of language and
correctness of meaning, to say that the cost of pro-
ducing any commodity is made up of all the wages,
all the profits, and all the rent which in the actual
_ circumstances of the society are necessary to bring
that particular commodity to market in the quan-
tity required ; or, in other words, that the payment
of these expenses is the necessary condition of its
supply. SB

If we were determined to use only one term, it
would certainly be more correct to refer to capital
rather than to labour ; because the advances which
are called capital generally include the other two.
The natural or necessary prices of commodities de-
pend upon the amount of capital which has been
employed upon them, together with the profits of
such capital at the ordinary rate during the time
that it has been employed. But as the amount of
capital advanced consists of the amount of wages
paid from the first to the last, together with the
amount of rent paid either directly to the landlord
or in the price of raw materials, the use of the
three terms seems to be decidedly preferable, both
as more correct, (rent being, in many cases, not an
advance of capital,) and also as conveying more of
the information that is wanted.

But if rent enters into the raw materials of al-
most all manufactures, and of almost all capital,
both fixed and circulating, the advance necessary
to pay it will greatly affect the amount of capital
employed, and combined with the almost infinite
variety that must take place in the duration of

H 4


*.


104 ON THE NATURE AND feu. a.


these advances, will most essentially affect that part
of price which resolves itself into profits.

Supposing, what is probably not true, that there
is land in an improved and populous country which
pays no rent whatever directly ; yet rent will be
paid even by the cultivator of such land in the tim-
ber which he uses for his ploughs, carts, and build-
ings, in the leather which he requires for harness,
in the meat which he consumes in his own family,
~ and in the horses which he purchases for tillage.
These advances, as far as rent alone is concerned
would at once prevent the price of the produce
from being proportioned to the quantity of labour
employed upon it; and when Re add the profits of
these advances according to their amount and the
periods of their return, we must acknowledge that
even in the production of corn, where no direct
rent is paid, its price must be affected by the rent
involved in the fixed and circulating capital em-
ployed in cultivation.

Under all the variations, therefore, which arise
from the different proportions of fixed capital em-
ployed, the different quickness of the returns of
the circulating capital, the quantity of foreign
commodities used in manufactures, the acknow-
ledged effects of taxation, and the almost universal
prevalence of rent in the actual state of all im-
proved countries, we must I think allow that, how-
ever curious and desirable it may be to know the
exact quantity of labour which has been employed
in’ the: production of each particular commodity,
it is certainly not this labour which determines


——oOoOS-


* :
\ >
@ :


SEC. IV. | MEASURES OF VALUE. 105


ehieis relative values in exchange, at the same time
and at the same place.

But if, at the same place and at the same time, the |
relative values of commodities are not determined
by the labour which they have cost in produc-
tion, it is clear that this measure cannot deter-
mine their relative values at different places and
at different times. If, in London and at the pre-
sent moment, other causes besides labour concur

ulating the average prices of the articles
Béuigth and sold, it is quite obvious, that because a
commodity in India now, or in England 500 years
ago, cost in its production double the quantity of
labour which it does in London at present, we
could not infer that it was doubly valuable in ex-
change; nor, if we found from a comparison of
money prices, that its value in exchange were dou-
ble compared with the mass of commodities, could
we with any degree of safety infer that it had cost,
in its production, just double the quantity of la-
bour.

If, for instance, it were to appear that a yard of
fine broad cloth in the time of Edward the Third
cost in its fabrication twenty days’ common labour,
and in modern times only ten, it would follow of
course that by improvements of different kinds,
the facility of fabricating broad cloth had been
doubled; but to what extent this circumstance
would have affected its relative value in exchange,
it would not be possible to determine without an
appeal to facts. The alteration im its exchangeable
value generally, or in reference to the mass of com-


‘

106 ONTHE NATURE AND — [CH. 11
modities, would of course depend upon the propor-
tionate facility or difficulty with which other com-
modities were fabricated, and in reference to. par-
ticular articles, the labour of fabricating which had
remained the same, or was accurately known, it
would still depend upon all those circumstances
which have already been stated, as preventing the
labour which a commodity has cost in its produc-
tion, from being’ a correct measure of relative value,
even at the same place and at the same time.

In order to shew that the quantity of labour
which a commodity has cost is a better measure of
value than the quantity which it will command,
Mr. Ricardo makes the supposition, that a given
quantity of corn might require only half the quan-
tity of labour in its production at one time which
it might require at another and-subsequent. period,
and yet that the labourer might be paid in both
periods with the same quantity of corn ;* in which
case, he says, we should have an instance of a com-
modity which had risen to double its former ex-
changeable value, according to what he conceives
to be the just definition of value, although it
would command no more labour in exchange than
before.

This supposition, it must be allowed, is a most
improbable one. But, supposing such an event to
take place, it would strikingly exemplify the in-
correctness of his definition, and shew at once the
marked distinction which must always exist be-
tween cost and value. We have here a clear case

* Principles of Political Economy, chap. i. p. 8. 2d edit.


-_ —


*


SEC,IV.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 107


of increased. cost in the quantity of labour to a
double amount; yet it is a part of the supposition.
that the commodity, which has been thus greatly
increased in the cost of its production, will not pur-


_ chase more of that article, which is, beyond com-


parison, the most extensive and the most important
of all the objects which are offered in exchange, .
namely, labour. This instance shews at once that
the quantity of labour which a commodity has cost °
in its production, is not a measure of its value in


- exchange.


It will be most readily allowed that the labour
employed in the production of a commodity, in-
cluding the labour employed i in the production of
the necessary capital, is the principal ingredient
among the component parts of price, and, other
things being equal, will determine the relative


- yalue of all the commodities in the same country,


or, more correctly speaking, in the same place.
But, in looking back to any past period, we should


. ascertain the relative values of commodities at


once, and with much more accuracy, by collecting
their prices in the money of the time. For this
purpose, therefore, an inquiry into the quantity of
labour which each commodity had cost, would be
of no use. And if we were to infer that, because
a particular commodity 300 years ago had cost ten
days’ labour and now costs twenty, its exchange-
able value had doubled, we should certainly run
the risk of drawing a conclusion most extremely
wide of the truth. '

It appears then, that the quantity of labour


-


108 ON THE NATURE AND [CHe II.


whicha commodity has cost in its production, is
neither a correct measure of relative value at the
same time and at the same place, nor a measure of
real value in exchange, as before defined, in dif-
ferent countries and at different periods.


SECT. V.


Of Money, when uniform in its cost, considered as a Measure
of Value.


Upon the principle, that the labour which a com-
modity has cost in its production, is at once a mea-
sure of real and relative value, it has been thought,
that if there were any article to be found which’
would at all times cost the same quantity of labour ~
in its production, it might be used as an accurate
and standard measure of value.* It is acknow-
ledged that the precious metals do not possess this
quality. The world has been at different periods
supplied from mines of different degrees of fertility.
This difference of fertility necessarily implies that
different quantities of labour are at different times
required in the production of the same’quantity of
metal ; and the different degrees of skill applied at
different periods in the ea of mines, must be
an additional source of variableness in the quantity

* Ricardo on the Principles of Political Economy and Taxa-
tion, ch. i. p. 24, 2d edit.


SEC. "V.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 109


of labour which a given weight of coin has ost to


bring it to market.

It.may be curious however to consider how far
the precious metals would be an accurate measure
of the quantities of labour employed upon each
commodity, even if these sources of variableness
were removed, and if it were really true that
given. quantities of the metals always required in
their production the same quantity of labour.

It isan acknowledged truth that the precious
metals, as they are at present procured and distri-
buted, are an accurate measure of exchangeable
value, at the same time and in the same place ; and
it is certain that the supposition here made would
not destroy, or in any respect impair, this quality
which they now possess. But it was shewn in the
last section that the exchangeable value of com-
modities is scarcely ever proportioned to the quan-
tity of labour employed upon them. It follows
therefore necessarily that the money prices of
commodities could not, even on the supposition
here made, represent the oa of labour em-
ployed upon them.

There is indeed no supposition which we can
make respecting the mode of procuring the pre-
cious metals, which can ever render the prices of
commodities a correct measure of the quantity of
labour which they have severally cost. These
prices will always be found to differ at least as
much from the quantity of labour employed upon
each commodity, as the quantity of labour does
from their exchangeable values. ‘To shew this, let


%


4


110 ON@HE NATURE AND _——i[cH. 11.


us suppose ; first, that the precious metals require
for their production at the mines which yield no
rent, a certain quantity of fixed and circulating capi-
talemployed for a certain time. In this case, it fol-
lows from the reasonings of the preceding section
and even from the admissions of Mr. Ricardo, that
none of the commodities which would exchange
for a given quantity of silver, would contain the
same quantity of labour as that silver, except those
which had been produced, not only by the same
quantity of labour, but by the same quantities of
the two kinds of capital employed for the same
time and in the same proportions: and, in the case
of a rise in the price of labour, all commodities
which still contained the same quantity of labour
would alter in price, except those very few which
were circumstanced exactly in the same manner
with regard to the capitals by which they were
produced as the precious metals.

Let us suppose, secondly, that the production of
the precious metals required no fixed capital, but
merely advances in the payment of manual labour
for a year. This case is so very unusual, that I
should almost doubt whether any commodities
could be found which would at once be of the
same exchangeable value, and contain the same
quantity of labour as a given portion of the pre-
‘cious metals ; and of course upon a rise in the price
of labour, almost all commodities would rise or fall
in price.

Let us suppose, thirdly, that labour alone, with-
out any advances above the food of a day, were suf-


SEC. V.] MEASURES OF VALUE, 111


ficient to obtain the precious metals, that is, that
half an ounce of silver and 1; of an ounce of gold
could always, on an average, be found by a day’s
search on the sea-shore. In this case it is obvious
_ that every commodity, which had required in its
production any sort or quantity of capital beyond
the advance of necessaries for a day, would differ
in price from any portion of gold or silver which
had cost the same quantity of labour. With re-
gard to the effects of a rise in the price of labour,
they cannot be the subject of our consideration, as
it is evident that no rise in the price of labour
could take place on the present supposition. A
day’s labour must always remain of the same mo-
ney price, and corn could only rise as faras the
diminution in the necessaries of the labourer would
allow. Still, however, though the.money price of
the labourer could not rise, the rate of profits
might fall; and on a fall in the rate of profits, every
commodity would fall compared with money.

On either of the above suppositions, the opera-
tion of the causes mentioned in the last section
would so modify the prices of commodities, that
- we should be as little able as we are at present, to
infer from these relative prices the relative propor-
tions of labour employed upon each commodity.

But independently of the causes here adverted
to, the precious metals have other sources of varia-
tion peculiar to them. On account of their dura-
bility, they conform themselves slowly and with
difficulty to the varieties in the qualities of other


od


sf


112. ON THE NATURE AND [CH. I.


commodities, and the varying facilities which at-
tend their production.

The market prices of gold and silver depend upon
the quantity of them in the market compared with
the demand ; and this quantity has been in part
produced by the accumulation of hundreds of
years, and is but slowly affected by the annual sup-
ply from the mines.

It is justly stated by Mr. Ricardo* that the agree-
ment of the market and natural prices of all com-
modities, depends at all times upon the facility
with which the supply can be increased or dimi-
nished, and he particularly notices gold, or the pre-
cious metals, as among the commodities where this
effect cannot be speedily produced. Consequently
if by great and sudden improvements in machi-
nery, both in manufactures and agriculture, the
facility of production were generally increased,
and the wants of the population were supplied
with much less labour, the value of the precious
metals compared with commodities ought greatly
to rise; but, as they could not ina short time be |
adequately diminished in quantity, the prices of
commodities would cease to represent the quantity

: of labour employed upon them.

' Another source of variation peculiar to the pre-
cious metals would be the use that is made of them
in foreign commerce; and unless this use were
given up, and the exportation and importation of
them were prohibited, it would unquestionably


* Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, ch, xiii. p. 255.


SEC. V.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 113


answer to some countries possessing peculiar ad-
vantages in their exportable commodities, to buy
their gold and silver abroad rather than procure
them at home. At this present moment, I believe
it is unquestionably true that England purchases
the precious metals with less labour than is applied
to obtain them directly from the mines of Mexico.
But if they could be imported by some countries
from abroad with less labour than they could be
obtained at home, it would answer to other coun-
tries to export them in exchange for commodities,
which they either could not produce on their own
soil, or could obtain cheaper elsewhere. And thus,
in reference to the relative value of commodities
both in different countries at the same. period, and
in the same country at different periods, it is ob-
vious that the prices in money might be subject to
considerable variations, without being accompa-
nied by any proportionate variations in the quan-
tities of labour which they had cost.

' The objections hitherto considered in this and
the preceding sections are some of those which
present themselves upon the supposition that each
nation possessed mines, or even could procure at
home the precious metals at all times’ with the
same quantity of labour without capital ; but these,
it must be allowed, are extravagant hypotheses. If
however we were to assume the more natural one,
of the mines, wherever they are, and in all ages,
costing always the same quantity of labour and ca-
pital in the working, we should see immediately
from the present distribution of the precious me-

I


114 ON THE NATURE AND [en. 14.


tals, how little comparatively they could be de-
pended upon as measuring, in different countries
and at different times, the quantities of labour
which commodities have cost.

If indeed the fertility of the mines were always
the same, we should certainly get rid of that source
of variation which arises from the existing con-
trary quality, and of the effects of sucha discovery
as that of the American mines. But other great
and obvious sources of variation would remain.
The uniform fertility of the mines would not es-
sentially alter the proportions in which the pre-
cious metals would be distributed to different coun-
tries; and the great differences, which are now

_ known to take place in their value in different
places, when compared with corn and labour,
would probably continue nearly the same.

According to all the accounts we: have received
of prices in Bengal, a given quantity of silver will
there represent or command six or eight times more
labour and provisions than in England. In all
parts of the world articles of equal money prices
exchange for each other. It will consequently
happen that, in the commerce carried on between
the two countries, the product of a day’s English
labour must exchange for. the product of five or six
days of Indian labour, after making a sufficient al-
lowance for the difference of profits.

Perhaps it will be said that the high comparative
value of silver in India arises mainly from the effects
of the discovery of the American mines not hay-
ing yet been adequately communicated to this part
of the world: but it must be recollected that the


SEC. V.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 115 —


discovery is now of long standing; and that the
difference in the relative value of gold and silver,
compared with their values in Europe, which most
clearly indicated an incomplete communication, is
now atanend. I am disposed to think therefore,
that the high value of silver in India arises mainly
from other causes. But at all events the difference
is NOW so enormous as to allow of a great abate-
‘ mnent, aid yet to leave it very considerable.

It is not however necessary to go to India in order’
to fitid similar differences in the value of the pre-
cious metals, though not perhaps so great. Russia,
Poland, Germany, France, Platidets,: and indeed al-
most all the countries in Europe, present imstauces
of great variations in the quantity of labour and
provisions which can be purchased by a given
quantity of silver. Yet the relative values of the
' precious metals in these countries must be very
nearly the same as they would be, if the American
mines had been at all times of a uniform fertility :
and*consequently, by their present relative values,
we may judge how little dependence could be
placed on a coincidence in different countries be-
tween the money prices of commodities and the
quantities of labour which they had cost, even on
the supposition that money was always obtained
fiom the mines in America by the same quantity
of labour and capital.

But if we aré not fully satisfied with this kind
of reference to experience, it is obvious that the
same conclusion follows inevitably from theory.
Tn those countries Where the precious metals are

12


116 ON THE NATURE’ AND {cu. I.


necessarily purchased, no plausible reason can be
assigned why the quantity of them should be in
proportion to the difficulty of producing the arti-
cles with which they are purchased.

When the English and Indian muslins appear in
the German markets, their relative prices will be
determined solely by their relative qualities, with-
out the slightest reference to the very different
quantities of human labour which they may have
cost ; and the circumstance that in the fabrication
of the Indian muslins five or six times more la-
bour has been employed than in the English, will
not enable them to command greater returns of mo-
ney to India.

In the ports of Europe no merchants are to be
found who would be disposed to give more money
for Swedish wheat, than Russian, Polish, or Ame-
rican, of the same quality, merely because more la-
bour had been employed in the cultivation of it, on
account of its being grown on a more barren soil.
If India and Sweden therefore had no other means.
of buying silver in Europe than by the export of
muslins and corn, it would be absolutely impossi-
ble for them to circulate their commodities at a
money price; compared with other countries, pro-
portioned to the relative difficulty with which they
were produced, or the quantity of labour which had
been employed upon them. It is indeed univer-
sally allowed, that the power of purchasing foreign
commodities of all kinds depends upon the relative
cheapness, not the relative dearness, of the articles
that can be exported ; and therefore, although the
actual currency ofan individual country, other cir-


SEC. V.] ' MEASURES OF VALUE. 117


cumstances being nearly equal, may be distributed
among the different commodities bought and sold,
according to the quantity of labour which they
have severally cost, the supposition that the same
sort of distribution would take place in different
countries, involves a contradiction of the first prin-
ciples of commercial intercourse.*

It appears then that no sort of regularity in the
production of the precious metals, not even if all
countries possessed mines of their own, and still less
_ if the great majority were obliged to purchase their
money from others, can possibly render the money
prices of commodities a correct measure of the
quantity of labour which has been employed upon
them, either in the same or different countries, or
at the same or different periods.

How far the precious metals so circumstanced,
may be a good measure of the erchangeable value
of commodities, though not of the labour which has
been employed upon them, is quite another ques-
tion. It has been repeatedly stated that the pre-
cious metals, in whatever way they may be ob-
tained, are a correct measure of exchangeable value
at the same time and place. And certainly the less
subject to variation are the modes of procuring
them, the more they will approach to a measure of
exchangeable value at different times and in dif-
ferent places.


* Mr. Ricardo very justly states that, even on the supposition
which he has made respecting the precious. metals, the foreign
interchange of commodities is not determined by the quantity of
labour which they have relatively cost.


13


118 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. 11.


If, indeed, they were procured according to
one of the suppositions made in this section, that
is, if each nation could at all times obtain them
by the same quantity of labour without any ad-
yances of capital, then, with the exception of the
temporary disturbances occasioned by foreign com-
merce and the sudden invention of machinery, the
exchangeable value in money in reference to the
labour which it would command, would be the.
same in all countries and at all times ; and the spe-
cific reason why the precious metals would in this
case approach near to a correct measure of real
value in exchange is, that it is the only supposi-
tion in which their cost in labour can ever be the
same as their exchangeable value in labour. In
the case supposed, money would certainly be of a
uniform value. ‘It would at ali times both cost the
same quautity of labour and command the same
quantity ; but we have seen that, in reference to
those commodities where any sort of capital was
used, their values, compared either with the pre-
cious metals or each other, could never be propor-
tioned to the labour which they had cost.


SECT. VI.


Of the Labour which a Commodity will command, considered
as a Measure of real Value in Exchange.


When we consider labour as a measure of value
in the sense in which it is most frequently applied


SEC. VI.] MEASURES OF VALUE, 119


by Adam Smith, that is, when the value of an ob-
ject is estimated by the quantity of labour of a
given description(common day-labour, for instance)
which it can command, it will appear to be un-
questionably the best of any one commodity, and
to, unite, more nearly than any other, the qualities
of a real and nominal measure of exchangeable
value.

In the first place, in looking for any one object
as a measure of exchangeable value, our attention
would naturally be directed to that which was most
extensively the subject of exchange. Now of all
objects it cannot be disputed, that by far the
greatest mass of value is given in exchange for la-
bour either productive or unproductive.

Secondly, the value of commodities, in ex-
change for labour, can alone express the degree in
which they are suited to the wants and tastes of
society, and the degree of abundance in which they
are supplied, compared with the desires and num-
bers of those who are to consume them. By im-
provements in machinery, cloth, silks, cottons,
hats, shoes, money, and even corn, for some years
might all be very greatly increased in quantity at
the same time. Yet while this remarkable altera-
tion had taken place in these commodities, the value
of any one of them in exchange for any other, or
even compared with the mass of the others collec-
tively, might remain exactly the same. It is ob-
vious therefore that, im order to express the impor-
tant effects arising from facility of production, we
must take into our consideration either the quan-

I 4


120 ON THE NATURE AND [cH. 11.


tity of labour which commodities have cost, or the
quantities of labour which they will command.
But it was shewn in the last two sections, that the
quantity of labour, which commodities have cost,
never approaches to a correct measure of exchange-
able value, even at the same time and place. Con-
sequently, our attention is naturally directed to the
labour which commodities will command.

Thirdly, the accumulation of capital, and its ef-
ficiency in the increase of wealth and population,
depends almost entirely upon its power of setting
labour to work ; or, in other words, upon its power
of commanding labour. No plenty of commodities
can occasion a real and permanent increase of ca-
pital if they are of such a nature, or have fallen
so much in value that they will not command
more labour,than they have cost. When this hap-
pens from permanent causes, a final stop is put to
accumulation ; when it happens for a time only, a
temporary stop to accumulation takes place, and
population is in both cases affected accordingly. As
it appears then that the great stimulus to production
depends mainly upon the power of commodities
to command labour, and especially to command a
greater quantity of labour than they have cost, we
are naturally led to consider this power of command-
ing labour as of the utmost importance in an esti-
mate of the exchangeable value of commodities.

These are some of the general considerations
which, in a search for a measure of value, would
direct our first attention to the labour which com-
modities will command; and a more particular con-


SEC. VI.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 121


sideration of the qualities of this measure will
convince us that no one other object is equally
adapted to the purpose.

_ It is universally allowed that, in the same place,
and within moderately short periods of time, the
precious metals are an unexceptionable measure of
value ; but whatever is true of the precious metals
with respect to nominal prices, is true of labour
applied in the way proposed.

It is obvious, for instance, that, in the same place
‘and at the same time, the different quantities of
day-labour which different commodities can com-
mand, will be exactly in proportion to their relative
values in exchange; and, if any two of them will
purchase’ the same quantity of labour of the same
description, they will invariably exchange for each
other.

The merchant might safely regulate his dealings,
and estimate his commercial profits by the excess
of the quantity of labour which his imports would
command, compared with his exports. Whether
the value of a commodity had arisen from a strict
or partial monopoly ; whether it was occasioned
principally by the scarcity of the raw material, the
peculiar sort of labour required in its construction,
or unusually high profits; whether its value had
been increased by an increased cost of production,
or diminished by the application of machinery;
whether its value at the moment depended chiefly
upon permanent, or upon temporary causes ;—in
all cases, and under all circumstances, the quantity
of labour which it will command, or, what comes


122 ON THE NATURE AND [cu. 11.


to the same thing, the quantity of labour or la-
bour’s worth, which people will give to obtain it,
will be a very exact measure of fts exchangeable
value. In short, this measure will, in the same place,
and at the same time, exactly accord with the no-
minal prices of commodities, with this great ad-
vantage in its favour, that it will serve to explain
very accurately and usefully all variations of value,
without reference to a circulating medium.

It may be said, perhaps, that in the same place
and at the same time exactly, almost every com-
modity may be considered as an accurate measure
of the relative value of others, and that what has
just been said of labour may be said of cloth, cot-
ton, iron, or any other article. Any two commodi-
ties which at the same time and in the same place
would purchase or command the same quantity of
cloth, cotton or iron, of a given quality, would
have the same relative value, or would exchange
for each other. This is no doubt true, if we take
the same time precisely ; but not, if a moderate
latitude be allowed, such as may be allowed in the
case of labour or of the precious metals. Cloth,
cotton, iron and similar commodities, are much more
exposed to sudden changes of value, both from the
variations of demand, and the influence of ma-
chinery and other causes, than labour. Day-labour,
taking the average of summer and winter, is the
most steady of all exchangeable articles ; and the
merchant who, in a foreign venture, the returns of
which were slow, was sure of gaining fifteen percent.
estimated in labour, would be much more secure


SEC. VI. MEASURES OF VALUE. 193


of finally gaining fifteen per cent. of real profits,
than he, who could only be sure of gaining fifteen
per cent. estimated in cloth, cotton, iron, or even
money.

While labour thus constitutes an accurate mea-
sure of value in the same place, and within short
periods of time, it approaches the nearest of any
one commodity to such a measure, when applied
to different places and distant periods of time.

Adam Smith has considered labour in the sense
here understood as so good a measure of corn, or,
what comes to the same thing, he has considered
corn as so good a measure of labour, that in his Di-
gression on the value of silver during the four last
centuries, he has actually substituted corn for la-
bour, and drawn the same conclusions from his
inquiry as if the one were always an accurate mea-
sure of the other.

In doing this I think he has fallen into. an im-
portant error, and drawn inferences inconsistent
with his own general principles. At the same time,
we must allow that, from century to century, and
in different and distant countries where the precious
metals greatly vary in value, corn, as being the
principal necessary of life, may fairly be considered
as the best measure of the real exchangeable value
of labour; and consequently the power of a com-
modity to command labour will, at distant times
and in different countries, be the best criterion of
its power of commanding the first necessary of
life—corn.

With regard to the other necessaries and conve-


124 ON THE NATURE AND {cn. 11.


niences of life, they must in general be allowed to
depend still more upon labour than corn, because
in general more labour is employed upon them
_ after they come from the soil. And as, all other
things being equal, the quantity of labour which a
commodity will command will be in proportion to
the quantity which it has cost; we may fairly pre-
sume that the influence of the different quantities
of labour which a commodity may have cost in its
production, will be sufficiently taken into con-
sideration in this estimate of value, together with
the further consideration of all those circumstances,
besides the labour actually employed on them in
which they are not equal. The great pre-eminence
of that measure of value, which consists in the
quantity of labour which a commodity will com-
mand, over that which consists in the quantity of
labour which has been actually employed about it,
is, that while the latter involves merely one cause
of exchangeable value, though in general the most
considerable one; the former, in addition to this
cause, involves all the different circumstances which
influence the rates at which commodities are ac-
tually exchanged for each other.

It is evident that no commodity can be a good
measure of real value in exchange in different
places and at distant periods, which is not at the
same time a good measure of nominal value in these
places and at these distant periods ; and in this re-
spect it must be allowed, that the quantity of com-
mon labour that an article will command, which
necessarily takes into account every cause that in-


SEC. VI, | MEASURES OF VALUE. 125


fluences exchangeable value, is an unexception-
able measure.

It should be further remarked, that although in
‘different countries and at distant periods, the same
quantity of labour will command very different
quantities of corn—the first necessary of life; yet
in the progress of improvement and civilization it
_ generally happens, that when labour commands the
smallest quantity of food, it commands the greatest
quantity of other commodities, and when it com-
mands the greatest quantity of food, it com-
mands the smallest quantity of other necessaries
and conveniences; so that when, in two countries,
or in two periods differently advanced in improve-
ment, two objects command the same quantity of
labour, they will often command nearly the same
quantity of the necessaries and conveniences of
life, although they may command different quan-
tities of corn. >

It must be allowed then that, of any one commo-
dity, the quantity of common day-labour which
any article will command, appears to approach the
nearest to a measure of real value in exchange.

But still, labour, like all other commodities, varies
from its plenty or scarcity compared with the de-
mand for it, and, at different times and in different
countries, commands very different quantities of
the first necessary of life; and further, from the
different degrees of skill and of assistance from
machinery with which labour is applied, the pro-
ducts of labour are not in proportion to the quantity
exerted. Consequently, labour, in any sense in


126 ON THE NATURE AND ' (cH. 11.


which the term can be applied, cannot be consi-
dered as an accurate and standard measure of real
value in exchange. And if the labour which a
commodity will command cannot be considered in
this light, there is certainly no other quarter in
' which we can seek for such a measure with a
— of success.


SECTION Vil.


Of @ Mean between Corn and Labour considered as a
Measure of Real Value in Exchange.


No one commodity then, it appears, can justly be
considered as a standard measure of real value in
exchange; and such an estimate of the eompara-
tive prices of all commodities as would determine
the command of any one in particular over the
necessaries, conveniences, and amusements of life,
including labour, would not only be too difficult
and laborious for use, but generally quite imprac-
ticable. Two objects, however, might, in some
eases, be a better measure of real value in exchange
than one alone, and yet be sufficiently manageable
for practical application.

A certain quantity of corn of a given quality,
on account of its capacity of supporting a certain
number of human beings, has always a definite
and. invariable value in use; but both its real and


SEC. VIT. | MEASURES OF VALUE. 127


nominal value in exchange is subject to consider-
able variations, not only from year to year, but
from century to century. It is found by expe-
rience that population and cultivation, notwith-
standing their mutual dependence on each other,
do not always proceed with equal steps, but are
subject to marked alternations in the velocity of
their movements. Exclusive of annual variations,
it appears that corn sometimes remains dear, com-
pared with labour and other commodities, for many
years together, and at other times remains cheap,
compared with the same objects, for similar pe-
riods. At these different periods, a bushel of corn
will command very different quantities of labour
and other commodities. In the reign of Henry
VILI., at the end of the 15th and beginning of the
16th centuries, it appears, from the statute price
of labour and the average price of wheat, that half
a bushel of this grain would purchase but little
more than a day’s common labour ; and, of course,
but a small quantity of those commodities im the
production of which much labour is’ necessary.
A century afterwards, im the latter part of the
reign of Elizabeth, half a bushel of wheat would
purchase three days’ common labour, and, of
course, a considerable quantity comparatively of
those commodities on which labour is employed.
Consequently, from century to century 4s well as
from year to year, a given quantity of corn ap-
pears to measure very imperfectly the quantity of
the necessaries, conveniences, and amusements of


128 ON THE NATURE AND [eH. 11.


life, which any particular commodity will com- |
iaand in exchange.

The same observation will hold good if we take
day-labour, the measure proposed by Adam Smith ;
and the same period in our history will illustrate
the variation from century. to century of this
measure. In the reign of Henry VII. a day’s
labour, according to the former statement, would
purchase nearly half a bushel of wheat, the chief
necessary of life, and consequently the chief ar-
ticle in the general estimate of real value in ex-
change. A century afterwards, a day’s labour
would only purchase one-sixth of a bushel,—a
most prodigious difference in this main article.
And though it may be presumed that a day’s la-
bour in both periods would purchase much more
nearly the same quantity of those articles where
labour enters as a principal ingredient, than of corn,
yet the variations in its command over the first
necessary of life, at. different periods, must alone
disqualify it from being an accurate measure of
real value in exchange from century to century.

Though neither of these two objects, however,
taken singly, can be considered as a satisfactory
measure of value, yet by combining the two, we
may perhaps approach to greater accuracy.

When corn compared with labour is dear, la-
bour compared with corn must necessarily be
cheap. At the period that a given, quantity of
corn will command the greatest quantity of the
necessaries, conveniences, and amusements of life,


SEC, VII.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 129


a given quantity of labour will always command
’ the smallest quantity of such objects; and at the —
- period when corn conimands the smallest, labour
will command the greatest quantity of them.

‘If, then, we take a mean between the two, we
shall evidently have a measure corrected by the
contemporary variations of each in opposite direc-
tions, and likely to represent more nearly than
either the same quantity of the necessaries, con-
veniences, and amusements of life, at the most
distant periods, and under all the varying circum-
stances to which the progress of population and
cultivation is subject.

For this purpose, however, it is necessary that
we should fix upon some measure of corn which
may be considered, in respect of quantity, as an
equivalent to a day’s labour;-and perhaps in this
country, a peck of wheat, which is about the
average daily earnings of a good labourer in good
times, may be sufficiently accurate for the ob-
ject proposed. Any commodity therefore which,
at different periods, will purchase the same num-
ber of days’ labour and of pecks of wheat, or parts
of them, each taken in equal proportions, may be
considered, upon this principle, as commanding
pretty nearly the same quantity of the necessaries,
conveniences, and amusements of life ; and, con-
sequently, as preserving pretty nearly its real value
in exchange at different periods. And .any com-
modity which at different periods is found to pur-
chase different quantities of corn and labour thus.
taken, will evidently have varied compared with a

K


130 ON THE NATURE AND » [em 1.


.measure subject to but little variation, and conse-
quently may be presumed to have varied propor-
tionably in its real value in exchange. ;

In estimating the real value in exchange of com-
modities in different countries, regard should be
had to the kind of food consumed by the labouring
classes ; and the general rule should be to compare
them in each country with a day’s labour, and a
quantity of the prevailing sort of grain, equal to
the average daily earnings of a good labourer.
Thus, if the money price of a commodity in Eng-
land would purchase five days’ labour and five pecks
of corn, and the money price of a commodity in
Bengal would purchase five days’ labour, and five
times the quantity of rice usually earned in a day
by a good, labourer, according to an average of a
very considerable period, these commodities might
be considered in each country as of equal real Value
in exchange; and the difference in their money
values would express pretty nearly the different
values of silver in England and Bengal.

The principal defect of the measure here pro-
posed arises from the effect of capital, machinery
and. the division. of labour in varying, in different
countries and at different periods, the results of day-
labour and the prices of manufactured commodi-
ties: but these varying results no approximation
hitherto suggested has ever pretended to estimate ;
and, in fact, they relate rather to riches than to ex-
changeable value, which, though nearly connected,
are not always the same; and on this account, in
an estimate of value, the cheapness arising from


SEC, VIT. ] MEASURES OF VALUE. 131


skill and machinery may without much, error be

neglected...»
Mr: Ricardo asks “ why should old.ec or corn, or
labour. be thie standard measure of value, more than.
coals or iron, more than cloth, soap,, candles, and
the other necessaries of the labourer? Why, in short,
‘should any commodity, or all commodities together,
be the standard, when such a standard jis itself sub-
ject: to fluctuations in value?’* I trust. that. the
question here put has been satisfactorily, answered
in the course of this inquiry into the nature and
measures of value. . And. I will only add here, that
some one, or more, or all commodities together, must
of necessity be. taken,.to express exchangeable
value, because they include. every thing that. can
be given in.exchange, Yet a measure oft exchange-
able value thus-formed; it;is acknowledged, is,.im-
perfect; and we should certainly have been obliged
to Mr. Ricardo:if.he had substituted a better.,., But
what measure has he proposed to substitute? ‘The
. sacrificeof toil and labour, made in, the, production
vof a commodity ;; thatiis, its cost, or, more properly
speaking, a portion of its cost, from which its value
in exchange is practically found, under different
circumstances, to, vary in almost every degree.
Cost and value are always essentially different. A
commodity, the cost of which has doubled, may
be worth in exchangeable value no more than _be-
fore, if other. commodities have, likewise, doubled.
When the. cost. of commodities however jis. esti-

* Princ, of Polit. Econ. ¢. xx. p. 343, 2d edit,
K&


132 - ON THE NATURE AND (CH. It.


mated upon the principles of Adam Smith, their
money cost and average money value will gene-
tally meet.. But when cost is estimated upon the
principles of Mr. Ricardo, by the quantity of la-
bour applied, the labour cost, and labour value
scarcely ever agree. Wherever there are profits,
(and the cases are very rare indeed in which there
~are none,) the value of a commodity in exchange
for labour is uniformly greater than the labour
which has been employed upon it.

We have therefore to choose between an imper-
fect measure of exchangeable value, and one that
is necessarily and fundamentally erroneous.

If Mr. Ricardo says that by value, when he uses ©
it alone, he does not mean exchangeable value,
then he has certainly led us into a great error in
many parts of his work; and has finally left us
‘without substituting any measure of exchangeable
value for the one to which he objects. There -
never was any difficulty in finding a measure of
cost, or indeed of value, if we define it to be cost.
The difficulty is, to find a measure of real value in
exchange, m contradistinction to nominal value or
price. There'is no question as toan accurate stand-
ard, which is justly consideredas unattainable. But,
of all the articles-given in exchange, labour is, -be-
yond comparison, the largest and most important ;
and next to it stands corn. The reason, why
corn should be preferred to coals or iron, is surely
~ very intelligible. The same reason combined with
others holds for preferring labour to corn. And
the reasons given in this section are, I trust, suffi-


SEC. VII.] MEASURES OF VALUE. 133


cient for preferring, in some cases, a mean between
corn and labour to either of them taken separately.
Where corn is not one of the articles to be mea-
sured, as in the case of an estimate of the value of
the precious metals, or any particular commodity,
a mean between corn and labour is certainly to be
preferred to labour alone; but where corn is one of
the main articles to be measured, as in an estimate
of the exchangeable value of the whole produce of
a country, the command of such produce over do-
mestic and foreign labour is still the best criterion
to which we can refer.


K 8


() 1345),


to ‘ CHAPTER III.
01 ' how fie RENT OF LAND.


| sertoN 1
° Of the eran and Causes of Rent.


Tur rent of land may be defined to be that por-
tion of the value of the whole produce whith re-
mains to the owner of the land, after all the out-
goings belonging to its cultivation, of whatever
kind, have been paid, including the profits of the
capital employed, estimated according to the usual
and ordinary rate of the profits of agricultural stock
at the time being.

It sometimes happens that, from accidental and
temporary circumstances, the farmer pays more, or
less, than this ; but this is the point towards which
the actual rents paid are constantly gravitating,
and which is therefore always referred to when the
term is used in a general sense.

Rent then being the excess of price above what
_ is necessary to pay the wages of the labour and the
profits of the capital employed in cultivation, the
first object which presents itself for inquiry, is,
the cause or causes of this excess of price.

After very careful and repeated revisions of the
subject, I do not find myself able to agree entirely


eo


“SEC. ca OF THE RENT OF LAND, 185


in the view taken of i it, either re ‘adlen Smith, or
the Economists; and still less, by’ some more mo-
dern writers. |

Almost all these’ writers appear to me to consi-
der rent as too nearly’ resembling, i in its nature, and
the laws by which it is governed, that excess of
price above the ‘cost of production, whicl is the
characteristic of a common monopoly.

‘Adam’ Smith, though in some parts of the ele-
venth chapter of ‘his first’ book he’ contemplates
rent quite in its true light,* and has interspersed
through his work more just observations on the
subject than any other writer, has ‘not explained
the’ most essential cause of ‘the high price of raw
produce with Sufficient distinctness, though he
of tet touches on it; and by applying occasionally’
the term ‘motopoly to’ the’ rent of land, ‘without
stopping to mark its more radical peculiarities, he
leavés the reader without a definite impression of
the real difference’ between the cause of the high’
price of the necessaries of life, and of monopolized
commodities.


* I cannot, however, agree with him in thinking that all land
which yields food must necessarily yield rent. The land which is
successively taken into cultivation in improving countries, may
only pay profits and labour. A fair profit on the stock employed,
including, of course, the payment of labour, will always be a 'suf-
ficient inducement to cultivate. But, practically, the cases are very
rare, where land is to be had by any body who chooses to take it:
and probably it is true, almost universally, that all appropriated
land which yields food in its natural state, always yields a rent,
whether cultivated or uncultivated:


tenis ig


136 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH. 111.


Some of the views which the Economists have
taken of the nature of rent appear to me also, to
be quite just; but they have mixed them with so _
much error, and haye drawn such unwarranted in-
ferences from them, that what is true in their doc-
trines has produced little effect. Their great
practical conclusion, namely, the propriety of tax-
ing exclusively the neat rents of the landlords,
evidently depends upon their considering these
rents as completely disposeable, like that excess
of price above the cost of production, which, dis-
tinguishes a common monopoly.

M. Say, in his valuable Treatise on Political
Economy, in which he has explained with great
clearness many points not sufficiently developed
by Adam Smith, has not treated the subject of
rent in a manner entirely satisfactory, In speak-
ing of the different natural agents which, as well
as the land, co-operate with the labours of man,
he observes; “Heureusement personne n’a pu dire,
le vent et le soleil m’appartiennent, et le service
quils rendent doit m’étre payé.”* And, though he
acknowledges that, for obvious reasons, property
in land is necessary, yet he evidently considers
rent as almost exclusively owing to such appro-
priation, and to external demand.

In the excellent work of M. de Sismondi, De la
Richesse Commerciale, he says, in a note on the


* Vol. II. p. 124. Of this work a new and much improved
edition has lately been published, which is highly worthy the ate
tention of all those who take an interest in these subjects,


=


SEC. 1.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 137


subject of rent: “ Cette partie de la rente foncitre
est celle que les Economistes ont décorée du nom


du produit net, comme étant le seul fruit du travail


qui ajoutat quelque chose a la richesse nationale.
On pourroit, au contraire, soutenir contre eux, que
c'est la seule partie du produit du travail, dont la
valeur soit purement nominale, et nait rien de
réelle : c'est en effet le résultat de augmentation
de prix qu’obtient un vendeur en yertu de son pri-
vilége, sans que la chose vendue en vaille réelle-
ment davantage, *

The prevailing opinions among the more modern
writers in ourown country have appeared to me to
incline towards a similar view of the subject; and,
not to multiply citations, I shall only add, that in
a very respectable edition of the Wealth of Na-
tions, lately published by Mr. Buchanan, of Edin-
burgh, the idea of monopoly is pushed still farther.
And, while former writers, though they considered
rent as governed by the laws of monopoly, were
still of opinion that this monopoly in the case of
land was necessary and useful, Mr. Buchanan
sometimes speaks of it even as prejudicial, and as
depriving the consumer of what it gives to the
landlord.

In treating of productive and unproductive la-
bour in the last volume, he observes, that, “ The


_ neat surplus by which the Economists estimate the


utility of agriculture, plainly arises from the high
price of its produce, which, however advantageous


* Vol. I. p. 49. + Vol. IV. p. 134.


138 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111.


to the landlord who receives it, is surely no advan-
tage to the consumer who pays it. Were the pro-
duce of agriculture to be sold for a lower price, the
same neat surplus would not remain, after defray-
ing the expenses of cultivation ; but agriculture
would be still equally ree ete to the general
stock ; and the only difference would be, that, as
the landlord was formerly enriched by the high
price, at the expense of the community, the com-
munity will now profit by the low price, at the
expense of the landlord. The high price in which
the rent or neat surplus originates, while it en-
riches the landlord who has the produce of agri-
culture to. sell, diminishes, i in. the same proportion,
the wealth of those who are its purchasers ; and on
this, account it, is quite inaccurate to consider the
landlord’s rent as a clear addition to the national
wealth.”

In other parts of this work he uses the same,
or even stronger language, and in a note on ‘the
subject of taxes, he speaks of the high. price of
the produce of land as advantageous to those who
receive it, but proportionably injurious to those
who pay it. “In this view,” he adds, “ it can
form no general addition to the stock of the com-
munity, as the neat surplus in question is nothing
more than a revenue transferred from one class to
another, and, from the mere circumstance of its
thus changing hands, it is clear that no fund can
arise out of which to pay taxes. The revenue
which pays for the produce of land exists already
in the hands of those who purchase that produce ;


SEC. J] OF THE RENT OF LAND, 139


and, if the price of subsistence were lower, it
would still remain in their hands, where it would
be just as available for taxation, as when by a
higher, bee it, is transferred to the landed BIo-
prietor.* —

_That, there are some) circumstances oan
with rent, which have a strong affinity to a natu-
ral, monopoly, will be readily allowed. The ex-
tent of the earth itself is limited, and cannot be
enlarged by. human, demand. The inequality of
soils occasions, even; at,an early period of society,
a comparative scarcity of the best lands; and this
scarcity is undoubtedly one of the causes of rent
properly so called. On this account, perhaps the
term ; partial monopoly may be fairly applicable: to
it. But the scarcity of land, thus implied, is by no
means alone sufficient to produce the effects ob-
served, And amore accurate investigation of the
subject, will shew us how different the high price
of raw produce is, both in its nature and. origin, :
and. the laws by which it is governed, from the
high price of a common monopoly.

The causes. of the excess of the price of raw pro-
duce above the costs of production, may be stated
to be three.

First, and mainly, That quality of the earth, by
which it can be made to yield a greater portion. of
the necessaries of life than is required for the main-
tenance of the persons employed on the land,

2dly, That quality peculiar to the necessaries of
life of being able, when properly distributed, to

' -* VoluIIL, p. 212.


140 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH. III.


create their own demand, or to raise up a number
of demanders in proportion to the quantity of ne-
cessaries produced.

And, 3dly, The comparative scarcity of fertile
land, either natural or artificial.

The quality of the soil here noticed as the pri-
mary cause of the high price of ‘raw produce, is
the gift of nature to man. It is quite unconnected
with monopoly, and yet is so absolutely essential to
the existence of rent, that without it no degree of
scarcity or monopoly could have occasioned an
excess of the price of raw produce above what was
necessary for the payment of wages and profits.

Tf, for instance, the soil of the earth had been
such, that, however well directed might have been
the industry of man, he could not have produced
from it more than was barely sufficient to main-
tain those whose labour and attention were neces-
sary to its products ; though, in this case, food and
raw materials would have been evidently scarcer
than at present, and the land might have been in
the same manner monopolized by particularowners;
yet it is quite clear, that neither rent nor any es-
sential surplus produce of the land in the form of
high profits and high wages could have existed.

On the other hand, it will be allowed, that in
whatever way the produce of a given portion of
land may be actually divided, whether the whole
is distributed to the labourers and capitalists, or a
part is awarded toa landlord, the power of such
land to yield rent is exactly proportioned to its
fertility, or to the general surplus which it can be


SEC. I.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. ‘141


made to produce beyond what is strictly necessary
to support the labour and keep up the capital em-
ployed upon it. If this surplus be as 1, 2, 3, 4,
or 5, then its power of yielding a rent will be as
1, 2, 3, 4, or 5; and no degree of monopoly—no
possible increase of external demand can essentially
alter their different powers.

But if no rent can exist. without this surplus,
and if the power of particular soils to pay rent be
proportioned to this surplus, it follows that this
surplus from the land, arising from its fertility,
must evidently be considered as the foundation or
main cause of all rent.

Still however, this surplus, necessary and impor-
tant as it is, would not be sure of possessing a value
which would enable it to command a proportionate
quantity of labour and other commodities, if it had
not a power of raising up a population to consume
it, and, by the articles produced in return, of cre-
ating an effective demand for it. {

_ It has been sometimes argued, that it is mis-
taking the principle of population to imagine, that
the increase of food or of raw produce alone can
occasion a proportionate increase of population.
This is no doubt true; but it must be allowed, as
has been justly observed by Adam Smith, that
“when food is provided, it is comparatively easy
to find the necessary clothing and lodging.” And
it should always be recollected, that land does not
produce one commodity alone, but, in addition to
that most indispensable of all commodities—food,


142 OF THE RENTOF LAND. — [CH. ITI.


it produces ‘the materials for clothing, lodging,
‘and firing.*

It is ‘therefore strictly true, that land produces
the necessaries of life—produces the means by
‘which, and by which alone, an increase of people
“may be brought into being and supported. In
this respect it is fundamentally different from
every other kind of machine known to man; and
“it is natural to suppose that the use of it should
be attended with some peculiar effects.”

If an active and industrious family were pos-
sessed of a certain portion of land, which ‘they
could cultivate so as to make it yield food; and the
‘materials of clothing, lodging, and firing, not only

© for themselves but for five other families, it fol-
“lows, from the principle of population, that, if they
properly distributed’ their surplus produce, they
would soon be able to command the ‘labour of five
other. families, and the value of their landed pro-
duce would soon be worth five times as much’as
the value of the labour which had been employed
in raising it:' But if, instead of a portion of land


* It is however certain that, if either these materials be want-
ing, or the skill and capital necessary to’ work’ them up be pre-
vented from forming, owing to the insecurity of property or any
other cause, the cultivators will soon slacken in their exertions,
and the motives to accumulate and to increase their produce will
greatly diminish. ‘ But in this case there will be a very slack de-
mand for labour: and, whatever may be the nominal cheapness
of provisions, the labourer will not: really be able to:;command
such a portion of the necessaries of life, including, of ;course,
clothing, lodging, &c. as will occasion an increase of population,


“$EC.1.] | OF THERENTOF LAND. — © 143


which would yield all the necessaries of life, they
possessed only, in addition to the means of their
own support, a machine which would produce
hats or coats for fifty people besides themselves, no
efforts which they could make would enable them
‘to ensure a demand for these hats or coats, and
_ give them in return a command over a quantity of
labour considerably greater than their fabrication
had cost. Fora long time, and by possibility for
ever, the machine might be of no more value than
that which would result from its making hats or
coats for the family. Its further powers might
be absolutely thrown away from the want of de-
mand; and even when, from external causes to-
tally independent of any efforts of tleir own, a
population had risen to demand the fifty hats, the
value of them in the command of labour and other
commodities might permanently exceed but very
little the value of the labour employed in making
them.

After the new cotton machinery had been intro-
duced into this country, a hundred yards of muslin
of a certain quality would not probably command
more labour than twenty-five yards would before ;
because the supply had increased faster than the
demand, and there was no longer a demand for
the whole quantity produced at the same price. *
But after great improvements in agriculture have
been adopted upon a limited tract of land, a quar-
ter of wheat will in a short time command just as
much labour as before; because the increased pro-
‘duce, occasioned by the improvements in cultiva-


144 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cn. 111.


tion, is found. to create a demand proportioned to
the supply, which must still be limited; and the
value of corn is thus prevented from falling like
the value of muslins.

Thus the fertility of the land gives the power
of yielding a rent, by yielding a surplus quantity
of necessaries beyond the wants of the cultivators;
and the peculiar quality belonging to the neces-
saries of life, when properly distributed, tends
strongly and constantly to give a value to this
surplus by raising up a population to demand it.

These qualities of the soil and of its products
have been, as might be expected, strongly insisted
upon by the Economists in different parts of their
works; and they are evidently admitted as truths
by Adam Smith, in those passages of the Wealth
of Nations, in which he approaches the nearest to
the doctrines of the Economists. But modern
writers have in general been disposed to overlook
them, and to consider rent.as regulated upon the
principles of a common monopoly, although the
distinction is of great importance, and appears ob-
vious and striking in almost any instance that we
can assume. /

If the fertility of the mines of the precious
metals all over the world were diminished one
half, it will be allowed that, as population and
wealth do not necessarily depend upon gold and
silver, such an event might not only be consistent
with an undiminished amount of population and
wealth, but even with a considerable increase of
both. In this case howeyer it is quite certain


SEC.I.] |§ OF THE RENT OF LAND, 145


that the rents, profits, and wages paid at the dif-
ferent mines in the world might not only not be di-
minished, but might be considerably increased. But
if the fertility of all the lands in the world were to
be diminished one half ;* inasmuch as population
and wealth strictly depend upon the quantity of the
necessaries of life which the soil affords, it is quite
obvious that a great part of the population and
_ wealth of the world would be destroyed, and with
it a great part of the effective demand for neces-
saries. The largest portion of the lands in most
countries would be thrown completely out of cul-
tivation, and wages, profits, and rents, particularly
the latter, would be greatly diminished on all the
. rest. I believe there is hardly any land in this
country employed in producing corn, which yields
a rent equal in value to the wages of the labour
and the profits of the stock necessary to its culti-
vation. If this be so, then, in the case supposed,


* Mr. Ricardo has supposed a case (p. 505.) of a diminution
of fertility of one-tenth, and he thinks that it would increase rents
by pushing capital upon less fertile land. I think, on the con-
trary, that in any well cultivated country it could not fail to lower
rents, by occasioning the withdrawing of capital from the poorest
soils. If the last land before in use would do but little more than
pay the necessary labour and a profit of 10 per cent. upon the
capital employed, a diminution of a tenth part of the gross pro-
duce would certainly render many poor soils no longer worth cul+
tivating. And, on Mr. Ricardo’s supposition, where, I would
ask, is the increased demand and increased price to come from,
when, from the greater quantity of labour and capital necessary
for the land, the means of obtaining the precious metals, or any
other commodities, to exchange for corn, would be greatly reduced?

L


146 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. TH.


the quantity of produce being only half of what
was before obtained by the same labour and capital,
it may be doubted whether any land in England
could be kept in tillage. All effective demand for
corn of home growth would be at anend ; and if a
supply could not be obtained from alyoad, the
population of the country must be diminished to
perhaps one-fifth of its former amount.

The produce of certain vineyards in France,
which, from the peculiarity of their soil and ‘situa-
tion, exclusively yield wine of a certain flavour, is
sold, of course, at a price very far exceeding the
cost of production. And this is owing to the
greatness of the competition for such wine, com-
pared with the scantiness of its supply, which con-
fines the use of it to so small a number of persons
that they are able, and, rather than go without it,
willing to give an excessively high price. But,
if the fertility of these lands were increased so
as very considerably to increase the produce, this
produce might so fall in value as to diminish most
essentially the excess of its price above the cost of
production. While, on the other hand, if the vine-
yards were to become less productive, this excess
might increase to almost any extent.*


~ * Mr. Ricardo says, (p. 505.) in answer to this passage, that,
“ given the high price, rent must be high in proportion to abun-
dance and not scarcity,” whether in peculiar vineyards or on
common corn lands. But this is begging the whole of the ques-
tion. The price cannot be given. By the force of external demand
and diminished supply the produce of an acre of Champaigne
grapes might permanently command fifty times the labour that
had been employed in cultivating it; but no possible increase of


'


SEC. T.]. OF THE RENT OF LAND. ‘147


\
' The obvious cause of these effects is, that, in all
common monopolies, the demand is exterior to,
and independent of, the production itself. The
number of persons, who might have a taste forscarce
wines, and would be desirous of entering into a
competition for the purchase of them, might in-
crease almost indefinitely, while the produce itself
was decreasing; and its price, therefore, would have
no other limit than the numbers, powers, and ca-
prices of the competitors for it.

In the production of the necessaries of life\ion on
the contrary, the demand is dependent on the pro-
duce itself, and the effects are therefore widely dif-
ferent. In this case it is physically impossible that
the number of demanders should increase, while
the quantity of produce diminishes, since the de-
manders can only exist by means of the produce.

In all common monopolies, an excess of the
value of the produce above the value of the labour
employed in obtaining it, may be created’ by ex-
ternal demand. In the partial monopoly of the
land which produces necessaries, such an excess |
can only be created by the qualities of the soil.

In common monopolies, and all productions ex-
cept necessaries, the laws of nature do very little
towards proportioning their value in exchange to
their value in use. The same quantity of grapes
or cottons might, under different circumstances, be
worth permanently three or three hundred days la-


external demand or diminution of supply could ever permanently
enable the produce of an acre of corn to command more labour
than it would support.

LQ


148 OF THE RENT OF LAND. (cH. 111.


bour. In the production of necessaries alone, the
laws of nature are constantly at work to regulate
their exchangeable value according to their value in
use; and though from the great difference of external
circumstances, and particularly the greater plenty
or scarcity of land, this is seldom or ever fully ef-
fected; yet the exchangeable value of a given
quantity of necessaries in commanding labour al-
ways tends to approximate towards the value of
the quantity of labour which it can maintain, or in
other words, to its value in use.

In all common monopolies, the price of the.pro-
duce, and consequently the excess of price,above
the cost of production, may increase without any
_ definite bounds. In the partial monopoly of the
land which produces necessaries, the price of the
produce cannot by any possibility exceed the value
of the labour which it can maintain; and the ex-
cess of its price above the cost of its production is
subjected to a limit as impassable. This limit is
the surplus of necessaries which the land can be
made to yield beyond the lowest wants of the cul-
tivators, and is strictly dependent upon the natural
or acquired fertility of the soil. Increase this fer-
tility, the limit will be enlarged, and the land may
yield a high rent; diminish it, the limit will be
contracted, anda high rent will become impossible;
diminish it still further, the limit will coincide with
the cost of production, and all rent will disappear.
| Inshort, in the one case, the power of the pro-
\duce to exceed in price the cost of the production
| depends mainly upon the degree of the monopoly ;


SEC. I.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 149


in the other, it depends entirely upon the degree
of fertility. This is surely a broad and striking
distinction.*.

Is it, then, possible to consider the price of the
necessaries of life as regulated upon the principle
of acommon monopoly ? Is it possible, with M. de
Sismondi, to regard rent as the sole produce of la-
bour, which has a value purely nominal, and the
mere result of that augmentation of price which a
seller obtains in consequence of a peculiar privi-
lege: or, with Mr. Buchanan, to consider it as no
addition to the national wealth, but merely as a
transfer of value, advantageous only to the land-
lords, and proportionably injurious to the con-
sumers ?f

Is it not, on the contrary, a clear indication of a
most inestimable quality in the soil, which God
has bestowed on man—the quality of being able
to maintain more persons than are necessary to
work it? Is it not a part, and we shall see farther
on that it is an absolutely necessary part, of that
surplus produce from the land, which has been
justly stated to be the source of all power and en-
joyment; and without which, in fact, there would


* Yet this distinction does not appear to Mr. Ricardo to be well
founded! ¢. xxxi. p. 508. 2d edit.

+ It is extraordinary that Mr. Ricardo (p. 501.) should have
sanctioned these statements of M. Sismondi and Mr. Buchanan.
Strictly, according to his own theory, the price of corn is always a
natural or necessary price. In what sense then can he agree with
these writers in saying, that it is like that of a common monopoly,
or advantageous only to the Relons and proportionably énjurious
to the consumers ?


Ls


*
150 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. III.


be no cities, no military or naval force, no arts, no
learning, none of the finer manufactures, none of
the conveniences and luxuries of foreign countries,
and none of that cultivated and polished society,
which not only elevates and dignifies individuals,
but which extends its beneficial influence through
the whole mass of the people?


SECTION II.


On the necessary Separation of the Rent of Land from the
Profits of the Cultivator and the Wages of the Labourer.


In the early periods of society, or more remark-
ably perhaps, when the knowledge and_ capital
of an old society are employed upon fresh and
fertile land, the surplus produce of the soil shews
_ itself chiefly in extraordinary high profits, and
extraordinary high wages, and appears but little
in the shape of rent. While fertile land is in
abundance, and may be had by whoever asks for
it, nobody of course will pay a rent to a land-
lord. But it is not consistent with the laws of
nature, and the limits and quality of the earth, that
this state of things should continue. Diversities of
soil and situation must necessarily exist in all coun-
tries. All land cannot be the most fertile: all
situations cannot be the nearest to navigable rivers
and markets. But the accumulation of capital be-
yond the means of employing it on land of the
greatest natural fertility, and the most advanta-


i P


SEC. II.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 151


geously situated, must necessarily lower ‘profits; —
while the tendency of population to increase be-
yond the means of subsistence must, after a certain
time, lower the wages of labour.

The expense of production will thus be dimi-
nished ; but the value of the produce, that is, the
quantity of labour, and of the other products of
labour (besides corn) which it can command, instead
of diminishing, will be imcreased. There will be
an increasing number of people demanding sub-
sistence, and ready. to offer their services in-any
way in which they can be useful. The exchange-
able value of food will therefore be in excess above
the cost of production, on all the more fertile lands;
and this excess is that portion of the general sur-
plus derived from land which has been. peculiarly
denominated rent.

‘The quality of the earth first mentioned, or its
power to yield a greater portion of the necessaries
of life than is required for the maintenance of the
-persons employed in cultivation, is obviously the
foundation of this rent, and the limit to its possible
increase. The second quality noticed, or the ten-
dency of an abundance of food to increase popu-
lation, is necessary both to give a value to the


-surplus of necessaries which the cultivators can


obtain on the first land cultivated; and also to

create a demand for more food than can be pro-

cured from the richest lands. And the third cause,

or the comparative scarcity of fertile land, which

is clearly the natural consequence of the second,

is finally necessary to separate a portion of the ge-
L4


“ +
152 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111.


neral surplus from the land, me the specific form
of rent to a landlord.*

Nor is it possible that rents shoul permanently
remain as parts of the profits of stock, or of the
wages of labour. If profits and wages were not to
fall, then, without particular improvements in cul-
tivation, none but the very richest lands could be
brought into use. The fall of profits and wages
which practically takes place, undoubtedly trans-
fers a portion of produce to the landlord, and forms
a part, though, as we shall see farther on, only a
part of his rent. But if this transfer can be consi-
dered as injurious to the consumers, then every
increase of capital and population must be consi-
dered as injurious; and a country which might
maintain well ten millions of inhabitants ought to
be kept down to a million. The transfer from pro-
fits and wages, and such a price of produceas yields


* Mr. Ricardo has quite misunderstood me, when he represents
me as saying that rent immediately and necessarily rises or falls
with the increased or diminished fertility of the land. (p. 507.)
How far my former words would bear this interpretation the
reader must judge ; but I was not aware that they could be so
construed ; and having stated three causes as necessary to the pro-
duction of rent, I could not possibly have meant to say that rent
would vary always and ‘exactly in proportion to one of them. I
distinctly stated, indeed, that in the early periods of society, the
surplus produce from the land, or its fertility, appears but little in
the shape of rent. Surely he has expressed himself most inadver-
tently while correcting me, by referring to the comparative scarcity
of the most fertile land as the only cause of rent, (p. 506.) although
he has himself acknowledged, that without positive fertility, no
rent can exist. (p. 507.) If the most fertile land of any country
were still very poor, such country could yield but very little rent.


t


¥


>


SEC. II] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 153
=


rent, which have been objected to as injurious,
and as depriving the consumer of what it gives to


the landlord, are absolutely necessary in order to


obtain any considerable addition to the wealth and
revenue of the first settlers in a new country ;
and are the natural and unavoidable consequences
of that increase of capital and population for which
nature has provided in the propensities of the
human race.

When such an accumulation of capital takes
place on the lands first chosen, as to render the
returns of the additional stock employed less than


could be obtained from inferior land,* it must evi-


dently answer to cultivate such inferior land. But
the cultivators of the richer land, after profits had
fallen, if they paid no rent, would cease to be mere
farmers, or persons living upon the profits of agri-
cultural stock; they would evidently unite the
characters of landlords and farmers—a union by no
means uncommon, but which does not alter in any
degree the nature of rent, or its essential separation
from profits and wages.

If the profits of stock on the inferior land taken
into cultivation were thirty per cent. and portions of
the old land would yield forty per cent., ten per cent.
of the forty would obviously be rent by whomsoever
received. When capital had further accumulated,


 * The immediate motive for the cultivation of fresh land can
only be the prospect of employing an increasing capital to gfeater
advantage than on the old land. A \rise in the market-price of
corn could not alone furnish such a motive.


7


154 OF THE RENTOF LAND. _ [CH. UII.
.


and labour fallen* on the more eligible lands of a
country, other lands, less favourably circumstanced
with respect to fertility or situation, might be occu-
pied with advantage. The expenses of cultivation,
including profits, having fallen, poorer land, or land
more distant from rivers and markets, though yield-
ing at first no rents, might fully repay these ex-
penses, and fully answer to the cultivator. And
again, when either the profits of stock, or the wages
of labour, or both, have still further fallen, land still
poorer or still less favourably situated, might be
taken into cultivation. And at every step it is _
clear, that if the price of produce do not fall, the
rent of land must rise. And the price of produce
will not fall so long as the industry and ingenuity
of the labouring classes, assisted by the capitals of _
those not employed upon the land, can find some-
thing to give in exchange to the cultivators and
landlords, which will stimulate them to continue
undiminished their agricultural exertions, and main-
tain their excess of produce.


* When a given portion of labour and capital yields smaller re-
turns, whether on new land or old, the loss is generally divided
between the labourers and capitalists, and wages and profits fall at
the same time. This is quite contrary to Mr. Ricardo’s language.
But the wages we refer to are totally different. He speaks of the
cost of producing the necessaries of the labourer ; I speak of the
necessaries themselves. In the same language Mr. Ricardo says,
(p. 115.) that the rise of rent never falls upon the farmer. Yet does
not the fall of profits go to rent? It is of very little consequence to
the farmer and labourer, even on Mr. Ricardo’s theory, that they
continue to receive between them the same nominal sum of money,
if that sum in exchange for necessaries is not worth half what it
was before,


—=


SEC. II.| OF THE RENT OF LAND. 155


It may be laid down, therefore, as an incontro-
vertible truth, that as a nation reaches any consi-
derable degree of wealth, and any considerable full-
ness of population, the separation of rents, as a
kind of fixture upon lands of a certain quality, is
a law as invariable as the action of the principle
of gravity; and that rents are neither a mere
nominal value, nor a value unnecessarily and in-
juriously transferred from one set of people to
another; but a most real and essential part of the
whole value of the national property, and placed
by. the laws of nature where they are, on the land,
by whomsoever possessed, whether by few or many,
whether by the landlord, the crown, or the actual
cultivator.

This then is the mode in which rent would se-
parate itself from profits and wages, in a natural
state of things, the least interrupted by bad go-
vernment, or any kind of unnecessary monopoly ;
but in the different states in which mankind have
lived, it is but too well known that bad govern-
ment and unnecessary monopolies have beeu fre-
quent ; and it is certain that they will essentially
modify this natural progress, and often occasion a
premature formation of rent. ;

In most of the great eastern monarchies, the so-
vereign has been considered in the light of the
owner of the soil. This premature monopoly of
the land joined with the two properties df the soil,
and of its products first noticed, has enabled the
government to claim, at a very early period, a cer-
tain portion of the produce of all cultivated land ;
and under whatever name this may be taken, it is


156 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [eH. HI.


essentially rent. It is an excess both of the quan-
tity, and of the exchangeable value of what is
produced above the actual costs of cultivation.

But in most of these monarchies there was a
great extent of fertile territory ; the natural sur-
plus of the soil was very considerable; and while
the claims upon it were moderate, the remainder
was sufficient to afford such ample profits and wages
_ as could not be obtained in any other employment,
and would allow of a rapid increase of population.

It is obvious, however, that it is in the power of
a sovereign who is owner of the soil in a very rich
territory to obtain, at an early stage of improve-
ment, an excessive rent. He might, almost from
the first, demand all that was not necessary to al-
low of a moderate increase of the cultivators, which,
if their skill was not deficient, would afford him a
larger proportion of the whole produce in the shape
of a tax or rent, than could probably be obtained
at any more advanced period of society ; but then
of course only the most fertile lands of the country
could be cultivated ; and profits, wages and popu-
lation would come to a premature stop.

.It is not to be expected that sovereigns should
push their rights over the soil to such an extreme
extent,as it would be equally contrary to their own
interest, and to that of their subjects ; but there is
reason to believe that in parts of India, and many
other eastern countries, and probably even in China,
the progress of taxation on the land, founded upon
the sovereign’s right to the soil, together with other
customary payments out of the raw produce, have


SEC. 11.] OF THE RENT OF LAND 157


forcibly and prematurely lowered the profits of
stock, and the wages of labour on the land, and
have thrown great obstacles in the way of pro-
gressive cultivation and population in latter times,
while much good land has remained waste. This
will always be the case, when, owing to an un-
necessary monopoly, a greater portion of the
' surplus produce is taken in the shape of rent or
taxes, than would be separated by the natural fall
of profits and wages. But whatever may be the
nature of the monopoly of land, whether necessary
or artificial, it will be observed that the power of
paying arent or taxes on the land, is completely
limited by its fertility ; and those who are disposed
to underrate the importance of the two first causes
of rent which I have stated, should look at the
various distributions of the produce in kind which
take place in many parts of India, where, when
once the monopoly has enabled the sovereign to
claim the principal part of the rent of the soil,
eyery thing else obviously depends upon the sur-
plus of necessaries which the land yields, and the
power of these necessaries to command labour.

It may be thought, perhaps, that rent could not
be forcibly and prematurely separated from profits
and wages so as unnaturally to reduce the latter,
because capital and labour would quit the land if

‘more could be made of them elsewhere; but it
should be recollected, that the actual cultivators of
the soil in these countries are generally in a very
low and degraded condition; that very little capital
is employed by them, and scarcely any which they


158 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. ITE.


can remove and employ in another business; that
the surplus produce possessed by the government
soon raises up a population to be employed by it,
so as to keep down the price of labour in other de-
partments to the level of the price in agriculture ;
and that the small demand for the products of ma-
nufacturing and commercial industry, owing to the
poverty of the great mass of society, affords no
room for the employment of a large capital, with
high profits in manufactures and commerce. On
account of these causes which tend to lower pro-
fits, and the difficulty of collecting money, and
the risk of lending it which tend to raise interest,
I have long been of opinion, that though the rate
of interest in different countries is almost the only
criterion from which a judgment can be formed of
the rate of profits; yet that in such countries as
India and China, and indeed in most of the:eastern
and southern regions of the globe, it is a criterion
subject to the greatest uncertainty. In China, the
legal interest of money is three per cent. per
month.* But it is impossible to suppose, when we
consider the state of China, so far as it is known
to us, that capital employed ‘on land can yield
profits to this amount ; or, indeed, that capital can
be employed in any steady and well-known trade
with such a return.

In the same way extraordinary accounts have
been given of the high rate of interest in India;


> .
* Penal Code, Staunton, p. 158. The market-rate of interest
at Canton is said, however, to be only from twelve to eighteen
percent. Id. note XVII.


SEC. 11. | OF THE RENT OF LAND. 159


but the state of the actual cultivators completely
contradicts the supposition, that, independently of
their labour, the profits upon their stock is so con-
siderable ; and the late reduction of the govern-
ment paper to six per cent. fully proves that, in
common and peaceable times, the returns of ca-
pital, which can be depended upon in other sorts
of business, are by no means so great as to warrant
the borrowing at a very high rate of interest.

It is probable that, with the exception of occa-
sional speculations, thé money that is borrowed at
the high rates of interest noticed in China and India,
is borrowed in both countries, rather with a view
to expenditure or the payment of debts, than with
a view to profit.

Some of the causes, which have been noticed as
tending prematurely and irregularly to raise rents
and lower profits in the countries of the east, ope-
rated without doubt to a certain extent in the early
stages of society in Europe. At one period most
of the land was cultivated by slaves, and in the
metayer systems which succeeded, the division of
the crop was so arranged as to allow the cultivator
but little more than a scanty subsistence. In this
state of things the rate of profits on the land could
have but little to do with the general rate of pro-

‘fits. The peasant could not, without the greatest
difficulty, realize money and change his profession ;
and it is quite certain that no one who had accu-
mulated a capital in manufactures and commerce,
would employ it in cultivating the lands of others
asa metayer. There would thus be little or no


.


160 - OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH. 111.


interchange of capital between trade and agricul-
ture, and their profits might in consequence be very
unequal.

- It is probable however, as in the case of China
and India above mentioned, that profits would not
be excessively high. This would depend indeed
mainly upon the supply of capital in manufactures
and commerce; if capital were scarce, compared
with the demand for the products of these kinds
of industry, profits would certainly be high; and
all that can be said safely is, that we cannot
infer that they were very high, from the very high
rates of interest occasionally mentioned.

Rent then has been traced to the same common
nature with that general surplus from the land,
which is the result of certain qualities of the soil
and its produce; and it has been found to com-
mence its separation from profits and wages, as
soon as they begin to fall from the scarcity of fer-
tile land whether occasioned by the natural pro-
gress of a country towards wealth and population,
or by any premature and unnecessary monopoly
of the soil.


_ SECTION III.


Of the Causes which tend to raise Rents in the ordinary
Progress of Society. ,


In tracing more particularly the laws which go-
vern the rise and fall of rents, the. main causes


es
|


:


>


SEC. It.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 16h


4


which diminish the expenses of cultivation, or re-
duce the costs of the instruments of production,
compared with the price of produce, require to be


- more specifically enumerated. -The principal of


these seem to be four :—Ist, Such an accumula-
tion of capital as will lower the profits of stock ;
@dly, such an increase of population as will lower
the wages of labour; 3dly, such agricultural im-
provements, or such increase of exertions as will
diminish the number of labourers necessary to pro-
‘duce a given effect ; and 4thly, such an increase
in the price of agricultural produce, from increased
demand, as, without nominally lowering the ex-
pense of production, will increase the difference
between this expense and the price of produce.

If capital increases so as to become redundant in
those departments where it has been usually em-
ployed with a certain rate of profits, it will not
remain idle, but will seek employment either in the
same or other departments of industry, although
with inferior returns, and this will tend to push it
upon less fertile soils.

In the same manner, if population increases
faster than the demand for it, the labourers
must content themselyes with a smaller quan-
‘tity of necessaries; and, the expense of labour in
kind being thus diminished, land may be cultivated
which could not have been cultivated before.

The two first causes, however, here mentioned
sometimes act so as to counterbalance one another.
An increase of capital raises the wages of labour,
and a fall of wages raises the profits of stock ; but

M


162 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [eH. 11n.)


these are only temporary effects. In the natural

and regular progress of a country towards the ac-

cumulation of stock and the increase of population,

the rate of profits and the real wages of labour per-

manently fall together. This may be effected by

a permanent rise in the money price of corn, accom-

panied by a rise, but nota proportionate rise, in

the money wages of labour. The rise in the mo-

ney price of corn is counterbalanced to the culti-

vator by the diminished quantity of produce ob-

tained by the same capital; and his profits, as well

as those of all other capitalists, are diminished, by

having to pay out of the same money returns

higher money wages; while the command of the’
labourer over the necessaries of life is of course

contracted by the inadequate rise of the price of
labour compared with the price of corn.

But this exact and regular rise in the money
price of corn and labour is not necessary to the fall
of profits; indeed it will only take place in the re-
gular way here described, when money, under all
the changes to which a country is subjected, re-
mains of the same value, according to the supposi-
tion of Mr. Ricardo,* a case which may be said
never to happen. Profits may undoubtedly fall,
and rent be separated, under any variations of the
value of money. All thaf is necessary to the most
regular and permanent fall of profits (and im this
Mr. Ricardo would agree with me) is, that an in-
creased proportion of the value of the whole pro-
duce obtained by a given quantity of capital,
should be absorbed by labour. On the land, this

* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. i. p, 24. 2d ed.


SEC. I11.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 163


is effected by a diminution of the produce, obtained
by the same capital without a proportionate dimi-
nution of the part absorbed by labour, which leaves
less for profits, at the same time that the real
wages of the labourer are diminished. But it is
obvious that if a smaller quantity of the necessa-
ries of life derived from a given capital employed
on the land, be sufficient to supply both the capi-
talist and the labourer,* the expenses of cultivation
will be diminished, poorer land may be cultivated
under the new rates of wages and profits, and rent
will rise on that which was before in cultivation.

The third cause enumerated as tending to raise
rents by lowering the expenses of cultivation com-
pared with the price of the produce is, such agri-
cultural improvements or such increase of exertions,
as will diminish the number of labourers necessary
to produce a given effect.

In improving and industrious countries, not de-
ficient in stimulants, this is a cause of great effi-
cacy. If the improvements introduced were of such
a nature as considerably to diminish the costs of

* Mr. Ricardo has observed (p. 516.) in reference to the second
cause which I have here stated, a8 tending to raise rents, ‘ that no
fall of wages can raise rents; for it will neither diminish the por-
tion, nor the value of the portion of the produce which will be allot-
ted to the farmer and labourer together.” But where, 1 would ask,
will the high real wages of America finally go? to profits? or to
rent? If labourers were permanently to receive the value of a
bushel of wheat a day, none but the richest lands could pay the
expense of working them, An increase of population and a fall
of such wages would be absolutely necessary to the cultivation of


poor land. How then can it be said that a fall of wages is not one
of the causes of arise of rents?


MQ


164 OF THE RENT OF LAND. (CH, 111,


production, without increasing in any degree the
quantity of produce, then, as it-is quite certain
that no alteration would take place in the price of
corn, the extravagant profits of the farmers would
soon .be reduced by the competition of capitals
from manufactures and commerce; and as the
whole arena for the employment of capital would
rather have been diminished than increased, pro-
fits on land as well as elsewhere would soon be at
their former level, and the increased surplus from
the diminished expenses of cultivation would go
to increase the rents of the landlords.

But if these improvements, as must always be the
case, would facilitate the cultivation of new land,
and the better cultivation of the old with the same
capital, more corn would certainly be brought to
market.: This would lower its price; but the fall
would be of short duration. The operation of that
important cause noticed in the early part of this
chapter, which distinguishes the surplus produce
of the land from all others, namely, the power of
the necessaries of life, when properly distributed,
to create their own demand, or in other words the
tendency of population to press against the means.
of subsistence, would soon raise the prices of corn
and labour, and reduce the profits of stock to their
former level, while in the mean time every step in
the cultivation of poorer lands facilitated by these
improvements, and their application to all the
lands of a better quality before cultivated, would
universally have raised rents: and thus, under an
improving system of cultivation, rents might con-
tinue rising without any rise in the exchangeable


SEC. If].] | OF THE RENT OF LAND. 165


value of corn, or any fall in the real wages of la-
bour, or the general rate of profits.
The very great improvements imagriculture whick
have taken place in this country are clearly demor
strated. by the profits of stock being as high now
as they were nearly a hundred years ago, when the
land supported but little more than half of its pre-


~ sent population. And the power of the necessaries
of life, when properly distributed, to create their
~own demand is fully proved by the palpable fact,


that the exchangeable value of corn in the com-
mand of labour and other commodities is, to say
the least, undiminished, notwithstanding the many


and great improvements which have been succes-


sively introduced in cultivation, both by the intro-
duction of better implements, and by an improved
system of managing the land. In fact, these im-
provements have gone wholly to the increase of
rents and the payment of taxes.

It may be added that, when improvements are
introduced in particular districts, which tend to


‘diminish the costs of production, the advantages


derived from them go immediately, upon the re-
newal of leases, to landlords, as the profits of stock
must necessarily be regulated by competition, ac-
cording to the general average of the whole coun-
try. Thus the very great agricultural improve-
ments which have taken place in some parts of
Scotland, the north of England, and Norfolk, have


raised, in a very extraordinary manner, the rents of


those districts, and left profits where they were.
It must be allowed then, that facility of pro-
M 3


166 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. III


duction in necessaries,* unlike facility of produc-
tion in all other commodities, is never attended
with a permanent fall of price. They are the only
commodities of which it can be said that their per-
manent value in the command of labour is nearly
proportioned to their quantity. And consequently,
in the actual state of things, all savings in the cost
of producing them will permanently increase the
surplus which goes to rent.

The fourth cause which tends to raise rents,
is such an increase in the price of agricultural
produce from whatever source arising, as will in-
crease the difference between the price of produce,
and the costs of production.

We have already adverted to a rise in the price
of raw produce, which may take place in conse-
quence of a regular increase of capital and popu-
lation while money remains nearly of the same
value. But this sort of rise is confined within nar-
row limits, and has little share in those great va-
riations in the price of corn, which are most fre-
quently the subject of observation. The kind of
increased price, the effects of which I wish now
more particularly to consider, is a rise of price
from increased demand, terminating in an altera-
tion in the value of the precious metals.


* Properly speaking, facility of production in necessaries can
only be temporary, where there are gradations of land as far as
barrenness, except when capital is prevented from increasing by the
want of will to savé. It may then be permanent. But though
corn will, in that case, cost but little labour, its exchangeable value
will be high, that is, it will command a great deal.


oe
SEC, III.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 167


If a great and continued demand should arise
among surrounding nations for the raw produce
of a particular country, the price of this produce
would of course rise considerably ; and the expen-
ses of cultivation rising only slowly and gradually


_ to the same proportion, the price of produce might


for a long time keep so much a head as to give a
prodigious stimulus to improvement, and encou-
rage the employment of much capital in bringing
fresh land under cultivation, and rendering the old
much more productive. If however the demand
continued, the price of labour would ultimately
rise to its former level, compared with corn; a de-
cided fall in the value of money supported by the
abundant exportation of raw produce might gene-
rally take place; labour would become extremely
productive in the purchase of all foreign commo-
dities; and rents might rise without a fall of profits
or wages.

The state of money prices, and the rapid pro-
gress of cultivation in North America, tend strongly
to illustrate the ease here supposed. The price of
wheat in the eastern states is nearly as high as in


- France and Flanders; and owing to the continued


demand for hands, the money price of day-labour
is nearly double what it isin England. But this ~
high price of corn and labour has given great faci-
lities to the farmers and labourers in the purchase
of clothing and all sorts of foreign necessaries and
conveniences. And it is certain that if the money
prices of corn and labour had been both lower, yet


chad maintained the same proportion to each other,


M 4


»
168 ' OF THE RENT OF LAND. (cH. 111.


land of the same quality could not have been cul-
tivated, nor could equal rents have been obtained
with the same rate of profits and the same real
wages of labour.

Effects of a similar kind took place in our own
country from a similar demand for corn during the
twenty years from 1793 to the end of 1813, though
the demand was not ogcasioned in the same way.
For some time before the war, which commenced
in 1793, we had been in the habit of importing a
certain quantity of foreign grain to supply our
habitual consumption. The war naturally in-
creased the expense of this supply by increasing
the expense of freight, insurance, &c. ; and, joined
to some bad seasons and the subsequent decrees of
the French government, raised the price, at which
wheat could be imported, in the quantity wanted
to supply the’ demand, in a very extraordinary
manner.

This great rise in the price of imported corn,
although the import bore but a small proportion

‘to what was grown at home, necessarily raised in
the same proportion the whole mass, and gave the
same sort of stimulus to domestic agriculture as
would have taken place from a great demand for
our corn in foreign countries. In the mean time,
the scarcity of hands, occasioned by an extending
war, an increasing commerce, and the necessity of
raising more food, joined to the ever ready inven-
tion of an ingenious people when strongly stimu-
lated, introduced so much saving of manual labour
into every department of industry, that the new


Pi


SEC. III.} OF THE RENT OF LAND. 169


and inferior land taken into cultivation to supply


the pressing wants of the society, was worked at a
less éxpense of labour than richer soils some years
before. Yet still the price of grain necessarily
kept up as long as the most trifling quantity of
foreign grain, which could only be obtained at a
very high price, was wanted in order to supply
the existing demand. With this high price; which
at one time rose to nearly treble in paper and above
double in bullion, compared with the prices before
the war, it was quite impossible that labour should
not rise nearly in proportion, and with it, of course,
as profits had not fallen, all the commodities into
which labour had entered.

We had thus a general rise in the prices of
commodities, or fall in the value of the precious
metals, compared with other countries, which our
increasing foreign commerce and abundance of
exportable commodities enabled us to sustain.


- That the last land taken into cultivation in 1813


did not require more labour to work it than the
last land improved in the year 1790, is incontro-


vertibly proved by the acknowledged fact, that


the rate of interest and profits was higher in the
later period than the earlier. But still the pro-
fits were not so much higher as not to have ren-
dered the interval most extremely favourable to
the rise of rents.” This rise, during the interval in
question, was the theme of universal remark ; and
though a severe and calamitous check, from a com-
bination of unfortunate circumstances, has ‘since
occurred ; yet the great drainings and permanent


170 OF THE RENT OF LAND, [cH. 111.


improvements, which were the effects of so power-
ful an encouragement to agriculture, have acted
like the creation of fresh land, and have increased
the real wealth and population of the country,
without increasing the labour and difficulty of
raising a given quantity of grain.

It is obvious then that a fall in the value of the
precious metals, commencing with a rise in the
price of corn, has a strong tendency, while it lasts,
to encourage the cultivation of fresh land and the
formation of increased rents.

A similar effect would be poaduced’i in a country
which continued to feed its own people, by a great
and increasing demand for its manufactures. These
manufactures, if from such a demand the value of
their amount in foreign countries was greatly to
increase, would bring back a great increase of
value in return, which increase of value could not
fail to increase the value of the raw produce. The
demand for agricultural as well as manufactured
produce would be augmented; and a considerable
stimulus, though not perhaps to the same extent
as in the last case, would be given to every kind
of improvement on the land.

Nor would the result be very different from the
introduction of new machinery, and a more judi-
cious division of labour in manufactures, It al-
most always happens in this case, not only that
the quantity of manufactures is very greatly in-
creased, but that the value of the whole mass is
augmented, from the great extension of the demand
for them both abroad and at home, occasioned by


SEC.11.| OF THE RENT OF LAND, 171


their cheapness. We see, in consequence, that in
all rich manufacturing and commercial countries,
the value of manufactured and commercial pro-
ducts bears a very high proportion to the raw pro-
ducts ;* whereas, in comparatively poor countries,
without much internal trade and foreign commerce,
the value of their raw produce constitutes almost
the whole of their wealth.

In those cases where the stimulus to agriculture
originates in a prosperous state of commerce and
manufactures, it sometimes happens that the first
step towards a rise of prices is an advance in the
wages of commercial and manufacturing labour.
This will naturally have an immediate effect upon
the price of corn, and an advance of agricultural
labour will follow. It is not, however, necessary,
even in those cases, that labour should rise first.
If, for instance, the population were increasing as
fast as the mercantile and manufacturing capital,
the only effect might be an increasing number of
workmen employed at the same wages, which
would occasion a rise in the price of corn before
any rise had taken place in the wages of labour.

We are supposing, however, now, that labour
does ultimately rise nearly to its former level com-
* pared with corn, that both are considerably higher,


* According to the calculations of Mr. Colquhoun, the value
of our trade, foreign and domestic, and of our manufactures, ex-
clusive of raw materials, is nearly equal to the gross value deriyed
from the land. In no other large country probably is this the
case.—Treatise on the Wealth, Power, and Resources of the
British Empire, p. 96.


172 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 115;


and that money has suffered a decided change of
value. Yet in the progress of this change, the

other outgoings, besides labour, in which capital is

expended, can never all rise at the same time, or

even finally in the same proportion. A period of
some continuance can scarcely fail to occur when

the difference between the price of produce and

the cost of production is so increased as to give a

great stimulus to agriculture ; and as the increased

capital, which is employed in consequence of the

opportunity of making great temporary profits, can

seldom or ever be entirely removed from the land,

a part of the advantage so derived’ is permanent;

‘together with the whole of that which is occasioned
by a greater rise in the price of corn than in some

of the materials of the farmer’s capital.

Mr. Ricardo acknowledges that, in a fall of the
value of money, taxed commodities will not rise in
the same proportion with others ; and, on the sup-

‘position of the fall in the value of money being
peculiar to a particular country, the same must
unquestionably be said of all the various commo-
dities which are either wholly or in part imported
from abroad, many of which enter into the capital
of the farmer. He would, therefore; derive an in-
creased power from the increased money price of
corn compared with those articles. A fall in the
value of money cannot indeed be peculiar to one
country without the possession of peculiar advan-
tages in exportation; but with these advantages,
which we know are very frequently possessed, and
are very frequently increased by stimulants, a fall


SEC. NI. ] OF THE.RENT OF LAND. 173


in the value of money can scarcely fail permanently
to increase the power of cultivating poorer lands,
and of advancing rents.

Whenever then, by the operation of the four
causes above mentioned, the difference between
the price of produce and the cost of the. instru-
ments of production increases, the rents of land.
will rise.

It is, however, not necessary that all these four
causes should operate at the same time ; it is only
necessary that the difference here mentioned should
increase. If, for itistance, the price of produce
were to rise, while the wages of labour and the
_ price of the other branches of capital did not rise
in proportion, and at the same time improved modes
of agriculture were coming into general use, it is
evident that this difference might be increased,
although the profits of agricultural stock were not
only undiminished, but were to rise decidedly
higher.

Of the great additional quantity of capital em-
ployed upon the land in this country during the
last twenty years, by far the greater part is sup-
posed to have been generated on the soil, and not
to have been brought from commerce or manufac-
tures. And it was unquestionably the high profits
of agricultural stock, occasioned by improvements
in the modes of agriculture, and by: the constant
rise of prices, followed only slowly by a propor-
tionate rise in the materials of the farmer's capital,
that afforded the means of so rapid and so advan-
fageous an accumulation.


174 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [eH. II.


In this case cultivation has been extended, and
rents have risen, although one of the instruments
of production, capital, has been dearer.

In the same manner a fall of profits, and im-
provements in agriculture, or even one of them
separately, might raise rents, notwithstanding a
rise of wages.

It is further evident, that no fresh land can be
taken into cultivation till rents have risen, or
would allow of a'rise upon what is already culti-
vated.

Land of an inferior quality requires a great
quantity of capital to make it yield a given pro-
duce; and if the actual price of this produce be
not such as fully to compensate the cost of pro-
duction, including profits, the land must remain
uncultivated. It matters not whether this com-
pensation is effected by an increase in the money
price of raw produce, without a proportionate in-
crease in the money price of the instruments of
production; or by a decrease in the price of the
instruments of production, without a proportionate
decrease in the price of produce. What is abso-
lutely necessary is, a greater relative cheapness of
the instruments of production, to.make up for the
quantity of them required to obtain a given Poe
duce from poor land.

But whenever, by the operation of one or more
of the causes before mentioned, the instruments of
production become cheaper, and the difference be-
tween the price of produce and the expenses of
cultivation increases, rents naturally tise. It fol-


SEC. III. | OF THE RENT OF LAND. 175


lows therefore as a direct and necessary conse-
quence, that it can never answer to take fresh land
of a poorer quality into cultivation till rents have
risen, or would allow of a rise, on what is already
cultivated.

‘It is equally true, that without the same ten-
dency to a rise of rents,* it cannot answer to lay
out fresh capital in the improvement of old land ;
at least upon the supposition, that each farm is
already furnished with as much capital as can be
laid out to advantage, according to the actual rate
of profits.

It is only necessary to state this proposition to
make its truth appear. It certainly may happen,
(and I fear it happens very frequently) that farmers
are not provided with all the capital which could
be employed upon their farms at the actual rate of
agricultural profits. But supposing they are so
provided, it implies distinctly, that more could not
be applied without loss, till, by the operation of
one or more of the causes above enumerated, rents
had tended to rise.

It appears then, that the power of extending
cultivation and increasing produce, both by the
cultivation of fresh land and the improvement of
the old, depends entirely upon the existence of
such prices, compared with the expense of pro-


* Rents may be said to have a tendency to rise, when more
capital is ready to be laid out upon the old land, but cannot be
laid out without diminished returns. When profits fall in manu-
factures and commerce from the diminished price of goods, capi-
talists will be ready to give higher rents for the old farms.


176 OF THE-RENT OF LAND. [cH, 111.


duction, as would raise rents in the actual state of
cultivation. |

But though cultivation cannot be extended and
-the produce of a country increased, except in such
a state of things as would allow of a rise of rents;
yet it is of importance to remark, that this rise of
rents will be by no means in proportion to the
extension of cultivation or the increase of produce.
Every relative fall in the price of the instruments
of production may allow of the employment of a
considerable quantity of additional capital; and
when either new land is taken into cultivation or
the old improved, the increase of produce may be
considerable, though the increase of rents be tri-
fling. We see, in consequence, that in the pro-'
gress of a country towards a high state of culti-
vation, the quantity of capital employed upon the
land and the quantity of produce yielded by it’
bear a constantly increasing proportion to the
amount of rents, unless counterbalanced by ex-
traordinary improvements in the modes of culti-
vation.* ni!


* To the honour of Scotch cultivators it should be observed,
that they have applied their capitals so very skilfully and econo-
mically, that at the same time that they have prodigiously in-
creased the produce, they have increased the landlord’s propor-
tion of it. The difference between the landlord’s share of the
produce in Scotland and in England is quite extraordinary—
much greater than can be accounted for, either by the natural
soil or the absence of tithes and poors-rates.—See Sir John Sin-
clair’s valuable Account of the Husbandry of Scotland; and the
General Report not long since published—works replete with the
most useful and interesting information on agricultural subjects.


SEC. 111.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 177


According to the returns. lately made to’ the
Board of Agriculture, the average proportion which
rent bears to the value of the whole produce seems
not to exceed, one-fifth ;* whereas formerly, when.
there was less capital employed and less value pro-
duced, the proportion amounted to one-fourth, one-
third, or even two-fifths.. Still, however, the nu-
merical difference between the price,of produce
and the expenses of cultivation increases with the
progress of improvement ; and though the land-
lord has a less share of the whole produce, yet this
less share, from the very great increase of the pro-
duce, yields a larger quantity, and gives him a
greater command of corn and labour. If the pro-
duce of land be represented by the number six,
and the landlord has one-fourth of it, his share
will be represented by one and a half. If the pro-
duce of land be as ten, and the landlord has one-
fifth of it, his share will be represented by two.
In the latter case, therefore, though the propor-
tion of the landlord’s share to the whole produce
is greatly diminished, his real rent, independently
of nominal price, will be increased in the propor-
tion of from three to four. And, in general, in all
cases of increasing produce, if the landlord's share
of this. produce do not diminish in the same pro-
portion, which, though it often happens during the
currency of leases, rarely or never happens on the
renewal of them, the real rents of land must rise. -


* See Evidence before the House of Lords, given by Arthur
Young, p. 66.
. N


178 OF THE RENT OF LAND. ‘LH. IIT.


We see then that a progressive rise of rents
seems to be necessarily connected with the pro-
gressive cultivation of new land, and the progres-
sive improvement of the old: and that this rise is
the natural and necessary consequence of the ope-
ration of four causes, which are the most certain
indications of increasing prosperity and wealth—
namely, the accumulation of capital, the increase
of population, improvements in agriculture, and the
high market price of raw produce, occasioned either
by a great demand for it in foreign countries, or by —
the extension of commerce and manufactures:


SECTION IV.
Of the Causes which tend to lower Rents.


The causes which lead to a fall of rents are, as
may be expected, exactly of an opposite description
to those which lead to a rise: namely, diminished ca-
pital, diminished population, a bad system of culti-
vation, and the low market price of raw produce.
They are all indications of poverty and decline,
and are necessarily connected with the throwing
of inferior land out of cultivation, and the con-
tinued deterioration of the land of a superior qua-
lity.*

The necessary effects of a diminished capital and
diminished population in lowering rents, are’ tod


* The effects of importing foreign corn will be considered more


particularly in the next section, and a subsequent part of this
chapter. ;


SEC. TV.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 179


obvious to require explanation ; nor is it less clear
that an operose and bad system of cultivation might
prevent the formation of rents, even on fertile land,
by checking the progress of population and de-
mand beyond what could be supplied from the
very richest qualities of soil. I will only therefore
advert to the fourth cause here noticed.

We have seen that a rise in the price of com,
terminating in an alteration in the value of the
precious metals, would give a considerable stimulus
to cultivation for a certain time, and some facilities
permanently, and might occasion a considerable
and permanent rise of rents. And this case was
. exemplified by what had happened in this country
during the period from 1794 to 1814.

It may be stated in like manner, that a fall in
the price of corn terminating in a rise in the value
of money, must, upon the same principles, tend to
throw land out of cultivation and lower rents.
And this may be exemplified by what happened
in this country at the conclusion of the war. The
fall in the price of corn at that period necessarily
disabled the cultivators from employing ‘the same
quantity of labour at the same price. Many la-
bourers, therefore, were unavoidably thrown out
of employment; and, as the land could not be cul-
tivated in the same way, without the same number
of ‘hands, the worst soils were no longer worked,
much agricultural capital was destroyed, and rents
universally fell; while this great failure im the
power of purchasing, among all those who either
rented or possessed land, naturally occasioned a

N 2


180 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [@H. IBF.


general stagnation in all other trades. In the
mean time, the fall in the price of labour from the
competition of the labourers joined to the poverty
of the cultivators, and the fall of rents both from
the want of power and the want of will to pay
the former rents, restored by degrees the prices of
commodities, the wages of labour, and the rents
of land, nearly to their former proportions, though
alt lower than they were before. ‘The land which
had been thrown out of tillage might then again
be cultivated with advantage; but in the progress
from the lower to the higher value of money, a
period would have elapsed of diminished produce,
diminished capital, and diminished rents. The
country would recommence a progressive movye-
ment from an impoverished state; and, owing to a
fall in the value of corn greater than in taxed com-
modities, foreign commodities, and others which
form a part of the capital of the farmer and of
the necessaries and conveniences of the labourer,
the permanent difficulties of cultivation would be
great compared with the natural fertility of the
worst soil then actually in tillage.

‘It appeared that, in the progress of cultivation
and of increasing rents, it was not necessary that
all the instruments of production should fall in
price at the same time ; and that the difference be-
tween the price of produce and the expense of cul-
tivation might increase, although either the profits
of stock or the wages of labour might be higher,
instead of lower. i

In the same manner, when the produce of a


SEC. Iv.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 181


country is declining, and rents are falling, it is not
necessary that all the instruments of production
should be dearer. In the natural progress of de-
cline, the profits of stock are necessarily low ;_be-
cause it is specifically the want of adequate returns
which occasions this decline. After stock has been
destroyed, profits may become high and wages low;
but the low price of raw produce joined to the
high profits of a scanty capital may more than.
counterbalance the low wages of labour, and render
it impossible to cultivate land where much capital
is required,
_» It has appeared’ also, that in the progress of.
cultivation, and of increasing rents, rent, though
greater in positive amount, bears a less and less
proportion to the quantity of capital employed
upon the land, and the quantity of produce derived
from it. According to the same principle, when
produce diminishes and rents fall, though the
amount of rent will always be less, the proportion
which it bears to capital and produce will be
greater. And as, in the former case, the diminished
proportion of rent was owing to the necessity of
yearly taking fresh land of an inferior quality into
cultivation, and proceeding in the improvement of
old land, when it would return only the common
profits of ‘stock, with little or no rent; so, in the
latter case, the high proportion of rent is owing
to the discouragement of a great expenditure in
agriculture, and the necessity of employing the re-
duced capital of the country in the exclusive cul-
tivation of the richest lands, and leaving the re-


e


No


182 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [e@H. 111,


mainder to yield what rent can be got for them in
natural pasture, which, though small, will bear a
large proportion to the labour and capital employed.

In proportion, therefore, as the relative state of
' prices is such as to occasion a progressive fall of
rents, more and more lands will be gradually thrown
out of cultivation, the remainder will be worse cul-
tivated, and the diminution of produce will proceed
still faster than the diminution of rents.

If the doctrine here laid down respecting the
laws which govern the rise and fall of rents, be
near the truth, the doctrine which maintains that,
if the produce of agriculture were sold at such a
price as to yield less neat surplus, agriculture ~
would be equally productive to the general stock,
must be very far from the truth. With regard to
my own conviction, indeed, I feel no sort ok doubt
that if, under the impression that the high price of
azaw produce, which occasions rent, is as injurious
to the consumer as it is advantageous to the land-
lord, a rich and improved nation were determined
by law to lower the price of produce, till no sur-
plus in the shape of rent any where remained, it
would inevitably throw not only all the poor land,
but all except the very best land, out of cultiva-
tion, and probably reduce its produce and popula-
tion to less than one-tenth of their former amount.


‘SEG. vs.) OF THE REND OF LAND. 183


SECTION V.


On the Dependance of the actual Quantity of Produce ob-
tained from the Land, upon the existing Rents and the
- existing Prices.


From the preceding account of the progress of rent,
it follows that the actual state of the natural rent
of land is necessary to the actual produce; and
that the price of corn, in every progressive country,
must be just about equal to the cost of production
on land of the poorest quality actually in use, with
the addition of the rent it would yield in its na-
tural state; or to the cost of raising additional pro-
duce on old land, which additional produce yields _
only the usual returns of agricultural stock with
little or no rent.

It is quite obvious that the price cannot be less ;
or such land would not be cultivated, nor such ca-
pital employed. Nor can it ever much exceed this
price, because it will always answer to the land-
lord to continue letting poorer and poorer lands,
as long as he can get any thing more than they
will pay in their natural state; and because it will
always answer to any farmer who can command -
capital, to lay ‘it out on his land, if the addi-
tional produce resulting from it will fully repay
the profits of his stock, although it yields nothing
to his landlord.

It follows then, that the price of corn, in reference

N4


184 OF THE RENT OF LAND. (cH. 111.


to the whole quantity raised, is sold at the natural
or necessary price, that is, at the price necessary to
obtain the actual amount of produce, although by
far the largest part is sold at a price very much
above that which is necessary to its production,
owing to this part being produced at less expense,
while its exchangeable value remains undiminished.

The difference between the price of corn and the
price of manufactures, with regard to natural or
necessary price, is this; that if the price of any ma-
nufacture were essentially depressed, the whole
manufacture would be entirely destroyed; whereas,
if the price of corn were essentially depressed, the
quantity of it only would be dininished. There
would be some machinery in the country: still
capable of sending the commodity to market at the
reduced price,

The earth has been. sometirnes compared toa
vast machine, presented by nature to.man for the
. production of food and raw materials; but, to make
the resemblance more just, as far as they admit of
comparison, we should consider the soil as a present
to man of a great number of machines, all sus-
ceptible of continued improvement by the applica-
tion of capital to them, but yet of very different
original qualities and powers,

This great inequality i in the powers of the ma-
chinery employed in producing raw produce, forms
one of the most remarkable features which distin-
guishes the machinery of the land from the ma-
chinery employed in manufactures.

When a machine in manufactures is invented,


— $$ —.»———_


SEC. V.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 185


which will produce more finished work with less
labour and capital than before, if there be no pa-
tent, or as soon as the patent has expired, a suffi-
cient number of such machines may be made to
supply the whole demand, and to supersede entirely
the use of all the old machinery. The natural con-
sequence is, that the price is reduced to the price


of production from the best machinery, and if


the price were to be depressed lower, the whole
of the commodity would be withdrawn from the
market.

The machines which produce corn and raw ma-
terials, on the contrary, are the gifts of nature, not
the works of man; and we find, by experience,
that these gifts inive very different qualities. and
powers. The most fertile lands of a country, those
which, like the best machinery in manufactures,
yield the greatest products with the least labour
and capital,. are never found sufficient, owing to


the second main cause of rent before stated, to


supply the effective demand of an increasing’ po-
pulation. The price of raw produce, therefore,
naturally rises till it becomes sufficiently high to
pay the cost of raising it with inferior machines,
and by a more expensive process; and, as there
cannot be two prices for corn of the same quality,
all the other machines, the working of which re-
quires less capital compared with the produce, must
yield rents in proportion to their goodness.

Every extensive country may thus be considered
as possessing a gradation of machines for the pro-
duction of corn and raw materials, including in this


186 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 11.


gradation not only all the various qualities of poor
land, of which every large territory has generally
an abundance, but the inferior machinery which
- may be said to be employed when good land is
further and further forced for additional produce.
As the price of raw produce continues to rise,
these inferior machines are successively called into
action; and as the price of raw produce continues
to fall, they are successively thrown out of action.
The illustration here used serves to shew at once
the necessity of the actual price of corn to the ac-
tual produce, in the existing state of most of the
countries with which we are acquainted, and the >
different effect which would attend a great reduc-
tion in the price of any particular manufacture,
and a great reduction in the price of raw produce.

We must not however draw too large inferences
from this gradation of machinery on the land. It
is what actually exists in almost all countries, and
accounts very clearly for the origin and progress
of rent, while land still remains in considerable
plenty. But such a gradation is not strictly ne-
cessary, either to the original formation, or the
subsequent regular rise of rents. All that is ne-
cessary to produce these effects, is, the existence
of the two first causes of rent formerly mentioned,
with the addition of limited territory, or a scarcity
of fertile land.

Whatever may be the qualities of any commo-
dity, it is well known that it can have no ex-
changeable value, if it exists in a great excess
above the wants of those who are to use vit. But


SEC, V.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 187


such are the qualities of the necessaries of life that,
in a limited territory, and under ordinary circum-
stances, they cannot be permanently in excess ;
and if all the land of such a country were precisely
equal in quality, and all very rich, there cannot
be the slightest doubt, that after the whole of the
land had been taken into cultivation, both the pro-
fits of stock, and the real wages of labour, would
go on diminishing till profits had been reduced to
what were necessary to keep up the actual capital,
and the wages to what were necessary to keep up
the actual population, while the rents would be
high, just in proportion to the fertility of the soil.
Nor would the effect be essentially different, if
the quantity of stock which could be employed
with advantage upon such fertile soil were ex-
tremely limited, so that no further capital were
required. for it than what was wanted for plough-
ing and sowing. Still there can be no doubt that
capital and population might go on increasing in
other employments, till they both came to a stand,
* and rents had reached the limits prescribed by the
powers of the soil, and the habits of the people.
In these cases it is obvious that the rents are
not regulated by the gradations of the soil, or the
different products ‘of capital on the same land ;
and that it is too large an inference from the theory
of rent to conclude with Mr. Ricardo, that “ It is
only because land is of different qualities with re-
spect to its productive powers, and because in the
progress of population, land of an inferior quality,


188 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH. HB


or less advantageously situated, is called into cul-
tivation, that rent is ever paid for the use of it.”*

- There is another inference which has been drawn
from the theory of rent, which involves an error of
much greater importance, and should therefore be
very carefully guarded against.

In the progress of cultivation, as poorer and
poorer land is taken into tillage, the rate of profits
must be limited in amount by the powers of the
soil last cultivated, as will be shewn more fully in
a subsequent chapter. It has been inferred from
this, that when land is successively thrown out
of cultivation, the rate of profits will be high in
proportion to the superior natural fertility of the
land which will then be the least fertile in cul-
tivation.

If land yielded no rent whatever in its natural
state, whether it were poor or fertile, and if the
relative prices of capital and produce remained the
same, then the whole produce being divided be-
tween profits and wages, the inference might be
just. But the premises are not such as are here
supposed. Ina civilized country uncultivated land
always yields a rent in proportion to its natural
power of feeding cattle or growing wood ; and of
course, when land has been thrown out of tillage,
particularly if this has been occasioned by the im-
portation of cheaper corn from other countries, and
consequently without a diminution of population,


* Principles of Political Econony, ch. ii. p. 54. This passage
was copied from the first edition. It is slightly altered in the second,
p- 51. but not so as materially to vary the sense.


SEC, V.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 189


the last land so thrown out may yield a moderate
rent in pasture, though considerably less than be-
fore. As was said in the preceding section, rent
will diminish, but notso much in proportion either
as the capital employed on the land, or the produce
derived from it. No landlord will allow his land
to be cultivated by a tillage farmer paying little
or no rent, when by laying it down to pasture,
and saving the yearly expenditure of capital upon
it, he can obtain a much greater rent. Conse-
_ quently, as the produce of the worst lands actually

cultivated can never be wholly divided between
profits and wages, and in the case above supposed,
not nearly so, the state of such land or its degree
of fertility cannot possibly regulate the rate: of
profits upon it.

_If to this circumstance we add the effect arising
from a rise in the value of money, and the probable
fall of corn more than of working cattle, it is ob-
vious that permanent difficulties will be thrown in
the way of cultivation, and that richer land may
not yield superior profits. The higher rent paid
for the last land employed in tillage, together with
the greater expense of the materials of capital com-
pared with the price of produce, may fully coun-
terbalance, or even more than counterbalance, the
difference of natural fertility. ;

With regard to the capital which the tenant may
- lay out on his farm in obtaining more produce
without paying additional rent for it, the rate of
its returns must obviously conform itself to the
general rate of profits: If the prices of manufac-


190 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cu. 111.


‘tured and mercantile commodities were to remain


the same notwithstanding the fall of labour, pro-
fits would certainly be raised; but they would not
remain the same, as was shewn in the preceding
chapter. The new prices of commodities and the
new profits of stock would be determined upon
principles of competition ; and whatever the rate
was, as so determined, capital would be taken from
the land till this rate was attained. ‘The profits of
capital employed in the way just described must
always follow, and can never lead or regulate.

It should be added, that in the regular progress
of a country towards general cultivation and im-
provement, and ina natural state of things, it may
fairly be presumed, that if the last land taken into
cultivation be rich, capital is scarce, and profits
will then certainly be high; but if land be thrown
out of cultivation on account of means being found
of obtaining corn cheaper elsewhere, no such in-
ference is justifiable. On the contrary, capital
may be abundant, compared with the demand for
corn and commodities, in which case and during
the time that such abundance lasts, whatever may
be the state of the land, profits must be low.

This.is a distinction of the greatest practical im-
portance, which it appears to me has been quite
overlooked by Mr. Ricardo.

It will be observed, that the rents paid for what
the land will produce in its natural state, though
they make-a most essential difference in the ques-
tions relating to profits and the component parts
of price, in no respect invalidate the important doc-


SEC. ¥.] OF THE RENT OF LAND: 191


trine that, in progressive countries in their usual
state with gradations of soil, corn is sold at its na-
tural or necessary price, that is, at the price neces-
sary to bring the actual quantity to market. This
price must.on an.average beat the least equal to
the costs of its production on the worst land actu-
ally cultivated, together with the rent of such |
land in its natural state: because, if it falls in any
degree below this, the cultivator of such land will
not be able to pay the landlord so high a rent as
he could obtain from the land without cultivation,
and consequently the land will be left unculti-
vated, and the produce will be diminished. The
rent of land in its natural state is therefore obvi-
ously so necessary a part of the price of all culti-
vated products, that, if it be not paid they will not
come to market, and the real price actually paid
for corn is, on an average, absolutely necessary to
the production of the same quantity, or, in the
words before stated, corn, in reference to the whole
quantity produced, is sold at its necessary price.

I hope to be excused for presenting to the
reader in various forms the doctrine, that corn, in
reference to the quantity actually produced, is
sold at its necessary price, like manufactures; be-
cause I consider it as a truth of high importance,
which has been entirely overlooked by the Econo-
mists, by Adam Smith, and all those writers who
have represented raw produce as selling always at
a monopoly price.


*


162; - OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. IDE.


SECTION VI.


Of the Connexion between- great comparative Wealth, and
a high comparative Price of raw Produce.


Adam Smith has very clearly explained in what
manner the progress of wealth and improvement
tends to raise the price of cattle, poultry, the mate-
rials of clothing and lodging, the most useful mi-
nerals, &c. compared with corn; but he has not
entered into the explanation of the natural causes
which tend to determine the price of corn. He
has left the reader indeed to conclude, that he con-
siders the price of corn as determined only by the
state of the mines, which at the time supply the
circulating medium of the commercial world. . But
this is a cause, which, though it may account for
the high or low price of corn positively, cannot
account for the relative differences in its price,
in different countries, or compared with certain
classes of commodities in the same country.

I entirely agree with Adam Smith, that it is of
great use to inquire into the causes. of high price,
as from the result of such inquiries it may turn
out, that the very circumstance of which we com-
plain, may be the necessary consequence and the
most certain sign of increasing wealth and pros-
perity. But of all inquiries of this kind, none
surely can be so important, or so generally in-
teresting, as an inquiry into the causes which affect


SEC. VI.| OF THE RENT OF LAND. 193


the price of corn, and occasion the differences in
this price so observable in different countries.

These causes, in reference to the main effects
observed, seem to be two:

1., A difference in the value of the precious | me-
tals, in different countries under different circum-
stances.

2. A difference in the quantity of labour and
capital necessary to produce corn. _

The first cause undoubtedly . occasions . the
greatest portion of that inequality in the price of.
corn, which is the most striking and prominent,
- particularly in countries at a consider able distance.
from each other. More than three-fourths of the
prodigious difference between the price of corn in
Bengal and England is probably occasioned by
the difference in the value of money in the two
countries ; and far the greater part of the high price
of corn in this country, compared with most of the


states in Europe, is occasioned in the same way.


The main causes which affect the precious metals
in different countries, are the greater or smaller
demand for corn and labour, and the abundance or
deficiency of exportable commodities. With great
facility of production in particular branches of
industry, or, in other, words, an abundance of
exportable commodities, corn and labour may be
maintained. at a very high comparative price ;
and in fact) it is this high price specifically, which
prevents the natural advantage attached to faci-
lity of production from. being in a great degree
lost by domestic competition, and practically ren-
oO


194 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cu. 111.


ders the industry of all those nations, where corn
and labour are high, peculiarly productive in the
purchase of foreign commodities. But this sub-
_ ject shall be more fully discussed on another occa-
sion. Our principal business at present is with the
second of the two causes before stated.

The second cause of the high comparative price
of corn is the high comparative cost of production.
If we could suppose the value of money to be the
same in all countries, then the cause of the higher
money price of corn in one country compared with
another, would be the greater quantity of capital
and labour, which must be employed to produce
it: and the reason why the price of corn would
be higher, and continually rising in countries al-
ready rich, and still advancing in prosperity and
population, would be to be found in the necessity
of resorting constantly to poorer land—to ma-
chines which would require a greater expenditure
to work them—and which would consequently oc-
casion each fresh addition to the raw produce of the
country to be purchased at a greater cost—in short,
it would be found in the important truth that corn,
in a progressive country, is sold at the price neces-
sary to yield the actual supply ; and that, as this
supply becomes more and more difficult, the price
must rise in proportion.

The price of corn, as determined by this cause,
will of course be greatly modified by other circum-
stances ; by direct and indirect taxation; by im-
provements in the modes of cultivation; by the
saving of labour on the land ; and particularly by
the importations of foreign corn. The latter cause,


SEC. VI. | OF .THE RENT OF LAND. 195


indeed, may do away, ina considerable degree, the
usual effects of great wealth on the price of corn;

and this wealth will then shew itself in a different
form.

Let us suppose seven or eight large countries
not very distant from each other, and not very
_ differently situated with regard to the mines. Let
us suppose further, that neither their soils nor their
skill in agriculture are essentially unlike; that
their currencies are in a natural state ; their taxes
nothing; and that every trade is free, except the
trade in corn. Let us now suppose one of them
very greatly to increase in capital and manufac-
turing skill above the rest, and to become in con-
sequence much more rich and populous. I should
say, that this comparative increase of riches could
not possibly take place, without a comparative ad-
vance in the price of raw produce; and that such
advance of price would, under the circumstances
supposed, be the natural sign and absolutely neces-
sary consequence, of the increased wealth and tee
pulation of the country in question.

Let us now suppose the same countries to have
the most perfect freedom of intercourse in corn,
and the expenses of freight, &c. to be quite imcon-
siderable; And let us still suppose one of them to
increase very greatly above the rest, in manufac+
turing capital and skill, in wealth and population:
I should then say, that as the importation of corn:
would prevent any great difference in the price of
raw produce; it would prevent any great difference
in the quantity of capital laid out upon the land,

02


196 OF THE RENT OF LAND. *  [CH. III.


and the quantity of corn obtained from it; that
consequently, the great increase of wealth could
not take place without a great dependence on the
other nations for corn; and that this dependence,
’ under the circumstances supposed, would be the na-
tural sign and necessary consequence of the in-
creased wealth and population of the country in
question. ;

Thesé I consider as the two alternatives neces-
sarily belonging to a great comparative increase of
wealth ; and the supposition here made will, with
proper allowances, apply to the state of Europe.

- In Europe, the expenses attending the carriage
of corn are often considerable. They forma natu-
ral barrier to importation ; and even the country,
which habitually depends upon foreign corn, must
haye the price of its raw produce considerably
higher than the general level. Practically, also,
the prices of raw produce in the different countries
of Europe will be variously modified by very dif-
ferent soils, very different degrees of taxation, and
very different degrees of improvement in the
science of agriculture. Heavy taxation, and a poor
soil, may occasion a high comparative price of raw
produce, or a considerable dependence on other
countries, without great wealth and population;
while great improvements in agriculture and a
good soil may keep the price of produce low, and
the country independent of foreign corn, in spite
of considerable wealth. But the principles laid -
down are the general principles on the subject;
and in applying them to any particular case, the


ee ee


SEC. VI.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 197


particular circumstances of such case must always
be taken into the consideration.

With regard to improvements in agriculture,
which in similar soils is the great cause which
retards the advance of price compared with the
advance of produce; although they are sometimes
most powerful, and of very considerable duration,
they cannot finally be sufficient to balance the ne-
cessity of applying to poorer land, or inferior ma-
chines. In this respect, raw produce is essentially


different from manufactures.


The cost of manufactures, or the quantity of la-
bour and capital necessary to produce a given quan-
tity of them, has a constant tendency to diminish ;
while the quantity of labour and capital necessary
to procure the last addition which has been made
to the raw produce of a rich and advancing coun-
try, has a constant tendency to increase.

We see in consequence, from the combined
operation of the two causes, which have been
stated in this section, that in spite of continued
improvements in agriculture, the money price of


‘corn is generally the highest in the richest coun-


tries; while in spite of this high price of corn and
consequent high price of labour, the money price
of manufactures still continues lower than in poorer
countries.

I cannot then agree with Adam Smith, in think-
ing that the low value of gold and silver is no
proof of the wealth and flourishing state of the
country where it takes place. Nothing of course
can be inferred from it, taken absolutely, except

03


198 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111,


the abundance of the mines ; but taken relatively,
or in comparison with the state of other countries,
much may inferred from it. If we are to measure
the value of the precious metals in different coun-
tries, and at different periods in the same country,
by the price of corn, as proposed by himself, it ap-
pears to me that whether we consider the first or
second cause which has been referred to in this
section, there are few more certain signs of wealth
than the high average price of raw produce. With
the value of money uniform in respect to cost,
then, independently of importation and improve-
ments in agriculture, the wealth and population of
a country would be proportioned to the high price
of its corn. And in the actual state of things, with
great differences in the value of money, it may
generally be presumed that those countries, which
have the greatest abundance of exportable com-
modities, are either rich, or in the way rapidly to
become rich.*


* This conclusion may appear to contradict the doctrine of the
level of the precious metals. And so it does, if by level be meant
level of value estimated in the usual way. I consider that doctrine,
indeed, as quite unsupported by facts. The precious metals are
always tending to a state of rest, or such a state of things as to
make their movement unnecessary. But when this state of rest
has been nearly attained, and the exchanges of all countries are.
nearly at par, the value of the ‘precious metals in different coun-
tries, estimated in corn and labour, or the mass of commodities, is
very far indeed from being the same. To be convinced of this, it
is only necessary to look at England, France, Poland, Russia, and
India, when the exchanges are at par. That Adam Smith, who
proposes labour as the true measure of value at.all timesand in all
places, could look around him, and yet say that the precious me


SEC. VII.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 199


It is of importance to ascertain this point ; that
we may not complain of one of the most certain
proofs of the prosperous condition of a country.


SECTION VII.


On the Causes which may mislead the Landlord in letting
his Lands, to the Injury both of himself and the
Country.


In the progress of a country towards a high state
of improvement, the positive wealth of the land-
lord ought, upon the principles which have been
laid down, gradually to increase; although his re-
lative condition and influence in society will pro-
bably rather diminish, owing to the increasing
number and wealth of those who live upon a still
more important surplus*—the profits of stock,
The progressive fall, with few exceptions, in
the value of the precious metals throughout Eu-
rope; the still greater fall, which has occurred in
the richest countries, together with the increase
of produce which has been obtained from the soil,


tals were always the highest in value in the richest countries, has
always appeared to me most unlike his usual attention to found his
theories on facts.

*T have hinted before, that profits may, without impropriety,
be called a surplus, But, whether surplus or not, they are the
most important source of wealth, as they are, beyond all question,
the main source of accumulation.


oO 4


200 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. III.


_ must all conduce to make the landlord expect ©
an increase of rents on the renewal of his leases.
But, in re-letting his. farms, he is liable to fall
into two errors, which are almost equally pre-
judicial to his own interests, and to those of his
country.

In the first place, he may be induced, by the.
immediate prospect of an exorbitant rent, offered
by farmers bidding. against each other, to let his
land to a tenant without sufficient capital to cul-
tivate it in the best way, and make the necessary
improvements upon it. This is undoubtedly a most
short-sighted policy, the bad effects of which have
been strongly noticed by the most intelligent land-
surveyors in the evidence lately brought before
Parliament; and have been particularly remark-.
able in Ireland, where the imprudence of the land-
lords in this respect, combined perhaps with some
real difficulty of finding substantial tenants, has
aggravated the discontents of the country, and
thrown the most serious obstacles in the way of
an improved system of cultivation. The conse-
quence of this error. is the certain loss of all that
future source of rent to the landlord, and wealth
to the country, which arises from increase of
produce.

The second error to which the landlord is liable,
is that of mistaking a mere temporary rise of prices,
for a rise of sufficient duration to warrant an. in-
crease of rents. It frequently happens that a
scarcity of one or two years, or an unusual demand
arising from any other cause, may raise the price


SEC. VIL. | OF THE RENT OF LAND. 201


of raw produce to a height at which it cannot be
maintained. And the farmers, who take land un-
der the influence of such prices, will, on the re-
turn of a more natural state of things, probably
fail, and leave their farms in a ruined and ex-
hausted state. These short periods of high price
are of great importance im generating capital upon
the land, if the farmers are allowed to have the
advantage of them; but if they are grasped at
prematurely by the landlord, capital is destroyed
instead of being accumulated ; and both the land-
lord and the country incur a loss, instead of gain-
ing a benefit. .

A similar caution is necessary in raising rents,


“even when the rise of prices seems as if it would


be permanent. In the progress:of prices and rents,
rent ought always to be a little behind; not only
to afford the means of ascertaining whether the
rise be temporary or permanent, but even in the
latter case, to give a little time for the accumula-
tion of capital on the land, of which the landholder
is sure to feel the full benefit in the end.

There is no just reason to believe, that if the
landlords were to give the whole of their rents to
their tenants, corn would be more plentiful and
cheaper. If the view of the subject, taken in the
preceding inquiry, be correct, the last additions
made to our home produce are sold at nearly the
cost of production, and the same quantity could
not be produced from our own soil at a less. price,
even without rent. The effect of transferring all
rents to tenants, would be merely the turning them


202 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111.


into gentlemen, and tempting them to cultivate
their farms under the superintendence of careless
and uninterested bailiffs, instead of the vigilant eye
of a master, who is deterred from carelessness by
the fear of ruin, and stimulated to exertion by the
hope of a competence. The most numerous in-
stances of successful industry, and well-directed
knowledge, have been found among those who
have paid a fair rent for their lands; who have
embarked the whole of their capital in their_un-
dertaking ; and who feel it their duty to watch
over it with unceasing case, and add to it whenever
it is possible.

But when this laudable spirit prevails among a
tenantry, it is of the very utmost importance to:
the progress of riches, and the permanent increase
of rents, that it should have the power as well as
the will to accumulate; and an interval of ad-
- yancing prices, not immediately followed by a pro-
portionate rise of rents, furnishes the most effective
powers of this kind. These intervals of advancing
prices, when not succeeded by retrograde move-
ments, most powerfully contribute to the progress
- of national wealth. And practically I should say,
that when once a character of industry and eco-
nomy has been established, temporary high profits
are a more frequent and powerful source of accu-
mulation than either an increased spirit of saving,
or any other cause that can be named.* It is the


* Adam Smith notices the bad effects of high profits on the ha- .
bits of the capitalist. ‘They may perhaps sometimes occasion ex-


SEC. VII.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 203


only cause which seems capable of accounting for
the prodigious accumulation among individuals,
which must have taken place in this country during
the last war, and which left us with a greatly in-
creased capital, notwithstanding the vast annual
destruction of stock, for so long a period.

Among the temporary causes of high price,
which may sometimes mislead the landlord, it is
necessary to notice irregularities in the currency.
When they are likely to be of short duration, they
must be treated by the landlord in the same man-
ner as years of unusual demand. But when they
continue so long as they have done in this country, ©
it is impossible for the landlord to do otherwise
than regulate his rent accordingly, and take the
chance of being obliged to lessen it again, on the
return of the currency to its natural state. :

With the cautions here noticed in letting farms,
the landlord may fairly look forward to a gradual
and permanent increase of rents; and, in general,
not only to an increase proportioned to the rise
in the price of produce, but to a still further in-
crease, arising from an increase in the guantity of
produce. |

If in taking rents, which are equally fair for the
landlord and tenant, it is found that in successive
lettings, they do not rise rather more than in pro-
portion to the price of produce, it will generally be
owing to heavy taxation.
travagance ; but generally, I should say, that extravagant habits


were a more frequent cause of a scarcity of capital and high pro-
fits, than high profits of extravagant habits.


-


204 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cu. 111.


Though it is by no means true, as stated by the
Economists, that all taxes fall on the neat rents of
the landlords, yet it is certainly true that they
have little power of relieving themselves. It
is also true that they possess a fund more dis-
posable, and better adapted for taxation than
any other. They are in consequence more fre-
quently taxed, both directly and indirectly. And
if they pay, as they certainly do, many of the
taxes which fall on the capital of the farmer and the
wages of the labourer, as well as those directly im-
posed on themselves, they must necessarily feel it
in the diminution of that portion of the whole pro-
duce, which under other circumstances would have
fallen to their share. :


SECTION VIII.


On the strict and necessary Connexion of the Interests of
the Landlord and of the State in a Country which sup-
ports its own Population.


It has been stated by Adam Smith, that the in-
terest of the landholder is closely connected with
that of the state ;* and that the prosperity or ad-
versity of the one involves the prosperity or adver-
sity of the other. The theory of rent, as laid down
in the. present ,chapter, seems strongly to confirm


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. c. xi. p. 394. 6th edit.


SEC. vill. OF THE RENT OF LAND. 205


this statement. If under any given natural re-
sources in land, the main causes which conduce.to |
the interest of the landholder are increase of capi-
tal, increase of population, improvements in agri-
culture, andan increasing demand for raw produce
occasioned by the prosperity of commerce, it seems.
scarcely possible to consider the interests of the
landlord as separated from those of the state and
people.

Yet it has been said by Mr. Ricardo that, “ the
interest of the landlord is always opposed to that
of the consumer and the manufacturer,”* that is,
to all the other orders in the state. To this opinion
he has been led, very consistently, by the peculiar
view he has taken of rent, which makes him state,
that it is for the interest of the landlord that the
cost attending the production of corn should be in-
creased, and that improvements in agriculture
tend rather to lower than to raise rents. '

If this view of the theory of rent were just, and
it were really true, that the income of the landlord
is increased by increasing the difficulty, and di-
minished by diminishing the facility, of production,
the opinion would unquestionably be well founded.
But. if, on the contrary, the landlord’s income is
practically found to depend upon natural fertility
of soil, improvements in agriculture, and inven-
tions to save labour, we may still think, with Adam
Smith, that the landlord’s interest is not opposed to
that of the country. ,


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ¢. xxiv, p. 423, 2dedit. + Ibid.


/


206 OF THE RENT OF LAND. few. 111.


It is so obviously true, as to be hardly worth
stating, that if land of the greatest fertility were
in such excessive plenty compared with the popu-
lation, that every man might help himself to as
much as he wanted, there would be no rents or
~ landlords properly so called. It will also be readily
allowed, that if in this or any other country you
could suppose the soil suddenly to be made so fer-
tile, that a tenth part of the surface, and a tenth
part of the labour now employed upon it, could
more than support the present population, you
would for some time considerably lower rents.

But it is of no sort of use to dwell upon, and
draw general inferences from suppositions which
never can take place.

What we want to know is, whether, living as we
do in a limited world, and in countries and districts
still more limited, and under such physical laws
relating to the produce of the soil and the increase
of population as are found by experience to pre-
vail, the interests of the landlord are generally op-
posed to those of the society. And in this view of
the subject, the question may be settled by an ap-
peal to the most incontrovertible principles con-
firmed by the most glaring facts.

Whatever fanciful suppositions we may make
about sudden improvements in fertility, nothing of
this kind which we have ever seen or heard of in
practice, approaches to what we know of the power
of population to increase up to the cana
means of subsistence.

Improvements in agriculture, however consi-


SEC, VIll.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 207


derable they may finally prove, are always found
to be partial and gradual. And as, where they
prevail to any extent, there is always an effective
demand for labour, the increase of population occa-
sioned by the increased facility of procuring food,
soon overtakes the additional produce. Instead
of land being thrown out of employment, more
land is cultivated, owing to the cheapness of the
instruments of cultivation, and under these circum-
stances rents must rise instead of fall. These re-
sults appear to me to be so completely confirmed
by experience, that I doubt, if a single instance in
the history of Europe, or any other part of the
world, can be produced, where improvements in
agriculture have been practically found to lower
rents.

I should further say, that not only have im-
provements in agriculture never lowered rents, but
that they have been hitherto, and may be expected
to be in future, the main source of the increase of
rents, in almost all the countries with which we
are acquainted.

It is a fundamental part of the theory which has
been explained in this chapter, that, as most coun-
tries consist of a gradation of soils, rents rise as
cultivation is pushed to poorer lands ; but still the
connexion between rent and fertility subsists in
undiminished force. The rich lands are those
' which yield the rents, not the poor ones. The
poor lands are only cultivated, because the increas-
ing population is calling forth all the resources of


208 OF THE RENT OF LAND. (CH. III.


the country, and if there were no poor soils, these
resources would still be called forth ; a limited ter-.
ritory, however fertile, would soon be peopled ; and
without any increase of difficulty in the produc-
tion of food, rents would rise. ;

It is evident then, that difficulty of production

“has no kind of connexion with increase of rent, ex-.
cept as, in the actual state of most countries, it is
the natural consequence of an increase of capital
and population, and a fall of profits and wages ;
or, in other words, of an increase of wealth.

But after all, the increase of rents which results
from an increase of price occasioned solely by the
greater quantity of labour and capital necessary to
produce a given quantity of corn on fresh land, is
very much more limited than has been supposed ;
and by a reference to most of the countries with
which we are acquainted, it will be seen that, prac-
tically, improvements in agriculture and the saving
of labour on the land, both have, been, and may be
éxpected in future to be, a much more pomertinl
source of increasing rents.

It has already been shewn, that for the very
great increase of rents which have taken place in
this country during nearly the last hundred years,
we are mainly indebted to improvements in agri- .
culture, as profits have rather risen than fallen, and
little or nothing has been taken from the wages, of
families, if we include. parish allowances, and the
earnings of women and children, Consequently
these rents must haye been a creation from. the


‘.


209,


SEC. VIII.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. .
: oo


skill and capital employed upon the land, and not
a transfer from profits and wages, as they existed
nearly a hundred years! ago.

The peculiar increase of rents, which has, taken:
place in the Highlands of Scotland, during the last
half century, is well known to have been occasioned
ina great degree by the saving of labour on the land.

In Ireland, neither the wages of labour, nor the
profits of stock on the land seem as if they could
admit of any considerable reduction; but there
can be no doubt thata great augmentation of rents.
might be effected by an improved. system of agri-
culture, and a prosperous commerce, which, at the,
same time that it ‘would sweep into flourishing
cities the idlers which are now only half employed
upon the land, would occasion an increasing de-
mand. for the products of agriculture, while, the)
rates of profits and wages might remain as high,
as before. 7

Similar observations may be made with regard
to. Poland, and indeed almost all the countries of
Europe. There is not one, in which the real wages
of labour are high, and scarcely one in which the
profits of agricultural stock are known to be con-
siderable. If no improvements whatever in agri-:
culture were to take place in these countries, and
the future increase of their rents were to depend
upon an increase of price occasioned solely by the
increased quantity of labour necessary to produce. -
food, I am inclined to think that the progress of
their rents would be very soon stopped. The pre-
sent rates of profits and wages are not such as

P


210 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH. LIT.


would admit of much diminution; and without
increased skill in cultivation, and especially the
saving of labour on the land, it is probable that no
soils much poorer than -those which are at present
in use, would pay the expense of cultivation.

Even the rich countries of India and South Ame-
rica are not very differently circumstanced. From
all the accounts we have received of these coun-
tries, I cannot believe that agricultural profits are
high, and it is certain that the real wages of labour
are in.general low. And though profits and wages
are not together so low as to prevent an increase
of rents from an increase of cultivation without
improvements in agriculture ; yet I conceive that
their possible increase in this way would be quite
trifling, compared with what it might be under an
improved system of cultivation, and a prosperous
commerce, even without any transfer from the la-
bourer or cultivator.

The United States of America seem to be almost
the only country with which we are acquainted,
where the present wages of labour and the pro-
fits of agricultural stock are sufficiently high to
admit of a considerable transfer to rents without
improvements in agriculture. And probably it is
only when the skill and capital of an old and in-
dustrious country are employed upon a new; rich,
and extensive territory, under a free government,
and in a favourable situation for the export of raw
produce, that this state of things can take place.

In old states, experience tells us that wages may
be extremely low, and the profits of the cultivator


‘SEC. VIII.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. . Si


not high, while; vast tracts of good land remain
uncultivated. . It is obvious indeed, that an operose
and ignorant, system of cultivation, combined with
such a faulty distribution of property as to check
the progress of demand, might keep the profits of
cultivation low, even in countries of the richest
soil, And there is little doubt, from the. very
large proportion of people employed in agriculture
in most. unimproved territories, that this is a case
which not unfrequently occurs. But in all in-
stances of this kind, it must be allowed, that the
great source of the future increase of rents will be
improvements in agriculture and the demand occa-
sioned by a prosperous external.and internal com-
merce, and not the increase of price occasioned by
the additional quantity of labour required to pro-
‘duce a given quantity of corn. —

If, however, in a country which continues to
grow nearly its own consumption of corn, or the
same proportion of that consumption, it appears.
that every sort of improvement which has ever been
known, to take place in agriculture, manufactures
or commerce, by which a country has been im-
riched, tends to increase rents, and every thing by
which it is impoverished, tends to lower them, it
must be allowed that the interests of the landlord,
and those of the state are, under the circumstances
supposed, absolutely inseparable.

Mr. Ricardo, as I have before intimated, takes
only one simple and confined view of the progress
of rent... He considers. it as, occasioned solely by
the increase of price, arising from the increased

P2


Ls


#12.» OF THE RENT OF LAND. (CH. tT.


difficulty of production.* But if rents in many
countries may be doubled or trebled by improve-
ments in agriculture, while in few countries they
could be raised a fourth or a fifth, and in some not
a tenth, by the increase of price arising from the
increased difficulty of production, must it not be
acknowledged, that such a view of rent embraces
only a very small part of the subject, and conse-
quently that any’ general inferences from it must
be utterly inapplicable to practice : ?

It should be further observed, in reference to im-
provements in agriculture, that the mode in which
Mr. Ricardo estimates the increase or decrease of

-rents is quite peculiar; and this peculiarity in the
use of his terms tends to separate his conclusions
‘still farther from truth as enunciated in the accus-
tomed language of political economy.

In speaking of the division ‘of the whole pro-
duce’ of the land and labour of the country be-

~ tween the three classes of landlords, labourers, and
capitalists, he has the following passage.

“ It is not by the absolute quantity of produce
obtained by either class, that we can correctly judge
of the rate of profit, rent, and wages, but by the
quantity of labour required to obtain that produce.


* Mr. Ricardo always seems to assume, that increased difficul- -
ties thrown in the way of production, will be overcome, by in- °
creased price, and that the same quantity will be produced. . But
this is an unwarranted assumption. Where is the increased price
to come from? An increase of difficulty in the actual state of a
country’s resources will always tend to diminish produce.


SEC. VIII.] | OF THE RENT OF LAND. ? 213


By improvements in machinery and agriculture the
whole produce may be doubled ; but if wages, rent
and profits be also doubled, they will bear the
same proportions to one another as before. But if
wages partook not of the whole of this increase ;
if they, instead of being ‘doubled, were only. in-
creased one half; if rent, instead of being doubled,


‘were only increased three-fourths, and the remain-


ing increase went to profit, it would, I apprehend,
be correct for me to say, that rent and wages had
fallen while profits had risen. For if we had an
invariable standard by which to measure the value
of this produce, we should find that a less value had
fallen to the class of labourers and landlords, and a
greater to the class of capitalists than had been
given before.”*

A little farther on, having stated some. specific
proportions, he observes, “In that case I should
say, that wages and rent had fallen and profits risen,
though, in consequence of the abundance of com-
modities, the guantity paid to the labourer and,
landlord would have increased in the proportion,
of 25 to 44." .

In reference to this statement, I should observe,
that if the application of Mr. Ricardo’s invariable
standard of value naturally leads to the use of such
language, the sooner the standard is got rid of, the
better, as in an inquiry into the nature and causes
of the wealth of nations, it must necessarily occa-
sion perpetual confusion and error. For what does


* Princ, of Polit. Econ, chap. i. p. 43. 2d edit. + Id. p, 44.
R3 ’


214 ‘OF THE RENT OF LAND. (eu. r1t.


it require us to say ?. We must say that the rents of
the landlord have fallen and his interests have suf-
fered, when he obtains as rent above three-fourths
more of raw produce than before, and with that
produce will shortly be able, according to Mr. Ri-
cardo’s own doctrines, to command three-fourths’
more labour. In applying this language to our
own country, we must say that rents have fallen
considerably during the last forty years, because,
_ though rents have greatly. increased in exchange-
able value,—in the command of money, corn, la-
bour and manufactures, it appears, by the returns
to the Board of Agriculture, that they are now only
a fifth of the gross produce,* whereas they were
formerly a fourth or a third.

In reference to labour, we must say that it is
low in America, although we have been hitherto
in the habit of considering it as very high, both in
money value and in the command of the necessa-
ries and conveniences of life. And we must call
it high in Sweden ; because, although the labourer
only earns low money wages, and with these low
‘wages can obtain but few of the necessaries’ and
conveniences of life; yet, in the division of the
whole produce of a laborious cultivation on a
poor soil, a larger proportion may go to labour.


* Reports from the Lords on the Corn Laws, p. 66.

+ It is specifically this unusual application of common terms
which has rendered Mr, Ricardo’s work so difficult to be under-
stood by many people. It requires indeed a constant and Jabo-
rious effort of the mind to recollect at all times what is meant by
high and Jow rents, and high or low wages. In other ‘respects, it


-)


SEC. VIII.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 215


Into this unusual language Mr. Ricardo has been
betrayed by the fundamental error of confounding
cost and. value, and the further error of considering
raw produce in the same light as manufactures. It
might be true, that if, by improvements in machi-
nery, the produce of muslins were doubled, the in-
creased quantity would not command in exchange
a greater quantity of labour and of necessaries than
before; and would haye little or no effect there-
fore on population. But Mr. Ricardo has him-
self said, that “if improvements extended to all
the objects of the labourer’s consumption, we
should find him probably, at the end of a very few
years, in possession of only a small, if any addition
to his enjoyments.”* Consequently, according to —
Mr. Ricardo, population will increase in proportion
to the increase of the main articles consumed by
- the labourer.

But if population increases according to the
necessaries which the labourer can command, the
increased quantity of raw produce which falls to
the share of the landlord must increase the ex-
changeable value of his rents estimated in labour,
corn and commodities. And it is certainly by real
value in exchange, and not by an imaginary
standard, which is to measure proportions or cost
in labour, that the rents and interests of landlords


has always appeared to me thatthe style in which the work is
written, is petfectly clear. It is never obscure, but when either the
view itself is erroneous, or terms are used in an unusual sense.
* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. i. p. 9.
P 4


/


216 | OFTHE RENTOF LAND. (cH. 111.


will be estimated. It would often happen, that
‘after improvements shad been taking place, rents
would rise according to the accustomed and natu-
ral meaning attached to the term, while they might
fall according to the new mode of estimating them
adopted by Mr. Ricardo:

I need hardly say, that, in speaking of the'i in-
‘terests of the landlord, I mean always to refer to
what I should call his real rents and his real in-
terests; that is, his power of commanding labour,
and the necessaries and conveniences of life, what-
ever proportion these rents may form of the whole
produce, or whatever quantity of labour they may
have cost in producing.* But im fact, improvements
in agriculture tend, in a moderate time, even ac-
cording to the concessions of Mr. Ricardo, to in-
crease the: proportion of the whole produce which
falls to the landlord’s share; so that in any way
we can view the subject, we must allow that, in-


* This interpretation of the term rent is, I conceive, strictly con-
sistent with.my first definition of it. I call it that portion (not pro-
portion) of the value of the produce which goes to the landlord ; ;
and if the value of the whole produce of any given quantity of
land increases, the portion of value which goes to the landlord
may increase considerably, although the proportion which it bears
to the whole may diminish, Mr. Ricardo has: himself expressly
stated, p. 503. that whatever sum the produce of land sells for
above the costs of cultivating it, is money rent, But if it conti-
nually happens that money rent rises, and is at the same time of
greater real value in exchange, although it bears a less proportion
to the value of the whole produce from the land in question, it
is quite obvious that neither money rent nor real rent is regulated
by this proportion.


Me
SEC..Ix.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. _ 217
dependently of the question of importations, the
interest of the landlord is strictly and necessarily
connected with that of the state.


bible SECTION IX.


‘On the Connexion of the Interests of the Landlord and of
the State, in Countries which import Corn.
The only conceivable doubt which can arise re-
specting the strictest union between the interest
of the landlord and that of the state, is in the ques-
tion of importation. And here it is evident, that
at all events the landlord cannot be placed ina
worse situation than others, and by some of the
warmest friends of the freedom of trade, he has
justly been considered as placed in a much better.
No person has ever doubted that the individual
interests of the manufacturers of woollen, silk, or
linen goods, might be injured by foreign aay
tion ; and few would deny that the importation of
a large body of labourers would tend to lower
wages. Under the most unfavourable view, there-
fore, that we can take of the subject, the case of
the landlord with regard to importation is not se-
parated from that of the other classes of society.
But it has been stated by no less an authority
than that of Adam Smith, that the freest importa-
tion of corn and raw produce cannot injure the
farmers and landlords ;* and it is almost universally
allowed, that from the bulky nature of raw pro-


* Wealth of Nations, Book IV, ch. ii. p. 189. 6th edit.


*


*
218 _ OF THE RENT OF LAND. [eH. 111.


duce, it must necessarily be more protected from
foreign competition than almost any other com-
modity.

The statement of Adam Smith is unquestionably
too strong. The other is strictly true. Yet still it
must be acknowledged) that the individual interests
of landlords may suffer from importation, though

‘not nearly so much as the interests of some of the
other classes of society. My reasons for thinking
that, in some cases which are likely to occur, the di-
minution of rents which would be sustained in this
way, would not be counterbalanced by proportionate
advantages to the state, I have given at some length
in the fifth edition of my Essay on the Principle of
Population,* and to them I refer the reader.

. But I willadda remark, which, if just, is certainly
very important ; namely, that the employment of
capital upon the land in the way in which it is not
unfrequently employed, appears. to me the only
considerable case where practically, and as the
business is really conducted, the interest of the
individual and of the state are not proportioned to
each other.

If land were always considered as a merchant-
able instrument, bought and sold merely with a
view to the profit which might be made of it, and
worked exclusively by the proprietors, every in-
crease of value and power which the instrument
might acquire from being used and improved, would
naturally enter into the computation in deciding


* Vol. li. Book IIL. chap. xii.


SEC. 1x.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 219


whether a capital might be more profitably em:
ployed on land, or in commerce and manufactures ;
and the advantage to the state, from the employ-
ment of such capital, would in general be propor-
tioned in both cases to the advantage gained by
individuals.’ But, practically, this state of things
rarely exists. A very large portion of the lands of
most European countries is kept out of the market
by the right of primogeniture, the practice of en-
tails, and the desire of maintaining a landed in-
fluence ; and that part which is purchased by the
mercantile classes, and others who have acquired
moveable property, is generally purchased rather
with a view to secure a revenue from the wealth
already gained, and a share in the influence of the
old landholders, than to the means of making’ or
increasing their fortunes. ‘The natural consequence
of these habits and feelings’ in the. great body of
landholders is, that the cultivation of the country
must be chiefly carried on by tenants. And indeed
it is allowed, that not only the common routine of
farming is principally conducted by persons who
are not proprietors, but that even a very large part
of the great permanent improvements in agricul-
ture, and in the instruments and modes of cultiva-
tion which have so peculiarly distinguished the last
thirty years, has been effected by the capitals of
the same class of people.

But if it be true, ‘as I fully believe it is, that a
very large part of the improvements which have
taken place on the soil, has been derived from the
capital, skill and industry of tenants, no truth can


220 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [on. 11.


be more distinct and incontrovertible than that the
advantage which such individuals have derived.
from a:capital employed in agriculture, compared,
with a;capital employed: in. commerce and manu-
factures, cannot have been proportioned to the
advantages derived by the country ; or, in other,
words, that the interests of individuals in the em-
ployment of capital, have not in this case’ been
identified with the interest of the state.

_ This position will be made perfectly clear, if we
examine attentively what would be the relative
effect to.the individual and the state of the em-
ployment of a capital of 10,000J. in agriculture,
or in manufactures under the circumstances de-
scribed.

Let us suppose that a capital of 10, 000. might
be employed im commerce or) manufactures bak
twenty years, at a profit of about twelve per cent.,
and that the capitalist might-retire, at the end. of
that term, with his fortune doubled. It is obvious
that, to give the same encouragement to the em-
ployment of such a capital in agriculture, the same
ornearly the same advantages must. be offered to
the individual. But in order to enable a person
who employs his capital on rented land to convert
his 10,0007. in the course of twenty years. into
20,0007. it is certain that he must make annually
higher profits, in order to enable him to recover
that part of his capital which he has actually sunk
upon the land, and cannot withdraw at the end of
the term; and then, if he has been an essential im-
prover, he must necessarily leave the land to his


SEC. IX.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 221


landlord, at the end of the lease, worth a consider-
ably higher rent, independently of any change in
the value of the circulating medium, than at the
commencement of it. But these higher annual
returns, which are necessary to the farmer with
a temporary tenure to give him the common pro-
fits of stock, are continued, in part at least, in the
_ shape of rent at the end of the lease, and must be
so much gained by the state.

In the case of the capital employed in commerce
and manufactures, the profit to the state is propor-
tioned’ to the profit derived by the individual; in
the case of the capital employed in agricultire it
is much greater ; and this would be true, whether
the produce were estimated in money, or in corn
and labour. In either way, under circumstances
which ‘in all probability have actually occurred,
_ the profits to the state derived from) the capital
employed in agriculture might be estimated per-
haps at fourteen or fifteen per cent., while the pro-
fits to the individuals, in both cases, may have been
only twelve per cent.

Sir John Sinclair, in his Husbandry of Scotland;
has given the particulars of a farm in East Lothian,
in which the rent is nearly half the produce; and the
rent and profits together yield a return of fifty-six
per cent. on the capital employed. But the rent
and profits together ate the ‘real measure of the
wealth derived by the country from the capital so
employed ; and as the farm described is one where
the convertible husbandry is practised, a system in
which the greatest improvements have been made


222 QF THE RENT OF'LAND. |. [CH. III.


of late years, there is little doubt that a consi-
derable part of this increase of wealth had. been
derived from the capital of the tenant who held
the farm previous to the renewal, of the lease, al-
though such increase of wealth to. the state could
not have operated as a motive of interest to the in-
dividual so, employing his stock.

If then during the war no obstacles had occurred
to the importation of foreign corn, and the profits
of agriculture had in consequence. been only ten
per cent. while the profits of commerce and manu-
factures were twelve, the capital of the- country
would of course haye flowed towards commerce ~
and manufactures; and measuring the interest. of
the state, as usual, by the interest of individuals,
this would have been a more advantageous direc-
tion of it, in the proportion of twelve to ten. . But,
if the view of the subject just taken be correct, in- —
stead of a beneficial direction of it,to a profit of
twelve per cent. froma profit of ten per cent. as
measured by the interests of the individuals. con-
cerned, it might have been a disadvantageous di-
rection of it to a profit of only twelve, per cent.
from a profit of fourteen per cent. as measured by
the interest of the state.

It is obvious therefore that the natural* restric-
tions upon the importation of foreign corn during
the war, by forcibly raising the profits of domestic

* It is of great importance always to recollect that the high
price of corn from,1798 to 1814 was occasioned by the war and
the seasons,—not by corn-laws; and that a country with open ports


may be subjected to, very great alternations of price in war and
in peace.


SEC. 1X.] OF THE RENT_OF LAND. 223


cultivation, may haye directed. the capital of the
country into a channel more advantageous than
that into which it would otherwise have flowed,
and instead of impeding the progress of wealth and
population, as at first one should certainly have
expected, may have decidedly and essentially pro-


- moted it.


And this, in fact, such restrictions not only may,
but must do, whenever the demand for corn grown
at home is such, that the profits of capitals em-
ployed on the new lands taken into. cultivation,
joined to the rents which they generate, form to-
gether greater returns in proportion to the stock
employed, than the returns of the capitals engaged
in commerce and manufactures; because, .in this
case, though foreign corn might be purchased,
without these restrictions, ata cheaper money price
than that at which it could be raised at home, it
would not be purchased at so small, an expense of
capital and labour,* which is the true proof of the
advantageous employment of stock.

But if the progress of wealth has been rather ac-
celerated than retarded, by such restrictions upon

* If restrictions upon importation necessarily increased the
quantity of labour and capital required to obtain corn, they could
not of course be defended for a moment, with a view to wealth
and productive power. But if by directing capital to the land
they occasion permanent improvements, the whole question is
changed. Permanent improvements in agriculture are like the
acquisition of additional land, | Even however, if they had no ef-
fect of this kind, they, might be desirable on other grounds yet


“more important, Late events must make us contemplate with no


small alarm a great increase in the proportion of our manufac-
turing population, both with reference to the happiness and to the


' liberty of our country.


rs


a


224 OF THE RENT OF LAND. _—[cH. III.


the importation of foreign corn, on account of the
greater quantity of raw produce that has been pur-
‘chased by a given quantity of capital and labour
at home, than could have been purchased by the
same quantity of capital and labour from abroad,
it is quite obvious that the population must have
been accelerated rather than retarded; and cer-
tainly the unusually rapid increase of population
which is known to have taken place during the
last tenor fifteen years of the war so much beyond
the average of the century, tends see ca to con-
firm this conclusion.

. The position here laid down may appear to be
rather startling ; but the reader will see how it is
limited. It depends for its general effects: upon
permanent improvements being made by a capital
which has only a temporary interest in’ the fruits of
such improvements; and, in reference to restrictions
upon importation, it depends upon the circutastance
that these restrictions. by the, increased demand
for the products of domestic: agriculture which
they create, should have the effect of occasion-
ing improvements which would otherwise not have
taken place. But neither of these usual concomi-
tants are absolutely necessary.

Considerable quantities of capital might be em-
ployed upon the land, and a temporary increase of
demand for domestic produce might take place,,
without permanent improvements in agriculture.
All that is meant to be said is, that when, under
such circumstances, permanent improvements in
agriculture are really made, and rent is created, it
is impossible to resist the conclusion, that to such


.
SEC..IX.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 225
v) i
extent the interest of the state in the exchangeable
value created by such capital,* is decidedly greater
‘than the interest of the individual. .

This consideration, combined with those before
adyerted to, may make it at least a matter of doubt,
whether even in the case of restrictions upon the
importation of foreign corn, the interest of the
state may not sometimes be the same as that of
the landlords. But no such doubt exists respect-
‘ing a restriction upon the importation of other
commodities. And when we add, that in a state of
perfectly free intercourse, it is eminently the in-
‘terest.of those who live upon the rents, of land,
that capital and population should increase, while
to those who live upon the profits of stock and the
wages of labour, an increase of capital and popula-
tion is,tosay the least of it,a much more doubtful
benefit ; it. may be most safely asserted, that the
interest of no other class in the state is so nearly
and. necessarily connected with its wealth and
aioe as the interest of the landlord,


‘, *1 refer to exchangeable value and rate of profits, not to
abundance of conveniences and luxuries. In almost all im-
provements in machinery, the state is ultimately more benefited
than the producers, but not in reference to rate of profits and real
value in exchange.


226 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [eH. 111.


SECTION X. |
General Remarks on the Surplus Produce of the Land.


It seems rather extraordinary that the very great
benefit which society derives from that surplus
produce of the land which, in the progress of so-
ciety, falls mainly to the landlord in the shape of
rent, should not yet be fully understood and ac-
knowledged. I have called this surplus a bounti-
ful gift of Providence, and am most decidedly of
opinion, that it fully deserves the appellation. But
Mr. Ricardo has the following passage :-—
~. © Nothing is more common than to hear of the
advantages which the land possesses over every
other source of useful produce, on account of the
surplus which it yields in the form of rent. Yet
when land is most abundant, when. most productive
and most fertile, it yields no rent; and it is only,
when its powers decay, and less is yielded in return
for labour, that a share of the original produce of
the more fertile portions is set apart for rent. It
is singular that this quality in the land, ,which
should have been noticed as an imperfection, com-
pared with the natural agents by which manufac-
tures are assisted, should have been pointed out
as constituting its peculiar pre-eminence. If air,
water, the elasticity of steam, and the pressure of
the atmosphere were of various qualities, if they
could be appropriated, and each quality existed


SEC. X.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. - 2O7


only in moderate abundance, they, as well as the


land, would afford a rent, as the successive qualities
were brought into use. With every worse quality
employed, the value of the commodities in the ma-
nufacture of which they were used would rise,
because equal quantities of labour would be less
productive. Man would do more by the sweat of
his brow, and nature perform less, and the land
would be no longer pre-eminent for its limited
powers.” ,

» If the surplus produce which the land affords
in the form of rent be an advantage, it is desirable
that every year the machinery newly constructed
should be less efficient than the old, as that would
undoubtedly give a greater exchangeable value to
the goods manufactured, not only by that ma-
chinery, but by all the other machinery in the
kingdom; and a rent would be paid to all those
who possessed the most productive machinery.”*

Now, in referring to a gift of Providence, we
should surely speak of its value in relation to the
laws and constitution of our nature, and of the
world in which we live. But, if any person will
take the trouble to make the calculation, he will
see that if the necessaries of life could be obtained
without limit, and the number of people could be
doubled every twenty-five years, the population
which might have been produced from a single pair
since the Christian era, would have been sufficient,
not only to fill the earth quite full of people, so that


* Princ. of Polit: Econ. ch. ii. p. 59.
Q 2


228 OF THE RENT OF LAND. TCH. I1t.


four should stand in every square yard, but to fill all
the planets of our solar system in the same way, and
not only them, but all the planets revolving round
the stars which are visible to the naked eye, sup-
posing each of them to bea sun, and to haveas many
planets belonging to it as our sun has. Under this
law of population, which, excessive as it may appear
when stated in this way, is, I firmly believe, best
suited to the nature and situation of man, it is quite
obvious that some limit to the production of food,
or some other of the necessaries of life, must exist.
Without a total change in the constitution of hu-
man nature, and the situation of man on earth, the
whole of the necessaries of life could not be fur-
nished in the same plenty as air, water, the elas-
ticity of steam, and the pressure of the atmosphere.
It is not easy to conceive a more disastrous pre-
sent—one more likely to plunge the human race
in irrecoverable misery, than an unlimited facility
of producing food ina limited space. A benevo-
lent Creator then, knowing the wants and neces-
sities of his creatures, under the laws to which he
had subjected them, could not, in mercy, have fur-
nished the whole of the necessaries of life in the
same plenty as air and water. This shews at once
the reason why the former are limited in quantity,
and the latter poured out in profusion. But if it
be granted, as it must be, that a limitation in the
power of producing food is obviously necessary to
man confined to a limited space, then the value of
the actual quantity of land which he has received,
depends upon the small quantity of labour neces-


SEC. X.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 299


sary to work it, compared with the number of per-
sons which it will support; or, in other words,
_ upon that specific surplus so much under-rated by
Mr. Ricardo, which by the laws of nature termi-
nates in rent.

If manufactured commodities, by the gradations
of machinery supposed by Mr. Ricardo, were to
yield a rent, man, as he observes, would do more
by the sweat of his brow ;* and supposing him still
to obtain the same quantity of commodities, (which,
however, he would not,) the increase of his labour
would be in proportion to the greatness of the rent
so created. But the surplus, whicha given quantity
of land yields in the shape of rent, is totally dif-
ferent. Instead of being a measure of the increase
of labour, which is necessary altogether to produce
the quantity of corn which the land can yield, it
is finally an exact measure of the relief from labour
in the production of food granted to him by a kind
Providence. If this final surplus be small, the la-
bour of a large portion of the society must be
constantly employed in procuring, by the sweat of
their brows, the mere necessaries of life, and so-


* That is, supposing the gradations were towards worse ma-
chinery, some of which it was necessary to use, but not otherwise.
The reason why manufactures and necessaries will not admit of
comparison with regard to rents is, that necessaries, in a limited
territory, are always tending to the same exchangeable value,
whether they have cost little or much labour ; but manufactures,
if not subjected to an artificial monopoly, must fall with the facility
of producing them. We cannot therefore suppose the price to be
given ; but if sve could, facility of production would, in both cases,
be equally a measure of relief from labour.

Q3


230 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111.


ciety must be most scantily provided with conve-
nient luxuries | and leisure; while if this’ surplus


be large, manufactures, foreign luxuries, arts, let- _


ters and leisure may abound,

It is a little singular, that Mr. Ricardo, whio has,
in general, kept his attention so steadily fixed on
permanent and final results, as even to define the
natural price of labour to be that price which
would maintain a stationary population, although
such a price cannot generally occur under mode-
rately good governments, and in an ordinary state
of things, for hundreds of years, has always, iti
treating of rent, adopted an opposite course, and
referred almost entirely to temporary effects.

It is obviously with this sort of reference, that
he has objected to Adam Smith for saying that, in
rice countries a greater share of the produce would
belong to the landlord than in corn countries, and
that rents in this country would rise, if potatoes
were to become the favourite vegetable food of the
‘common people, instead of ‘corn.* Mr.. Ricardo
could not but allow, indeed he has allowed,f that
fents would be finally higher in both cases. But
he immediately supposes that this change is put in
execution at once, and refers to the temporary re-
sult of land being thrown out of cultivation. Even
on this supposition however, all the lands which
had been thrown up, would be cultivated again in
avery much less time, than it would take to reduce
the price of labour, in a natural state of things, to
* Wealth of Nations, vol. i. Book I. c. xi. pp. 248250. 6th edit.

+ Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. xxiv. p. 423.


|


SEC. .X.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 231


the maintenance only of a stationary population.
And therefore, with a view to permanent and final
results, which are the results which Mr. Ricardo
has mainly considered throughout his work; he
ought'to have allowed the truth of Adam Smith’s
statements. ©

» But, in point of fact, there is every probability that
not even a temporary fall of rent would take place.
No nation ever has changed or ever will change
the nature of its food allat once. The process, both
in reference to the new system of cultivation to be
adopted, and the new tastes to be generated, must
necessarily be very slow. In the greater portion
of Europe, it is probable, that a change from corn
to rice could never take place; and where it could,
it would require such great preparations for irri-
gation, as to. give ample time for an increase of
population fully equal to the increased quantity
of food produced. In those countries where rice
is actually grown, the rents are known to be very
high. Dr. Buchanan, in his valuable travels through
the Mysore, says, that in the watered lands below
the Ghats, the government was in the habit of
taking two-thirds of the crop.* _ This is an amount
of rent which probably no lands cultivated in corn
can ever yield); and in those parts of India and
other countries, where an actual change has taken
place from the cultivation of corn to the cultiva-
tion of rice, I have little doubt that rents have
not only finally risen very considerably, but have
risen even during the progress of the change.

* Vols ii. p. 212."
ae Q4


232 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cH.. 11:


_ With regard to potatoes, we have very near to
us an opportunity of studying the effects of their
becoming the vegetable food of the great mass of
a people. The population of Ireland has increased
faster, during the last hundred years, than that of
’ any other country in Europe ; and under its actual
government, this fact cannot be rationally ac-
counted for, but from the introduction and gradual
extension of the use of the potatoe. Iam per-
suaded, that had it not been for the potatoe, the
population of Ireland would not have more than
doubled, instead of quadrupled, during the last cen-
tury. This increase of population has prevented
lands from being thrown out of cultivation, or
given greater value to natural pasture, at the same
time that it has occasioned a great fall in the com-
parative money wages of labour. This fall, expe-
rience tells us, has not been accompanied by a pro-
portionate rise of profits, and the consequence is a
considerable rise of rents. The wheat, oats and
cattle of Ireland are sold to England and bear Eng-
lish money prices, while they are cultivated and
tended by labour paid at half the money price; a
state of things which must greatly increase either
the revenue derived from profits, or the revenue
derived from rents; and practical information as-
sures us, that it is the Jatter which has derived the
greatest benefit from it.

I think, therefore, that though it must lead to
great errors, not to distinguish very decidedly the
temporary rates of wages from their final rates, it
ivould lead to no such error to consider the tempo-


SEC. X.]} OF THE RENT OF LAND.) 933


rary effects of the changes of food which have been
referred to, as of the same kind with their final ef-
fects, that is, as tending always to raise rents. And
I am convinced, that if we make our comparisons
with any tolerable fairness, that is, if we compare
countries under similar circumstances, with respect
to'extent, and the quantity of capital employed
upon the soil, which is obviously the only fair
mode of comparing them, we shall find that rent
will be in proportion to the natural and acquired
fertility of the land.

If the natural fertility of this island had been
double what it is, and the people had been equally
industrious and enterprising, the country would, ac-
cording to all just theory, have been at this time
doubly rich and populous, and the rents of land -
much more than double what they are now. On
the other hand, if the soil of the island had pos-
sessed only half its present fertility, a small portion
of it only, as I stated on a former occasion, would
have admitted of corn cultivation, the wealth and
population of the country would have been quite in-
considerable, and rents not nearly one half of what
they are now. But if, under similar circumstances,
rent) and fertility go together, it is no just argu-
ment against their’ natural connexion to say that
rent is higher in England, where a great mass of
capital has been employed upon the land, than in
the more fertile country of South America, where,
on the same extent of territory, not a twentieth part
has been employed, and the population is ex-
tremely scanty. ‘


234 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH IIT.


The fertility of the land, either natural or ac-
quired, may be said to be the only source of per-
manently high returns for capital. If a country
were exclusively manufacturing and commercial,
and were to purchase’ all its corn at the market
prices of Europe, it is absolutely impossible that the
returns for its capital should for any great length
of time be high. In the earlier periods of history,
indeed, when large masses of capital were extremely
rare, and were confined to a very few towns, the
sort of monopoly which they gave to particular
kinds of commerce and manufactures tended to
keep up profits for a much longet time; and great
and brilliant effects were undoubtedly produced by
some states which were almost exclusively commer-
cial. Butin modern Europe, the general abundance
of capital, the easy mtercourse between different
nations, and the laws of domestic and foreign com-
petition prevent the possibility of large permanent
returns being received for any other’ capitals than
those employed on the land... No great commer-
cial. and manufacturing state in) modern times,.
whatever may have been its skill, has yet been
known permanently to make higher profits. than
the average of the rest of Europe. But the capi-
tals successfully employed on moderately good
land, may permanently and without fear of inter-
ruption or check, sometimes yield twenty per cent.,
sometimes thirty or forty, and, sometimes, even
fifty or sixty per cent.

A striking illustration of the effects of capitals em-
ployed on land compared with others, appeared in


SEC. X.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 235


the returns of the'property-tax in this country. ‘The
taxable income derived from the capitals employed
on land, was such as to yield to the property-tax
nearly 64 millions, while the income derived from
the capitals employed in commerce and manufac-
tures was only such as to yield two millions.* It
is probably true, that a larger proportion of the in-
comes derived from the capitals employed in trade
and manufactures, escaped the tax, partly from
their subdivision, and partly from other causes; but
the deficiency so occasioned could in no respect
make up for the extraordinary productiveness of
the capitals employed in agriculture.t And indeed
it is quite obvious that, in comparing two coun-
tries together with the same capitals and the same
rate of profits; one of which has land om which to
gtow its corn, and the other is obliged to purchase
it, that which has the land, particularly if it be fer-
tile; must be much richer, more populous, and have
a larger disposable income for taxation.

Another most desirable benefit belonging to a fer-
tile soil is, that states so endowed are not obliged to
pay much attention to that most distressing and dis-
heartening of all cries to every man of humanity—


- the cry of the master manufacturers and merchants


for low wages; to enable them to find a market for


* The Schedule D. included every species of professions. The
whole amounted to three millions, of which the professions were
considered to be above a million.

+ It must always be recollected, that the national profits on land
must be considered as including rents as well as the common agri-
cultural profits.


236 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [CH. 111.


their exports. If a country can only be rich by run-
ning a successful race for low wages, I should be dis-
posed to say at once, perish such riches! But, though
a nation which purchases the main part of its food
from foreigners, is condemned to this hard alterna-
tive, itis not so with the possessors of fertile land.
The peculiar products of a country, though never
probably sufficient to enable it to import a large
proportion of its food* as well as of its conveniences
and luxuries, will generally be sufficient to give
full spirit and energy to all its commercial dealings,
both at home and abroad; while a small sacrifice
of produce, that is, the not pushing cultivation too
far, would, with prudential habits among the poor,
enable it to maintain the whole of a large po-
pulation in wealth and plenty. Prudential habits,
among the labouring classes of a country mainly
depending upon manufactures and commerce,
might ruin it, Ina country of fertile land, such


~'* Cottons are no more a peculiar product of this country than
silks: and woe will, I fear, befal us, greater than ever we have
yet experienced, if the prosperity of our cotton trade should be-
come necessary to purchase the food of any considerable body of
our people !

+ Under similar circumstances, with respect to capital, skill,
&c., it is obvious that land of the same degree of barrenness could
not be cultivated, if by the prevalence of prudential habits the la-
bourers were well paid; but to forego the small. increase of .pro-
duce and population arising from the cultivation of such land,
would, in a large and fertile territory, be a slight and impercepti-
ble sacrifice, while the happiness which would result from it to the
great mass of the population, would be beyond all price.


SEC. x.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 237


habits would be the greatest of all conceivable
blessings.

Among the inestimable advantages which be-
long to that quality in the land, which enables it
to yield a considerable rent, it is not one of the
least, that in the progress of society it affords the
main security to man that nearly his whole time,
or the time of nearly the whole-society, shall not
be employed in procuring mere necessaries. . Ac-
cording to Mr. Ricardo, not only will each indi-
vidual capital in the progress of society yield a
continually diminishing revenue, but the whole
‘amount of the revenue derived from profits will be
diminished; and there is no doubt that the labou-
rer will be obliged to employ a greater quantity of
labour to procure that portion of his wages:which
must be spent in necessaries. Both these great
classes of society, therefore, may be expected to
have less power of giving leisure to themselves, or
of commanding the labour of those who adminis-
ter to the enjoyments of society, as contradistin-
guished from those who administer to its necessary
wants. But, fortunately for mankind, the neat
rents of the land, under a system of private pro-
perty, can never be diminished by the progress of
cultivation. Whatever proportion they may bear
to the whole produce, the actual amount must
always go on increasing, and will always afford a
fund for the enjoyments and leisure of the society,
sufficient to leaven and animate the whole mass.

If the only condition on. which we could obtain
lands yielding rent were, that they should remain


238 OF THE RENT OF LAND. [cu. 111.


‘with the immediate descendants of the first posses-
sors, though the benefits to be derived from the
present would no doubt be very greatly dimi-
nished, yet from its general and unavoidable ef-
fects on society, it would be most unwise to refuse
it as of little orno value. But, happily, the benefit
is attached to the soil, not to any particular pro-
prietors. Rents are the reward of present valour
and wisdom, as well as of past strength and cun-
ning. Every day lands are purchased with the
fruits of industry and talents.* They afford the
great prize, the “otiwm cum dignitate” to every
species of laudable exertion ; and, in the progress of
society, there is every reason to believe, that, as
they become more valuable from the increase of ca-
pital and population, and the improvements in-
_ agriculture, the benefits which they yield may be
divided among a much greater number of persons.


‘


* Mr. Ricardo himself is an instance of what I am stating. He
is now become, by his talents and industry, a considerable land-
holder; and a more honourable and excellent man, a man who for
the qualities of his head and heart more entirely deserves what he
has earned, or employs it better, I could not point out in the
whole circle of landholders.

It is somewhat singular that Mr. Ricardo, a considerable recei-
ver of rents, should have so much underrated their national impor-
tance; while I, who never received, nor expect to receive any,
shall probably. be accused of overrating their importance. Our
different situations and opinions may serye at least to shew our
mutual sincerity, and afford a. strong presumption, that to what-
ever bias our minds may have been subjected in the doctrines we
have laid down, it has not been that, against which perhaps it is
most difficult to guard, the insensible bias of situation and interest.

’


SEC. X.] OF THE RENT OF LAND. 239


In every point of view, then, in which the sub-
_ject can be considered, that quality of land which,
by the laws of our, being, must terminate in rent,
appears to be a boon most important to the happi-
ness of mankind; and I am persuaded, that its
value can only be underrated by those who still la-
bour under some mistake, as to its nature, and its
effects on society.


CHAPTER IV.


OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.


SECTION I.


Of the Dependance of the Wages of Labour upon Supply
and Demand. ;


Tue wages of labour are the remuneration to the
labourer for his personal exertions.

They may be divided, like the prices of commo-~
dities, into real and nominal.

The real wages of labour consist of their value,
estimated in the necessaries, conveniences, and
luxuries of life.

The nominal wages of labour consist in their
value, estimated in money.

As the value of labour, as well as of commodi-
ties, is most frequently compared with money, it
will be advisable in general to adopt this mode of

_comparison, with a frequent reference, however,
where it is necessary, to the money’s worth, or the
real wages of labour.

The money wages of labour are determined by
the demand and supply of money, compared with

‘the demand and supply of labour: and, during pe-
riods when money may be supposed to maintain
nearly the same value, the variations in the wages


1


$EC.1.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 241


of labour, may be said to be regulated by the va-
riations in the demand compared with the supply
of labour. . '

The principle of demand and supply is the para-
mount regulator of the prices of labour as well as
of commodities, not only temporarily but perma-
nently ; and the costs of production affect these
prices only as they are the necessary condition of
the permanent supply of labour, or of commodi-
ties. P

It is as the condition of the supply, that the prices
of the necessaries of life have so important an in-
fluence on the price of labour. A certain portion
of these necessaries is required to enable the.
labourer to maintain a stationary population, a
greater portion to maintain an increasing one; and
consequently, whatever may be the prices of the
necessaries of life, the money wages of the labourer
must be such as to enable him to purchase these
portions, or the supply cannot possibly take place
in the quantity required.

‘To shew that what may be called the cost of
producing labour only influences wages as it regu-
lates the supply of labour, it is sufficient to turn
our attention to those cases, where, under tempo-
rary circumstances, the cost of production does not
regulate the supply ; and here we shall always find
that this cost immediately ceases to regulate prices.

When, from a course of abundant seasons, or any
cause which does not impair the capitals of the
farmers, the price of corn falls for some time to-

R


,
242 OF THE WAGES OF. LABOUR.  [CH. IV.


gether, the cost of producing labour may be said,
to be diminished, but it is not found that the
wages of labour fall ;* and for this obvious reason,
that the reduced cost of production cannot, under
sixteen or eighteen years, materially influence the
supply of labour inthe market. On the other hand,
when the prices of corn rise from a succession of
indifferent seasons, or any cause which leaves the
demand for labour nearly the same as before, wages
will not rise: because the same number of labour-
ers remain in the market; and though the price of
production has risen, the supply is not for some.
time affected by it. So entirely, indeed, does the
effect of the cost of production on price depend
upon the manner in which it regulates supply, that
if in this, or any other country during the last
twenty years, the production of labour had cost ab-
solutely nothing, but had still been supplied in
exactly the same proportion to the demand, the
wages of labour would have been in no respect dif-
ferent. Of the truth of this position, we may be quite


_, assured, by the instance alluded to in a: former


chapter, of a paper currency so limited in quantity
as not to exceed the metallic money, which would
otherwise have circulated, in which case, though
the cost of the paper is comparatively nothing, yet,
as it performs the same function, and is supplied


* The fall in the price of labour which took place in 1815 and
1816 was occasioned solely by the diminution of demand, arising
from the losses of the farmers, and in no respect by the diminished
cost of production.


SEC, 1.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOURS 243'


only in the same quantity as. the mianey; it acquires —
the same value in exchange.

Adam Smith is practically quite noma when he’
says, “that, “ the money price of labour is necessa-
rily regulated by two circumstances; the demand —
for labour ; and the price of the necessaries and
conveniences of life.”* But it is of great impor-
tance to a thorough understanding of the subject,
to keep constantly under our view the precise —
mode in which the costs of production operate on
the price of labour, and to see clear ly and distinctly
the constant and predominant action of the prin-
ciple of supply and demand.

In all those cases which Adam Smith has so hap-
pily explained and illustrated, where an apparent
irregularity takes place in the pay of different kinds’
of labour, it will be found, universally, that the
causes to which he justly attributes them, are
causes of a nature to influence the supply of labour
in, the particular departments in question. The
five principal circumstances, which, according to
him, make up for a small pecuniary gain in some ©
employments, and counterbalance a great one in
others, namely ; 1. The agreeableness or disagree-
~ ableness of the employments themselves. 2. The
easiness. and. cheapness, or the difficulty and ex-
pense of learning them. 3. The constancy or in-
constancy of employment in them; 4. the small or
great trust which must be reposed in. those: who
exercise them ; and 5. the probability or improba-


* Wealth of Nations, Book, i. ch. viii. p. 130. 6th edit,
R 2


244 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _—[CH. IV.


bility of success in them,* are all obviously of this
description ; and in many of the instances, it would
not be easy to account for their effects on the price
of the different kinds of labour, upon any other
principle. One hardly sees, for instance, why the
cost of producing a poacher should be less than
that of a common labourer, or the cost of producing
a coal-heaver much greater ; yet they are paid very
differently. It is not easier to resolve the effects
on wages of the small or great trust which must be
reposed in a workman, or, the probability or impro-
bability of success in his trade, into the quantity of
labour which has been employed to bring him into —
the market. Adam Smith satisfactorily shews,
that the whole body of lawyers is not remunerated
sufficiently to pay the expenses which the educa-
tion of the whole body has cost ;f and it is obvious
that particular skill, both in trades and professions,
is paid high, with but little reference to the labour
employed in acquiring it, which, owing to supe-
rior talent, is often less than that which is fre-
quently applied to the acquisition of inferior pro-
ficiency. But all these cases are accounted for in
the easiest and most natural manner, upon the
principle of supply and demand. Superior artists
are paid high on account of the scanty supply of
such skill, whether occasioned by unusual labour
or uncommon genius, or both. Lawyers as a body,
are not well remunerated, because the prevalence


* Wealth of Nations, B. i. ch. x. part i. p. 152. 6th edit.
t Id. p. 161.


SEC, I.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. = -245


of other motives, besides mere gain, crowds the
profession with candidates, and the supply is not
regulated by the cost of the education ; and in all
those instances, where disadvantages or difficulties
of any kind accompany particular employments, it
is obvious that they must be paid comparatively
high, because if the additional remuneration were
not sufficient to balance such disadvantages, the
supply of labour in these departments would be
deficient, as, ceteris paribus, every person would
choose to engage in the most agreeable, the least
difficult, and the least uncertain occupations.
The deficiency so occasioned, whenever it occurs,
will naturally raise the price of labour; and the
advance of price, after some little oscillation, will
rest at the point where it is just sufficient to effect
the supply required. . .

Adam Smith has in general referred to the prin-
ciple of supply and demand in cases of this kind,
but he has occasionally forgotten it:—‘ If one
species of labour,” he says, “ requires an uncom-
mon degree of dexterity and ingenuity, the esteem
which men have for such talents will give a value
to their produce, superior to what would be due to
the time employed about it.”* And in another
place, speaking of China, he remarks, “ That if in
such a country, (thats, a. country with stationary
resources,) wages had ever been more than suffi-
cient to maintain the labourer, and enable him to
bring up a family; the competition of the labourers


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. ch. vi. p. 71. 6th edit:
R3


246 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.  [CH. Iv.


and the interest of the masters, would soon reduce
them to the lowest rate which is consistent with
common humanity.”* The reader will be aware,
from what has been already said, that in the first
case here noticed, it is not the esteem for the dex-
terity and ingenuity referred to, which raises the
price of the commodity, but their scarcity, and the
consequent scarcity of the articles produced by
them, compared with the demand. And in the
latter case, it is not common humanity which in-
terferes to prevent the price of labour from falling
still lower. If humanity could have successfully
interfered, it ought to have interfered long before,
and prevented any premature mortality from being
occasioned by bad or insufficient food. But un-
fortunately, common humanity cannot alter the
resources of acountry. While these are stationary,
and the habits of the lower classes prompt them
to supply a stationary population cheaply, the
wages of labour will be scanty; but still they
cannot fall below what is necessary, under the ac-
tual habits of the people, to keep up a stationary
population ; because, by the supposition, the re-
sources of the country are stationary, not increas-
ing or declining, and consequently the principle of
demand and supply would always interfere to pre-
vent such wages as would either occasion an in-
crease or diminution of people.


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. chap. vii. p. 108.


SEC.11.] . OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. = 247


°


SECTION II.


Of the Causes which principally affect the Habits of the
Labouring Classes. ~~


Mr. Ricardo has defined the natural price of labour
to be “ that price which is necessary to enable the
labourers one with another to subsist, and to per-
petuate their race, without either increase or dimi-
nution.”* This price I should really be disposed
to call a most unnatural price; because in a natural
state of things, that is, without great impediments
to the progress of wealth and population, such a
price could not generally occur for hundreds of
years. But if this price be really rare, and, in
an ordinary state of things, at so great a distance
in point of time, it must evidently lead to great
errors to consider the market-prices of labour
as only temporary deviations above and below
that fixed price to which they will very soon re-
turn. :

The natural or necessary price of labour in any
country I should define to be, “ that price which, in
the actual circumstances of the society, is necessary /
to occasion an'average supply of labourers, suffi-
cient to meet theaveragedemand.” And the market
price I should define to be, the actual price in the
market, which from temporary causes is sometimes


* Polit. Econ. c. v. p. 85. 2d edit.
R 4


248 |« OF THE WAGES OF Labour. _ [OH. IV.


above, and sometimes below, what is necessary to
supply this average demand.

The condition of the labouring classes of society
must evidently depend, partly upon the rate at
which the resources of the country and the demand
. for labour are increasing; and partly, on the habits
of the people in respect to their food, clothing and
lodging. ‘

If the habits of the people were to remain fixed,
the power of marrying early, and of supporting a
large family, would depend upon the rate at which
the resources of the country and the demand for
labour were increasing. And if the resources of
the country were to remain fixed, the comforts of
the lower classes of society would. depend upon
their habits, or the amount of those necessaries and
conveniences, without which they would not con-
sent to keep up their numbers.

It rarely happens, however, that either of them
- remain fixed for any great length of time together.
The rate at which the resources of a country in-
crease is, we well know, liable, under varying cir-
cumstances, to great variation ; and the habits of
a people though not so liable, or so necessarily .
. subject to change, can scarcely ever be considered
as permanent. In general, their tendency is to
change together.. When the resources of a country
are rapidly increasing, and the labourer commands
a large portion of necessaries, it is to be expected
‘that if he has-the opportunity of exchanging his
superfluous food for conveniences and comforts, he
will acquive’a taste for these conyeniences, and


SEC. 11.) OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 249


his habits will be formed accordingly. On the
other hand, it generally happens that, when the
resources of a country become nearly stationary,
such habits, if they ever have existed, are found
to give way; and, before the population comes
to a stop, the standard of comfort is essentially
lowered,

Still, however, oaxile from physical, and partly
from moral causes, the standard of comfort differs
essentially in different countries, under the same
rate of increase in their resources. Adam Smith,
in speaking of the inferior food of the people of
Scotland, compared with their neighbours of the
same rank in England, observes, “ This difference
in the mode of their subsistence is not the cause,
but the effect, of the difference in their wages,
though, by a strange misapprehension, I have fre-
quently heard it represented as the cause.”* It
must be allowed, however, that this correction of
acommon opinion is only partially just. The effect,
in this case as in many others, certainly becomes
in its turn a cause; and there is no doubt, that if
the continuance of low wages for some time,
should produce among the labourers of any coun-
try ‘habits of marrying with the prospect only of
a mere subsistence, such habits, by supplying the
quantity of labour required at a low rate, would
become a constantly operating cause of low wages.

It would be very desirable to ascertain what are
the principal causes which determine the different


* Book I. chap. viii. p. 114. 6th edit.


250 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _[CH. IV.


modes of subsistence among the lower classes of
people of different countries ; but the question in-
volves so many considerations, that a satisfactory
solution of it is hardly to be expected. Much
must certainly depend upon the physical causes
of climate and soil ; but still more perhaps on moral
causes, the formation and action of which are owing
to a variety of circumstances.

From high wages, or the power of commanding
a large portion of the necessaries of life, two very
different results may follow ; one, that of a rapid
increase of population, in which case the high
wages are chiefly spent in the maintenance of large
and frequent families: and the other, that of a de-
cided improvement in the modes of subsistence, and
the conveniences and comforts enjoyed, without a
proportionate aeceleration in the rate of increase.

In looking to these different results, the causes
of them will evidently appear to be the different
habits existing among the people of different
countries, and at different times. In an inquiry
into the causes of these different’ habits, we shall
generally be able to trace those which produce the
first result to all the circumstances which contri-
bute to depress the lower classes of the pedple,
which make them unable or unwilling to reason
from the past to the future and ready to acquiesce,
for the sake of present gratification, in a very low
standard of comfort and respectability ; and those
which produce the second result, to all the cireum-
stances which tend to elevate the character of the
lower classes of society, which make them approach


| 4


SEC. Il.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 251


the nearest to beings who “look before and after,”
and who consequently cannot acquiesce patiently
in the thought of depriving themselves and their
children of the means of being respectable, virtuous
and happy.

Among the circumstances which contribute. to
the character first described, the most efficient will
‘be found to be despotism, oppression, and ignorance:
among those which contribute to the latter cha-
racter, civil-and political liberty, and education.

Of all the causes which tend to generate pru-
dential habits among the lower classes of society,
the most essential is unquestionably civil liberty.
No people can be much accustomed to form plans
for the future, who do not feel assured that their
industrious exertions, while fair and honourable,
will be allowed to have free scope ; and that the
property which they either possess, or may acquire,
will be secured to them by a known code of just
laws impartially administered. But it has been
found by experience, that civil liberty cannot be
permanently secured without political liberty. Con-
sequently, political liberty becomes almost equally
essential; and in addition to its being necessary in
this point of view, its obvious tendency to teach
the lower classes of society to respect themselves
by obliging the higher classes to respect them,
must contribute greatly to aid all the good effects
of civil liberty.

With regard to education, it might certainly be
made general under a bad form of government,
and might be very deficient under one in other


252 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. [cH. IV.


respects good: but it must be allowed, that the
chances, both with regard to its quality and its —
prevalence, are greatly in favour of the latter.
Education alone could do little against insecurity
of property ; but it would powerfully assist all the
favourable consequences to be expected from civil
and political liberty, which could not indeed be
considered as complete without it.

According as the habits of the people had been
determined by such unfavourable or favourable
circumstances, high wages, or a rapid increase of
the funds for the maintenance of labour, would be
attended with the first or second results before
described ; or at least by results which would ap-
proach to the one or the other, according to the
proportions in which all the causes which influence
habits of improvidence or prudence had been ef-
ficient. : ;

Ireland, during the course of the last century,
may be produced perhaps as the most marked in-
stance of the first result. On the introduction of
the potatoe into that country, the lower classes of
society were in such a state of oppression and
ignorance, were so little respected by others, and
had consequently so little respect for themselves,
that as long as they could get food, and that of
the cheapest kind, they were content to marry
under the prospect of every other privation. The
abundant funds for the support of labour, occa-
sioned by the cultivation of the potatoe in a
favourable soil, which often gave the labourer the
command of a quantity of subsistence quite un-


SEC. I1.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 253


usual in the other parts of Europe, were spent al-
most exclusively in the maintenance of large and
frequent families ; and the result was, a most rapid
increase of population, with little or no melioration
in the general condition and modes of subsistence
of the labouring poor. -

An instance somewhat approaching to the second
may be found in England, in the first half of the
last century. It is well known, that during this
period the price of corn fell considerably, while the
’ wages of labour are stated to have risen. During
the last forty years of the 17th century, and the
first twenty of the 18th, the average price of corn
was such as, compared with the wages of labour,
would enable the labourer to purchase, witha day’s
earnings, two-thirds of a peck of wheat. From
1720 to 1750 the price of wheat had so fallen, while
wages had risen, that instead of two thirds the la-
bourer could purchase the whole of a peck of wheat
with a day’s labour.*

This great increase of command over the neces-
saries of life did not, however, produce a propor-
tionate increase of population. It found the people
of this country living under an excellent govern-
ment, and enjoying all the advantages of civil and
political liberty in an unusual degree. The lower
classes of people had been in the habit of being
respected, both by the laws and the higher orders
of their fellow citizens, and had learned in conse-
quence to respect themselves. And the result was,


* See Sect. LV. of this chapter.


254. OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR., [CH. Iv.


that, instead.of an. increase of population exclu-,
sively, a considerable portion of their increased.
real wages was expended ina marked improvement
of the quality of the food consumed, and a decided
elevation in the standard of their comforts, and.
conveniences.

_ During the same period, the resources of Scot-
land do not appear to have increased so fast as those
of England; but since the middle of the century,
the former country has perhaps made a more rapid
progress than the latter ; and the consequence has
been, that, from. the same causes, these, increased
resources have not produced, exclusively, increase
of population, but a great alteration for the better
in the food, dress, and houses of the lower classes
of society. .

The general change from bread of a very inferior
quality to the best wheaten bread, seems to have
been peculiar to the southern and midland counties
of England, and may perhaps have been aided by
adventitious circumstances.

The state of the foreign markets as opesed. by
the bounty, together with the improving cultiva-
tion of the country; appears to have diminished, in
some districts, the usual difference in the prices of
the different kinds of grain. Though barley was
largely grown and largely exported, it did not fall
in price so much as wheat. On an average of the
twenty years ending with 1705, compared with an
average of twenty years ending with .1745, the
quarter of wheat fell from 1/. 16s. 3d. to 12. 9s, 10d.
but malt during the same period remained at the


SEC..1I.| OF THE. WAGES OF LABOUR. 955


same price, or, if any thing, rather rose ;* and as
barley is supposed to be not a cheaper food than
wheat, unless it can be purchased at ~ of the
price,t such a relative difference would have a
strong tendency to promote the change?

. From the small quantity of rye exported, com-
pared with wheat and barley, it may be inferred
that it did not find a ready vent in foreign mar-
kets; and this circumstance, together with the
improving state of the land, diminished its cultiva-
tion and use. :

With regard to oats, the prohibitory laws and
the bounty were not so favourable to them as to
the other grains, and more were imported than ex-
ported. This would naturally tend to check their
cultivation in the districts which were capable of
growing the sort of grain most certain of a market;
while the Act of Charles IL. respecting the buying
up of corn to sell again, threw greater obstacles in
the way of the distribution of oats than of any
other grain.

By this Act, wheat might be bought up and
stored for future sale when the price did not ex-
ceed 48s.; barley, when the price did not exceed
28s.; and oats, when, the price did not exceed
13s. 4d. The limited rates of wheat and barley
were considerably above their ordinary and average
rates at that period, and therefore did not often in-


* Eden’s State of the Poor. Table, Vol. III. p.79. In this
table, a deduction is made of % for the quarter of middling wheat of
eight bushels, which is too much.

+ Tracts on the Corn Trade, Supp. p. 199.


256 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. [CH. IV.


terfere with their proper distribution; but the ordi-
nary price of oats’ was supposed to be about 19s.
the quarter, and consequently the limit of 13s. 4d.
would be very frequently exceeded,* and obstacles
would be continually thrown in the way of their
transport from the districts of their growth to the
districts where they might be wanted. But if, from
the causes here described, the labouring elasses of
the South of England were partly induced, and
partly obliged, to adopt wheat as their main food,
instead of the cheaper kinds of grain, the rise of
wages would at once be accounted for, consistently
with the fall in the price of wheat; an event which,
under an apparently slack demand for labour at
the time, has been considered as so improbable by
some writers, that the accuracy of the accounts
has been doubted. It is evidently, however, pos-
sible, either on supposition of a voluntary deter-
- mination on the part of the labouring classes to
adopt a superior description of food, or a sort of
obligation to do it, on account of the introduction of
a new system of cultivation adapted to a more im-
proved soil: and, in either case, the effects observ-
able from 1720 to 1750 would appear; namely, an
increased power of commanding the necessaries of
life, without a proportionate increase of popula-
tion. It is probable that both causes contributed
their share to the change in question. When once
the fashion of eating wheaten bread had become
general in some countries, it would be likely to


* Tracts on the Corn Trade, p. 50.


SEC. III.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 257


spread into others, even at the expense of comforts
of a different description; and in all cases where
particular modes of subsistence, from whatever
causes arising, have been for any time established,
though such modes always remain susceptible of
change, the change must be a work of time and
difficulty. A country, which for many years had
principally supported its peasantry on one sort of
grain, must alter its whole system of agriculture
before it can produce another sort in sufficient
abundance; and the obstinacy with which habits
are adhered to by all classes of people, as in some
countries it would prevent high wages from im-
proving the quality of the food, so in others it ©
would prevent low wages from suddenly deterio-
rating it; and such high or low wages would be
felt almost exclusively in the great stimulus or
the great check which they would give to popu-
lation.


SECTION III.


Of the Causes which principally influence the Demand for
Labour, and the Increase of the Population.


There is another cause, besides a change in the

habits of the people, which prevents the population

of a country from keeping pace with the apparent

command of the labourer over the means of sub-

sistence. It sometimes happens that wages are for
s


258 QE THE WAGES OF LABOUR. Lea. ly.


atime rather higher than they ought to be, in pro-
portion to the demand for labour. This i is the
most likely to take place when the price of raw
produce has fallen in value, so.as to diminish the
power of the cultivators to employ the same or an
increasing number of labourers at the same price,
If the fall be considerable, and not made up in
value by i lucrease, of quantity, so many labourers
will be thrown out of work that wages, after a
period of great distress, will generally be lowered
in proportion. But if the fall be gradual, and
partly made up in exchangeable value by increase
of quantity, the money wages of labour will not
necessarily sink ; and the result will be merely a
slack demand for labour, not sufficient perhaps to
throw the actual labourers out of work, but such
as to prevent or diminish task-work, to check the
employment of women and children, and to give
but little encouragement to the rising generation
of labourers. In this case the quantity of the ne-
cessaries of life actually earned by the labourer and
his family, may be really less than when, owing to
a rise of prices, the daily. pay of the labourer will
command a smaller quantity of corn. The com-
mand of the labouring classes over the necessaries
of life, though apparently greater, is really less in
the former than in the latter case, and, upon all ge-
neral principles, ought to produce less effect on the
increase of population.

This disagreement between apparent wages and
the progress of population will be further aggrava-
ted in those,countries where poor laws are estab-


/SEC. Il.] OF THE, WAGES OF LABOUR, 259


lished, and it has become customary to pay a por-
tion of the labourers’ wages out of the parish rates:
If, when corn rises, the farmers and landholders of
a parish keep the wages of labour down, and make
a regular allowance for children, it is obvious that
there is no longer any necessary connexion be-
tween the apparent. wages of day labour and the
real means which the labouring classes possess of
maintaining a family. When once the people are
reconciled to such a system,:the progress of popu-
lation might be very rapid, at a time when the
wages of labour, independently of parish assistance, |
were only sufficient to support a wife and one
child, or even a single man without either wife or
child, because there might still be both encourage-
ment to marriage, and the means of supporting
children.*

When the population of a country increases
faster than usual, the labouring classes must have
the command of a greater quantity of food than
they had before possessed, or at least applied to
the maintenance of their families. This may be
‘obtained in various ways—by higher real -wages,


* It is most fortunate for the country and the labouring classes
of society, that the bill which passed the House of Commons last
session, for taking from their parents the children of those who
asked for relief, and supporting them on public funds, did not pass
the House of Lords. Such a law would have been the commence-
ment of a new system of poor laws beyond all comparison worse
than the old: and it is difficult to conceive how it could have been .
recommended by persons who agreed to publish the opinions which
appear in the greater part of the Report on the Poor Laws,

s 2


260 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _[CH. IV.


by saving in conveniences, by adopting a cheaper
kind of food, by more task-work and the more ge-
neral employment of the women and children, or
by parish allowances. But the actual application
of the greater quantity of food is, I conceive, neces-
sary to the increase of population; and wherever
such increase has taken place, some of these causes,
by which a greater quantity of food is procured,
will always be in oes and may generally be
traced.

The high wages, both real and nominal of Ame-
rica, occasioned by the rapid accumulation of capi-
tal, and the power of selling produce, obtained by
a comparative small quantity of labour, at Euro-
pean prices, are unquestionably the cause of the
very rapid progress of the American population.

The peculiar increase of the population of Ire-
land, compared with other European countries,
has obviously been owing to the adoption of a
cheaper food, which might be produced in large
quantities, and which, aided by the Cottar system
of cultivation, has allowed the increase of people
to precede the demand for labour.

And the great increase of population of late years
in England. and Scotland: has been owing to the
power of the labouring classes to obtain a greater
quantity of food, partly by temporary high wages in
manufactures, partly by the increased use of pota-
toes, partly by increased task-work and the increased
employment of women and children, partly by in-
creased parish allowances to families, and partly
perhaps, (though I think but little taking the coun-


SEC. 11I.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 261


try throughout) by a saving in conveniences and
luxuries.

In general, perhaps, more of these causes will be
called into action by arise of prices, which some-
times lowers the command of a day’s labour over
the necessaries of life, than by a fall of prices which
sometimes raises it.

What.is mainly necessary to a rapid increase of
population, is a great and continued demand for
labour; and this is occasioned by, and proportioned
to, the rate at which the whole value of the capital
and revenue of the country increases annually ;
because, :. faster the value of the annual produce
increases, the greater will be the power of pur-
chasing fresh labour, and the more will be wanted
every year.

It has been sometimes thought, that the demand
for labour can only be in proportion to the increase
of the circulating, not the fixed capital; and this
is no doubt true in individual cases :* but it is not
necessary to make the distinction in reference to a
whole nation; because where the substitution of
fixed capital saves a great quantity of labour, which
cannot be employed elsewhere, it diminishes the
value of the annual produce, and retards the in-
crease of the capital and revenue taken together.

If, for instance, a capitalist who had employed
£20,000 in productive labour, and had been in the
habit of selling his goods for £22,000, making a


* See an ingenious pamphlet on the condition of the labouring
classes by Mr. Barton.
s 3


262 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _—_[CH. IV.


a profit of 10 per cent., were to employ the same
quantity of labour in the construction of a machine
worth £20,000, which would enable him to carry
on his business without labour in future, except
as his machine might require repair, it is obvious
that, during the first year, the same value of the an-
nual produce and the same demand for labour
would exist; but in the next year, as it would only
be necessary for the capitalist, in order to obtain
the same rate of profits as before, to sell his goods
for a little more than £2,000 instead of £22,000,
the value of the annual produce would fall, the ca-
pital would not be increased, and the revenue
would be decidedly diminished; and upon the prin-
ciple that the demand for labour depends upon the
rate at which the value of the general produce, or
of the capital and revenue taken together, increases,
the slackness of the demand for labour under such
circumstances would be adequately accounted for.

In general, however, the use of fixed capital is
extremely favourable to the abundance of circu-
lating capital ; and if the market for the products
can be proportionally extended, the whole value of
the capital and revenue of a state is greatly in-
creased by it, and a great demand for labour cre-
ated. !

The increase in the whole value of cotton pro-
ducts, since the introduction of the improved ma-
chinery, is known to be prodigious; and it cannot
for a moment be doubted that the demand for la-
bour in the cotton business has very greatly in-
creased during the last forty years. This is indeed


sEC. 111.] oF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 963


sufficiently proved by ‘the greatly increased’ po-
pulation of Manchester, Glasgow, and’ the other
towns where the cotton manufactures have most
flourished.

A similar increase of vale though not to the
same extent, has taken place in our hardware,
woollen, and other manufactures, and has been ac-
companied by an increasing demand for labour,
picid bade 3 the increasing use of fixed ca-
pit ital.

Even in our agriculture, if the fixed capital of
horses, which, from the quantity of produce they
consume, is the most disadvantageous description
of fixed capital, were disused, it is probable, that
a great part of the land which now bears’ ‘corn
would be thrown’ out of cultivation. “Land ‘of
a poor quality would’ never yield sufficient to pay
the labour of cultivating” with the spade, of
bringiig manure to distant fields in ‘barrows,
and of ¢arrying the products of ‘the earth ‘to
distant markets by the same sort of conveyance.
Under these circumstances, as there would be a
great diminution in’ the quantity of corn produced,
thers would be a great diminution in the whole
value of the produce; and the demand for labour
and the amount of the population would be greatly
diminished.*


*Tt tks say been stated, that ape cultivation will yield both

a greater gross produce and a greater neat produce. I am always

ready to bow to well established experience; but if such expe-

rience applies in the present case, one cannot sufficiently: wonder

at the continued tise of plough said horses in agriculture. Even
s 4 .


264 OF THE WAGES OF LABouR. _[CH. IV.


On the other hand, if, by the gradual introduc-
tion of a greater quantity of fixed capital, we could
cultivate and dress our soil and carry the produce
to market at a much less expense, we might in- ,
crease our produce very greatly by the cultivation
and improvement of all our waste lands; and if the
substitution of this fixed capital were to take
place in the only way in which we can suppose it
practically to take place, that is, gradually, there is
no reason to doubt that the value of raw produce
would keep up nearly to its former level; and its
greatly increased quantity, combined with the
greater proportion of the people which might be
employed in manufactures and commerce, would
unquestionably occasion a very great increase in
the exchangeable value of the general produce,
and thus cause a great demand for labour and a
great addition to the population.

In general, therefore, there is little to fear that
the introduction of fixed capital, as it is likely to
take place in practice, will diminish the effective
demand for labour; indeed it is to this source that
we are to look for the main cause of its future in-


supposing however that the use of the spade might, on some soils,
so improve the land, as to make the crop more than pay the ad-
ditional expense of the labour, taken separately ; yet, as horses must
be kept to carry out dressing to a distance and to convey the pro-
duce of the soil to market, it could hardly answer to the cultivator
to employ men in digging his fields, while his horses were stand-
‘ing idle in his stables. As far as experience has yet gone, I should
certainly say, that it is commerce, price and skill, which will cul-
tivate the wastes of large and poor territories—not the spade.


SEC. I11.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 265


crease. At the same time, it is certainly true, as
will be more fully stated in a subsequent part of
this volume, that if the substitution of fixed capi-
tal were to take place very rapidly, and before an
adequate market could be found for the more abun-
’ dant. supplies derived from it and for the new
products of the labour that had been thrown out
of employment, a slack demand for labour and
great distress among the labouring classes of so-
ciety would be universally felt. But in this case,
the general produce, or the capital and revenue of
the country taken together, would certainly fall in
value, owing to a temporary excess of supply com-
pared with the demand, and would shew that the
variations in this value, compared with the pre-
vious value paid in wages, are the main regulators
of the power and will to employ labour.

In the formation of the value of the whole pro-
duce of a country, a part depends upon price, and
a part upon quantity. That part which depends
merely upon price is in its nature less durable and
less effective than that which depends upon quan-

tity. An increase of price, with little or no in-
crease of quantity, must be followed very soon by
a nearly proportionate increase of wages; while
the command of these increased money wages
over the necessaries of life going on diminishing,
the population must come to astop, and no further
rise of prices can occasion an effective demand for
labour.

On the other hand, if the quantity of produce
be increased so fast that the value of the whole


266 | (OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. — [CH. IV.


diniinishes' from excessivé supply, it may not
command so’ much labour this year as it did in
the last, and fora time there will be no demand
for workmen.
\ These are the two! extremes, one : acini from
inereaxbil waluewithout indeaed quantity ; and ~
the other from: increased rages without ins
creased value.

It is obvious that the object which it’ is most de-
sirable to attain is the union of the two. There is
somewhere a happy medium, where, under the
actual resources of a country, the increase’ of
wealth and the demand for labour are a maximum;
but this point cannot be ascertained. An increase
of quantity with steady prices, or even’ slightly
falling, is consistent with ‘a considerable increase
of the genéral'value of produce, aid may occasion
a considerable demand’ for labour; but in the ac-
tual state! of things; and in the way in which the
precious metals are’ actually distributed; some’ in-
crease’ of prices generally accompanies’ the most
effective demand for’ produce and: population. It
is this increase both of quantity and ‘price which
most surely creates the greatest demand for labour,
excites the greatest quantity of industry, ‘and ge-
nerally occasions the greatest increase of popula-
tion.


SEC..1V.] OFTHE WAGES OF LABOUR. 267


x


9)


SECTION IV.


Of the Effect of a Fall in the Value of Money di the
Demand for Labour and the Condition of the Labourer.


Some writers of great ability have been of opinion
that rising prices, or a falling value of money, are
very unfavourable to the lower classes of society ;
and certainly there are some periods of our history
which seem strongly to countenance this opinion :
but Iam inclined to think, that if these periods,
and the circumstances connected with them,. be
examined with more attention, the conclusion
which, has been drawn from them will not appear
so certain as has been generally imagined. It will
be found that, in the instances in question, other
causes were in operation to which the, effect, re-
ferred to might more justly be attributed; and we
shall hardly have good reason to conclude,, that
where an effective demand for labour accompanies
a fallin the value of money and no positive obsta-
cles are thrown in the way of its rising, it will not,
in a moderately short time, follow the price of the
main food of the labourer. :

The period of our history universally noticed. is
the 16th century, from the end of the reign. of Henry
VII. to the end of the reign of Elizabeth.. During
this period it is an unquestionable fact that the real
wages of labour fell in an extraordinary manner,


268 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _‘[CH. IV.


and towards the latter end of the century they
would not command much above one-third of the
quantity of wheat which they did at the beginning
of it.

Sir F. M. Eden has noticed the price of wheat
in nineteen out of the twenty-four years of Henry
VII.’s reign, and in some of the years two or
three times.* Reducing the several notices in the
same year first to an average, and then taking the
average of the nineteen prices, it comes to 6s. 34d.
the quarter, rather less than 94d. the bushel, and
22d. the peck.

By a statute passed in.1495 to regulate wages,
the price of common day labour seems to have
been 4d. or 44d. without diet. All labourers and

-artificers, not specifically mentioned, are put down
at 4d.; but in another part of the statute, even a
woman labourer (I suppose in hay time) is set
down at 44d. and a carter at 5d. f

At the price of wheat just stated, if the wages
of the labourer were 4d. he would be able to pur-
chase, by a day’s labour, a peck and three quarters
of wheat, within half a farthing; if his wages
were 44d. he would be able to purchase half a
bushel, within a farthing.

The notices of the price of day labour in the
subsequent years are extremely scanty. There
are none in the reigns of Henry VIII., Edward,
and Mary. The first that occurs is in 1575, and
the price is mentioned at 8d. Taking an average


* State of the Poor, vol. iii. p, xli.
+ Id. vol. iii. p. Ixxxix. t Id. vol. iii, p. Ix.


SEC. IV.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 269


of the five preceding years in which the prices
of wheat are noticed, including 1575, having
previously averaged the several prices in the same
year, as before, it appears that the price of the
quarter of wheat was 1/. 2s. 2d. which is Qs. 94d.
the bushel, and 81d. the peck. At this price, a day’s
labour would purchase a peck of _— within a
farthing, or +4 6 of a peck.

‘This is a diminution of nearly a half in the corn
wages of labour ; but at the end of the century, the
diminution was still greater.

The next notice of the price of labour, with the
exception of the regulations of the justices in some
of the more northern counties, which can hardly
be taken as a fair criterion for the south, is in
1601, when it is mentioned as 10d. Taking an
average from the Windsor table of five years, which
includes, however, one excessively dear year, and
subtracting 4 to reduce it to Winchester measure,
it appears that the price of the quarter was
Ql. 2s. Od. which is 5s. 3d. the bushel, and 1s. 344d,
the peck. A day’s labour would at this price pur-
chase less than ¢ of a peck. *

This is unquestionably a prodigious fall in the


' * The year 1597 seems to have been an extraordinary dear
one, and ought not to be included in so short an average. If an
average was taken of the five years beginning with 1598, the
labourer would appear to earn about 4 of a peck; and, on an
average of ten years, from the same period, he would earn about
4of a peck. During the five years from 1594 to 1598 inclusive,
the price of wheat seems to have been unusually high from un-
favourable seasons.


270 —§ OF THE, WAGES OF LABOUR. [GH. IY, _


real wages of labour, But it isof great importance.
to inquire: whether the prices ftom which they fell
are not as extraordinary. as the prices to which
they sunk ;, and here I think we shall find that the
prices. the most difficult to be accounted, for are
the high prices of ‘the 15th century, rather than
the low prices of the 16th.:

If we revert to the middle of the 14th century,
at the time when the first general statute was passed -
to regulate wages, the condition of the labourer
will appear to be very inferior to what it was
during the greatest part of the 15th. century. This
fact may be established on unexceptionable evi-
dence. Statutes or regulations to fix the price of
labour, though they do not always succeed in their
immediate object, (which is generally the unjust
one, of preventing labour from rising,) may be con- .
sidered as undeniable testimonies, of what, the
prices of labour had been not long previous to the
time of their passing. No legislature in the most
ignorant age could ever be so rash as arbitrarily to
fix the prices of labour without reference to some
past experience. Consequently, though the prices
in such statutes cannot be depended upon with re-
gard to the future, they appear to be quite conclu-
sive with regard to the past. In the present case,
indeed, it is expressly observed, that servants should
be contented with such liveries and wages as they
received in the 20th year of the King’s reign, and
two or three years before. *


* Eden’s State of the Poor, vol. i. p. 32.


SEC.1V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. == 271


_ From this statute, which was enacted in 1350,
the 25th of the King, for the most unjust and im-
politic. purpose of preventing the price of labour
from rising after the great pestilence, we. may.
infer that the price of, day labour had been about
13d. or 2d. Common agricultural labour, indeed,
is not specifically mentioned ;, but the servants of
artificers are appointed to take 14d., common car-
penters 2d.,and a reaper, the first. week in August,
also 2d., all without diet ; from which we may con-
clude that the wages of common day labour must
have been as often, 14d. as 2d.*

Sir F. M. Eden has collected notices of the prices
of wheat in sixteen out of the twenty-five years
of Edward ILI. previous to the time of the passing
of the statute. Taking an average as before, the
price of wheat appears to have been about 5s, 4d.
the quarter, which is 8d. the bushel, and 2d. the
peck,

At this price of wheat, if the labourer sieaie’
14d. a day, he could only purchase by a day’s la-
bour of a peck of wheat; if he earned 2d, ‘he
could purchase justa peck. In the former case, he
would earn less than half of the corn, earned. by
the labourer of Henry VII.; and in the latter case,
very little more than half.

But, in, the. subsequent period, of Edward
IHli’s reign, the labourer appears to have been
much worseoff. The statute of labourers was re-
newed, and, it is said, enforced very rigidly, not-


* Eden’s State of the Poor, vol, i, p. 33.


272 ON THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _[CH. Iv.


withstanding a considerable rise’ in the price of
corn.* Onan average of the thirteen years out
of twenty-six, in which the prices of wheat are
noticed, the quarter is about 11s. 9d. which is
about 1s. 51d. the bushel, and 44d. the peck.

At this price, if the wages of labour had not
risen, the condition of the labourer would be very
miserable. He would not be able to purchase so
~ much as half-a-peck of wheat by a day’s labour,
about a fourth part of what he could subsequently
command in the reign of Henry VII. It is
scarcely possible, however, to conceive that the
wages of labour should not have risen in some
degree, notwithstanding the statute and its re-
newal; but even if they rose one half, they would
not have nearly kept pace with the price of corn,
which more than doubled; and during the last
twenty-five years of the reign of Edward III. the
earnings of the labourer in corn were probably
quite as low as during the last twenty-five years of
Elizabeth.

In the reigns of Richard II. and Henry IV. the
price of wheat seems to have fallen nearly to what
it was in’ the first half of the reign of Edward
III. From 1377 to 1398 inclusive, it was about
5s. 7d. the quarter ; and from 1399 to 1411, about
6s. 1d.¢ It is difficult to ascertain how much the
wages of labour had advanced; but if they had
risen so as to enable the labourer to support him-


* Eden’s State of the Poor, vol.i. p. 36. 42.
+ Id. vol. iii. p. xxv. et seq.


SEC...1V.] OF THE WAGES.OF LABOUR. 273: |


self, through the last twenty-six years of the reign
of Edward III. and had not sunk again, in con-
sequence of the subsequent fall, which is probable,
the: labourer, during these ae must have bren
well paid. .

During the reign of Henry V. ee the first ss
of Henry VI. to the passing of the statutes in 1444,
the:price of the quarter of wheat was about 8s. 8d. *
This would be 1s. 1d. the bushel, and 34d. the peck.
For the greater part of these thirty-two years, the
wages of day labour seem to have been about 3d.
They did not:probably rise to what they were ap-
pointed to be in 1444, that is 4d. or 44d., till the ten
dear years preceding the statute, during which, the
average price of the quarter was 10s. 8d. On an
average of the whole period of thirty-two years, the
wages of day labour appear to have purchased about
a peck of corn, rather less perhaps, than more, in
reference to the greater portion of the period.

From 1444 to the end of the century, the
average money price of wheat was about 6s. while
the wages of day labour continued at'4d. or 44d. T
At the latter of these prices of labour, wages would
purchase exactly two pecks of wheat, or half a
bushel, and at the former price 8 of half a bushel.

From the passing of the first statute of labourers


* Eden’s State of the Poor, Table of Prices, vol. iii.

+ Mr. Hallam, in’ his valuable Work on the Middle Ages, has
overlooked the distinction between the reigns of Edward III. and
Henry IV..with regard to the state of the labouring classes. The
‘two periods appear to have been essentially different in this: re-
spect. 7

i


»*
4


974 OF THE WAGES OF LABouR. [CH. IV.


im 1850 to the end of the 15th century, a period
of 150 years, successive changes had been taking
place in the quantity of metal contained in the
same nominal sum; so that the pound of silver,
which in the middle of the reign of Edward III.
was coined into 1/. 2s. 6d. was, in the peli of
Hen. VII., coined into W. 178. 6d.

One should naturally have expected, that this
depreciation of the coin would have shewn itself
first, and most conspicuously, in some exportable
commodity, such as corn, rather than labour; and
so it probably would, as it did afterwards in
the reign of Elizabeth, if wheat had not at the
same time been cheap in the rest of Europe, par-
ticularly in France. In fact, however, this great
fall im the intrinsic value of the coin was in no
respect made up by the slight rise of nominal price
which occurred in the course of that period. This
rise was only from: about 5s. 4d. to 6s. or 6s. 3d.
Consequently a very considerable fall had only
taken place in the bullion price of wheat.

- But the nominal price of labour, instead of rising
in'the same slight degree as wheat, rose from 14d.
or 2d. to 4d. or 44d., a rise much more:than suffi-
cient to cover the deterioration of the:coim; so that ~
the bullion price of labour rose considerably, during
the time that the bullion price of wheat fell. It
is singular, that Adam Smith, in his Digression
concerning the value of silver during the four last
centuries, "should not have noticed this circum-
stance. If he had been aware of this rise in the
bullion price of labour, his principles, which’ led


-


SEC. IV.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR?” 275


him to consider corn as a’ good measure of value
merely because it is the best measure of labour,
should have led him to a very different conclusion
from that which he has stated. If we were to take
a mean between corn and labour, the value of silver
during these 150 years, instead of rising to double
what it was, would appear to have continued |
“ost stationary.

It was during the favourable putt of this period
that Sir John Fortescue wrote his work on Absolute
and Limited Monarchy, and contrasted the prosperous
and happy condition of the peasantry of England
with the miserable state of the peasantry of France.

But it is not sufficient to shew that the condition
of the lower classes of people in England during
the last half of the’ 15th century, was much supe-
rior to what it was either in the preceding century,

or subsequently during the depreciation of money
oecasioned by the discovery of the’American mines.
To prove that it was peculiar, we must compare it
with the condition of the people after the depre-
ciation had ceased.

According to Adam Smith, the effects of the
discovery of the American mines seemed to’ be at
an end ‘about 1638 or 40.' In 1651 the wages of
day-labour, as established by the justices in’ Essex
at the Chelmsford quarter-sessions, were for the
summer half year, harvest excepted, 1s. 2d.. This
is a considerable rise in the money. price of labour,
from the time of Elizabeth; but we shall find that
it is hardly proportionate to the rise of the price of

T2


276 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. [cH. Iv.


wheat. If we take an average of the five years
preceding 1651,* the period to which the regula-
tion would probably for the most part refer ; it ap-
pears that the price of the quarter of wheat in the
Windsor market, deducting 4 to reduce it to Win-
chester measure, was 3/. 4s.7d.} the quarter, which
would be about 8s. the bushel, and 9s. the peck.
At this price of wheat, with wages at 14d. the la-
bourer would only earn 54 of a peck, half a peck,
and .1,.

In 1661, soon after the accession of Charles IL.,
wagés were again regulated by the justices in Es-
sex, at the Easter Sessions, and the price of common
day-labour during the summer half year, with the
exception of harvest time, was continued at 14d.

If we take an average of the price of wheat for
the five years preceding 1661, as before, it appears
that the quarter was 2/. 9s. 3d. This is 6s. 2d. the
bushel and 184d. the peck. At this rate the la-
bourer would earn about 3 of a peck. It is true
that the averages of ‘the prices of corn here taken
refer to dear times; but the wages were appointed
just at these times : and in the regulations of 1651
it is expressly stated, that they are appointed,
“ having a special regard and consideration to the
prices at this time of all kinds of victuals and ap-
parel, both linen and woollen, and all other neces-.


* As the regulation passed in April, the year 1651 is not in-
cluded in the average.

+ Encyclopedia Brit, Supp. Artic. Corn Laws, where a4able is
given with the 4 deducted. h


SEC. 1v.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 277


sary charges wherewith artificers, labourers and
servants have. been more grievously charged with
than in times past.”*

If we take an average of the twenty years from
1646 to 1665 inclusive, we shall find that the price
of wheat was rather above than below that of the
five years preceding 1661. The average price of
the quarter of wheat during these twenty years
was 2/. 10s. 03d.} which is 6s. 3d. the bushel, and
nearly 19d. the peck. At this price, with wages
at 14d. the labourer for these twenty years would
hardly be able to earn so much as ¢ of a peck.
After 1665 the price of corn fell, but wages seem
to have fallen at the same time.

In 1682 wages at Bury in Suffolk were ap-
pointed to be 6d. in summer, and 5d. in winter
with diet, and double without. This makes the
summer wages ls.; and according to the price of
wheat in the preceding five years, the labourer who
earned a shilling a day, could hardly command so
much as 4 of a peck of wheat.

_ The average price of the quarter of wheat from
1665 to 1700 was about 27. 2s. 6d. If we suppose
the wages of labour during this period to have
been about 1s. the earnings of the labourer would |
be about 4 of a peck of wheat. But there is reason
to think that the average wages were not so high
as 1s.

In the regulations of the justices at Warwick in


* Eden’s State of the Poor, vol. iii. p. 98.
+ Windsor Table, deducting 4.
T 3


ate OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. ([€H. Iv


1685," common labourers were allowed to take only
8d. a day for the summer half year. Sir George
Shuckburgh puts down only 73d. for the. period
from 1675 to 1720;f and Arthur Young estimates
the average price of labour during the whole of
the 17th century at 104d.[ If on these grounds we
were to estimate the wages of labour from 1665 to
the end of the century at 10}d. it would appear
that the earnings of the labourer, in the 17th cen-
tury, after the depreciation of money had ceased;
were only sufficient to purchase $ of a peck of
wheat. . Taking however the more favourable sup-
position of 1s,.a day as the earnings of the labourer,
they would purchase, as before stated, about 4 of
a peck.
» During the — imneaty years of the 18th cen-
tury, the price of corn fell, but not much ; and it
may be doubted whether the price of labour rose.
In.1725, afew years later than the period alluded
to, the wages of labour were settled by the justices
at Manchester. The best husbandry labourer, from
the middle.of March till the middle of September,
was not to take more than 1s. a day without meat
and ‘drink; but common labourers, and hedgers,
ditchers, palers, thrashers, or other task-work, only
10d... Mr. Howlett, .as quoted by Sir F. Eden,§
states the price of day-labour, so late as 1737, at
only 10d. a day; and Sir F. Eden, writing in 1796,


* Eden’s State of the Poor, vol. iii. p. 104.

+ Philosoph. Trans, for 1798. Part i. p. 176.
} Annals of Agriculture, No. 270. p. 88.

§ Vol. I. p. 385,


SEC. 1V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR: 279


observes, that from various information he had col-
lected in different parts of England, he had reason
to think that the wages of labour had’ doubled*
during the last sixty years, which could hardly be
true, unless wages in the early ree of the century
had been lower than 15.

The average price of wheat for the first twenty
years ‘of the century was rather less than @/.; and
if the wages of labour were only 10d. or 104d, the
labourer would earn considerably less than 4 of a
peck. If the wages were 1s. he would earn $ of @
peck.

From 1720 to 1755 corn fell and continued low,
while the wages of labour seem to have been about
1s. During these thirty-five years the price of
wheat was about 33s. the quarter, ora little above
is. the peck, and the labourer therefore, on an
average of thirty-five years together, would be able
to earn about a peck of wheat.

From this time corn began gradually to rise,
while wages do not appear to have risen in.the
same proportion. The first authentic accounts that
we have of the price of labour, after corn had be-
gun to rise, is in the extensive Agricultural Tours
of Arthur Young, which took place in 1767, 1768
and 1770. The general result of the price of la-
bour from these tours, on’'the mean rate of the
whole year, was7s.44d.a week. Taking an average

of the five years, from 1766 to 1770 inclusive, the


* VolvT. piss
+ Annals of seseiite, No. 271. p. 215.
T4


280 OF)THE WAGES OF LABOUR. _[CH. Ivy


price of the quarter of wheat. was 2/.,7s. 8d. or
nearly 48s.* which would, be 6s., the bushel, and
1s. 6d. the peck,. At these prices of labour; and
wheat, the labourer would earn very: nearly. si of.a
peck.

In 1810 and 1811, accounts from thirty-seven
counties, which, according to Arthur Young, were
quite’ satisfactory, make the wages of day-labour
for the mean rate of the year 14s. 6d.f a week, or
nearly 2s. 6d. a day.. The price of wheat for five
years ending with 1810 was 92s.—ending with
1811, 96s. The prices both of labour and wheat
appear to have doubled; and the labourer, in 1810
and 1811, could earn just about the same quantity

“of wheat as he could about forty years before, that
is 4 of a peck. The intermediate periods must ne-
cessarily have been subject to slight. variations,
owing to the uncertainty of the. seasons, and an
occasional advance in the price of corn, not imme-
diately followed by an increased price of labour ;
but, in general, the average must have been nearly
the same, and seldom probably for many years
together differed much from 4 of a peck.


* Deducting 4 from the prices in the Windsor Table. Arthur
Young deducts another,9th for the quality ; but this is certainly too
much, in reference to the general average of the kingdom to which
the latest tables apply. I have therefore preferred adhering all
along to the Windsor prices; and the reader will make what al-
lowances he thinks fit for the quality, which, according to Mr.
Rose; is not much above the average,

+ Annals of Agriculture, No. 271. p. 215 and 216.

t Windsor Table, Supp. to Encyclopedia Brit. Art, Corn Laws.


SEC..V;] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 281


e,


= . s-
Hs ") : :


SECTION Z.


On the Ciealieione to be drawn froin the sicsiedion Review.
_ — Of the Prices of Corn and Labour during the five last
Centuries.


From this review of the prices of corn and labour,


during nearly the five last centuries; we may draw
some important inferences.

In the first place, I think it appears that the
great fall in the real wages of labour which took
place in the 16th century, must have been occa-
sioned mainly by the great and unusual elevation
which they had previously attained, and not by the
discovery of the American mines and the conse-
quent fall in the value of money. When we com-
pare the wages of labour during the last half of the
15th century, with what they were both before
and subsequently, it appears that whatever may
have been the cause of these high wages, they
were evidently peculiar, and could not therefore be
permanent. ‘This indeed ‘is evident, not only by
comparing them with previous and subsequent pe-
riods, but by considering their positive amount.
Earnings of the value of nearly two pecks or half
a bushel of wheat a day would allow of the earliest
marriages, and the maintenance of the largest fami-
lies. ‘They are nearly the same as the earnings of
the American labourer. In such a country as
England was, even at that time, such wages could
only be occasioned by temporary causes. Among
these we must reckon, a. general improvement in


282 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. [cH. IV


the system of cultivation after the abolition of vil-
lanage, which increased the plenty of corn; and -
the comparatively rapid progress of commerce and
manufactures, which occasioned a great demiand —
for labour; while, owing to the wars in France, the
civil wars between the Houses of York and Lan-
caster, and. above all perhaps the slow change of
habits among a people lately emancipated, this in-
crease of produce and demand had not yet been
followed by a proportionate effect on the thi
tion.

Certain it is that corn was very cheap both in
France* and England; and labour in this country
could not possibly have risen and kept high for so
Jong a period as between sixty and seventy years,
unless some peculiar cause or causes had restrained ©


the supply of population, compared with the supply


of corn and the demand for Jabour.
oIt is with the fact however of the very high
wages of labour in the 15th century rather than


“# It is a very curious fact, that the bullion price of corn con-
tinued unusually low in France from 1444 to 1510. (Garnier’s
Richesse des Nations, vol. ii. p. 184.) just during the same period
that it was low in England, Adam Smith is inclined to attribute
this fall and low price to a deficiency in the supply of the mines,
compared with the demand ; (B. i. ch, xi.) but this solution in no
respect accounts for the rise of the bullion price of labour in
England, at the time that the bullion price of corn was falling.
Nothing can account for this fact, bnt a relative plenty of corn
compared with labour—a state of things which has little to do
with the mines. The low prices in France were probably con-
nected with the abolition of villanage, and an extended cultivation
in the reign of Charles VII. and his immediate successors, aftet
the ravages of the Eaglish were at an end.


SEC..V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR, 283


with the causes of it, that we are mainly concerhed
at present, and of the fact there can be no doubt ;
but if the fact be allowed, it follows; that. such


- wages must have very greatly fallen during the


course of the following century, if the mines af
sblenina had not been discovered. i

') What effect the depreciation of : ‘money might
Mann had in aggravating that increasing poverty of
the lower classes of society; which, with or with-
out such a depreciation, would inevitably have
fallen upon them, it is not easy to say. But from
the still lower wages which prevailed) in the: 17th
century after the depreciation had ceased, and from
what has happened of late years (which shall be
more fully noticed presently) I should not be dis+
posed to consider a general rise in the price of corn,
occasioned by an alteration in the value of money,
and not by bad seasons, as likely to affect the la-
bourmg classes prejudicially for more than a very
few years. Still, however, it is quite certain that
the condition of the labouring classes of society:
was growing much worse during the time that the
depreciation of money from the discovery of the
American mines was taking place; and whatever
may have been the cause, as the people would
always be comparing their situation with what it
had been, in their own ‘recollection and that of
their fathers, it would mevitably excite great com-
plaints; and, after it had grown comparatively very
bad, as in the latter end of the reign of Elizabeth,
it was likely to lead to those measures relating to
the poor, which marked this period of our history.


284 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. = [CH. IV.


| Another inference which we may draw from the
review is, that during the course of nearly 500
years, the earnings of a day’s labour in this coun-
try have probably been more frequently below
‘than above a peck of wheat ; that a peck of wheat
may be considered as something like a middle
point, or rather above the middle point, about
which the market wages of labour, varying accord-
ing to the demand and supply, have oscillated ; and
that the population of a country may increase with
some rapidity, while the wages of labour are even
under this point.

. The wages of day labour in France during the
two last centuries, are said to have been pretty
uniformly about the 20th part of a septier of
wheat,* which would be a little above # of a peck ;
but just before the revolution, at the | time of Ar-
thur Young’s tour in France, they were only about
Sof a peck. Since the revolution, they appear
to have risen so as to command more than a peck.

A third inference which we may draw from this
review is, that the seasons have a very consider-
able influence on the price of corn, not only for
two or three years occasionally, but for fifteen or
twenty years together. These periods of unfa-
vourable seasons seem to supersede. all the other
causes which may be supposed to have the greatest
influence upon prices. An instance of this occurs
after the great pestilence in the time of Edward
III. One should naturally have thought that the


» * Wealth of Nations, b. i. c. xi. p. 313:


SEC, V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 285


quantity of good land being abundant, compared
with the population, corn would have been very
cheap. It was however, on the contrary, dear
during the twenty-five subsequent years,—a fact
which cannot be accounted for but from unfavour-
able seasons.

Another instance of the same kind had occurred
in the reign of Edward II., during the whole of
which, the average price of wheat was more than
double what it had been during the greatest part
of the reign of Edward. I., and the first half of the
reign of Edward III.—evidently owing to unfa-
vourable seasons.

A third instance occurs during the civil wars of
the 17th century. So far from thinking that civil
wars have a necessary tendency to make corn dear,
I am disposed to agree with Sir F. Eden, in at-
tributing a part of the high price of labour and the
cheapness of corn in the 15th century, to the cir-
cumstance of a greater destruction of men than of
cultivation having been occasioned in the civil
wars of the Houses of York and Lancaster. But in
the civil wars of the 17th century no such cheap-
ness of corn took place. On the contrary, in the
period from 1646 to 1665 ‘the price of corn was
higher both in France and England than it had
ever been known for twenty years together, either
before or since, exclusive of the prices of the last
twenty-five years in this country. For shorter
periods, these unfavourable seasons are of frequent
recurrence, and must essentially affect the condition
of the labourer during ten or five years. It de-


286 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. [CHL IV.


pends’ upon their continuance and other concomi-
tant circumstances, whether they raise the’ Scan
wages, or leave them as they were.

. The periods of the lowest wages, or of the
greatest falls in real wages have been, when a con-
siderable rise in the price of corn has taken place
under circumstances not favourable to a propor-
tionate rise in the price of labour. This is the most
likely to happen in unfavourable seasons, when the
power of commanding labour at the old price
would by no means be increased in proportion to
the price of corn. It may also happen’ when a —
fall is taking place in the value of money, if any
previous causes have given an extraordinary sti-
taulus to the progress of population. In this case,
though the resources of the country may be increas-
ing fast, the population may be ‘increasing faster,
and the wages of labour ‘will not rise’ in proportion
to the fall in the value of money. ‘To this cause I
am. strongly disposed’ to attribute the inadequate
tise of the money wages of labour during the reigns
of Henry VIIL, Mary, Edward VL, and Elizabeth.
The state of ‘things in the early part of the 16th
century must have given a powerful stimulus to
population ; and considering the extraordinary high
corn wages at this period, and that they could only
fall very gradually, the stimulus must have con-
tinued to operate with considerable force during
the greatest part of the century. In fact, depopula-
tion was loudly complained of at the end of the 15th
and beginning of the 16th centuries, and a redun-
dancy of population was acknowledged at the end


SEC.V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 287


of the 16th. And it was this change in the jstate
of the population, and not the discovery of the Ame-
rican mines, which occasioned so marine a falli in
the corn wages of labour.

If the discovery of the denbaraet mines, had
found the labouring classes. of the people earning
only the same wages which they appear to haye
earned in the latter half of the reign of Edward IIL,
and if the same increase of capital and resources
had. taken place during the 16th century, as really
did take place, 1 feel not the slightest doubt, that
the money wages of labour: would have ‘increased
as fast as the money price of corn. Indeed when
a fall in the value of money is accompanied, as it
frequently is, by a rapid increase of capital, there
is one reason, why, in the natural state of things,
the price of labour should feel it more than. other
commodities. The encouragement given to popus
lation by such increase of resources, could not ap-
pear with any effect in the market under sixteen
oreighteen years; and in the mean time the de-
mand:compared with the supply of labour would
be greater than the demand compared with. the
supply of most other commodities.

_ It is on this account, that in the fall in the value
of money which took place from 1793 to 1914,
and which was unquestionably accompanied by a
great increase of capital, and a great demand for
labour, I am strongly’ of opinion, that if the ptice
of labour had not been kept down by artificial
means, it would have risen higher in proportion
than the average. price of corn; and this opinion


288 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.  [CH.. IVs


is, I think, fairly borne out by facts. If according
to the last authentic accounts which had been ob-
tained of the price of labour, previous to 1814, it
appears that on an average of the returns of thirty-
seven counties in 1810 and 1811, the weekly wages
of day labour were 14s. 6d.,—a price, which, com-
pared with the wages of 1767, 1768 and 1770,* is
equal to the rise in the price of wheat during the

same period, while it is known that in many coun-
ties and districts in the southern parts of England,
wages in 1810 and 1811 were unnaturally kept
down to 12s., 10s., 9s. and even 7s.6d. by the bane-
ful system of regularly maintaining the children
of the poor out of the rates, it may fairly be. con-
cluded that if this system had not prevailed over
a large part of England, the wages of labour would
have risen higher than in proportion to the price
of wheat.

And this conclusion is still further confirined by
what has happened in Scotland and some parts of
the north of England. In these districts, all ac-
counts agree that the rise of wages was in fact
greater than the rise of corn, and that the condition
of the labourer till 1814 was decidedly improved,
even in spite of the taxes, many of which certainly
bore heavily on the conveniences and comforts of
the labourer, though they affected but little his
command over strict necessaries.

In considering the corn wages of labour in the
course of this review, it has not been possible to


* Annals of Agriculture, No, 271. pp. 215 and 216.


*


* “s


SEC. V.] | OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 289


make any distinction between the effects of a fall
in the price of corn and a rise in the price of labour.
In merely comparing the two objects with each
other, the result is precisely similar; but their ef-
fects ir the encouargement of population are some-
times very dissimilar, as I have before intimated.
There is no doubt ‘that a great encouragement
to an increase of population is consistent, with


a fall in the price of raw produce, because, not-—


withstanding this fall, the exchangeable value
of the whole produce of the country may still
be increasing compared with labour; but it
may sometimes happen that a fall in the. price
of raw produce is accompanied by a diminished
power and will to employ labour; and in this case
the demand for labour and the encouragement to
population will not be in proportion to the apEpeiet
corn wages of labour.

If a labourer commands a peck instead of of a
peck of wheat a day in consequence of a rise of
wages occasioned by a demand for labour, it is cer-
tain that all labourers may be employed who are
willing and able to work, and probably also their
wives and children ; but if he is able to command
this additional quantity of wheat on account of a
fallin the price of corn which diminishes the ca-
pital of the farmer, the advantage may be more
apparent than real, and though labour for some
time may not nominally fall, yet as the demand for
labour may be stationary, if not retrograde, its cur-
rent price will not bea certain criterion of what
might be earned by the united labours of a large

U


290 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. __[CH. Iv.
family, or the increased exertions of the head of it
in task-work. :

It is obvious, therefore, that the same current
corn wages will, under different circumstances, have
a different effect in the encouragement of popula-
- tion:

It should also be observed, that in estimating
- the corn wages of labour I have uniformly

‘taken wheat, the dearest grain. I have taken

‘one grain to the exclusion of other necessaries,

) because I wish to avoid complicating the subject ; 3

and have chosen wheat because it is the main
: food of the greatest part of the population in

«England. But it is evident that at those pe-
riods, or in those countries, in which the main
food of the people does not consist of wheat, the
wheat wages that can be earned by a family will
not form a just criterion of the encouragement
given to population. Although the wheat wages
might be very unequal at two different periods or
in two different countries, yet if in one case an in-
ferior grain were habitually consumed, the en-
couragement to the population might be the same.
2’, The Irish labourer cannot command the support

S, of so large a family upon wheat as the English,

but he can command in general the support of a
much larger family upon the food on which he is
accustomed to live; and consequently, population
has increased much faster during the last century
in Ireland than in England.

It appears then that, making a proper allowance
for the varying value of other parts of the wages


vy


—


Se _*
SEC, V.] OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. 291


of labour besides food, the quantity of the custo-
mary grain which a labouring family can actually
earn, is at once a measure of the encouragement
to population and of the condition of the labourer;
while the money price of such wages is the best »
measure of the value of money as far as one com-
modity can go. Butit is of the utmost importance
always to bear in mind that a great command over
the necessaries of life may be effected i in two ways,
either by rapidly increasing resources, or by the
prudential habits of the labouring classes; and that
as rapidly increasing resources are neither in the
power of the poor to effect, nor can in the nature
of things be permanent, the great resource of the
labouring classes for their happiness must be in
those prudential habits which, if properly exercised,
‘are capable of securing to the labourer a fair pro-
portion of the necessaries and conveniences of life,
from the earliest stage of society to the latest.

I have said nothing of the value of labour as
measured by the criterion assumed by Mr. Ri- .
cardo, that is, by the labour which has been ex-
pended in procuring the earnings of the labourer,
or the cost in labour of the labourer’s wages ; be-
cause it appears to me, that what I have called the
real and nominal wages of labour include every
thing which relates to the condition of the la-
bourer, the encouragement to population, and the
value of money, the three great points which
chiefly demand our attention. According to Mr.
Ricardo’s view- of the subject, nothing can be in-
ferred on these points either from high or from low

ug


292 OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR. (CH. IV.


wages. Such high or low wages serve only to
determine the rate of profits, and their influence


in this respect will be fully considered in the next
chapter. ;


( 293 )


CHAPTER V.


OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.


SECTION I. F


Of Profits as affected by the increasing Difficulty of pro-


curing the Means of Subsistence.


Tr has been usual, in speaking of that portion of
the national revenue which goes to the capitalist
in return for the employment of his capital, to call
it by the name of the profits of stock. But stock
is not so appropriate an expression in this case, as
capital. Stock isa general term, and may be de-
fined to be all the material possessions of a country,
or all its actual wealth, whatever may be its desti-
nation; while capital is that particular portion of
these possessions, or of this accumulated wealth,
which is destined to be employed with a view to
profit. They are often, however, used indiscrimi-
nately ; and perhaps no great error may arise from


-it; but it may be useful to recollect that all stock


is not properly speaking capital, though all capital
is stock.

The profits of capital consist of the difference be-
tween the value of the advances necessary to pro-
duce a commodity, and the value of the commodity
when produced ; and these advances are generally

US


-


294 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ([CH.V.


composed of accumulations which have previously
cost in their production a certain quantity of
wages, profit and rent, exclusive of the rent which,
in the case of landed products, is paid directly. _

The rate of profits is the proportion which
the difference between the value of the advances
and the value of the commodity produced bears to_.
the value of the advances, and it varies with the va-
riations of the value of the advances compared with
the value of the product. When the value of the
advances is great compared with the value of the
product, the remainder being small, the rate of pro-
fits will be low. When the value of the advances
is inconsiderable the remainder being great, the
rate of profits will be high.

The varying rate of profits, therefore, obviously.
depends upon the causes which alter the propor-
tion between the value of the advances and the
value of the produce; and this proportion may be
altered either by circumstances which affect the
value of the advances, or the value of the product.

Of the advances necessary to production, the
means of supporting labour are generally the
greatest and most important. These means, there-
fore, will have the greatest influence on the value
of the advances.

The two main causes which influence the means
of supporting labour, are

Ist. The difficulty or facility of production ‘on

_the land, by which a greater or less proportion of
the value of the whole produce is capable of sup-
porting the labourers employed.


SEC. I.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 295


And @dly, The varying relation of the quantity
of capital to the quantity of labour employed by
it, by which more or less of the necessaries of life
may go to each individual labourer.

Each of these causes is alone sufficient to occa-
sion all the variations of which profits are suscep-
tible. If one of them only acted, its operation
would be simple. It is the combination of the
two, and of others in addition to them, sometimes
acting in conjunction and sometimes in opposition,
which occasions in the progress of society those
varied phenomena which it is not always easy to
explain.

If the first cause operated singly, and the wages
of the individual labourer were always the same,
then supposing that the skill in agriculture were
to remain unchanged, and that there were no
means of obtaining corn from foreign countries,
he rate of profits must regularly and without any
interruption fall, as the society advanced, and as it
became necessary to resort to inferior machines
which required more labour to put in action.

It would signify little, in this case, whether the
last land taken into cultivation for food had
yielded a rent in its uncultivated state. It is cer-
tain that the landlord would not allow it to be cul-
tivated, unless he could, at the least, obtain the
same rent for it as before. This must be consi-
dered as an absolute condition -on the worst lands
taken into cultivation in an improved country.
After this payment was made, the remainder of

U4


296 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.  [CH. V.


the produce would be divided chiefly* between the
capitalist and the labourers, and it is evident that
if the number of labourers necessary to obtain a
given produce were continually increasing, and
the wages of each labourer remained the same, the
portion destined to the payment of labour would
be continually encroaching upon the portion des-
tined to the payment of profits; and: the rate of
profits would of course continue regularly dimi-
nishing till, from the want of power or will to save,
the progress of accumulation had ceased.

‘In this case, and supposing an equal demand for
all the parts of the same produce,t it is obvious
that the profits of capital in agriculture would be
in proportion to the fertility of the last land taken
into cultivation, or to the amount of the produce
obtained by a given quantity of labour. And as
profits in the same country tend to an equality,
the general rate of profits would follow the same
course.

* T say chiefly, because, in fact, some rent, though it may be
trifling, is almost always paid-in the materials of the farmer's
capital.

t It is necessary to qualify the positicn in this way, because,
with regard to the main products of agriculture, it might easily


happen that all the parts were not of the same value. Ifa farmer
cultivated his lands by means of domestics living in his House


whom he found in food and clothing, his advances might always


be nearly the same in quantity and of the same high value in use;
but in the case of a glut from the shutting up of an accustomed
market, or a season of unusual abundance, a part of the crop might
be of no value either in use or exchange, and his profits could by
no means be determined, by the excess of the quantity produced,
above the advances necessary to produce it.


‘4


——— _—


SEC. I.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 297


- Buta moment’s consideration will shew us, that
the supposition here made of a constant uniformity
in the real wages of labour is not only contrary.
to the actual state of things, but involves a contra-
diction. bi )

The progress of population is almost exclusively
regulated by the quantity of the necessaries of life
actually awarded to the labourer ; and if from the’
first he had no more than sufficient to keep up the
actual population, the labouring classes could not
increase, nor would there be any occasion for the
progressive cultivation of poorer land. On the
other hand, if the real wages of labour were such
as to admit of and encourage an increase of popu-
lation, and yet were always to remain the same, it
would involve the contradiction of a continued in-
crease of population after the accumulation of ca-
pital, and the means of supporting such an increase
had entirely ceased. j

We cannot then make the supposition of a na-
tural and constant price of labour, at least if we
mean by such a price, an unvarying quantity of the
necessaries of life. And if we cannot fix the real
price of labour, it must evidently vary with the
progress of capital and revenue, and the demand
for labour compared with the supply.

We may however, if we please, suppose a uniform
progress of capital and population, by which is not
meant in the present case the same “ate of progress
permanently, which is impossible; but a uniform
progress towards the greatest practicable amount,
without temporary accelerations or retardations.


298 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. V.


~ And before we proceed to the actual state of things, _
it may be curious to consider in what manner profits
would be affected under these circumstances.

At the commencement of the cultivation of a
fertile country by civilized colonists, and while
rich land was in great plenty, a small portion only
of the value of the produce would be paid in the
form of rent. Nearly the whole would be divided
between profits and wages; and the proportion
which each would take, as far as it was influenced
by the share of each individual labourer, must be
determined by the demand and supply of capital
compared with the demand and supply of labour.

As the society continued to proceed, if the terri-
tory were limited, or the soil of different qualities,
it is quite obvious that the productive powers of
labour as applied to the cultivation of land must
gradually diminish; and as a given quantity of
capital and of labour would yield -a smaller and
smaller return, there would evidently be a less and
less produce to be divided between labour and
profits. .

If, as the powers of labour diminished, the phy-
sical wants of the labourer were also to diminish
in the same proportion, then the same share of the
whole produce might be left to the capitalist, and
the rate of profits would not necessarily fall.
But the physical wants of the labourer remain al-
ways the same; and though in the progress of
society, from the increasing scarcity of provisions
compared with labour, these wants are in general
less fully supplied, and the real wages of labour


SEC. I.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 299


gradually fall; yet it is clear that there is a limit,
~ and probably at no great distance, which cannot
be passed. “The.command of a certain quantity of
food is absolutely necessary to the labourer in order
to support himself, and such a family as will main-
tain merely a stationary population. Consequently,
if poorer lands which required more labour were
successively taken into cultivation, it would not
be possible for the corn wages of each individual
labourer to be diminished in proportion to the di-
minished produce; a greater proportion of the whole
would necessarily go to labour; and the rate of pro-
fits would continue regularly falling till the accu-
mulation of capital had ceased.

Such would be the necessary course of profits

and wages in the progressive accumulation of
capital, as applied to the progressive cultivation of |
new and less fertile land, or the further improve-
ment of what had before been cultivated ; and on
the supposition here made, the rates both of profits
and of real wages would be highest at first, and
would regularly and gradually diminish together,
till they both came to a stand at the same period,
and the demand for an increase of produce ceased
to be effective.
- In the mean time, it will be asked, what be-
comes of the profits of capital employed in manu-
factures and commerce, a species of industry not
like that employed upon the land, where the pro-
ductive powers of labour necessarily diminish ; but
where these powers not only do not necessarily di-
minish, but very often greatly increase?


- 300 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. _[CH. Y.


_ In the cultivation of land, the immediate and
main.cause of the necessary diminution of profits
appeared to be the increased quantity of labour
necessary to obtain the same produce. In manu-
factures and commerce, it is the fall in the ex-
changeable value of the products of industry in
these departments, compared with corn and labour.

The cost of producing corn and labour conti-
nually increases from inevitable physical causes,
while the cost of producing manufactures and. ar-
ticles of commerce sometimes diminishes, some-
times remains stationary, and at all events increases
much slower than the cost of producing corn and
labour. Upon every principle therefore of demand
and supply, the exchangeable value of these latter
objects must fall, compared with the value of la-
bour. But if the exchangeable value of labour
continues to rise, while the exchangeable value of
manufactures either falls, remains the same, or rises


_ in a much less degree, profits must continue to
fall; and thus it appears that in the progress of


improvement, as poorer and poorer land is taken
into cultivation, the rate of profits must be limited
by the powers of the soil last cultivated.. If the
last land taken into cultivation can only be made
to yield a certain excess of value above the value
of the labour necessary to produce it, it is obvious
that, upon the principles of competition, profits,
generally, cannot possibly be higher than this. ex-
cess will allow. In the ascending scale, this is a
barrier which cannot be passed. But limitation is
essentially different from regulation. Inthe de


ae


-=—


SEC. Il.] | OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 301


scending scale, profits may be lower in any degree.
There is here no controlling necessity which deter-
mines the rate of profits; and below the highest
limit which the actual state of the land will ‘al-
low, ample scope is left for the operation of other .
causes,


i: _ SECTION II.


Of Profits as affected by the Proportion which hel bears
to Labour.


The second main cause kia; by increasing” the
amount of advances, influences profits, is the’ pro-
portion’ which capital bears to labour.*

This is obviously a cause which alone is capable
of producing the very greatest effects; andon the
supposition of adequate variations taking place be-
tween the supplies of capital and the supplies of
labour, all the same effects might be produced on
profits as by the operation of the first eee and in
a much shorter time.

When capital is really abundant compared with
labour, nothing can prevent low profits; and the


* I have stated in a former chapter, that the demand for labour
does not depend upon capital alone, but upon capital and revenue
together, or the value of the whole produce; but to illustrate the
present supposition, it is only necessary to consider capital and
labour: We may allow that no difficulty will occur with respect
to demand,


302 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. Y.


greatest facility of production is incapable of pro-
ducing high profits, unless oon is scarce com-
pared with labour.

“But in order to see more clearly the powerful
effects of the second cause on profits, let us con-
sider it for a moment as operating alone; and sup-
pose, that while the capital of a country continued
increasing, its population were checked and kept -
short of the demand for it, by some miraculous
influence. Under these circumstances, every sort
of gradation might take place. in the proportion
which capital would bear to labour, and we should
see in consequence every sort of gradation take
place in the rate of profits.

If, in an early period of improvement, capital
were scarce compared with labour, the wages of la-
bour being on this account. low, while the produc-
tive powers of labour, from the fertility of the
land, were great, the proportion left for profits.
would necessarily be very considerable, and the
rate of profits would be very high.

In general, however,. though capital may be
said to be scarce in the early periods of cultivation,
yet that particular portion of capital, which re-
solves itself into food, is often plentiful compared
with the population, and high profits and high real _
wages are found together. In the most natural
state of things this is generally the case, though —
it is not so when capital is prematurely checked by
extravagance, or other causes. But whether we
set out from low or high corn wages, the diminu-
tion. in the rates of profits, from the gradual in-


SEC. Il.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 303


crease of capital compared with labour, will re-
main undisturbed.

As capital at any time increases faster than la-
bour, the profits of capital will fall, and if a pro-
gressive increase of capital were to take place,
while the population, by some hidden cause, were
prevented from keeping pace with it, notwith-
standing the fertility of the soil and the plenty of
food, then profits would be gradually reduced,
until, by successive reductions, the power and will
_ toaccumulate had ceased to operate.

Profits in this case would experience exactly the
same kind of progressive diminution as_ they
would by the progressive accumulation of capital
in the present state of things; but rent and wages
would be very differently affected. From what
has before been stated on the subject of rent, the
amount of it in such a country could not be great,
According to the supposition, the progress of the
population is retarded, and the number of labourers
is limited, while land of considerable fertility re-
mains uncultivated. The demand for fertile land
therefore, compared with the supply, would be com-
paratively inconsiderable ; and in reference to the
whole of the national produce, the portion which
would consist of rent would depend mainly upon
the gradations of more fertile land that had been
cultivated before the population had come to a
stop, and upon the value of the produce to be
derived from the land that,was not cultivated.

With regard to wages they would continue pro-
gressively to rise, and would give the labourer a


~*


304 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ([CH. V.


greater command not only of manufactures and
of the products of foreign commerce (as is gene-
rally the case in the present state of things) but
of corn and all other necessaries, so as to place him
in a condition continually and in all respects im-
proving, as long as capital continued to increase.


In short, of the three great portions into which —


the mass of produce is divided, rent, profits, and
wages, the two first would be low, because both the
supply of land and the supply of capital would be
abundant compared with the demand; while the
wages of labour would be very high, because the
supply of labourers would be comparatively
scanty; and thus the value of each would be
regulated by the great peril of demand a
supply.

If, instead of supposing the population to ibd
checked by some peculiar influence, we make the
more natural supposition of a limited territory,
with all the land of nearly equal quality, and of
such great fertility as to admit of very little capi-
tal being laid out upon it, the effects upon the
profits of capital would be just the same as in the
last instance, though they would be very different
on rents and wages. After all the land had been
cultivated, and no more capital could be employed
on it, there cannot be a doubt that rents would
be extremely high and profits and wages very
low. The competition of increasing capital in
manufactures and commerce would reduce the
rate of profits, while the principle of population
would continue to augment the number of the


SEC. I.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 305


labouring classes, till their corn wages were so low
as to check their further increase. It is probable
that, owing to the facility of production on the
land and the great proportion of persons em-
ployed in manufactures and commerce, the exports
would be great and the value of money very low.
The money price of corn and money wages would
perhaps be as high as when their cost in labour
had been double or treble; rents would rise to an
extraordinary pitch without any assistance from
poor lands, and the gradations of soil; and profits
might fall to the point only just sufficient to keep
up theactual capital without any additional labour
being necessary to procure the food of the la-
bourer. ;

The effects which would obviously result from
the two suppositions just made, clearly shew
that the increasing quantity of labour required for
the successive cultivation of poorer land is not
theoretically necessary to a fall of profits from the
highest rate to the lowest.

The former of these two suppositions further
shews the extraordinary power possessed by the
labouring classes of society, if they chose to ex-
ercise it. The comparative check to population,
which was considered as occasioned by some mira-
culous influence, might in reality be effected by
the prudence of the poor; and it would unques-
tionably be followed by the result described. It
may naturally appear hard to the labouring classes
that, of the vast mass of productions obtained
from the land, the capital, and the labour_of the

x


306 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.  [CH. Vv.


country, so small a portion should individually fall
to theirshare. But the division is at present de-
termined, and must always in future be determined,
‘ by the inevitable laws of supply and demand. If
the market wére comparatively understocked with
labour, the landlords and capitalists would be
obliged to give a larger share of the produce to
each workman. But with an abundant supply of la-
bour, such a share, for a permanence, is an absolute
impossibility. The rich have neither the power,
nor can it be expected that they should all have the
will, to keep the market understocked with labour.
Yet every effort to ameliorate the lot of. the poor
generally, that has not this tendency, is perfectly
futile and childish. It is quite obvious therefore,
that the knowledge and prudence of the poor
themselves, are absolutely the on/y means by which
any general improvement in their condition can be
effected. -They are really the arbiters of theirown
destiny ; and what others can do for them, is like
the dust of the balance compared with what they
can do for themselves. These truths are so im-
portant to the happiness of the great mass of so-
ciety, that every opportunity should be taken of
repeating them.

But, independently of any particular efforts of
prudence on the part of the poor, itis certain that
the supplies of labour and the supplies of capital
do not always keep pace with each other. They
are often separated at some distance, and for a
considerable period ; and sometimes population in-


=


z=


SEC. I1.] . OFTHE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 307


creases faster than capital, and at other times capi-
tal increases faster than population.

It is obvious, for instance, that from’ the very
nature of population, and the time required to
bring full-grown labourers into the market, a sud-
den increase of capital cannot effect a propor-
tionate supply of labour in less than sixteen or
eighteen years; and, on the other hand, when capi-
tal is stationary from the want of will to accumu-
late, it is well known.that population in general
continues to increase faster than capital, till the
wages of labour are reduced to that standard
which, with the actual habits of the country, are
no more than sufficient to maintain a stationary
population.

_ These periods, in which capital and population
do not keep pace with each other, are evidently of
sufficient extent to produce the most important
results on the rate of profits, and to affect in the
most essential manner the progress of national
wealth.

The value of the government long annuities hasa
natural and inevitable tendency to diminish as they
approach nearer and nearer to the end of the
term for which they wére granted. This is a pro-
position which I conceive no person is inclined to
doubt ; but under the fullest acknowledgment of
its truth, it would be a most erroneous calculation
to estimate the value of this kind of stock solely
bythe number of years which it would have to
run. It is well known that out of the compara- »
tively short term of ninety years, so large a propor-

x @


308 OF THE PROFITS-‘OF CAPITAL,  [CH. vs


tion as twenty has sometimes elapsed, not only
without any diminution, but with an n actual in-
crease of value.

In the same manner, the natural and necessary
tendency of profits to fall in the progress of so-
ciety, owing to the increasing difficulty of pro-
curing food, is a proposition which few will be
disposed to controvert ; but to attempt to estimate
the rate. of profits in any country by a reference
to this cause alone, for ten, twenty, or even fifty
years together, that is for periods of sufficient
length to produce the most important effects on
national prosperity, would inevitably lead to the
greatest practical errors.

Yet notwithstanding the utter inadequacy of
this single cause to account for existing pheno-
mena, Mr. Ricardo, in his very ingenious chapter
on profits, has dwelt on no other.

If the premises were all such as he has supposed
them to be, that is, if no other cause operated on
profits than the increasing difficulty of procuring
the food of the labourer, and no other cause af-
fected the exchangeable and money value of com-
modities than the quantity of labour which they
had cost in production, the conclusions which he
has drawn would be just, and the rate of profits
would certainly be regulated in the way which he
has described. But, since in theactual state of things
the premises are most essentially different from
those which he has supposed ; since another most
powerful cause operates upon profits, as I have en-
deavoured to shew in the present section ; and since


’
SEC, I1.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ‘309


the exchangeable value of commodities is not de-
termined by the labour they have cost, as I endea-
voured to shew in a former chapter, the conclusion
drawn by Mr. Ricardo must necessarily contradict
experience ; not slightly, and for short periods, as
the market prices of some articles occasionally dif-
fer from the natural or necessary price, properly
explained ; but obviously and broadly, and for
periods of such extent, that to overlook them,
would not be merely like overlooking the resist-
ance of the air in a falling body, but like over-
looking the change of direction given to a ball by
a second impulse acting at a different angle from
the first.

It is impossible then to agree in the conclusion
at which Mr. Ricardo arrives in his chapter on
profits, “that in all countries, and at all times,
profits depend upon the quantity of labour re-
quired to provide necessaries for the labourer on
that land, or with that capital which yields no
rent.’*

If by the necessaries of the labourer be meant,
such wages as will just keep up the population, or
what Mr. Ricardo calls the natural wages of labour,
it is the same as saying that land of equal fertility
will always yield the same profits—a proposition
which must necessarily be untrue.

If, for instance, in one country, with the last
land taken into cultivation of a given fertility,
capital were stationary, not from want of demand,


* Priac. of Polit. Econ. c. vi. p. 133. 2d-edit.
x3


310 OF THE, PROFITS OF CAPITAL. | [CH. vs


but from great expenditure and the want. of
saving habits, it is certain that labour, after a
time, would be paid very low, and profits would
be very high.

If; in another country with similar land in cul-
tivation, such a spirit of saving should prevail. as
to occasion the accumulation of capital to be more
rapid than the progress of population, it is as cer-
tain that profits would be very low.

So understood therefore, the proposition | cannot
for a moment be maintained.

If, on the other hand, by necessaries be meant the
actual earnings of the labourer, whatever they may
be, the proposition is essentially incomplete. Even


allowing that the exchangeable value of commodi- _
ties is regulated by the quantity of labour that has _


been employed in their production, (which it has
been shewn is not so,) little is done towards deter-
mining the rate of profits. It is merely a truism to
say that if the value of commodities be divided be-
tween labour and profits, the greater is the share
taken by one, the less will be left for the other; or in
other words, that profits fall as labour rises, or rise
as labour falls. We can know little of the laws
which determine profits, unless, in addition to the
causes which increase the price of necessaries, we
explain the causes which award a larger ora smaller
share of these necessaries to each labourer. And
here it is obvious that we must have recourse to
the great principles of demand and supply, or to
that very principle of competition brought for-


SEC.11.| | OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 311


ward by Adam Smith, which Mr. Ricardo ex-
pressly rejects, or at least considers as of so tem-
porary a nature as not to require attention in a
general theory of profits.*

And yet in fact there is no other cause of per-
manently high profits than a deficiency in the
supply of capital; and under such a deficiency;
occasioned by extravagant expenditure, the profits
of a particular country might for hundreds of years
together continue very high, compared with others,
owing solely to the different proportions of —
to labour.

In Poland, and some other parts of Europe, pro-
fits are said to be higher than in America; yet it


_ 1s probable that the last land taken into cultivation


in America is richer than the last land taken into
cultivation in Poland. But in America the labourer
earns perhaps the value of sixteen or eighteen quar-
ters of wheat in the year; in Poland only the value
of eight or nine quarters of rye. ‘This difference in
the division of the same or nearly the same pro-
duce, must make an extraordinary difference in
the rate of profits; yet the causes which determine
this division can hardly be said to form any part of
Mr. Ricardo’s theory of profits, although, far from
beg of so temporary a nature that they may be
safely overlooked, they might contribute to operate
most powerfully for almostany length of time. Such
is the extent of America, that the price of its labour
may. not essentially fall for hundreds of years ;'and


* Princ. of Polit. Econ, chap. vi. p, 132. and ch. xxi. 2d edit:
x 4


312 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.  [CH. Vv.


the effects of a scanty but stationary capital onan
overflowing but stationary population might last
for ever.

In dwelling thus upon the powerful effects which
mustinevitably be produced by the proportion which
capital bears to labour, and upon the necessity of
giving adequate weight to the principle of demand
and supply or competition in every explanation of
the circumstances which determine profits, it is not
meant to underrate the importance of that cause
which has been almost exclusively considered by
Mr. Ricardo. It is indeed of such a nature as
finally to overwhelm every other. To recur to the
illustration already used—as the Long Annuities
approach nearer and nearer to the term at which
they expire, their value must necessarily so dimi-
nish, on this account alone, that no demand arising
from plenty of money could possibly keep up their
value. In the same manner, when cultivation is
pushed to its extreme practical limits, that is, when
the labour of a man upon the last land taken into
cultivation will scarcely do more than support such
a family as is necessary to maintain a stationary
population, it is evident that no other cause or
causes can prevent profits from sinking to the
lowest rate required to maintain the actual capital.

But though the principle here considered is
finally of the very greatest power, yet its progress
is extremely slow and gradual; and while it is
proceeding with scarcely perceptible steps to its
final destination, the second cause, particularly
when combined with others which will be noticed


SEC. I1I.]| .OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 313


in the next section, is producing effects which en-
tirely overcome it, and often for twenty or thirty,
or even 100 years together, make the rate of profits
take a course absolutely different from what it
ought to be according to the first cause.


SECTION III.


Of Profits as affected by the Causes ang wi: in
operation.


We come now to the consideration of the causes
which influence profits in the actual state of things.
And here it is evident that we shall have in opera-
tion not only both the causes already stated, but
others which will variously modify them.

In the progressive cultivation of poorer land for
instance, as capital and population increase, profits,
according to the first cause, will regularly fall; but if
at the same time improvements in agriculture are
taking place, they may certainly be such as, for a
considerable period, not only to prevent profits from
falling, but to allow of a considerable rise. To
what extent, and for what length of time, this cir-
cumstance might interrupt the progress of profits
arising from the first cause, it is not easy to say ;
but, as it is certain that in an extensive territory,
consisting of soils not very different in their natural
powers. of production, the fall of profits arising


314 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. Vs


from this cause would be extremely slow, it is pro-
bable that fora considerable extent of time agri-
cultural, improvements, including of course the
improved implements and machinery used in cul-
tivation, as well as an improved. system of crop-
ping and managing a land, might more than
balance it.

A second circumstance which would contribute
to the same effect is, an increase of personal exer-
tion among the labouring classes. This exertion
is extremely different in different countries, and at
different times in the same country. A day’s labour
of a Hindoo, or a South-American Indian, will not
admit of a comparison with that of an Englishman;
and it has even been said, that though the money
ptice of day-labour in Ireland is little more than the
half of what it is in England, yet that Irish labour
is not really cheaper than English, although it: is
well known that Irish labourers when in this coun-
try, with good exainples and adequate wages to
stimulate them, will work as hard as their English
companions.

This latter circumstance alone clearly  shews
how different may be the personal exertions of the
labouring classes in the same country at different
times; and how different therefore may be the
products of a given number of days labour, as the
society proceeds from the! indolence of the savage
to the activity of the civilized state. This activity
indeed, within certain limits, appears almost always
to come forward when it is most called for, that
is, when there is much work to be done without


———————_


-


SEC, UI.| OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 315


a full supply of persons todo: it. The personal
exertions of the South American Indian, the Hin-
doo, the; Polish boor, and the Irish agricultural
labourer, may be: very different indeed 500. years
hence.

The two preceding circumstances tend, to. di+
minish the expenses of production, or to reduce
the relative amount of the advances necessary to
obtain a certain value of produce. But it was
stated at the beginning of this chapter, that: pro-
fits depend upon the prices of products compared
with the expenses.ot production, and must vary
therefore with any causes which affect prices with-
out proportionally affecting costs, as well as with
any causes which affect costs without propor-
tionally affecting prices. _

A considerable effect on profits may therefore
be occasioned by a third circumstance which not
unfrequently occurs, namely, the unequal rise of
some parts of capital, when the price of corn is
raised. by an increased demand. I was obliged to
allude to this cause, and indeed to the two pre-
ceding ones, in the chapter on rents. I will only
therefore add here, that when the prices of corn
and labour rise and terminate in an altered value of
money, the prices of many home commodities will
be very considerably modified for some time, by the
unequal pressure of taxation, and by the different
quantities of fixed capital employed in their produc-
tion ; and the prices of foreign commodities and of
the commodities worked up at home from foreign


316 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. V.


materials, will permanently remain comparatively
low. The rise of corn and labour at home will not
proportionally raise the price of such products ;
and as far as these products form any portion of
the farmer’s capital this capital will be rendered
more productive ; but leather, iron, timber, soap,
candles, cottons, woollens, &c. &c. all enter more
or less into the capitals of the farmer, or the wages
of the labourer, and are all influenced in their
prices more or less by importation. While the
value of the farmer’s produce rises, these articles
will not rise in proportion, and consequently a
given value of capital will yield a greater value of
produce.

All these three circumstances, it is obvious, have
a very strong tendency to counteract the effects
arising from the necessity of taking poorer land
‘into cultivation; and it will be observed that,
as they are of a nature to increase in efficiency
with the natural progress of population and
improvement, it is not easy to say how long and
to what extent they may balance or overcome
them.

The reader will be aware that the reason why,
in treating of profits, I dwell so much on agricul-
tural profits is, that the whole stress of the ques-
tion rests upon this point. The argument against
the usual view which has been taken of profits, as
depending principally upon the competition of ca-
pital, is founded upon the physical necessity of a
fall of profits. in agriculture, arising from the m-


SEC. 111.] | OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 317


creasing quantity of labour required to procure the
same food; and it is certain that if the profits on
land permanently fall from this or any other cause,
profits in manufactures and commerce must fall
too, as it is an acknowledged truth that in an im-
‘proved and civilized country the profits of stock,
with few and temporary exceptions which may be
easily accounted for, must be nearly on a level in
all the different branches of industry to which
capital is applied.

Now I am fully disposed to allow the truth of
this argument, as applied to agricultural profits,
and also its natural consequences on all profits.
This truth is indeed necessarily involved both in
the Principle of Population and in the theory of
rent which I published separately in 1815. But I
wish to shew, theoretically as well as practically,
that powerful and certain as this cause is, in its
final operation, so much so as to overwhelm every
other; yet in the actual state of the world, its na-
tural progress is not only extremely slow, but is
so frequently counteracted and overcome by other:
causes as to leave very great play to the principle
of the competition of capital; so that at any one
period of some length in the last or following hun-
dred years, it might most safely be asserted that
profits had depended or would depend very much
more upon the causes which had occasioned a com-
paratively scanty or abundant supply of capital
than upon the natural fertility of the land last
» taken into cultivation.

The facts which support this position are obvious


318 | OFTHE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ([CH. Y.


and incontrovertible. ‘Some of them have been
stated in the preceding section, and their number
might easily be increased. I will only add how-
ever one more, which is'so strong ‘an instance as
to be:alone almost decisive of the question, and
having happened in our own country, it is com-
pletely open to the most minute examination.

From the accession of George II. im 1797 to the
commencement of the war in 1739, the interest
of money was little more than 3 percent. The
public securities which had been reduced to 4 per
cent: rose considerably after the reduction. Ac-
cording to Chalmers, the atural rate of interest
ran steadily at 3'per cent. ;*' and it appears’ by a
speech of Sir John Barnard’s that the 3 per cent.
stocks sold at a premium upon Change. In 1750,
after the termination of the war, the 4 per cent.
stocks were reduced to 341, for seven years, and
from that time to 3 per cent. permanently.

Excluding then the interval of war, we have
here a period of twenty-two years, during which
the general rate of interest was between 34 and
3 per cent.

The temporary variations in the value of govern-
ment securities will not certainly at all times be a
correct criterion of the rate of profits or even of
the rate of interest; but when they remain nearly
steady for some time together, they must be’ con-
sidered as ‘a fair approximation to a correct mea-


* Estimate of the Strength of Great Britain, c. vii. p. 115.
t Id. ch, vii. p. 120.


as


SEC. III.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 819


sure of interest ; and when the public creditors of
a government consent toa great fall in the interest
which they had before received, rather than be
paid off, it is a: most decisive proof of a great diffi-
culty in the means of employing capital profitably,
and consequently a most decisive proof of a low
rate of profits.

After an interval of nearly: adveaty years ftori
the commencement of the period here noticed,yand
forty years from the end. of it,: during which a
great accumulation of capital had taken place, and
an unusual quantity of new land had been brought
into cultivation, we find a period of twenty years
succeed in which the average market rate of in-


_ terest was rather above than below 5 per cent. ;


and we have certainly every reason to think, from
the extraordinary rapidity with which capital was
recovered, after it had been destroyed, that the rate
of profits in general was quite in proportion to this
high rate of interest.

The difficulty of borrowing on mortgage during
a considerable part of the time is perfectly well
known; and though the pressure of the public
debt might naturally be supposed to create some
alarm and incline the owners of disposable funds
to give a preference to landed security ; yet it ap-
pears from the surveys of Arthur Young, that the
number of years purchase given for land was in
1811, 294, and forty years before, 32 or 324,*—the


* Annals of Agriculture, No. 270. pp. 96. and 97. and,No. 271.
p. 215. Mr. Young expresses considerable surprize at these re-
sults, and does not seem sufficiently aware, that the number of


320 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. Y.


most decisive proof that can well be imagined of
an increase in the profits of capital employed upon
land.

The different rates of interest and profits in the
two periods here noticed are diametrically opposed
' to the theory of profits founded on the natural
quality of the last land taken into cultivation. The
facts, which are incontrovertible, not only cannot
be accounted for upon this theory, but in re-
ference to it, either exclusively or mainly, they
ought to be directly the reverse of what they are
found to be in reality.

The nature of these facts, and the state of things
under which they took place, (in the one case, ina
state of peace with a slack demand for agricultural
products, and in the other, a-state of war with an
unusual demand for these products,) obviously and
clearly point to the relative redundancy or defi-
ciency of capital, as, according to every probabi-
lity, connected with them. And the question
which now remains to be considered, is, whether
the circumstances which have been stated in this
section are sufficient to account theoretically for
such a free operation of this principle, notwith-
standing the progressive accumulation of capital,
and the progressive cultivation of fresh land, as
to allow of low profits at an earlier period of this
progress and high profits at a later period. At all
events, the facts must be accounted for, as they are


years purchase given for land has nothing to do with prices, but
mainly expresses the abundance. or scarcity of moyable capital
compared with the means of employing it. ;


—
'


a


SEC, III.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL, 321


so broad and glaring, and others of the same kind
are in reality of such frequent recurrence, that I
cannot but consider them as at once decisive
against any theory of profits which is inconkimtent
with them,

In the first period of the two which have been
noticed, it is known that the price of corn had
fallen, but that the wages of labour had not only
not fallen in proportion, but had been: considered
by some authorities as having risen. Adam Smith
states the fall of corn and the rise of labour during
the first sixty-four years of the last century asa
sort of established fact ;* but Arthur Young, in his
very useful inquiries into the prices of corn and
labour published in his Annals of Agriculture,
seems to think with some reason, that the fact is
not well authenticated, and is besides a little in-
consistent with the apparently slack demand for
labour and produce and comparatively slow pro-
gress of population, which took place during the
period in question.f Allowing, however, even a
stationary price of labour, with a falling price of
corn, and the fall of agricultural profits is at once
accounted for. Such a state of prices might alone
be much more than sufficient to counteract the
effects arising from the circumstance of pretty


‘good land being yet uncultivated. When we add,


that the other outgoings belonging to the farmers’
capital, such as leather, iron, timber, &c. &c., are


* Wealth of Nations, Book I. ch. xi. p. 309. 313. 6th edit,
+ Annals of Agriculture, No. 270. p. 89.
y


$22 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. — [CH. ¥.


supposed to have risen while his main produce was
falling, we can be at no loss to account for a low
rate of agricultural profits, notwithstandmg the
unexhausted state of the country. And as to the
low rate of mercantile and manufacturing profits,
that would be accounted for at once by the pro-
portion of capital to labour.

In the subsequent period, from 1793 to 1813, it
is probable that all the circumstances noticed in
this section concurred to give room for the opera-
tion of that principle which depends upon the pro- °
portion of capital to labour.

In the first place, there can be no doubt of the
improvements in agriculture which were going
forwards during these twenty years, both in re-
ference to the general management of the land
and the instruments which are connected with
cultivation, or which in any way tend to facilitate
the bringing of raw produce to market. 2@dly, the
increasing practice of task-work during these
twenty years, together with the increasing em-
ployment of women and children, unquestionably
occasioned a great increase of personal exertion ;
and more work was done by the same number of
persons and families than before.

These two causes of productiveness in the powers
of labour were evidently encouraged and in a man-
ner called into action by the circumstances of the
times, that is, by the high price of corn, which en-
couraged the employment of more capital upon
the land with the most effective modes of apply-
ing it, and by the increasing demand for labour,


es a, ee


SEC. III.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL, 323


owing to the number of men wanted in the army


and navy at the same time that more than éver
were wanted in agriculture and manufactures.

The third cause, which had a very considerable
effect, much more indeed than is generally attri-
buted to it, was a rise in the money price of corn
without a proportionate rise in mercantile and ma-
nufacturing produce. This state of things always
allows of some diminution in the corn wages of
labour without a proportionate diminution of the
comforts of the labourer; and if the money price
of the farmer's produce increases without a propor-
tionate increase in the price of labour and of the
materials of which his capital consists, this capital
becomes more productive and his profits must
necessarily rise.

In a country in which labour had been well paid,
it is obvious that an alteration in the proportion
between labour and capital might occasion a rise
in the rate of profits without supposing any in-
crease in the productive powers of labour. But all
the causes just noticed are of a nature to increase
the productive powers both of labour and capital ;
and if in any case they are of sufficient force to
overcome the effect of taking poorer land into cul-
tivation, the rate of profits may rise consistently
even with an increase in the real wages of labour.

In the case in question, though it is generally
supposed that the money wages of labour did not
rise in proportion to the rise in the price of pro-
visions ; yet I cannot help thinking, both from the
acknowledged demand for labour and the rapid in-

y¥@


324 _ OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ° [CH. V.


crease of population, that, partly owing to parish
assistance and the more extended use of potatoes,
and partly to task-work and the increased employ-
ment of women and children, the labouring classes
had on an average an increased command over
the necessaries of life. I am inclined to think,
therefore, that the increased rate of profits from
1793 to 1813 did not arise so much from the dimi-
nished quantity of agricultural produce given to
the labourer’s family, as from the increase in the
amount of agricultural produce obtained by the
same number of families. As a matter of fact, I
have no doubt that, as I stated in the chapter on
rent, the capital employed upon the last land taken
into cultivation in 1813 was more productive than
the capital employed upon the last land taken into
cultivation in 1727; and it appears to me that the
causes which have been mentioned are sufficient to .
account for it theoretically, and to make such an
event appear not only possible, but probable, and
likely to be of frequent recurrence.

It will be said, perhaps, that some of the causes
which have been noticed are in part accidental ;
and that in contemplating a future period, we can-
not lay our account to improvements in agricul-
' ture, and an increase of personal exertions in the
labouring classes: This is in some degree true.
At the same time it must be allowed that a great
demand for corn of home growth must. tend greatly:
to encourage improvements in agriculture, and a
great demand for labour must stimulate the actual
population to do more work; and when to these two


SEC. I1I.] - OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 325


circumstances we add the necessary effect of a
rising price of corn owing to an increase of wealth,
without a proportionate rise of other commodities,
the probabilities of an increase in the productive
powers of labour sufficient to counterbalance the
effect of taking additional land into cultivation
are so strong, that, in the actual state of most coun-
tries in the world, or in their probable state for some
centuries to come, we may fairly lay our account
to their operation when the occasion calls for them.

I should feel no doubt, for instance, of an increase
in the rate of profits in this country for twenty
years together, at the beginning of the twentieth
century, compared with the twenty years which
are now coming on; provided this near period
were a period of profound tranquillity and peace
and abundant capital, and the future period were
a period in which capital was scanty in proportion
to the demand for it owing to a war, attended by
the circumstances of an increasing trade and an
increasing demand for agricultural produce similar
to those which were experienced from 1793 ta
1813.

But if this be so, it follows, that in the actual
state of things in most countries of the world, and
within limited periods of moderate extent, the
rate of profits will practically depend more upon
the causes which affect the reiative abundance or
scarcity of capital, than on the natural powers of
the last land taken into cultivation. And con-
sequently, to dwell.on this latter point as the sole,
or even the main cause which determines profits,

y 3


326 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. [CH. V.


must lead to the most erroneous conclusions.
Adam Smith, in stating the cause of the fall of
profits, has omitted this point, and in so doing has
omitted a most important consideration; but in
dwelling solely upon the abundance and competi-
tion of capital, he is practically much nearer the
truth,* than those who dwell almost exclusively
on the quality of the last land taken into cul-_
tivation.


SECTION IV.


Remarks on Mr. Ricardo’s Theory of Profits.


According to Mr. Ricardo, profits are regulated
by wages,.and wages by the quality of the last
land taken into cultivation. This theory of pro-
fits depends entirely upon the circumstance of
the mass of commodities remaining at the same
price, while money continues of the same value,
whatever may be the variations in the price of
labour. This uniformity in the value of wages
and profits taken together is indeed assumed by
Mr. Ricardo in all his calculations, from one end
of his work to the other; -and if it were true,


* Perhaps it ought to be allowed that Adam Smith, in speaking
of the effects of accumulation and competition on profits, na-
turally means to refer to a limited territory, a limited popu-
lation, and a limited demand; but accumulation of capital under
these circumstances involves every cause that can affect profits.


rs


SEC. 1V.] | OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 327


we should certainly have an accurate rule which
would determine the rate of profits upon any
given rise or fall of money wages. But if it be
not true, the whole theory falls to the ground.


- We can infer nothing respecting the rate of profits


from a rise of money wages, if commodities, in-
stead of remaining of the same price, are very
variously affected, some rising, some falling, and a
very small number indeed remaining stationary.
But it was shewn in a former chapter* that this
must necessarily take place upon a rise in the
price of labour. Consequently the money wages
of labour cannot regulate the rate of profits.

This conclusion will appear still more strikingly
true, if we adopt that supposition respecting
the mode of procuring the precious metals which
would certainly maintain them most strictly of
the same value, that is, if we suppose them to be
procured by a uniform quantity of unassisted la-
bour without any advances in the shape of capital
beyond the necessaries of a single day. That the
precious metals would in this case retain, more
completely than in any other, the same value, can-
not be denied, as they would both cost and com-
mand the same.quantity of labour. But in this
case, as was before stated, the money price of la-
bour could never permanently rise. We cannot
however for a moment imagine that this impossi-


- bility of a rise or fall im the money price of la-


)


bour could in any respect impede or interrupt the


* Chap. ii. sects. 4 and 5.


Yy 4


328 _OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. — [CH. Vs


natural career of profits. The continued accumu-
lation of capital and increasing difficulty of pro-
curing subsistence would unquestionably lower
profits. All commodities, in the production of
which the same quantity of labour continued to
be employed, but with the assistance of capitals
of various kinds and amount, would fall in price,
and just in proportion to the degree in which the
price of the commodity had before been affected
by profits ; and with regard to corn, in the produc-
tion of which more labour would be necessary,
this article would rise in money price, notwith-
standing the capital used to produce it, just to
that point which would so reduce corn wages as
to render the population stationary ; and thus all
the effects upon profits, attributed by Mr. Ricardo
to a rise of money wages, would take place while
money wages and the value of money remained
precisely the same. This supposition’ serves fur-
ther to shew how very erroneous it must be to
consider the fall of profits as synonimous with a rise
of money wages, or to make the money price of
labour the great regulator of the rate of profits.
It is obvious that, in this case, profits can only be
regulated by the principle of competition, or of
demand and supply, which would determine the
degree in which the prices of commodities would


fall; ‘and their prices, compared with the uniform °


price of labour, would mainly regulate the rate of
profits,

But Mr. Ricardo never contemplates the fall of
prices as occasioning a fall of profits, although prac-


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 329


tically in many cases, as well as on the preceding
supposition, a fall of profits must be produced in-
this way.

Let us Suppose a prosperous commercial city,
greatly excelling in some manufactures, and pur-
chasing all its corn abroad. At first, and perhaps
for a considerable time, the prices of its manufac-
tures in foreign markets might be such as, cof-
pared with the price of its imported corn, to yield
high profits ; but, as capital continued to be accu-


mulated and employed in larger quantities on the ©


exportable manufactures, such manufactures, upon
the principles of demand and supply, would in all
probability fall in price. A larger portion of them
must then be exchanged for a given portion of
corn, and profits would necessarily fall. It is true
that, under these circumstances, the labouring ma-
nufacturer must do more work for his support, and
Mr. Ricardo would say that this is the legitimate ‘
cause of the fall of profits. In this I am quite
willing to agree with him; but surely the specific
cause, in this case, of more work being necessary to
earn the same quantity of corn is the fall in the
prices of the exportable manufactures with which


itis purchased, and not a rise in the price of corn,


which may remain exactly the same. The fall in
these manufactures is the natural consequence of
an increase of supply arising from an accumulation
of capital more rapid than the extension of demand
for its products; and that the fall of profits so
occasioned depends entirely upon the principles of
demand and supply will be acknowledged, if we


330 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.  [CH. Vv.


acknowledge, as we certainly must do, that the
openitig a new market for the manufactures in
question would at once put an end to the fall of
profits.

Upon the same principle, of considering the
prices of commodities as.constant, Mr. Ricardo is


of opinion, that if the prices of our corn and labour’


were to fall, the profits of our foreign trade would

rise in proportion, But what is it, I would ask,
' that is to fix the prices of commodities in foreign
markets?—not merely the quantity of labour which
has been employed upon them, because, as was no-
ticed in a former chapter, commodities will be
found selling at the same price in foreign markets,
which have cost very different quantities of labour.
But if they are determined, as they certainly are,
both on an average and at the moment, by supply
and demand, what is to prevent a much larger
supply, occasioned by the competition of capital
thrown out of employment, from rapidly lowering
prices, and with them reducing the rate of profits?

If the price of corn during the last twenty-five
years could have been kept at about fifty shillings
the quarter, and the increasing capital of the coun-


try had chiefly been applied to the working up of -


exportable commodities for the purchase of foreign
‘corn, I am strongly disposed to believe that the
profits of stock would have been lower instead of
higher. The millions which have been employed
in permanent agricultural improvements* have had


* The millions of capital which have been expended in drain-
ings, and in the roads and canals for the conveyance of agricul-


=


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL, 331


no tendency whatever to lower profits; but if, in
conjunction with a large portion of the common
capital employed in domestic agriculture, they
had been added to the already large capitals ap-
plied to the working up of exportable commodities,
I can scarcely feel a doubt that the foreign mar-
kets would have been more than fully supplied ;
that the prices of commodities would have been
such as to make the profits of stock quite low ;*
and that there would have been both a greater mass
of moveable capitals at a loss for employment, and
a greater disposition in those capitals to emigrate
than has actually taken place.

Mr. Ricardo has never laid any stress upon the
influence of permanent improvements in agricul-
ture on the profits of stock, although it is one of
the most important considerations in the whole
compass of Political Economy, as such improve-
ments unquestionably open the largest arena for
the employment of capital without a diminution
of profits. He observes, that “ however extensive
a country may be, where the land is of a poor
quality, and where the importation of food is pro-
hibited, the most moderate accumulations of capital


tural products, have tended rather to raise than lower profits ;


and millions and millions may yet be employed with the same
advantageous effect.

* Our present body of manufacturers, when they call for im-
ported corn, think chiefly of the additional demand for their
goods occasioned by the increased imports, and seem quite to
forgetthe prodigious increase of supply which must be occasioned
by the competition of so many more capitals and workmen in the
same line of business.


332 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. — [CH. V.


will: be attended with great reductions in the rate
of profits, and a rapid rise in rent ; and on the con-
trary, a small but fertile country, particularly if it
freely permits the importation of food, may accu-
mulate a large stock of capital, without any great
diminution in the rate of profits, or any great in-
crease in the rent of land.”*

Adverting to the known effects of permanent
improvements on the land, I should have drawn
an inference from these two cases precisely the re-
verse of that which Mr. Ricardo'has drawn. A very
extensive territory; with the soil of a poor quality,
yet all, or nearly all capable of cultivation, might,
by continued improvements in agriculture, admit of
the employment of a vast mass of capital for hun-
dreds of years, with little or with no fall of profits;
while the small but fertile territory, being very
soon filled with all the capital it could employ on
the land, would be obliged to employ its further
accumulations in the purchase of corn with falling
manufactures; a state of things which might easily
reduce profits to their lowest rate before one-third
of the capital had been accumulated that had been
accumulated in the former case.

A country, which accumulates faster than its
neighbours, might for hundreds of years still keep
up its rate of profits, if it were successful in making
permanent improvements on the land; but, if with
the same rapidity of accumulation it were to de-
pend chiefly on imported corn, its profits could


* Princ. of Pol. Econ. ch. vi. p. 133. 2d edit,


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 333


scarcely fail to fall; and the fall would probably
be occasioned, not by a rise in the bullion price of
corn in the ports of Europe, but by a fall in the bul-
lion price of the exports with which the corn was
purchased by the country in question.

These statements appear to me to accord with
the most correct theory of profits, and they cer-
tainly seem to be confirmed by experience. I have

_already adverted to the unquestionable fact of the
profits on land being higher in 1818 than they
were above eighty years before, although in the
interval millions and millions of accumulated ca-
pital had been employed on the soil. And the
effect of falling prices in reducing profits is but
too evident at the present moment. In the largest
article of our exports, the wages of labour are now
lower than they probably would be in an ordinary
state of things if corn were at fifty shillingsa quarter.
If, according to the new theory of profits, the prices
of our exports had remained the same, the master
manufacturers would have been in a state of the
most extraordinary prosperity, and the rapid accu-
mulation. of their capitals would soon have em--
ployed all the workmen that could have been found.
But, instead of this, we hear of glutted markets,
falling prices, and cotton goods selling at Kam-
schatka lower than the costs of production.

It may be said, perhaps, that the cotton trade
happens to be glutted; and it is a tenet of the new
doctrine on profits and demand, that if one trade
be overstocked with capital, it is a certain sign
that some other trade is understocked. But where,


334 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. ([C¢H. V.


I would ask, is there any considerable trade that is


confessedly understocked, and where high profits.


have been long pleading in vain for additional
capital? The war has now been at an end above
four years; and though the removal of capital ge-
nerally occasions some partial loss, yet it is seldom
long in taking place, if it be tempted to remove by
great demand and high profits; but if it be only dis-
couraged from proceeding in its accustomed course
by falling profits, while the profits in all other


"


trades, owing to general low prices, are falling at


the same time, though not perhaps precisely in the
same degree, it is highly probable that its motions
will be slow and hesitating.

It must be allowed then, that in contemplating
the altered relation between labour and the pro-
duce obtained by it which occasions a fall of
profits, we only take a view of half the question
if we advert exclusively to a rise in the wages of
labour without referring to a fall in the prices of
commodities. Their effects on profits may be pre-
cisely the same; but the latter case, where there


is no question feapeating the state of the land,


shews at once how much profits depend upon the
prices of commodities, and upon the cause which
determines these prices, namely the supply com-
pared with the demand.

At all times indeed, and on every supposition,
the great limiting principle which depends upon
the increasing difficulty of procuring food from
the soil, or on the still more general cause, a limi-
tation of the population, in whatever way it may


SEC. 1V.| OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. 335


be occasioned, is ready to act; and, if not overcome
by countervailing facilities, will necessarily lower
the rate of profits on the land, and from the land
this fall will extend to all other departments of
industry. But even this great principle operates
according to the laws of apained and supply and
competition.
The specific reason why profits must fall as
the land becomes more and more exhausted. is,.
that from the intrinsic nature of necessaries, and
of the soil from which they are procured, the
demand for them and the price of them cannot
possibly go on increasing in proportion to the
expense of producing them. The cost in labour of
producing capital increases faster than the value
of such capital when produced, or its efficiency in
setting fresh labourers to work. The boundary to
the further value of and demand for corn, lies clear
and distinct before us. Putting importation out of
the question, it is precisely when the produce of
the last land taken into cultivation will but just
replace the capital and support the population em-
ployed in cultivating it. Profits must then be at
their lowest theoretical limit. In their progress
towards this point, the continued accumulation of
capital will always have a tendency to lower them;
and at no one period can they ever be higher than
the state of the land, under all the circumstances,
will admit.
They may be lower, however, as was before
stated, in any degree, from an abundant supply of
capital compared with the demand for produce; °


336 OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL. | [CH. Vv.


and practically they are very rarely so high as the
actual state of the land combined with the smallest
possible quantity of food awarded to the labourer
would admit of. But what would be the effects
upon the profits of stock of any given increase of
capital, or even of any given increase of the labour
necessary to produce a certain quantity of corn, it
would be quite impossible to say before hand.

In the case of a mere increase of capital, how-
ever large, it has appeared that circumstances
might occur to prevent any fall of profits for a
great length of time. And, even in the case of an
increase in the quantity of labour necessary to
produce corn, it would depend entirely upon the
principles of demand and supply and competi-
tion, whether the increase in the price of corn
would be such as to throw almost the whole of
the increased difficulty of production upon labour,
or such as to throw almost the whole of it upon
profits, or finally such as to divide the loss more
equally in various proportions between them.

No theory of profits therefore can approach to-
wards correctness, which attempts to get rid of
the principle of demand and supply and compe-
tition.


I dati i all ee


6a 89%:2


CHAPTER. VI.


OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN WEALTH AND
’ VALUE.


Ir has been justly stated by Adam Smith that a man
is rich or poor according to the degree in which
he can afford to enjoy the necessaries, conveniences,
and amusements of human life. And it follows
from this definition that, if the bounty of nature
furnished all the necessaries, conveniences ‘and
amusements of life to every inhabitant of a country
in the fullest measure of proportion to his wishes,
such a country would be in -the highest degree
wealthy, without possessing any thing which would
have exchangeable value, or could command a
single hour's labour. '

In this state of things, undoubtedly, wealth has
nothing to do with exchangeable value. But as
this is not the actual state of things, nor likely to
be so at any future time; as the bounty of nature
furnishes but few of the necessaries, conveniences
and amusements of life to man without the aid of
his own exertions; and as the great stimulus to
exertion is the desire to possess what can only be
possessed by means of some labour or sacrifice, it
will be found that, in the real state in which man
is placed on earth, wealth and exchangeable value,

zZ


338 OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN [CH. VI.


though still by no means the same, are much more
nearly connected than they have sometimes been
supposed to be.

In considering the different quantities of the
same commodity which, under different circum-
stances, have the same exchangeable value, the dis-
tinction is indeed perfectly obvious. Stockings
do not lose half their power of contributing to the
comfort and convenience of the wearer, because
by improved machinery they can be made at half
the price, or their exchangeable value be reduced _
one half. It will be readily allowed that the man
who has two pairs of stockings of the same quality
instead of one pair, possesses, as far as stockings
are concerned, a double portion of the conveniences
of life. .

Yet even in this case he is not in all respects
doubly rich. If, indeed, he means to use them
himself, he really has twice as much wealth, but
_if he means to exchange them for other commo-
dities, he has not; as one pair of stockings, under
certain circumstances, may command more labour
and other commodities than even two or even three
pairs after very great improvements have been made
in the machinery used in producing them. In all
cases however of this description, the nature of the
difference between wealth and value is sufficiently
marked.

But when we come to compare objects of dif-
ferent kinds, there is no other way of estimating
the degree of wealth which the possession and en-
joyment of them confer on the owner, than by the


Ee ————- |


CH, VI.] WEALTH AND VALUE. 339


relative estimation in which they are respectively
held, evinced by their relative exchangeable values.
If one man has a certain quantity of tobacco, and
another a certain quantity of muslin, we can only
determine which of the two is the richer by ascer-
taining their relative command of wealth in the
market. And even: if one country exports corn,
and imports lace and cambrics, notwithstanding
that corn has a more marked and definite value in
use than any other commodity, the estimate must
be formed exactly in the same way. . Luxuries are
a part of wealth as well as necessaries. The coun-
try would not have received lace and cambrics in
exchange for its corn unless its wealth, or its ne-
cessaries, conveniences and luxuries taken together,
had been increased by such exchange ; and this
increase of wealth cannot possibly be measured in
any other way than by the increase of value so
occasioned, founded upon the circumstance that
the commodities received are more wanted and
held in higher estimation than those which were
sent away.

Wealth, however, it will be allowed, does not
always increase in proportion to the increase of
value; because an increase of value may sometimes
take place under an actual diminution of the ne-
cessaries, conveniences and luxuries of life; but
neither does it increase in proportion to the mere
quantity of what comes under the denomination
of wealth, because the various articles of* which
this quantity is composed may not be so propor-

Zz


Rees


$40. OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN  [CH. VI.


tioned to the wants and powers of the society as
to give them their proper value. ‘The most useful
commodity, in respect of its qualities, if it be abso-
lutely in excess, not only loses its exchangeable
value, but its power of supplying the wants of the
society to the extent of its quantity, and part of it
therefore loses its quality of wealth. If the roads
and canals of England were suddenly broken up
and destroyed, so as to prevent all passage and
interchange of goods, there would at first be no
diminution of commodities, but there would be
immediately a most alarming diminution both of
value and wealth. <A great quantity of goods
would at once lose their value by becoming utterly
useless; and though others would rise in particular
places, yet from the general want of power to pur-
chase, the rise rcjutd? by no means compensate for
the fall. The whole exchangeable value of the
produce estimated in labour, corn, or money, would
be greatly diminished ; and it is quite obvious that
the wealth of the society would be most essentially
impaired ; that is, its wants would not be in any
degree so well supplied as before.

It appears then that the wealth of a country de-
/pends partly upon the quantity of produce obtained


| by its labour, and partly upon such an adaptation
_ of it to the wants and powers of the existing popu-
lation as is calculated to give it value.


But where wealth and value are perhaps the
most nearly connected, is in the constant necessity
of the latter to the production of the former. In


CH. VI.] WEALTH AND VALUE. 341


the actual state of things, no considerable quantity
of wealth can be obtained except by considerable
exertions; and unless the value which an indi-


vidual or the society places on the object when


obtained fully compensates the sacrifice which has
been nfiade to obtain it, such wealth will not be
produced in future. If labour alone be concerned
in its production, as in shrimping, in the collection
of hirts and wild strawberries, and some other exer-
tions’ of mere manual labour, it is obvious that
this wealth will not be collected, will not be used
to supply any of the wants of the society, unless
its value when collected will, at the least, command
as much labour as the collection of it cost.

If the nature of the object to be obtained re-
quires advances in the shape of capital, as im the
vast majority of instances, then by whomsoever
this capital is furnished, whether by the labourers
themselves or by others, the commodity will not
be produced, unless the estimation in which it is
held by the society or its value in exchange be
such, as not only to replace all the advances of
labour and other articles which have been made
for its attainment, but to pay the usual profits of


_ capital.


_ It is obviously therefore the value of commodi- \
ties, or the sacrifice of labour and of other articles |


which people arg willing to make in order to ob-

tain them, that in the actual state of things may

be said to be the sole cause of the existence of

wealth; and this value is founded on the wants of
23


342 OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN [CH, VI.


mankind, and the adaptation of particular commo-
dities to supply these wants, independently of the
actual quantity of labour which these commodities
may cost in their collection or production. It is
this value which is not only the great stimulus to
the production of all kinds of wealth, but the
great regulator of the forms and relative quanti-
ties in which it shall exist. No species of wealth
can be brought to market for a continuance, unless
some part:of the society sets a value upon it equal to
its natural or necessary price, and is both able and
willing to make a sacrifice to this extent in order
to obtainit. A tax will entirely put an end to the
production of a commodity, if no one of the so-
ciety is disposed to value it at a price equal to the
new conditions of its supply. And-on the other
hand, commodities will be continually increased
in quantity so long as the numbers of those, who
are able and willing to give a value for them equal
to this price, continue to increase. ©

In short, the market prices of commodities are
the immediate causes of all the great movements
of society in the production of wealth, and’ these
market prices always express clearly and unequi-
vocally the exchangeable value of commodities at
the time and place in which they are exchanged, -
and differ only from natural and necessary prices
as the actual state of the demand and supply, with
regard to any particular article, may differ from the
ordinary and average state.

The reader of course will observe that in using


CH. VI. | WEALTH AND VALUE. 343


the term value, or value in exchange, I always
mean it to be understood in that enlarged and, as -
I conceive, accustomed and correct sense, accord-
mg to which I endeavoured to explain and define
it in the Second Chapter of this work, and never in
the confined sense in which it has been lately ap-
plied by Mr. Ricardo, as depending exclusively
upon the actual quantity of labour employed in
production.* Understood in this latter sense, va-
lue, certainly, has not so intimate a connection
with wealth. In comparing two countries toge-
ther of different degrees of fertility, or in com-
paring an agricultural with a manufacturing and .
commercial country, their relative wealth would
be very different from the proportion of labour
employed by each in production; and certainly
the increasing quantity of labour necessary to pro-
duce any commodity would be very far indeed
from being a stimulus to its increase. In this
sense therefore wealth and value are very different. .

But if value be understood in the sense in which
it is-most generally used, and according to which


* Mr. Ricardo says, (ch. xx. p. 343.) “That commodity is
alone invariable, which at all times requires the same sacrifice of
toil and labour to produce it.” _ What does the term “invariable”
meanhere? It cannot mean invariable in its exchangeable value ;
because Mr. Ricardo has himself allowed that commodities which
have cost the same sacrifice of toil and labour will very frequently
not exchange for each other. Asa measure of value in exchange
this standard is much more variable than those which he has re-
jected ; and in what other sense it is to be understood, it is not
easy to say.


zZ4


344 OF THE DISTINCTION, &c. [cH. v1.


I have defined it, wealth and value, though cer-
- tainly not always the same, will appear to be very
nearly connected; and in making an estimate of
wealth, it must be allowed to be as grave an error
to consider quantity without reference to value, as
to consider value without reference to quantity.


vy
+ ey


Se


€ 345 )


CHAPTER VII.
’ ; +
oN re IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF THE PROGRESS
OF WEALTH.


SECTION I.


Statement of the particular Object of Inquiry.


Turre is scarcely any inquiry more curious, or,
from its importance, more worthy of attention,
than that which traces the causes which practically
check the progress of wealth in different countries,
and stop it, or make it proceed very slowly, while
the power of production remains comparatively
undiminished, or at Jeast would furnish the means
of a great and abundant increase of produce and
population.

In a former work * I endeavoured to trace the
causes which practically keep down the population
of a country to the level of its actual supplies.
It is now my object to shew what are the causes
which chiefly influence these supplies, or call the
powers of production forth into the shape of in-
creasing wealth. '

Among the primary and most important causes
which influence the wealth of nations, must un-


* Essay on the Principle of Population.


-


346 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cu. vil.


questionably be placed, those which come under the
head of politics and morals. Security of property,
without a certain degree of which, there can be
no encouragement to individual industry, depends
mainly upon the political constitution of a country,
the excellence of its laws and the manner in
which they are administered. And those habits
which are the most favourable to regular exer-
tions as well as to general rectitude of character,
and are consequently most favourable to the
production and maintenance of wealth, depend
chiefly upon the same causes, combined with
moral and religious instruction. It is not how-
ever my intention at present to enter fully into
these causes, important and effective as they are;
but to confine myself chiefly to the more imme-
diate and proximate causes of increasing wealth,
whether they may have their origin in these politi-
cal and moral sources, or in any others more speci-
fically and directly within the province of political
economy. ;
It is obviously true that there are many coun-
tries, not essentially different either in the degree
of security which they afford to property, or in
the moral and religious instruction received by the
people, which yet, with nearly equal natural capa-


bilities, make a very different progress in wealth.


It is the principal object of the present inquiry to
explain this; and to furnish some solution of
certain phenomena frequently obtruded upon our
attention, whenever we take a view of the diffe-
rent states of Europe, or of the world; namely,


|
t
|


SEC. II.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 347°


countries with great powers of production com-
paratively poor, and countries with small powers
of production comparatively rich.

If the actual riches of a country not subject to
repeated violences and a frequent destruction of
produce, be not after a certain period in some
degree proportioned to its power ef producing
riches, this deficiency must have arisen from the
want of an adequate stimulus to continued pro-
duction. The practical question then for our con-
sideration is, what are the most immediate and
effective stimulants to the continued creation and
progress of wealth. 2 EH “eh
4


oT Ng


’ ‘


ne
sgl SECTION II.


Of the Increase of Population considered as a Stimulus to


the continued Increase of Wealth.


Many writers have been of opinion that an in-
crease of population is the sole stimulus necessary —
to the increase of wealth, because population, being
the great source of consumption, must in their
opinion necessarily keep up. the demand for an
increase of produce, which will naturally be fol-
lowed by a continued increase of supply.
That a permanent increase of population is a
powerful and necessary element of increasing de-
mand, will be most readily allowed ; but. that the
increase of population alone, or, more properly


348 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


speaking, the pressure of the population hard against
the limits of subsistence, does not furnish an effec-
tive stimulus to the continued increase of wealth,
is not only evident in theory, but is confirmed by
universal experience. If want alone, or the desire


- of the labouring classes to possess the necessaries


and conveniences of life, were a sufficient stimulus
to production, there is no state in Europe, or in
the world, that would have found any. other prac-
tical limit to its wealth than its power to produce ;
and the earth would probably before this period
have contained, at the very least, ten times as many
inhabitants as are supported on its surges at pre-
sent.
- But those who’ are acquainted with the nature
of effective demand, will be fully aware that,
where the right of private property is esta-
blished, and the wants of society are supplied by
industry and barter, the desire of any individual to
possess the necessary conveniences and luxuries
of life, however intense, ‘will avail nothing. to-
wards their production, if there be no where a
reciprocal demand for something which he pos-
sesses. A man whose only possession is his labour
has, or has not, an effective demand for produce
according as his labour is, or is not, in demand by
those who have the disposal of produce. And no
productive labour will ever be in demand unless
the produce when obtained is of greater value than
the labour which obtained it. No fresh hands can
be employed in any sort of industry merely in
consequence of the demand for its produce occa-


, % : :
SEC. Il.| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 349


sioned by the persons employed. No farmer will
take the trouble of superintending the labour of
ten additional men merely because his whole pro-
duce will then sell in the market at an advanced
price just equal to what he had paid his.additional
labourers. There must be something in the pre-
vious state of the demand and supply of the com-
modity in question, or in its price, antecedent to
and independently of the demand occasioned by
the new labourers, in order to warrant the employ-
ment of an additional number of people in its
production. ‘

It will be said perhaps that the imcrease_ of
population will lower wages, and, by thus diminish-
ing the costs of production, will increase the pro-
fits of the capitalists and the encouragement. to
produce. Some temporary effect of this kind may
no doubt take place, but it is evidently very strictly
limited. The fall of wages cannot go on beyond
a certain point without not only stopping the pro-


- gress of the. population but making it even retro-


grade; and before this point is reached, it will pro-
bably happen that the increase of produce occa-
sioned by the labour of the additional number of
persons ‘will have so lowered its value,,as more
than to counterbalance the fall of wages, and thus
to diminish instead of increase the profits of the
capitalists and the power and val to employ more
labour.

It is obvious then in. theory that an increase of
population, when an additional quantity of labour
is not wanted, will soon be checked by want of


350 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT,


employment, and the scanty support of those em-
ployed, and will not furnish the required stimulus
to an increase of wealth proportioned to the power
of production. ;

But, if any doubts should remain with respect to
the zheory on the subject, they will surely be dissi-
pated by a reference to experience. It is scarcely
possible to cast our eyes on any nation of the
world without seeing a striking confirmation of
what has been advanced. Almost universally, the
actual wealth of all the states with which we are
acquainted is very far short of their powers of pro-
duction; and almost universally among those
states, the slowest progress in wealth is made where
the stimulus arising from population alone is the
greatest, that is, where the population presses the
hardest against the limits of subsistence. It is
quite evident that the only fair way, indeed the
only way, by which we can judge of the prac-
tical effect of population alone as a stimulus to
wealth, is to refer to those countries where, from
the excess of population above the funds applied
to the maintenance of labour, the stimulus of
want is the greatest. And if in these countries,
which still have great powers of production, the
progress of wealth is very slow, we have certainly
all the evidence which experience can possibly
give us, that population alone cannot create an
effective demand for wealth.

To suppose an actual and permanent increase of
population is to beg the question. We may as
well suppose at once an increase of wealth; be-


,


SEC. I1I.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 351


cause an actual and permanent increase of popu- |
lation cannot take place without a proportionate
or nearly proportionate increase of wealth. The
question really is, whether encouragements to
population, or even the natural tendency of popu-
lation to increase beyond the funds for its main-
tenance, so as to press hard against the limits of
subsistence, will, or will not, alone furnish an ade-
quate stimulus to the increase of wealth. And
this question, Spain, Portugal, Poland, Hungary,
Turkey, and many other countries in Europe, to-
gether with nearly the whole of Asia and Africa,
and the greatest part of America, distinctly answer
in the negative.


SECTION III.


Of Accumulation, or the Saving from Revenue to add to
Capital, considered as a Stimulus to the Increase of
Wealth.


Those who reject mere population as an adequate
stimulus to the increase of wealth, are generally
disposed to make every thing depend upon accumu-
lation. It is certainly true that no permanent and
continued increase of wealth can take place with-
out a continued increase of capital; and I cannot
agree’ with Lord Lauderdale in thinking that this
increase can be effected in any other way than by


352 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VITi


saving from the stock which might have been des-
tined for immediate consumption, and adding it
to that which is to yield a profit; or in other
words, by the conversion of revenue into capital.*

But we have yet to inquire what is the state of
things which generally disposes a nation to accu-
mulate; and further, what is the state of things
which tends to make that accumulation the most
effective, and lead to a further and continued
increase of capital and wealth.

It is undoubtedly possible by parsimony to de-
vote at once a much larger share than usual of the
produce of any country to the maintenance of
productive labour; and it is quite true that the
labourers so employed are consumers as well as
unproductive labourers; and as far as the labourers
are concerned, there would be no diminution of
consumption or demand. But it has already been
shewn that the consumption and demand occa-
sioned by the persons employed in productive la-
bour can never alone furnish a motive to the
accumulation and employment of capital; and
with regard to the capitalists themselves, together
with the landlords and other rich persons, they
have, by the supposition, agreed to be parsimo-
nious, and by depriving themselves of their usual


* See Lord Lauderdale’s Chapter on Parsimony, in his Inquiry
into the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth, ch. iv. p. 198. 2d.
edit. Lord Lauderdale appears to have gone as much too far in
deprecating accumulation, as some other writers in recommending
it. This tendency to extremes is exactly what I consider as
the great source of error in political economy.


. 7


SEC. I1.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 353


conveniences. and luxuries to save from their re-
venue and add to their capital. Under these cir-
cumstances, I would ask, how it is possible to sup-
pose that the increased quantity of commodities,
obtained by the increased number of productive
labourers, should find purchasers, without such a
fall of price as would probably sink their value
below the costs of production, or, at least, very


_ greatly diminish both the power and the will to


save.
It has been thought by some very able writers,
that although there may easily be a glut of parti-
cular commodities, there cannot possibly be a glut
of commodities in general; because, according to
their view of the subject, commodities being al-
ways exchanged for commodities, one half will
furnish a market for the other half, and production
being thus the sole source of demand, an excess in
the supply of onearticle merely proves a deficiency


_ in the supply of some other, and a general excess is
impossible. M. Say, in his distinguished work on


political economy, has indeed gone so far as to
state that the consumption of a commodity by
taking it out of the market diminishes demand,
and the production of a commodity proportionably
increases it.

This doctrine, ‘however, to the extent in which
it has ‘been applied, appears to me to be utterly
unfounded, and completely to contradict the
great principles which regulate supply and_de-
mand. ’ ihe

It is by no means true, as a matter of fact,

AA


354 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES (CH. VIL.\


that commodities are always exchanged for com-
modities. The great mass of commodities is
exchanged directly for labour, either productive


or unproductive; and it is quite obvious that
this mass of commodities, compared with the
labour with which it is to be exchanged, may


fall in value from a glut just as any one com-
modity falls in value from an excess of supply,
compared either with labour or money.


In the case supposed there would evidently bean


unusual quantity of commodities of all kinds in
the market, owing to the unproductive labourers


of the country having been converted, by the


accumulation of capital, into productive labourers ;
while the number of labourers altogether being
the same, and the power and will to purchase for
consumption among landlords and capitalists being
by supposition diminished, commodities would ne-


cessarily fall in value, compared with labour, so as’


to lower profits almost to nothing, and to check for
a time further production. But this is precisely
what is meant by the term glut, which, in this
case, is evidently general not partial.

M. Say, Mr. Mill,* and Mr. Ricardo, the. prin-


* Mr. Mill, in a reply to Mr, Spence, published in 1808, has
laid down very broadly the doctrine that commodities are only
purchased by commodities, and that one half of them must al-
ways furnish a market for the other half. The same doctrine
appears to be adopted in its fullest extent by the author of an
able and useful article on the Corn Laws, in the Supplement to the


Encyclopadia Britannica, which has been referred to in a previous
chapter.


SEC. III.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 355


cipal authors of the new doctrines on profits, ap-
pear to me to have fallen into some fundamental
errors in the view which they have taken of this
subject.

In the first place, they have considered com-
modities as if they were so many mathematical
figures, or arithmetical characters, the relations
of which were to be compared, instead of articles
of consumption, which must of course-be referred
to the numbers and wants of the consumers.

If commodities were only to be compared and
exchanged with each other, then indeed it would
be true that, if they were all increased in their
proper proportions to any extent, they would con-
tinue to bear among themselves the same relative
value ; but, if we compare them, as we certainly
ought to do, with the numbers and wants of the
consumers, then a great increase of produce with
comparatively stationary numbers and with wants
diminished by parsimony, must necessarily occa-
sion a great fall of value estimated in labour, so~
that the same produce, though it might have cost the
same quantity of labour as before, would no longer
command the same quantity ; and both the power
of accumulation and the motive to accumulate
would be strongly checked.

It is asserted that effectual demand is nothing
more than the offering of one commodity in ex-
change for another. But is this all that is neces-
sary to effectual demand? Though each commo-
dity may have cost the same quantity of labour
and capital in its production, and they may be

AA


356 | ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


exactly equivalent to each other in exchange, yet
why may not both be so plentiful as not to com-
mand more labour, or but very little more than,
they have cost ; and in this case, would the demand


for them be effectual?: Would it be such as to en- |


courage their continued production? Unquestion-
ably not. Their relation to each other may not
have changed ; but their relation to the wants of
the society, their relation to bullion, and their re-
lation to domestic and. foreign labour, may have
experienced a most important change.
- It will be readily allowed that a new commodity
thrown into the market, which, in proportion, to
the labour employed upon it, is of higher exchange-
able value than usual, is precisely calculated to
increase demand ; because it implies, not a mere
" increase of quantity, but a better adaptation of the
produce to the tastes, wants and: consumption of
the society. But to fabricate or procure commo-
dities of this kind is the grand difficulty; and they

certainly do not naturally and necessarily follow
an accumulation of capital and increase of commo-
dities, most particularly when such accumulation
and increase have been occasioned by economy of
consumption, or a discouragement to the indul-
gence of those tastes and wants, which are the
very elements of demand.

Mr. Ricardo, though he maintains as a general
position that capital cannot be redundant, is obliged
to make. the following concession. « He. says,
“There is only one case, and that will be tempo-
rary, in which the accumulation of capital with a


>!


SEC. I1I.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 357


low price of food may be attended with a fall of >
profits ; and that is, when the funds for the main-
tenance of labour increase much more rapidly than
population ;—wages will then be high and profits
low. If every man were to forego the use of
luxuries and be intent only on accumulation, a
quantity of necessaries might be produced for
which there could not be any immediate consump-
tion. Of commodities so limited in number, there
might undoubtedly be an universal glut ; and con-
sequently there might neither be demand for an
additional quantity of such commodities, nor pro-
fits on the employment of more capital. If men
ceased to consume, they would cease to produce.”
Mr. Ricardo then adds, “ This admission does not
impugn the general principle.”* In this remark I
cannot quite agree with him. As, from the nature
of population, an increase of labourers cannot be
brought into the market, in consequence of a par-
ticular demand, till after the lapse of sixteen or
eighteen years, and the conversion of revenue into
capital may take place much more rapidly; a
country is always liable to an increase of the funds


‘for the maintenance of labour faster than the in-


crease of population. But if, whenever this occurs,
there may be a universal glut of commodities, how
can. it be maintained, as a general position, that


- capital is never redundant ; and that because com-


modities may retain the same relative values, a gh ut
can only be partial, not general ?


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. xxi. p. 364. 2d edit.
AA 3


358 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


_ Another fundamental error into which the wri-
ters above-mentioned and their followers appear
to have fallen is, the not taking into consideration
the influence of so general and important a principle
in human nature, as indolence.or the love of ease.

It has been supposed* that, if a certain number
of farmers and a certain number of manufacturers
had been exchanging their surplus food and cloth-
ing with each other, and their powers of produc-
tion were suddenly so increased that both. parties
could, with the same labour, produce luxuries in
addition to what théy had before obtained, there
could be no sort of difficulty with regard to de-
mand, as part of the luxuries which the farmer
produced would be exchanged against part of the
luxuries produced by the manufacturer; and the
only result would be, the happy one of both par-
ties being better supplied and having more enjoy-

ments. '
But in this intercourse of mutual gratifications,
* two things dre taken for granted, which are the
very points in dispute. It is taken for granted
that luxuries are always preferred to. indolence,
and that the profits of each party are consumed as
revenue. What would be the effect of a desire to
save under such circumstances, shall be considered.
presently. The effect of a preference of indolence


to luxuries would evidently be to occasion a want .


of demand for the returns of the increased powers
of production supposed, and to throw labourers out


* Edinburgh Review, No. LXIV. p. 471.


—S


SEC. 111.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 359


of employment. The cultivator, being now enabled
to obtain the necessaries and conveniences to which
he had been accustomed, with less toil and trouble,
and his tastes for ribands, lace and velvet not


-being fully formed, might be very likely to indulge


himself in indolence, and employ less labour on
the land; while the manufacturer, finding his vel-
vets rather heavy of sale, would be led to discon-


tinue their manufacture, and to fall almost neces-


sarily into the same indolent system as the farmer.
That an efficient taste for luxuries, that is, such a
taste as will properly stimulate industry, instead of


‘being ready to appear at the moment it is required, is
-aplant of slow growth, the history of human society


sufficiently shews; and that it is a most important


error to take for granted, that mankind will produce
and consume all that they have the power to pro-


duce and consume, and will never prefer indolence
to the rewards of industry, will sufficiently appear
from a slight review of some of the nations with


which we are acquainted. But I shall have occa- —


sion for a review of this kind in the next section ;
and to this I refer the reader.

A third very serious error of the writers slochas
referred to, and practically the most important of
the three, consists in supposing that accumulation
ensures demand ; or that the consamption of the
labourers employed by those’ whose object: is to
save, will create such an effectual demand for com-


‘modities as'to encourage a continued increase of —


produce, bw rib
Mr. Ricardo observes, that “ If 10,0007, were
AA4


he


360 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES ([CH. VII.


given ‘to a man having 100,000/. per annum, he
would: not lock it up in a chest, but would either
increase his expenses by 10,000/., employ it himself
productively, or lend it tosome other person for
that purpose; in either case demand would be in-


creased, although it would be for different objects.


If he increased his expenses, his effectual demand
might probably be for buildings, furniture, or some
such enjoyment. If heemployed his 10,0007. pro-
ductively, his effectual demand would be for food,
clothing, and raw materials, which might set new
labourers to work. But still it would be demand.™*

Upon this principle it is supposed that if the
richer portion of society were to forego their ac-
customed conveniences, and luxuries with a view
to accumulation, the only effect would be a direc-
tion of nearly the whole capital of the country to
the production of necessaries, which would lead to
a great increase of cultivation and population. But,
without supposing an. entire change’ in the usual
motives to accumulation, this could not: possibly


happen. The usual motives for accumulation are,


I conceive, either the future wealth and enjoyment
of the individual who accumulates, or of those to
whonr he means to leave his property. And with
these motives it could never answer to the possessor
of land to employ nearly all the labour which the
soil could support in cultivation; as by so doing
_ he would necessarily destroy his neat rent, and
render it impossible for him, without subsequently
dismissing the greatest part of his workmen and


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. chap. xxi. p. 361. 2d edit.


a


,


eo
—.


SEC. III.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 361


occasioning the most dreadful distress, either to
give himself the means of greater enjoyment at a
future distant period, or to transmit such means to
his posterity.

The very definition of fertile land is, land that
will support a much greater number of persons
than are necessary to cultivate it; and if the land-
lord, instead of spending this surplus in conve-
niences, luxuries and unproductive consumers, were
to employ it in setting to work on the land as
many labourers as his savings could support, it is
quite obvious that, instead of being enriched, he
would be impoverished by such a proceeding, both
at first and in future. Nothing could justify such
a conduct but a different motive for accumulation;
that is, a desire to increase the population—not the
love of wealth and enjoyment; and till such a
change takes place in the passions and propensities
of mankind, we may be quite sure that the land-
lords and cultivators will not go on tite sie
labourers in this way.

What then would happen? As soon as the land-
lords and cultivators found that they could not
realize their increasing produce in some way which
would give them a command of wealth in future,
they would cease to employ more labour upon the
land ;* and if the business of that part of the so-


* Theoretical writers in Political Economy, from the fear of ap- _


pearing to attach too much importance to money, have perhaps
been too apt to throw it out of their consideration in their reason-
ings. It is an abstract truth that we want commodities, not
money. But, in reality, no commodity for which it is possible to


.


362 “ON THE IMMEDIATE. CAUSES [CH. VIT,


ciety which was not engaged in raising raw” pro- .
duce, consisted merely in preparing the other simple
necessaries of life, the number required for this
purpose being inconsiderable, the rest. of those
whom the soil could support would be thrown out
of work. Having no means of legally demanding
a portion of the raw produce, however plentiful it
might be at first, they would gradually decrease in
numbers; and the failure of effective demand. for
the produce of the soil would necessarily diminish
cultivation, and throw a still greater number of
persons out of employment. This action and re-—
action would thus go on till the balance of pro-
duce and consumption was restored in reference to
the new tastes and habits which were established ;
_and it is obvious that without an expenditure which
will encourage commerce, manufactures, and un-
productive consumers, or an Agrarian law  calcu-
lated to change the usual motives for aecumula-
tion, the possessors of land would have no sufficient


sell our goods at once, can be an adequate substitute for a circu-
Jating medium, and enable us in the same manner to provide for
children, to purchase an estate, or to command labour and provi-
sions a year or two hence. A circulating medium is absolutely
necessary to any considerable saving ; and even the manufacturer
‘would get on but slowly, if he were obliged to accumulate in kind
all the wages of his workmen. We cannot therefore be surprized
at his wanting money rather than other goods; and, in civilized
countries, we may be quite sure that if the farmer or manufacturer
- cannot sell his products so as to give him a profit estimated in
money, his industry will immediately slacken. The circulating
medium bears so important a part in the distribution of wealth,
and the encouragement of industry, that to set it aside in our
_ Teasonings may often lead us wrong. '


SEC. I11.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 363


stimulus to cultivate well; and a country such
as our own, which had been rich and populous,
would, with such parsimonious habits, infallibly
become poor, and comparatively unpeopled.
The same kind of reasoning will obviously ap-
ply to the case noticed before. While the far-
mers were disposed to consume the luxuries pro-
duced by the manufacturers, and the manufactu-
rers those produced by the farmers, all would go
on smoothly ; but if either one or both of the par-
ties were disposed to save with a view of bettering


their condition, and providing for their families in


future, the state of things would be very different.
The farmer, instead of indulging himself in ribands,
lace, and velvets,* would be disposed to be satis-
fied with more simple clothing, but by this eco-
nomy he would disable the manufacturer from pur-
chasing the same amount of his produce ;..and for
the returns of so much labour employed upon the
land, and all greatly increased in productive power,
there would evidently be no market. The manu-
facturer, in like manner, instead of indulging him-
self in sugar, grapes ‘and tobacco, might be dis-
posed to save with a view to the future, but would
be totally unable to do so, owing to the parsimony
of the farmers and the want of demand for manu-
factures.t


* Edinburgh Review, No. LXIV. p. 471. — en y

+ Of all the opinions advanced by able and ingenious men,
which I have ever met with, the opinion of M. Say, which states
that, un produit consommé ou détrutt est un débouché fermé (\. i. ch.


364 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


An accumulation, toa certain extent, of common
food and common clothing might take place on
both sides ; but the amount must necessarily be ex-
tremely confined. It would be of no sort of use to
the farmer to go on cultivating his land with a
view merely to give food and clothing to his Ja-
bourers. He would be doing nothing either for
himself or family, if he neither consumed the sur-
plus of what they produced himself, nor could
realize it in a shape that might be transmitted to
his descendants. If he were a tenant, such ad


tional care and labour would be entirely thrown
- away ; and if he were a landlord, and were deter-


mined, without reference to markets, to cultivate
his estate in such a way as to make it yield the
greatest neat surplus with a view to the future, it is
quite certain that the large portion of this surplus
which was not required either for his own con-
sumption, or to purchase clothing for himself and
his labourers, would be absolutely wasted. If he
did not choose to use it in the purchase of luxuries
or the maintenance of unproductive labourers, it
might as well be thrown into the sea. To save


WTR


15.) appears to me to be the most directly opposed to just theory,
and the most uniformly contradicted by experience. Yet it di-
rectly follows from the new doctrine, that commodities are to be
considered only in their relation to each other,—not to the consu-
mers. What, I would ask, would become of the demand for com-


_ modities, if all consumption except bread and water were sus-


pended for the next half year? What an accumulation of \com-
modities! Quels débouchés ! What a prodigious market would
this event occasion !


SEC, 11].] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 365


it, that is to use it in employing more labourers
upon. the land would, as I said before, ‘be to im-
poverish both himself and his family, =

It would be still more useless to the manufac-
turers'to go on producing clothing beyond what
was wanted by the agriculturists and themselves.
Their numbers indeed would entirely depend upon


‘the demands of the agriculturists, as they would


have no means of purchasing subsistence, but in
proportion as there was a reciprocal want of their


manufactures. The population required to provide


simple clothing for such a society with the assistance
of good machinery would be inconsiderable, and
would absorb but a small portion of the proper sur-
plus of rich and well cultivated land. There would
evidently therefore be a general want of demand,
both for produce and population; and while it is
quite certain that an adequate passion for con-
sumption may fully keep up the proper proportion
between supply and demand, whatever may be the
powers of production, it appears to be quite as cer-
tain that a passion for accumulation must inevi-
tably lead to a supply of commodities beyond
what the structure and habits of such a society
will permit to be consumed.*

But if this be so, surely it is a most important
error to couple the passion for expenditure and


* The reader must already know, that I do not share in the


apprehensions of Mr. Owen about the permanent effects of ma-


chinery. But I am decidedly of opinion, that on this point he
has the best of the argument with those who think that accumu-
lation ensures effective demand.


*


*


‘
366 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.’


the passion for accumulation together, as if they
were of the same nature; and to consider the
demand for the food and clothing of the labourer,
who is to be employed productively, as securing
such a general demand for commodities and’


such a rate of profits for the capital employed in —


producing them, as will adequately call forth the
powers of the soil, and the ingenuity of man in
procuring the greatest quantity both of raw and:
manufactured produce.

Perhaps it may be asked by those who ha
adopted Mr. Ricardo’s view of profits,—what
comes of the division of that which is produ
when population is checked merely by want of de-
mand? It isacknowledged that the powers of pro-
duction have not begun to fail; yet, if labour pro-
duces largely and yet is ill paid, it will ee said that
profits must be high. .

I have already stated in a former dpe that
the value of the materials of capital very frequently
do not fall in proportion to the fall in the value of
the produce of capital, and this alone will often
account for low profits. But independently of
this consideration, it is obvious that in the pro-
duction of any other commodities than necessaries,
the theory is perfectly simple. From want of de-
mand, such commodities may be very low in price,
and a large portion of the whole value produced
may go to the labourer, although in necessaries he
may be ill paid, and his wages, both with regard
to the quantity of food which he receives and the
labour required to produce it, may be decidedly low.


 $EC. I11.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 367


If it be said, that on account of the large portion
of the value of manufactured produce which on
this supposition is absorbed by wages, it may be
affirmed that the cause of the fall of profits is high
wages, I should certainly protest against so mani-


fest, an abuse of words. The only justifiable


ground for adopting a new ‘term, or using an old
oné in a new sense, is, to convey more precise ,in-
formation to the reader; but to refer to high
wages in this case, instead of to.a fall of commo-


dities, would be to proceed as if the specific inten-


ion of the writer were to keep his reader as much
‘pete in the dark as to the real state of things.
n the production of necessaries however, it will
be allowed, that the answer to the question is not
quite so simple, yet stillit may be made sufficiently
clear. Mr. Ricardo acknowledges that there may
be a limit to the employment of capital upon the
land from the limited. wants of society, i epen-
dently of the exhaustion of the soil. In the case
supposed, this limit must necessarily be very nar-
row, because there would be comparatively no po-
pulation besides the agriculturists to make an
effective demand for produce. Under such cir-
cumstances corn might be produced, which would
lose the character and quality of wealth; and, as I
before observed in a note, all the parts, of the same
produce would not be of the samevalue. Theac-
tual labourers employed might be tolerably well
fed, as is frequently. the case, practically, in those
countries where the labourers are fed by the far-


e<


368 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cH. VII.


mers,* but there would be little work or food for
their grown up sons; and from varying markets
and varying crops, the profits of the farmer might
be the lowest at the very time when, according to
the division of the produce, it ought to be the


highest, that is, when there was the greatest pro- .


portionate excess of produce above what was paid
to the labourer. The wages of the labourer can-
not sink below a certain point, but a part of the
produce, from excess of supply, may for a time be
absolutely useless, and permanently it may so fall
from competition as to yield only the lowest pre
fits.

- I would observe further, that if in consequence
of a diminished demand for corn, the cultivators
were to withdraw their capitals so as better to
proportion their supplies to the quantity that could
be properly paid for; yetif they could not employ
the capital they had withdrawn in any other way,
which, according to the preceding supposition,
they could not, it is certain that, though they
might fot a time make fair profits of the small


* In Norway and Sweden, particularly the former, where the
agricultural labourer either lives in the farmer's famil y or has a
portion of land assigned to him in lieu of wages, he is in general
pretty well fed, although there is but little demand for labour, and
considerable competition for such employment. In countries so
circumstanced, (and there are many such all over the world,) it is
perfectly futile to attempt to estimate profits by the excess of the
produce above what is consumed in obtaining it, when for this
excess there may be often little or no market. All evidently


depends upon the exchangeable value of the disposable pro-
duce.


SEC. I1I.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 869


stock which they still continued to employ in agri-
culture, the consequences to them as cultivators
would be, to all intents and purposes, the same as
if a general fall had taken place on all — ca-
pital.
If, in the process of saving, all that was lost by
the capitalist was gained by the labourer, the
check to the progress of wealth would be but tem-
porary, as stated by Mr. Ricardo; and the conse-


- quences need not be apprehended. But if the


ona of revenue into capital pushed beyond
certain point must, by diminishing the effec-
tual demand for produce, throw. the labouring
classes out of employment, it is obvious that the
adoption of parsimonious habits in too great a de-
gree may be accompanied by the most distressing
effects at first, and by a marked depression of
wealth and population permanently. i

It is not, of course, meant to be stated that par-
simony, or even a temporary diminution of con-—
sumption,* is not often in the highest degree use-
ful, and sometimes absolutely necessary to the
progress of wealth. A state may certainly be
ruined by extravagance; and a diminution of the |
actual expenditure may not only be necessary on
this account, but when the capital of a country is
deficient, compared with the demand for its pro-
ducts, a temporary economy of consumption is re-
quired, in order to provide that supply of capital

* Parsimony, er the conversion of revenue into capital, may
take place without any diminution of consumption, if the revenue
increases first.

BB


3870 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cu. VII.


which can alone furnish the means of an increased
consumption in future. All that I mean to say is,
that no nation can possibly grow rich by an accu-
mulation of capital, arising from a permanent di-
minution of consumption; because, such accumu-
lation being greatly beyond what is wanted, in or-
der to supply the effective demand for produce,
a part of it. would very soon lose both its use and
its value, and cease to possess the character of —
wealth.

On the supposition indeed of a given consump-
tion, the accumulation of capital beyond a oa
point must appear at once to be perfectly futile.
But, even taking into consideration the increased
consumption likely to arise among the labouring
classes from the abundance and cheapness of com-
modities, yet as this cheapness must be at the ex-
pense of profits, it is obvious that the limits to such
an increase of capital from parsimony, as shall not be
attended by a very rapid diminution of the motive
to accumulate, are very narrow, and may very
wae be passed.

The laws which regulate the rate of profits and
the progress of capital, bear a very striking and
singular resemblance to the laws which regulate
the rate of wages and the progress of population.

Mr. Ricardo has very clearly shewn that the
rate of profits must diminish, and the progress
of accumulation be finally stopped, under the
most favourable circumstances, by the increasing
difficulty of procuring the food of the labourer.
I, in like manner, endeavoured to shew in my


SEC. III.] OF THE PROGRESSOF WEALTH. $71


Essay on the Principle of Population that, under
circumstances the most favourable to cultivation
which could possibly be supposed to operate in
the actual state of the earth, the wages of the la-
bourer would become more scanty, and the progress
of population be finally stopped by the increasing
difficulty of procuring the means of subsistence.
But Mr. Ricardo has not been satisfied with
proving the position just stated. He has not been
satisfied with shewing that the difficulty of pro-
curing the food of the labourer is the only abso-
lutely necessary cause of the fall of profits, in
which I am ready fully and entirely to agree with
him: but he has gone on to say, that there is no
other cause of the fall of profits in the actual state
of things that has any degree of permanence. In
this latter statement he appears to me to have
fallen into precisely the same kind of error as I
should have fallen into, if, after having shewn that
the unrestricted power of population was beyond
comparison greater than the power of the earth
to produce food under the most favourable circum-
stances possible, I had allowed that population
could not be redundant unless the powers of the
earth to keep up with the progress of population
had been tried to the uttermost. But I all along
said, that population might be ‘redundant, and
greatly redundant, compared with the demand for it
and the actual means of supporting it, although it
might most properly be considered as deficient, and
greatly deficient, compared with the extent of terri-
tory, and the powers of such territory: to produce
BB


- 872 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIL,


additional means of subsistence; that, in such cases,
notwithstanding theacknowledged deficiency of po-
pulation, and the obvious desirableness of haying it
greatly increased, it was useless and foolish directly
to encourage the birth of more children, as the
effect of such encouragement, without a demand
for labour and the means of paying it properly,
could only be increased misery and mortality with
little or no final increase of population.

Though Mr. Ricardo has taken a very different
course, I think that the same kind of reasoning
ought to be applied to the rate of profits and the
progress of capital. Fully acknowledging that
there is hardly a country in the four quarters
of the globe where capital is not deficient, and in
most of them very greatly deficient, compared
with the territory and even the number of people ;
and fully allowing at the same time the extreme
desirableness of an increase of capital, I should
say that, where the demand for commodities was
not such as to afford fair profits to the producer,
and the capitalists were at a loss where and how
to employ their capitals to advantage, the saving
from revenue to add still more to these capitals
would only tend prematurely to diminish the mo-
tive to accumulation, and still further to distress
the capitalists, with little increase of a wholesome
and effective capital.

The first thing wanted in both these cases of de-
ficient capital and deficient population, is-an effec-
tive demand for commodities, that is, a demand
by those who are able and willing to pay an


SEC. 111.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 373


adequate price for them; and though high profits
are not followed by an increase of capital, so cer-
tainly as high wages are by an increase of popu-
lation, yet I believe that they are so followed more
generally than they appear to be, because, in many
countries, as‘I have before intimated, profits are
often thought to be high, owing to the high in-
terest of money, when they are really low; and
because, universally, risk in employing capital has
precisely the same effect in diminishing the mo-
tive to accumulate and the reward of accumulation,
as low profits. At the same time it will be allowed
that determined extravagance, and a determined
indisposition to save, may keep profits perma-
nently high. The most powerful stimulants may,
under peculiar circumstances, be resisted ; yet still
it will not cease to be true that the natural and
legitimate encouragement to the increase of capi-
tal is that increase of the power and will to save
which is held out by high profits; and under cir-
cumstances in any degree similar, such increase of
power and will to save must almost always be ac-
companied by a proportionate increase of capital.
One of the most striking instances of the truth
_ of this remark, and a further proof of a singular
resemblance in the laws that regulate the increase
of capital and of population, is to be found in the
rapidity with which the loss of capital is recovered
during a war which does not interrupt commerce.
The loans to government convert capital into re-
venue, and increase demand at the same time
BBS


374 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


‘that they at first diminish the means of supply.*
The necessary consequence must be an increase of
profits. This naturally increases both the power
and the reward of accumulation; and if only the
same habits of saving prevail among the capita-
lists as before, the recovery of the lost stock must -
be rapid, just for the same kind of reason that the
recovery of population is so rapid when, by some
cause or other, it has been suddenly destroyed.

It is now fully acknowledged that it would be a
gross error in the latter case, to imagine that, with-
out the previous diminution of the population, the
same rate of increase would still have taken place;
because it is precisely the high wages ‘occasioned
by the demand for labour, which produce the effect
of so rapid an increase of population. On the same

. principle itappears to me as gross an error to suppose
that, without the previous loss of capital occasioned
by the expenditure in question, capital should be
as rapidly accumulated ; because it is precisely the
high profits of stock occasioned by the demand
for commodities, and the consequent demand for


A

* Capital is withdrawn only from those émployments where it
can best be spared. It is hardly ever withdrawn from agriculture.
Nothing is more common, as I have stated in the Chapter on Rent,
~ than increased profits, not only without any capital being with-
drawn from the land, but under a continual addition to it. Mr.
Ricardo’s assumption of constant prices would make it absolutely
impossible to account theoretically for things as they are. If
capital were considered as not within the pale of demand and
supply, the very familiar event of the rapid recovery of capital
during a-war would be quite inexplicable.


'


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 875


the.means of producing them, which at once give
the power and the will to accumulate.

Though it may be allowed therefore that the
laws which regulate the increase of capital are
not quite so distinct as those which regulate the
increase of population, yet they are certainly just
of the same kind; and it is equally vain, with a
view to the permanent increase of wealth, to con-
tinue converting revenue into capital, when there is
no adequate demand for the products of such capital,
as to continue encouraging marriage and the birth
of children without a’demand for labour and an
increase of the funds for its maintenance.


SECTION IV.


"Of the Fertility of the Soil, considered as a Stimulus to
the continued Increase of Wealth.


In speaking of the fertility of the soil as not af-
‘fording an adequate stimulus to the continued
increase of wealth, it must always be recollected
that a fertile soil gives at once the greatest natural.
capability of wealth that a country can. possibly
possess. When the deficient wealth of such a
country is mentioned, it is not intended always to
speak positively, but comparatively, that is with
reference to its natural capabilites ; and so under-

, stood, the proposition will be liable to few or no.

BB 4


376 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. Vi.


exceptions. Perhaps, indeed, it may be said that
no instance has occurred, in modern times, of a
large and very fertile country having made full
use of its natural resources ; while-there have been
many instances of small and unfertile states
having accumulated within their narrow limits,
by means of foreign commerce, a degree of wealth
very greatly exceeding the proportion which
should belong to them, in reference to their physi-
cal capabilities.

If a small body of people were possessed of a
rich and extensive inland territory, divided into
large proportions, and not favourably situated with
réspect to markets, a very long period might
elapse before the state became wealthy and po-
pulous, notwithstanding the fertility of the soil
and the consequent facility of production. The
nature of such a soil would make it yield a profit
or rent to the owner in its uncultivated state. He
would set a value therefore upon his property, as
a source of profit as well as of power and amuse-
ment; and though it was capable of yielding
_ much more raw produce than he and his immediate
dependents could consume, he would by no means
be disposed to allow others to seize on it, and
divide it at their pleasure. He would probably let
out considerable portions of it for small rents. But
the tenant of these portions, if there wereno foreign
vent for the raw produce, and the commodities which
contribute to the conveniences and luxuries of life
were but little known, would have but small in-
citement to call forth the resources of his land,
and give encouragement to a rapid increase of


_ SEC. IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 377


population. By employing ten families he might
perhaps, owing to the richness of the soil, obtain
food for fifty; but he would find no proportionate
market for this additional food, and would be soon
sensible that he had wasted his time and attention
in superintending the labour of so many persons.
He would be disposed therefore to employ a smaller
number ; or if, from motives of humanity, or any
other reason, he was induced to keep more than
were necessary for the supply of the market, upon
the supposition of their being tolerably industrious,
he would be quite indifferent to their industry, and
his labourers would naturally acquire the most
indolent habits. Such habits would naturally be
generated both in the masters and servants by such
circumstances, and when generated, a considerable
time and considerable stimulants are necessary to
get rid of them.

It has been said, that those who have food and
necessaries at their. disposal will not be long in
want of workmen, who will put them in possession
of some of the objects most useful and desirable
to them.* But this appears to be directly con-
tradicted by experience. If the establishment,
extension, and refinement of domestic manufac-
tures were so easy a matter, our ancestors would
not have remained for many hundred years so ill
supplied with them; and been obliged to expend
the main part of their raw produce in the support
of idle retainers. They might be very ready, when


* Ricardo’s Princ. of Polit, Econ. ch. xxi. p. 363, 2d. edit.


378 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH: VII.


they had the opportunity, to exchange. their sur- |


plus raw produce for the: foreign commodities
with which they were acquainted, and which they
had learnt to estimate. But it would be a very
difficult thing, and: very ill suited: to their habits
and degree of information, to employ their power
of commanding labour in setting up manufac-
tures on their own ‘estates. Though the land:
might be rich, it might not suit the production of
the materials most wanted; and the necessary machi~
nery, the necessary skill in using it, and the neces-
sary intelligence and activity of superintendance,
would all “unavoidably be deficient at first, and
under the circumstances supposed, must be of
very slow growth; so that after those ruder and
more indispensable articles were supplied, which
are always wanted and produced in an early stage
of society, it is natural enough that a great lord
should prefer distinguishing himself by a few
splendid foreign commodities, if he could get
them, and a great number of retainers, than by a
large quantity of clumsy manufactures, which in-
volved great trouble of superintendance.

It is certainly true, however, taking as an in-
stance an individual workman, and supposing him
to possess a given degree of industry and. skill,
that the less time he is employed in procuring food,
the more time will he be able to devote to the pro-
curing of conveniences and luxuries; but to apply
this truth to whole nations, and to infer that the
greater is the facility of procuring food, the more
abundantly will the people be supplied with con-


.


SEC.1IV:] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 379


veniences and luxuries would be one among the
many rash and false conclusions which are often
made from the want of due attention to the change
which the application of a proposition may make
in the premises on which it rests. In the present
case, all depends upon the supposition of a given
degree of industry and skill, and the means of em-
ploying them. But if, after the necessaries of life
were obtained, the workman should consider indo-
lence as a greater luxury than those which he was"
likely to procure by further labour, the proposition
would at once cease to be true. And as a matter
of fact, confirmed by all the accounts we have of
nations, in the different stages of their progress, it
must be allowed that this choice seems to be very .
general in the early periods of society, and by no
means uncommon. in the most improved states.

Few indeed and scanty would be the portion of
conveniences and luxuries found in society, if
those who are the main instruments of their pro-
duction had no stronger motives for their exertions
than the desire of enjoying them. It is the want
of necessaries which mainly stimulates the labour-
ing classes to produce luxuries; and were this
stimulus removed or. greatly weakened, so that
the necessaries of life could be obtained with
very little labour, instead of more time being de-
voted to the production of conveniences, there is
every reason to think that ‘less time would be so
devoted.

At an early period of cultivation, when only rich
soils are worked, as the quantity of corn is the


380 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [ex. vil-


greatest, compared with the quantity of labour re-
quired to produce it, we ought always to find a
small portion of the population engaged in agri-
culture, and a large portion engaged in administer-
ing to the other wants of the society. And there
can be little doubt that this is the state of things
which we really should see, were it true, that if
the means of maintaining labour be found, there
can be no difficulty in making it produce objects
of adequate value ; or that when food can be ob-
tained with facility, more time will be devoted to
the production of conveniences and luxuries. But
in examining the state of unimproved countries,
what do we really see?—almost invariably, a much
larger proportion of the whole people employed on
the land than in those countries where the increase
of population has occasioned the necessity of re-
sorting to poor soils ; and less time instead of more
time devoted to the production of conveniences
and luxuries.

Of the great landed nations of Europe, and in-
deed of the world, England, with only one or two
exceptions, is supposed to have pushed its cultiva-
tion the farthest; and though the natural qualities
of its whole soil by no means stand very high in the
scale of comparative richness, there isa smaller pro-
portion of the people employed in agriculture, and
a greater proportion employed in the production of
conveniences and luxuries, or living on monied in+
comes, than in any other agricultural country of
the world. According toa calculation of Susmilch,
in which he enumerates the different proportions


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH: 381


of people in different states, who live in towns,
and are not employed in agriculture, the highest
is that of seven to three, or seven people living in
the country to three living in the towns:* whereas
in England, the proportion of those engaged in
agriculture, compared with the rest of the popu-
lation, is less than as two to three.

This is a very extraordinary fact, and affords a


striking proof how very dangerous it is, in political


economy, to draw conclusions from the physical
quality of the materials which are acted upon,
without reference to the moral as well as physical
qualities of the agents.

It is undoubtedly a physical quality of very rich
land, if worked by people possessing a given de-
gree of industry and skill, to yield a large quantity
of produce, compared with the number of hands
employed; but, if the facility of production which
rich land gives has the effect, under certain cir-
cumstances, of preventing the growth of industry
and skill, the land may become practically less
productive, compared with the number of persons
employed upon it, than if it were not distinguished
for its richness. ;

Upon the same principle, the man who can pro-
cure the necessary food for his family, by two
days labour in the week, has the physical power of
working much longer to procure conveniences


* Susmilch, vol. iii. p. 60. Essay on Population, vol. i. p. 459.
edit. 5th. In foreign states very few persons live in the country
who are not engaged in agriculture ; but it is not so in England.

+ Population Abstracts, 1811.


382 . ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES  [CH. VIT.


and luxuries, than the man who must employ four
days in procuring food; but if the facility of getting
food creates habits of indolence, this indolence
may make him prefer the luxury of doing little or
nothing, to the luxury of possessing conveniences
and comforts; and in this case, he may devote less
time to the working for conveniences and comforts,

and be more scantily provided with them than if
he had been obliged to reieieor more industry in
procuring food.

Among the crowd of countries which tend more
or less to illustrate and confirm by their present
state the truth of these positions, none perhaps
will do it more strikingly than the Spanish domi-
nions in America,:of which M. Humboldt has
lately given so valuable an account.

Speaking of the different plants which are culti-
vated in New Spain, he says of the banana, “ Je
doute qu'il existe une autre plante sur le globe qui,
sur un si petit espace de terrain, puisse produire une
masse de substance nourrissante aussi considérable.”*
He calculates in another place more particularly,
that “ dans un pays éminemment fertile un demi
hectare, ou un arpent légal cultivé en bananes de la
grande espéce, peut nourrir plus de cinquantes in-
dividus, tandis qu’en Europe le méme arpent ne don-
neroit par an, en supposant le huiti¢me grain, que
576 kilogrammes de farine de froment, quantité
qui n’est pas suffisante pour la subsistance de deux
individus: aussi rien ne frappe plus l’Européen


* Essai Politique sur la Nouvelle Espagne, tom. iii. 1. iv. c. ix.
p. 28,


SEC. Iy.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. $83


récemment arrivé dans la zone torride que Vex-
tréme petitisse des terrains cultivés autour d’une
cabane qui renferme une famille nombreuse d’in-
digénes.”"*

It appears further, that the banana is cultivated
with a very trifling quantity of labour, and “ se per-
pétue sans que homme y mette d’autre soin que
de couper les tiges dont le fruit a mari, et de don-
ner a la terre une ou deux fois par an un léger
labour en piochant autour des racines.”’}

What immense powers of production are here
described !. What resources for unbounded wealth,
if effectively called into action? Yet what is the
actual state of things in this fertile region. M.
Humboldt says, ‘ On entend souvent répéter dans
les colonies Espagnoles, que les habitans de la ré-
gion chaude (tierra caliente) ne pourront sortir de
l'état d’apathie dans lequel ils sont plongés depuis
des siécles, que lorsqu’une cedule royale ordonnera
la destruction des bananiers. Le reméde est
violent ; et ceux qui le proposent avec tant de cha-
leur ne déploient généralement pas plus d’activité
que le bas-peuple qu‘ils veulent forcer au travail
en augmentant la masse de ses besoins. II faut
espérer que l'industrie fera des progrés parmi les
Mexicains sans qu’on emploie des moyens de de-
struction. . En considérant d’ailleurs la facilité avec
laquelle homme se nourrit dans un climat ot
croissent les bananiers, on ne doit pas s’étonner
que dans la région equinoctiale du nouveau con-


* Nouvelle Espagne, tom. iii. 1. iv. c. ix. p. 36.
+ Id. p. 28.


384 ON THE IMMEDIATE CausEs [CH. vit.


tinent la civilisation ait commencé dans les mon-
tagnes, surun sol moins fertile, sous un ciel moins


favorable au développement des étres seo" ug


ot le besoin méme réveille l'industrie.

_ “ Au pied de la Cordillére dans les vallées u-
mides des Intendances de Vera-Cruz, de Vallado-
lid, ou de Guadalaxara, un homme qui employe
seulement deux jours de la semaine 4 un travail
peu pénible peut fournir de la subsistance a une fa-
mille entiére.”*

It appears then, that the extreme fertility of
these countries, instead of affording an adequate
stimulus to a rapid increase of wealth and popula-
tion, has produced, under the actual circumstances
in which they have been placed, a degree of indo-
lence which has kept them poor and thinly peopled
after the lapse of ages. Though the labouring
classes have such ample time to work for conve-
niences and comforts, they are almost destitute of
them. And, even in the necessary article of food,
their indolence and improvidence prevent them
from adopting those measures which would secure
them against the effects of unfavourable seasons,
M. Humboldt states that famines ate common to
almost all the equinoctial regions; and observes
that, “ sous la zone torride, oh une main bienfai-
sante semble avoir répandu le germe de l’abon-
dance, l’homme insouciant et phlegmatique éprouve
périodiquement un manque de nourriture que lin-


* Humboldt’s Nouvelle Espagne, tom. iii. 1. iv. c. ix. p. 38.


”


SEC. IV.] Of THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 883


dustrie des peuples cultivés babies des régions les


plus stériles du Nord.’*


It is possible, however, that the heat of the cli:
mate in these lower régions of New Spain,.and an
inferior degree of healthiness compared with the
higher regions, though by no means such as to
preclude a-full population, may have assisted in
keeping them poor and thinly peopled. But when


-we ascend the Cordilleras, to climates which seem


to be the finest in the world, the scene which pre-
sents itself is not essentially different. '

_ The chief food of the lower classes of the inha:
bitants on the elevated plains of the Cordilleras, is
maize ; and maize, though not so productive, com-


-pared with the labour employed upon it, as the


banana, exceeds very greatly in productiveness the
grains of Europe, and even of the United States.
Humboldt states, that “La fécondité du thaolli,
ou mais Mexicain, est au-dela de tout ce que l'on.
peut imaginer en Europe. La plante, favorisée par
de fortes chaleurs et par beaucoup d’humidité,
aquiert une hauteur de deux a trois métres. Dans
les belles plaines qui s’étendent depuis San Juan
del Rio 4 Quiretaro, par exemple, dans les terres
de la grande metairie de l’Esperanza, un fanégue
de mais en produit quelquefois huit cents; des ter-
reins fertiles en donnent, année commune, trois 2
quatre cents. Dans les environs de Valladolid on
regarde comme mauvaise une récolte qui ne donne
que 150 ou 150 fois la semence. La ot le sol est


* Essai Politique sur la Nouvelle Espagne, tom, i. 1. ii. .¢. v.
p. 358.
cc


886 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


le plus stérile, on compte encore soixante ou quatre-
vingt grains. On croit qu’en général le produit
du mais peut étre évalué dans la région equinoc-
tiale du royaume de la Nouvelle Espagne a cent
cinquante pour un.”*

This great fertility produces, as might be ex-
pected, its natural effect of making the mainte-
nance of a family in ordinary times extremely easy.

In the town of Mexico itself, where provisions
are very considerably dearer than in the country,
on account of the badness of the roads, and the
expense of carriage, the very dregs of the people
are, according to Humboldt, able to earn their
maintenance by only one or two days’ labour in
the week.t “ Les rues de Mexico fourmillent de
vingt 4 trente mille malheureux (Saragates Gua-
chinangos ), dont la plapart passent la nuit a la belle
étoile, et s’étendent le jour au soleil, le corps tout
nu enveloppé dans une couverture de flanelle.
Cette lie du peuple, Indiens et Metis, présentent
beaucoup d’analogie avec les Lazaronis de Naples.
Paresseux, insoucians, sobres comme eux, les Gua-
chinangos n’ont cependant aucune férocité dans le
caractére; ils ne demandent jamais l’auméne:
s'ils travaillent un ou deux jours par semaine, ils
gagnent ce qu'il leur faut pour acheter du pulque,
ou de ces canards qui couvrent les lagunes Mexi-
caines, et que l’on rétit dans leur propre graisse.”

But this picture of poverty is not confined to

* Essai Politique sur la Nouvelle Espagne, tom. iii. liv. c. ix.

56.
ae ii. 1. ii. c. vii. p. ‘37.


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. ~~ $87


the dregs of the inhabitants of a large town. “ Les
Indiens Mexicains, en les considérant en masse,
présentent le tableau d’une grande misére. Re-
légués dans les terres les moins fertiles ; indolens
par caractére, et plus encore par suite de leur si-
tuation politique, les natifs ne vivent qu’au jour le
jour.”™*

With these habits they are little likely to make
provision against the occasional failures in the


~ crops of maize, to which these crops are peculiarly


liable ; and consequently, when such failures take
place, they are exposed to extreme distress.
Speaking generally of the obstacles to the pro-
gress of population in New Spain, Humboldt seems
to consider famine and the diseases which it pro-
duces, as the most cruel and destructive of all.
“ Les Indiens Américains,” (he says) “ comme les
habitans de I’Indostan, sont accofitumés a se con-
tenter de la moindre quantité d’alimens qu’exige
le besoin de la vie; ils augmentent en nombre sans
que l’accroissement des moyens de subsistance soit
proportional a cette augmentation de population.
Indolens par caractére, et surtout a cause de la
position dans laquelle ils se trouvent sous un beau
climat, sur un sol généralement fertile, les in-
digénes ne cultivent en mais, en pommes de terre, et
en froment que ce qu illeur faut pour leur propre
nourtiture, ou tout au plus ce que requiert la con-
sommation des villes et celle des mines les plus
voisines.” And further on, he says, “ le manque


* Tom. i. liv. ii. ¢. vi. p. 429.
cca


388 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES (CH. VII.


de proportion qui existe entre les progrés de la po-
pulation et l’accroissement de la quantité d’alimens
produite par la culture, renouvelle le spectacle
affligeant de la famine chaque fois qu'une grande
sécheresse ou quelque autre cause toca a gate —
la récolte du mais.”*


These accounts strikingly shew ‘ aibicelieall


and improvidence which prevail among the people.
Such habits must necessarily act as formidable
obstacles in the way of a rapid increase of
wealth and population. Where they have been
once fully established, they are not likely to
change, except gradually and slowly under a
course of powerful and effective stimulants. And
while the extreme inequality of landed property
continues, and no sufficient vent is found for the
raw produce in foreign commerce, these stimulants
will be furnished very slowly and inadequately.
That the indolence of the natives is greatly ag-
gravated by their political situation, cannot for a
moment be doubted ; but that, in spite of this situa-
tion, it yields ina great measure to the usual ex-
citements is sufficiently proved by the rapid culti-
vation which takes place in the neighbourhood of
a new mine, where an animated and effective de-
mand is created for labour and produce. “ Bien-
tdt le besoin réveille l'industrie ; on commence 4
labourer le sol dans les ravins, et sur les pentes des.
montagnes.voisines, par tout ot le roc est cotvert
de terreau: des fermes s’établissent dans le voisi-


* Nouvelle Espagne, tom. i. liy. ii. c, y. pp. 355 et 356.


i


+


%


be | = . ©
Ee - es .


r


_ sidérable auquel la concurrence des acheteurs


‘_


Pian ~ ~ “a
SEC. Iv.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 389


nage de la mine: ‘la cherté des’ vivres, le prix con-


maintient tous les produits de l’agriculture, dé-

_ -dommagent le cultivateur des privations aux-

_ quelles Vexpose la vie pénible des montagnes.”*
When these are the effects of a really brisk de-


mand for produce and labour, we cannot be ata


loss for the main cause of the slow cultivation
which has taken place over the greatest part of
the country. Except in the neighbourhood of the
mines and near the great towns, the effective de-
mand for produce is not such as to induce the
great proprietors to bring their immense tracts of
land properly into cultivation : and the population,
which, as we have seen, presses hard against
the limits of subsistence, evidently exceeds in ge-


‘neral the demand for labour, or the number of per-


sons which the country can employ with regula-
rity and constancy in the actual state of its agri-
culture and manufactures.

In the midst of an abundance of fertile land, it
appears that the natives are often very scantily sup-
plied with it. They would gladly cultivate por-
tions of the extensive districts held by the great
proprietors, and could not fail of thus deriving an
ample subsistence for themselves and families ; but
‘in the actual state of the demand for produce in
many parts of the country, and in the actual state
of the ignorance and indolence of the natives, such
tenants might not be able to pay a rent equal to


* Nouvelle Espagne, tom. iii. liv. iv. c. ix. p. 12.
ccs


$90 ON THE IMMEDIA‘


might be made capable of s
people, may be left to sur
eddie, 2 25 ea
Speaking « of a part of 1 y of
- Cruz, Humboldt saye;. + urd’hui lier es
_ de plusieurs lieues carrées sont occupés ar deux
ou trois cabanes, autour desquelles errent des beufs ies
a demi-sauvages. Un petit nombre de familles =
puissantes, et qui vivent sur le plateau central,
possédent la plus grande partie du littoral des In- —
tendances de Vera Cruz, et de San Luis Potosi.

Aucune loi agraire ne force ces riches propriétaires

de vendre leurs majorats, s’ils persistent a ne pas

vouloir défricher eux-mémes des terres immenses’

qui en dépendent.’ mH

Among proprietors of this description, captive

and indolence might often prevent them from
cultivating their lands. Generally, however, it

might be expected, that these tendencies would sdk
yield, at least in a considerable degree, to the more
steady influence of self-interest. But a vicious

division of territory prevents the motive of inte-

rest from operating so strongly as it ought to do

in the extension of cultivation. Without suffi-

cient foreign commerce to give value to the raw

produce of the land; and before the general in-
troduction of manufactures had opened channels .


¥ Tom. ii. ]. iii. ¢. viii. p. 342.


HOGRESS OF WEALTH. 391


industry, the demand of the great
labour would be very soon supplied ;
labouring classes would have
or the use of their lands.

s might have ample power


Ty ncrease of enjoyments, if any,
a which they anliihel derive from it, would rarely be.
ufficient to overcome their natural indolence, or
~ eleabadanBie the possible inconveniences or trouble
that might attend the proceeding. Of that en-
couragement to the increase of population, which

arises from the division and sub-division of land as
new families are brought into being, the country is
deprived by the original state of property, and the
feudal customs and habits which it necessarily
tends to generate. And under these circum-
stances, if a comparative deficiency of commerce
and manufactures, which great inequality of pro-
perty tends rather to perpetuate than to correct,
prevents the growth of that demand for labour and
produce, which can alone remedy the discou-
ragement to population occasioned by this in-
equality, it is obvious that Spanish America may
remain for ages thinly peopled and poor, compared
with her natural resources.

And so, in fact, she has remained. For though
the increase of population and wealth has been
considerable, particularly of late years, since the
trade with the mother-country has been more
open, yet altogether it has been far short of what
it would have been, even under a Spanish govern-

cc4


392 ON THE IMMEDIAT)


ment, if the riches 6 the soil
by a» better division ‘of ‘1
greater and more constant d :
duce. «> ': se tae
Humboldt ebadcnds that « ‘Les
ont-réfléchi sérieusement sur la riche:
Mexicain savent que, par ‘enya dur 4
plus soignée, et sans supposer des travaux extra-_
ordinaires pour l’irrigation des champs, la portion de
terrain déja défriché pourroit fournir de la sub-—
sistance pour une population huit a. dix fois plus —
nombreuse.” He then adds, very justly, “Si les —
‘plaines fertiles d’Atalisco, de Cholula‘et de Puebla’
ne produisent pas des récoltes plus abondantes, la
cause principale doit étre cherchée dans le manque >
des consommateurs, et dans les entraves que les
inégalités du sol opposent au commerce intérieur—
des grains, surtout a leur transport vers les cétes
qui sont baignées par la mer des Antilles.”* In —
the actual state of these districts, the main and”
immediate cause which retards their cultivation is — ;
indeed the want of consumers, that is, the want of ia
power to sell the produce at such a price as will at
once encourage good cultivation, and enable the
farmers to give the landlords something that they
want, for the use of their land. And nothing is
so likely to prevent this price from being ob-
‘tained, as any obstacles natural or artificial to in-
ternal and external commerce.
That the slow progress of New Spain in wealth


* Tom, iii. 1. iv. c. ix. p. 89.


SEC.1V.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 393


and population, compared with its prodigious re-
sources, has been more owing to want of demand
than want of capital, may fairly be inferred from
the actual state of its capital, which, according
to Humboldt, is rather redundant than deficient.
S peaking of the cultivation of sugar, which he
thinks might be successfully carried on in New


“Spain, he says, “ La Nouvelle Espagne, -outre I’a-


vantage de sa population, en aencore un autre trés
important, celui d’une masse énorme de capitaux


_ amoncelés chez les propriétaires des mines ou entre


les mains de négocians qui se sont retirés du com-
merce.”*

Altogether the state of New Spain, as deustibed
by Humboldt, clearly shews—

Ist. That the power of supporting labour may
exist to a much greater extent than the will.

2dly. That the time employed in working for
conveniences and luxuries is not always great in
proportion as the time employed in working for
food is small.

3dly. That the deficient wealth of a fertile coun-
try may be more owing to want of demand than
want of capital,

And, in general, that fertility of soil alone is
not an adequate stimulus to the continued increase
of wealth.

It is not necessary, however, to go so far as the
Spanish dominions in America, to illustrate these
propositions. The state of the mother-country
itself, and of most .of the countries of Europe,


* Tom, iii. 1. iv. c. x. p. 178.


394 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


would furnish the same conclusions. We need
not indeed go farther than Ireland to see a con-
firmation of them to a very considerable extent.
The cultivation of the potatoe, and its adoption as
the general food of the lower classes of the people in
Ireland, has rendered the land and labour necessary
to maintain a family, unusually small, compared with
most of the countries of Europe. The consequence
of this facility of production, unaccompanied by
such a train of fortunate circumstances as would
give it full effect in the increase of wealth, is a state
of things resembling, in many respects, countries
less advanced in civilization and improvement.
The prominent feature of Ireland is, the power
which it possesses and actually exercises, of sup-
porting a much greater population than it can em-
ploy, and the natural and necessary effect of this
state of things, is the very general prevalence of
habits of indolence. The landed proprietors and
principal tenants being possessed of food and ne-
cessaries, or at least of the ready means of procur-
ing them, have found workmen in abundance at
their command ; but these workmen not finding
sufficient employment in the farms on which they
had settled, have rarely been able to put their land-
lords in possession of the objects “ most useful and
most desirable” to them. Sometimes, indeed, from
the competition for land occasioned by an over-
flowing population, very high rents have been given
for small portions of ground fit for the growth of
potatoes ; but as the power of paying such rents ~
must depend, in a considerable degree, upon the


SEC.Ivy.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 395


power of getting work, the number of families
upon an estate, who can pay high money rents,
must have an obvious limit. This limit, there
is reason to believe, has been often found in the
inability of the Irish cottar to pay the rent which
he had contracted for; and it is generally under-
stood that the most intelligent Irish landlords, in-
fluenced both by motives of humanity and interest,
are now endeavouring to check the progress of that
redundant population upon their estates, which,.

while it generates an excessive degree of poverty
and misery as well as indolence, seldom makes up
to the employer, in the lowness of wages, for the
additional number of hands which he is obliged to
hire, or call upon for their appointed service in la-
bour. He is now generally aware that a smaller
number of more industrious labourers would enable
him to raise a- larger produce for the consumption
of towns and manufacturers, and at the same time
that they would thus contribute more largely to
the general wealth of the country, would be ina
more happy condition themselves, and enable him
to derive a larger and more certain rent from his
estates. It may fairly be said therefore, that the
possessors of food and necessaries in Ireland have
not been able to obtain the objects most useful and
desirable to them in return.

The indolence of the country-labourers in Ire-
land has been universally remarked. And whether
this arises from there being really little for them to
do in the actual state of things, or from a natural
tendency to idleness, not to be overcome by ordi-


396 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH, VIT.


nary stimulants ; it is equally true that the large
portion of time of which they have the command,.
beyond what is employed in providing themselves
with necessaries, does not certainly produce the
effect of making them abound in conveniences and
luxuries.. The poor clothing and worse lodging of
the Irish peasant are as well known as the spare
time which it might be expected would be the
means of furnishing him amply with all kinds of
conveniences.

In defence, however, of the Trish peasant, it may
be truly said, that in the state of society in which
he has been placed, he has not had a fair trial; he
has not been subjected to the ordinary stimulants
which produce industrious habits. In almost every
part of the island, particularly in the south and
west, the population of the country districts is
greater than the actual business to be done on the
land can employ. If the people, therefore, were
ever so industriously inclined, it is not possible for
them all to get regular employment in the occupa-
tions which belong to the soil. In the more hilly
parts of the country which are devoted chiefly to
pasture, this impossibility is more particularly strik-
ing. A small farm among the Kerry mountains
may support perhaps a large family, among whom
are a number of grown-up sons ; but the business
to be done upon the farm is a mere trifle. The
greatest part of it falls to the share of the women.
What remains for the men cannot occupy them
for a number of hours equal to a single day in the
week; and the consequence is, they are generally


SEC.IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 397.


seen loitering about, as if time was absolutely 6d
no value to them.

They might, one should suppose, with all this
leisure, employ themselves in building better houses,
or at least in improving them, and keeping them
neat and clean. But with regard to the first, some
difficulties may oceur in procuring materials ; and
with regard to the second, it appears from expe-
rience, that the object is either not understood, or
not considered as worth the trouble it would cost.

They might also, one should suppose, grow or
purchase the raw materials of clothing, and work
them up at home; and this in fact is really done
toacertain extent. Most of the linen and woollen
they wear is prepared by themselves. But the raw
materials, when not of home growth, cannot be
purchased without great difficulty, on account of
the low money prices of labour ; and in preparing
them for wear, the temptations to indolence will
generally be too powerful for huntan weakness,
when the question is merely about a work which
may be deferred or neglected, with no other effect
than that of being obliged to wear old clothes a
little longer, ina country where custom is certainly
in their favour.

If the Irish peasant could find such a market for
the result of his in-door occupations as would give
him constant employment at a fair money price,
his habits might soon change; but it may be
doubted whether any large body of people in any
country ever acquired regular and industrious
habits, where they were unable to get regular and


398 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


constant work, and when, to keep themselves con-
stantly and beneficially employed, it was necessary
to exercise a great degree of providence, energy,
and self-command.

It may be said, perhaps, that it is capital alone
which is wanted in Ireland, and that if this want
were supplied, all her people might be easily em-
ployed. That one of the great wants of Ireland is
capital will be readily allowed ; but I conceive it
would be a very great mistake to suppose that the
importation of a large quantity of capital, if it
could be effected, would at once accomplish the
object required, and create a quantity of wealth
proportioned to the labour which seems ready to
be employed in its production. The amount of
capital which could be laid out in Ireland in pre-
paring goods for foreign sale, must evidently de-
pend upon the state of foreign markets; and the
amount that could be employed in domestic manu- .
factures, must as evidently depend upon the do-
mestic demand. An attempt to force a foreign
market by means of capital, must necessarily occa-
sion a premature fall of profits, and might, after
great losses, be quite ineffectual ; and with regard
to the domestic demand, while the habits of the
great mass of the people are such as they are at
present, it must be quite inadequate to take off the
products of any considerable mass of new capital.
In a country, where the necessary food is obtained
with so little labour, and the population is still
equal or nearly equal to the produce, it is perhaps
impossible that the time not devoted to the produc-


SEC. IV.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 399


tion of food should create a proportionate quantity
of wealth, without a very decided taste for conve-
niences and luxuries among the lower classes of
society, and such a power of purchasing as would
occasion an effective demand for them. But it is
well known, that the taste of the Irish peasant for
articles of this description is yet to be formed. * His
wants are few, and these wants he is in the habit
of supplying principally at home. Owing to the
cheapness of the potatoe, which forms the principal
food of the lower classes of the people, his money
wages are low; and the portion which remains,
after providing absolute necessaries, will go but a
very little way in the purchase of conveniences.
All these circumstances are most unfavourable to
the increase of wealth derived from manufactures
destined for home consumption. But the tastes
and habits of a large body of people are extremely
slow in changing; and in the mean’time the appli-
cation of capital in larger quantities than was suited
to the progress of the change, would certainly fail to
yield such profits as would encourage its continued
accumulation and application in the same way. In
general it may be said that demand is quite as ne-
cessary to the increase of capital as the increase of
capital istodemand. They mutually act upon and
encourage each other, and neither of them can pro-
ceed with vigour if the other be left far behind.
In the actual state of Ireland, I am inclined to
believe, that the check which the progress of her
manufactures has received, has been owing to a
want of demand rather than a want of capital.


400 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


Her peculiar distress upon the termination of the
late war had unquestionably this origin, whatever
might have been the subsequent destruction of
capital. And the great checks to her manufactures
formerly were the unjust and impolitic restrictions
imposed by England which prevented, or circum-
scribed thé demand for them. When, however, a
brisk demand for any manufacture has existed,
few instances I believe have occurred of its being —
allowed to languish through the want of capital ;.
though there is reason to think that advances of
capital have been sometimes made, which have
failed to create an adequate market.

The state of Ireland in respect to the time and
labour necessary to the production of her food is
such, that her capabilities for manufacturing and
commercial wealth are prodigious. If an im-
proved system of. agriculture were to raise the
food and raw materials required for the population
with the smallest quantity of labour necessary to
do it in the best manner, and the remainder of the
people, instead of loitering about upon the land,
were engaged in manufactures and commerce car-
ried on in great and flourishing towns, Ireland
would be beyond comparison richer than England.
This is what is wanted to give full scope to her
great natural resources ; and to attain this state of
things an immense capital is undoubtedly required;
but it can only be employed to advantage as its
gradually called for; and a premature supply of it
would be much less beneficial and less permanent
in its effects, than such a change in the tastes and


SEC. V.]. OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 401


habits of the lower classes of people, and such an
alteration in the mode of paying their labour, as
would give them both the will and the power to
puichase domestic manufactures and foreign com-
modities.

The state of Ireland then may be said to lead to
nearly the same conclusions as that of New Spain,
and to shew—

That the power of supporting tabouti may often
exist to a much greater extent than the will} —

That the necessity of employing only a siffell
portion of time in producing food does not always
occasion the employment of a greater ‘portion of
time in procuring conveniences and luxuries ;

That the deficiency of wealth in a fertile coun-
try may be more owing to want of demand. than
to want of capital ;

And, in general, that the fertility of the soil
alone is not an adequate stimulus to the permanent
increase of wealth.


SECTION V.


Of Inventions to save Labour, considered asa Stimulus to
ae the continued Increase of Wealth.


Inventions to save labour seldom take place to any

considerable extent, except when there is a decided

demand for them. They are the natural products
DD


402 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


of improvement and civilization, and, in their more
perfect forms, generally come in aid of the failing
powers of production on the land. The fer-
tility of the soil, being a gift of nature, exists
whether it is wanted or not ; and must often there-
fore exceed for many hundred years the power of
fully using it. Inventions, which substitute ma-
chinery for manual exertions, being the result of
the ingenuity of man, and called forth by his wants,
will, as might be expected, seldom greatly exceed
those wants.

But the same laws apply to both. They both
come under the head of facilities of production ;
and in both cases a full use cannot be made of this
facility, unless the power of supply which it fur-
nishes be accompanied by an adequate extension

of the market.

When a machine is invented, which, by saving
labour, will bring goods into the market at a much
cheaper rate than before, the most usual effect is
such an extension of the demand for the commo-
dity, by its being brought within the power of a
much greater number of purchasers, that the value
of the whole mass of goods made by the new ma-
chinery greatly exceeds their former value; and,
notwithstanding the saving of labour, more hands,
instead of fewer, are required in the manufacture.

This effect has been very strikingly exemplified
in the cotton machinery of this country. The
consumption of cotton goods has been so greatly
extended both at home and abroad, on account of
their cheapness, that the value of the whole of


SEC. V.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH, 403
tf


_the cotton goods and twist now made exceeds,
beyond comparison, the former value; while the
rapidly increasing population of the towns of
Manchester, Glasgow, &c. during the last thirty
years, amply testifies that, with a few temporary
exceptions, the demand for the labour concerned in
the cotton manufactures, in spite of the machi-
nery used, has been increasing very greatly.

When the introduction of machinery has this
effect, it is not easy to appreciate its enriching
power, or its tendency to increase both the value
and quantity of domestic and foreign commodities,

When however the commodity to which machi-
nery is applied is not of such a nature, that its
consumption can extend with its cheapness, the
increase of wealth derived from it is neither so
great nor so certain. Still however it may be
highly beneficial; but the extent of this benefit
depends upon a contingency. Let us suppose a
number of capitalists in the habit of employing
20,0007. each in a manufacture of limited con-
sumption, and that machines were introduced which,
by the saving of labour, would enable them to sup-
ply the actual demand for the commodity with
capitals of ten thousand pounds each, instead of '
twenty. There would, in this case, be a certain
number of ten thousand pounds, and the men em-
ployed by these capitals, thrown out of employ-
ment. On the other hand, there would be a por-
tion of revenue set free for the purchase of fresh
commodities; and this demand would undoubtedly
be of the greatest advantage in encouraging the

DD2


404 ON: THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cu. VIT?*


employment of the vacant capitals in other direc-
tions. At the same time it must be recollected
that this demand is not anew one, and, even when
fully supplied, could only replace the. diminution
of capital and profits in one department, occa-
sioned-by the employment of so many ten thou-
sands, instead of twenty thousands. But in with-
drawing capital from one employment and placing
it in another, there: is almost always a consider-
able loss. Even if the whole of the remainder
were directly employed, it would be less in
amount. Though it might yield a greater pro-
duce, it would not command the same quantity of
labour as before; and, unless more menial servants
were used, many persons would be thrown out of
work ; and thus the power of the whole capital to
command the same quantity of labour would evi-
dently depend upon the contingency of the vacant
capitals being withdrawn undiminished from their
old occupations, and finding immediately equiva-
lent employment in others.

If, in order to try the principle, we were to push it
farther, and to suppose that, without any extension
of the foreign market for our goods, we could by
means of machinery obtain all the commodities at
present in use, with one third of the labour now
applied, is it in any degree probable that the mass
of vacant capitals could be advantageously em-

_ ployed, or that the mass of labourers thrown out
of work could find the means of commanding an
adequate share of the national produce? If there
were other foreign trades which, by means of the


SEC. V.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 405.


capital. and labour thrown out of employment,
might be greatly extended, the case would be at”
once quite altered, and the returns of such trades
might furnish stimulants sufficient to keep up the
value of the national income. But, if only an
increase of domestic commodities could’ be ob-
tained, there is every reason to fear that the exer-
tions of industry would slacken. The: peasant,
who might be induced to labour an additional
number of hours for tea or tobacco, might prefer
indolence to a new coat. The tenant or small
owner of land, who could obtain the common con-
veniences and luxuries of life at one third of their
former price, might not labour so hard to procure
the same amount of surplus produce from the
land. And the trader or merchant, who would
continue in his business in order to be able to
drink and give his guests claret and champagne,
might think an addition of homely commodities
by no means worth the trouble of so much con-
stant attention. |

It has been said that, when there is an income
ready for the demand, it is impossible that there
should be any difficulty in the-employment of
labour and capital to supply it, as the owner
of such an income, rather than not spend it,
would purchase a table or chair that had cost the
labour of a hundred men for a year. This may
be true, in cases of fixed monied revenues, ob-
tained by inheritance, or with little or no trouble.
We well know that some of the Roman nobles,
who obtained their immense wealth chiefly by the

DDS


406 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


easy mode of plunder, sometimes gave the most
enormous prices for fancied luxuries. <A feather
will weigh down a scale when there is nothing in
the opposite one. But where the amount of the
incomes of a country depend, in a considerable
degree, upon the exertion of labour, activity and
attention, there must be something in the commo-
dities to be obtained sufficiently desirable to balance
this exertion, or the exertion will cease. And ex-
perience amply shews, by the number of persons
who daily leave off business, when they might
certainly have continued to improve their fortunes,
that most men place some limits, however variable,
to the quantity of conveniences and luxuries which
they will labour for; and that very few indeed
would attend a counting-house six or eight hours
a day, in order to purchase conmmodities which
have no other merit than the quantity of labour
which has been employed upon them, ©

Still however it is true that, when a great in-
come has once been created ina country, in the
shape.of a large mass of rents, profits and wages,
a considerable resistance will be made to any essen-
tial fall in its value. It is a very just remark of
Hume,* that when the affairs of a society are
brought to this situation ; that is, when, by means
of foreign trade, it has acquired the tastes neces-
sary to give value to a great quantity of labour
not employed upon actual necessaries, it may lose
most of this trade, and yet continue great and


* Essays, vol. i. p. 293.


SEC. V.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 407


powerful, on account of the extraordinary efforts
which would be made by the spare capital and
ingenuity of the country to refine home manufac-
tures, in order to supply the tastes already formed,
and the incomes already created. But if we were
to allow that the income of such a nation might,
in this way, by possibility be maintained, there is
little chance of its increasing; and it is almost
certain that it would not have reached the same
amount, without the market occasioned by foreign
commerce. ~

Of this I think we shall be convinced, if, in our
own country, we look at the quantity of goods
which we export chiefly in consequence of our
machinery, and consider the nature of the returns
obtained for them. In the accounts of the year
ended the 5th of January 1818, it appears that the
exports of three articles alone in which machinery
is used—cottons, woollen and hardware, including
steel goods, &c. are valued at above 29 millions.
And among the most prominent articles of the
imports of the same year, we find coffee, indigo,
sugar, tea, silks, tobacco, wines, and cotton-wool,
amounting in value all together to above 18 millions
out of thirty! Now I would ask how we should
have obtained these valuable imports, if the foreign
markets for our cottons, woollens, and hardware
had not been extended with the use of machinery?
And further, where we could have found substitutes
at home for such imports, which would have been
likely to have produced the same effects, in stimu-
lating the cultivation of the land, the accumulation

DD4


408 ON THE IMMEDIATE-CAUsES » [CH. VIT:


of capital, and the increase of population? And
when to these considerations we add the fortunes
which have been made in these manufactures, the
market for which has been continually extending,
and continually requiring more capital and more
people to be employed in them; and contrast with
this state of things the constant necessity of look-
ing out for new modes of employing the same
capital and the same people, a portion of which
would be thrown out of their old occupations by
every new invention ;—we must be convinced that
the state of this country would have been totally
different from what: it is, and that it would not
certainly have acquired the same income in rents,
profits and wages, if the same ingenuity had been
exercised in the invention of machinery, without
the same extension of the market for the commo- .
dities produced. »

It may justly be doubted, whether, at the pre-
sent moment, upon the supposition of our foreign
intercourse being interrupted, we should be likely
to find efficient substitutes for teas, coffee, sugar,
wines, silks, indigo, cottons, &c. so as to keep up the
value ore: present income ; but it cannot well be
doubted, that if, from the time of Edward the First,
and setting out with the actual division of landed
property which then prevailed, the foreign vent
for our commodities had remained stationary, our
revenue from the land alone would not have ap-
proached to what it is at present, and still less, the
revenue from trade and manufactures.

Even under the actual division of the landed


SEC. V.| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. — 409


property in Europe, which is very much better.
than it was 500 years ago, most of the states of ~
which it is composed would be’ comparatively un-,
peopled, if it were not for trade and manufactures, —
Without the excitements arising from the results
of this sort of industry, no sufficient motives could
be presented to them either to divide their great
estates by sale, or to take care that they were well
cultivated. :

‘ According to Adam Smith, the most important
manufactures of the northern and western parts of -
Europe were established either in imitation of fo-
reign articles, the tastes for which had been already
formed by a previous foreign trade, or by the gra-
dual refinement of domestic commodities till they
were fit for exportation.* In the first case, the
very origin of the manufacture is made to depend
upon a previous extension.of market, and the im-
portation of foreign articles; and in the second
case, the main object and. use of refining the do-
mestic commodities in an inland country, appears
to be the fitting them for an extensive market,
without which the local advantages enjoyed would
be in a great measure lost.

In carrying on the late war, we were powerfully
assisted by our steam-engines, which enabled: us
to. command a.prodigious quantity of foreign pro-
duce and foreign labour. But how would their
efficacy have been weakened if we could not have
exported our cottons, cloths and hardware?


* Wealth of Nations, Vol. ii. B. iii. ch. iii. p. 115. 6th edit.


410 = ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


If the mines of America could be successfully
worked by machinery, and the King of Spain’s
_tax could be increased at will, so as to make the
most of this advantage, what a vast revenue might
they not be made to afford him! But it is obvious
that the effects of such machinery would sink into
insignificance, if the market for the precious metals
were confined to the adjacent countries, and the
-principal effect of it was to throw capital and
labour out of employment.
In the actual state of things in this country, the
population and wealth of Manchester, Glasgow,
Leeds, &c. have been greatly increasing ; because,
on account of the extending demand for their
goods, more people have been continually required
to work them up; but if a much smaller number
of people had been required, on account of a saving
of labour from machinery, without an adequate
extension of the market, it is obvious that these
towns would have been comparatively poor, and
thinly peopled. To what extent the spare capital
and labour thrown out of employment in one dis-
trict would have enriched others, it is impossible
to say; and on this subject any assertion may be
made, as we cannot be set right by an appeal to
facts. But I would ask, whetlier there are any
grounds in the slightest degree plausible for saying,
that not only the capital spared at any time from
these manufactures would be: preserved and em-
ployed elsewhere; but that it would be employed
as profitably, and create as much exchangeable
value in other places as it would have done in


SEC. V.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 411


Manchester and Glasgow, with an extending mar-
ket? In short, are there any plausible grounds
whatever for stating that, if the twenty millions
worth of cottons which we now export, were en-
tirely stopped, either by successful foreign compe-
tition or ‘positive prohibitions, we should have no
difficulty in finding employment for our capital
and labour equally advantageous to individuals in
point of profit, and equally enriching to the coun-
try with respect to the exchangeable value of its
revenue ?

Unquestionably any country has the power of
consuming all that it produces, however great in
quantity ; and every man in health has the power
of applying his mind and body to productive labour
for ten or twelve hours of the day. But these are
dry assertions respecting the powers of a country,
which do not necessarily involve any practical
consequences relating to the increase of wealth. If
we could not export our cottons, it is quite certain
that, though we might have the power, we should
not have the will, to consume them all in kind at
home; and the maintenance of our national wealth
and revenue would depend entirely upon thecircum-
stance whether the capital thrown out of the cotton
trade could be so applied as to produce commo-
dities which would be estimated as highly and
consumed as eagerly as the foreign goods before
imported. There is no magic in foreign markets.
The final demand and consumption must always
be at home; and if goods could be produced at
home, which would excite people to work as many


412 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAusES [CH. VII.


hours in the day, would communicate the same
enjoyments, and create a consumption of the
same value, foreign markets would be useless.
We know however from experience, that very
few countries are capable of producing commodi-
ties of the same efficacy, in this respect, as those
which may be obtained by a trade to various
climates and soils. Without such a trade, and with


a great increase in the power of production, there -


is no inconsiderable danger that industry, consump-
tion, and exchangeable value would diminish ; and
this danger would most unquestionably be realized
if the cheapness of domestic commodities occa-
sioned by machinery, were to lead to increased
saving rather than,to increased expenditure.

But it is known that facilities of production have
the strongest tendency to open markets, both at
home and abroad. In the actual state therefore
of .most countries, there is little reason to appre-
hend any permanent evil from the introduction of
machinery. The presumption always is, that it
will lead to a great extension of wealth and value.
But still we must allow that the pre-eminent
advantages derived from the substitution of ma-
chinery for manual labour, depend_upon the exten-
sion of the market for the commodities produced,
and the increased stimulus given to consumption ;
and that, without this extension of market and
increase of consumption, they must be ina great
degree lost. Like the fertility of land, the inven-
tion of good machinery confers a prodigious power
of production, But neither of these great powers


SEC. VI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 413


can be called fully into action, if the situation and
circumstances, or the habits and tastes of the
society prevent the opening of a sufficient market,
and an adequate increase of consumption.

The three great causes most favourable to pro-
duction are, accumulation of capital, fertility of
soil, and inventions to save labour. They all act
in the same direction; and as they all tend to
facilitate supply, without reference to demand, it
is not probable that they should either separately
or conjointly afford an adequate stimulus to the
continued increase of wealth, which can only be
kept up by a continued increase of the demand for
commodities.


SECTION VI.


Of the Necessity of a Union of the Powers of Production
with the Means of Distribution, in order to ensure a con-
tinued Increase of Wealth.


We have seen that the powers of production, to
whatever extent they may exist, are not alone
sufficient to secure the creation of a proportionate
degree of wealth. Something else seems to be
necessary in order to call these powers fully into
action ; and this is, such a distribution of produce,
and such an adaptation of this produce to the
wants. of those who are to consume it, as con-
stantly to increase the exchangeable value of the
whole mass.


414 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES ([CH. VII.


In individual cases, the power of producing par-
ticular commodities is called into action, in pro-
portion to the effective demand for them ; and the
greatest stimulus to their production is a high

market price, or an increase of their exchangeable
value, before more capital and labour have been
employed upon them.

In the same manner, the greatest stimulus to the
continued production of commodities, taken all to-
gether, is an increase in the exchangeable value of
the whole mass, before more labour and capital
have been employed upon them. And this increase
of value is effected by such a distribution of the
actual produce as is best adapted to gratify the
existing wants of society, and to inspire new ones.

It has been stated in a preceding section, that if
all the roads and canals of the country were broken -
up, and the means of distributing its produce were
essentially impeded, the whole value of the. pro-
duce would greatly fall ; indeed, it is obvious that
if it were so distributed as not to be suited to the
wants, tastes, and powers of the actual population
in different situations, its value might smk to such
a degree as to be comparatively quite inconsider-
able. Upon the same principle, if the means of |

distributing the produce of the country were still

further facilitated, and if the adaptation of it to the
wants, tastes and powers of the consumers were
more complete than at present, there can be no
doubt that a great increase in the value of the
whole produce would follow.

But to illustrate the power of distributigts in in- ©


SEC, VI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 415


creasing the mass of exchangeable value, we need
only refer to experience. Before the introduction
of good roads and canals in England, the prices
_ of: produce in many country districts were ex-
tremely low compared with the same kind of pro-
duce in the London markets. After the means of
distribution were facilitated, the price of country
produce, and of some sorts of London produce
which were sent into the country in exchange for
it, rose; and rose in a greater degree than the
country produce fell in the London markets, or the
London produce fell in the country markets ; and
consequently the value of the whole produce, or
the supplies of London and the country together,
was greatly increased ; and while encouragement
was thus given to the employment of a greater
quantity of capital by the extension of demand,
the temporary rise of profits, occasioned by this
extension, would greatly contribute to furnish the
additional capital required.

It will be asked, perhaps, how an increase in
the exchangeable value of the whole produce of a
country is to be estimated? It has before been
stated that real value in exchange, from its very
nature, admits of no accurate and standard mea-
sure; and consequently, in the present case, no_
measure can be mentioned which is perfectly satis-
factory. Yet even bullion, our most common
measure of value, might, in general, and. for short
periods, be referred to; and though abstractedly
considered, wealth is nearly independent of money ;
yet in the actual state of the relations of the dif-


416 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH, VIt.


ferent countries of the world with each other, it
rarely happens that any great increase or decrease
in the bullion value of all the commodities of a
country takes place, without an increase or decrease
of demand for commodities, compared with the
supply of them.

It happens however, undoubtedly, sometimes,
that the value of bullion alters, not only generally,
but in particular countries; and it is not meant to
be said that a country cannot possibly be stimu-
lated to an increase of wealth after a fall has taken
place in the money-price of all its commodities.

\As the best approximation to a measure of real
value in exchange, in application to the commo-
dities of different countries and different times, I
before proposed a mean between corn and labour;*
and to this measure I should be disposed always
to refer, when any commodities are to be estimated,
with the exception of corn and Jabour themselves.
But as, in speaking of national wealth, it is neces-’
sary to include the exchangeable value of food; and
as food cannot well be the measure of food, I shall
refer. generally to the labour, domestic and foreign,
which the bullion-price of the produce will com-
mand, or the sacrifices which people are willing:
and able to make of their own or other persons
exertions in order to obtain it, as the, best practical
measure of value that can be applied ; and though
undoubtedly not accurate, yet sufficiently so for
the present purpose.


* Chap. ii. sect. vii.


SEC. VI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 417


General wealth, like particular portions of it,
will always follow effective demand. Whenever
there is a great demand for commodities, that is,
whenever the exchangeable value of the whole .
mass will command more labour than usual at the
same price, there is the same kind of reason for
expecting a general increase of commodities, as
there is for expecting an increase of particular
‘commodities when their market-prices rise. And
on the other hand, whenever the produce of a
country estimated in the labour which it will com-
mand falls in value, it is evident that with it
the power and will to purchase the same quantity
of labour must be diminished, and the effective
demand for an increase of produce must, for a time,
be checked.

Mr. Ricardo, in his chapter on Value and Riches,
has stated that “ a certain quantity of clothes and
provisions will maintain and employ the same num-
ber of men, and will therefore procure the same
quantity of work to be done, whether they be pro- _
duced by the labour of a hundred or of two hun-
dred men; but they will be of twice the value,
if two hundred have been employed in their pro-
duction.”* But, even taking his own peculiar esti-
mate of value, this statement would very rarely
indeed be true. The clothes and provisions which
had cost only one hundred days’ labour would
never, but in the most unnatural state of things,
be able to procure the same quantity of work to


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. xx. p. 349.
EE


418 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH: VII.


be done as if they had cost two hundred days’
labour. To suppose it, is to suppose that the price
of labour, estimated in necessaries, is the same at
all times and in all countries, and does not depend
upon the plenty or scarcity of necessariés com-
pared with labour, a supposition contradicted by
universal experience. Nine quarters of wheat
will perhaps command a year’s labour in England ;
but sixteen quarters will hardly procure the same
quantity of work to be done in America... And in
the case either of a sudden increase of productive
labour, by a rapid conversion of revenue into capi-
tal, or a sudden increase of the productiveness of
the same quantity of labour, there is. not the
slightest doubt that a given portion of necessaries
would be quite unable to set in motion the same
quantity of labour ; and, if the exchangeable value
of the produce should fall in a greater ratio than
its quantity increases, (which may very easily
happen,) then the same quantity of labour would °
not be set in motion by the increased quantity of
necessaries, and the progress of wealth would re-
ceive a decided check.

Such a check would still more obviously be. the
consequence of a diminished demand for produce,
owing to the decline of foreign commerce, or any
other cause. Under these circumstances, both the
quantity and value of produce would. soon be di-
minished; and though labour, from the want of
demand, would be very cheap, the capitalists

-would soon lose both the will and the power to
employ it in the same quantity as before.


SEC. VI.] _ OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 419


_ In every case, a continued increase in the value
of produce estimated in labour seems to be abso-
lutely, necessary to a continued and unchecked
increase of wealth; because without such an in-
crease of value it is obvious that no fresh labour
can be set in motion. And in order to support this
value it is necessary that an effective distribution
of the produce should take place, and a due pro-
portion be maintained between the. objects to be
consumed and the number, wants, and powers of
the consumers, or, in other words, between the sup
ply of commodities and the demand for them.

It has already been shewn that this value cannot
be maintained in the case of a rapid accumulation
of capital occasioned by an actual and continued
diminution in the expenditure and consumption of
the higher classes of society.* Yet it will be
most readily allowed that the saving from revenue
to add to capital is an absolutely necessary step in
the progress of wealth. How then is this saving
to take place without producing the diminution of
_ value apprehended ?

It may take place, and practically almost always
does take place, in consequence of a previous in-
crease of value, or of revenue, in which case a
saving may be effected, not only without any di-
minution of demand and consumption, but under
an actual increase of demand, consumption and
value during every part of the process. And it is
in fact this previous increase of value and revenue


. * Sect. III. of this chapter.
EE2


420 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cH. vii.


which both gives the great stimulus to accumulation,
and makes that accumulation effective in the con-
tinued production of wealth.

M. Sismondi, in his late work, speaking of the
limits of accumulation, observes, “On ne fait jamais
aprés tout qu’échanger la totalité de la production
de l’année contre la totalité de la production dé
l'année précédente.”* If this were really the case,
it would be difficult to say how the value of. the
national produce could ever be increased. But in


* Nouveaux Principes d’Economie Politique, tom. i. p. 120.
I quite agree with M. Sismondi in many of his principles. re-
specting consumption and demand; but I do not think that the
view which he takes of the formation of national revenue, on
which all increase of consumption and demand depends, is just ;
and I can by no means go with him in the fears which he ex-
presses about machinery, and still less in the opinion which he
holds respecting the necessity of a frequent interference on the
part of government to protect individuals, and classes, from the
Consequences of competition, With regard to population, he
has misunderstood my work more than I could have expected
from so able and distinguished a writer. He says, that my reason- °
ing is completely sophistical, because I have compared the virtual
increase of population with the positive increase of food. But
surely I have compared the virtual increase of population with
the virtual inctease of food; and the positive increase of popula-
tion with the positive increase of food; and the greater part of
my book is taken up with the latter'comparison, Practically M.
Sismondi goes much farther than I do in his apprehensions of a
redundant population, and proposes to repress it by all sorts of
strange means. I never have recommended, nor ever shall, any
other means than those of explaining to the labouring classes the
manner in which their interests are affected, by too great an in-
crease of their numbers, and’of removing or weakening the posi-
tive laws which tend to discourage habits of prudence and
foresight.


SEC. VI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 421


fact a great increase of productions may imme-
diately find an adequate market, and experience
consequently a great increase of exchangeable
value, if they are so well distributed and so well
adapted to the tastes and wants of the society as
to excite the desire of making an adequate sacrifice
in order to procure and consume them. All increase
of commodities shews itself first in increased
revenue; andas long as they increase in value as well
as in quantity by being properly distributed and
the consumption properly proportioned to the sup-
’ ply, it is obvious that a yearly saving may take
place consistently with a yearly increase of re-
venue and a yearly increase of expenditure and
demand.

The fortune of a country, though necessarily
made more slowly, is made in the same way as the
fortunes of individuals in trade are generally made,
—by savings, certainly ; but by sayings which are
furnished from increased-gains, and by no means
involve a diminished expenditure on objects of
luxury and enjoyment.

Many a merchant has made a large fortune
although, during the acquisition of this fortune,
there was perhaps hardly a single year in which
he did not rather increase than diminish his ex-
penditure in objects of luxury, enjoyment, ahd
liberality. The amount of capital in this coun-
‘try is immense, and it certainly received very
great additions during the last twenty-five years;
but on looking back, few traces are to be found of
adiminished expenditure in the maintenance of

E.E3


422 ON THEIMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


unproductive labour. If some such traces how-
ever are to be found, they will be found in exact
conformity to the theory here laid down; they
will be found during a period, when, from particu-
lar circumstances, the value of the national produce
was not maintained, and there was in consequence
a great diminution of the power of expenditure,
and a great check to the production of wealth. *

Perhaps it will be said, that to lay so much
stress on distribution, and to measure demand by
the exchangeable value of the whole produce, is to
exalt the gross revenue at the expense of the neat
revenue of a country, and to favour that system of
cultivation and manufacturing which employs on
each object the greatest number of hands. But I
have already shewn that the saving of labour, and
the increase of skill, both in agriculture and manu-
facturing industry, by enabling a country to push
its cultivation over poorer lands, without diminu-
tion of profits, and to extend far and wide the
markets for its manufactures, must tend to increase
the exchangeable value of the whole; and there
cannot be a doubt that in this country they must
have been the main sources of that rapid and as-
tonishing increase in the value of the national
wealth, which has taken place ake the last
thirty or forty years.

To dwell therefore mainly on the gross revenue
of a country rather than on its neat revenue is in no
respect to under-rate the prodigious advantage de-
tived from skill and machinery, but merely to give
that importance to the value of the whole produce


~


SEC. VI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF. WEALTH. + 423.


to which it isso justly entitled. No description
of national wealth, which refers only to neat re-
venue, can ever be in any degree satisfactory. The
Economists destroyed the practical utility of their
works by referring exclusively to the neat produce ~
of the land. And the writers who make wealth con-
‘sist of rents and profits, to the exclusion of wages,
commitan error exactly of the same kind though
less in degree. » Those who live upon the wages of
labour, unproductive as well as productive, re-
ceive and expend much the greatest part of the
annual produce, pay a very considerable sum in
taxes for the maintenance of the government,
and form by far the largest portion of its physical
force. Under the prevalence of habits of pru-
dence, the whole of this vast mass might be nearly
as happy as the individuals of the other two classes,
and probably a greater number of them,. though
not a greater proportion of them, happier. “In
every point of view therefore, both in reference
to the part of the annual produce which falls to
their share, and the means of health and happiness
which it may be presumed to communicate, those
who live on the wages of labour must be con-
sidered as the most important portion of the so-
.ciety ; and any definition of wealth which should
involve such a diminution of their numbers, as
to require for the supply of the whole population
a smaller annual produce, must necessarily be
erroneous.

In the First Chapter of this Work,-having defined
wealth to be “the material objects which are ne-

E E4


'’


424 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


cessary, useful, and agreeable to mankind,” I
stated as a consequence that a country was rich or
poor according to the abundance or scantiness in
which these objects were supplied, compared with
the extent of territory. It will be readily allowed
that this definition doés not include the question
of what may be called the amount of disposable
produce, or the fund for taxation; but still I must
‘consider it as a much more correct definition of
the wealth of a country than any that should refer
to this disposable part alone. What should we.
say of the wealth of this country, if it were pos-
sible that its rents and profits could remain the
same, while its population and produce were re-
duced two-thirds? Certainly it would be much
poorer according to the above definition ; and there
are not many that would dissent from such a con-
clusion.

That it would be desirable, in a definition of
national wealth, to include the consideration of
disposable produce, as well as of actual quantity

_and value, cannot be doubted; but such a definition
seems to be in its nature impossible, because in
each individual case it must depend upon opinion,
what increase of disposable produce should be
accounted equivalent to a given diniinution of
goss produce.

We must content ourselves therefore with refer-
ring generally to the amount and value of national
produce ; and it may be subsequently stated as a
separate, though very important consideration, that
particular countries, with the same amount and


a


Meas


SEC. VI.]. OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 425


value of produce, have a larger or smaller propor-
tion of that produce disposable. In this respect,
no doubt, a country with a fertile territory will
have a prodigious advantage over those whose
wealth depends almost entirely on manufactures,
With the same population, the same rate of profits,
and the same amount and value of produce, the
landed nation would have much the — por-
tion of its wealth disposable.

Fortunately, it happens but seldom that we have
-to determine the amount of advantage or dis-
advantage occasioned by the increase of the neat,
at the expense of the gross revenue. The interest
of individual capitalists uniformly prompts them
to the saving of labour, in whatever business they
are engaged; and both theory and experience com-
bine to shew that their successful efforts in this
direction, by increasing the powers of production,
afford the means of increasing, in the greatest
practicable degree, the amount and value of the’
gross produce,* provided always that such a dis-


* From what has been here said, the reader will see that I can
by no means agree with Mr. Ricardo, in his chapter On Gross and
Net Revenue. I should not hesitate a moment in saying, that a
country with a neat revenue from rents and profits, consisting of
food and clothing for five millions of men, would be decidedly
richer and more powerful, if such neat revenue were obtained
from seven millions of men, rather than five, supposing them to
be equally well supported. The whole produce would be greater ;
and the additional two millions of labourers would some of them
unquestionably have a part of their wages disposable. But I
would further ask what is to become of the capital as well as the

‘people in the case of such a change? It is obvious that a con-


426° ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


tribution and consumption of the increased supply
of commodities takes place as constantly to in-
crease their exchangeable value.

In general, an increase of produce and an in-
crease of value go on together; and this is that
natural and healthy state of things, which is most
favourable to the progress of wealth.» An increase
in the quantity of produce depends chiefly upon
the power of production, and an increase in the
value of produce upon its distribution. Produc-
tion and distribution are the. two grand ele-
ments of wealth, which, combined in their due
proportions, are capable of carrying the riches and
population of the earth in no great length of
time to the utmost limits of its possible resources ;
but which taken separately, or combined in undue
proportions, produce only, after the lapse of many
thousand years, the scanty riches and scanty popu-
lation, which are at present racine over the face
of the globe. Honk Tea


siderable portion of it must become redundant and useless, I
quite agree with Mr. Ricardo, however, in approving all saving of
labour and inventions in machinery’; but it is because I think that
their tendency is to increase the gross produce and to make room
for a larger population and a larger capital. If the saving of
labour were to be accompanied by the effects stated in Mr, Ri-
cardo’s instance, I should agree with M. Sismondi and Mr. Owen
in dentponsne it as a great misfortune. }


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESSOF WEALTH. 427


SECTION VII.


Of the Distribution occasioned by the Division of landed
Property considered as the Means of increasing a ex-
changeable Value of the whole Produce.

The causes most favourable to that increase of

value which depends upon distribution are, Ist, .

the division of landed property ; 2dly, internal and

external commerce; 3dly, the maintenance of un-
productive consumers. e148

In the first settlement and colonization of new
countries, an easy division and subdivision of the
land is a point of the very highest importance.

Without a facility of obtaining land in small por-

tions by those who have accumulated small capi-

tals, and of settling new proprietors upon the
soil, as new families branch off from the parent
‘stocks, no adequate effect can be given to the prin-
ciple of population. This facility of settling the
rising population upon the soil is still more im-
periously necessary in inland countries, which are
not favourably situated for external and internal
commerce. Countries of this description, if, from
the laws and customs relating to landed property,
great difficulties are thrown in the way of its dis-
tribution, may remain for ages very’ scantily  peo-
pled, in spite of the principle of population ; while
the easy division and subdivision of the land as —


428 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


new families arise to be provided for, might, with ,
comparatively little commerce, furnish an effec-
tive demand for population, and create a produce
which would have no inconsiderable value in ex-
change. Such a country would probably have a
small neat produce compared with its gross pro-
duce; it would also be greatly deficient in the
amount of its manufactures and mercantile pro-
ducts ;, yet still its actual produce and population
might be respectable; and for the increase of ex-
changeable value which had produced these effects,
it would be mainly indebted to that distribution of
the produce which had arisen. from the easy diyi-
sion of larid. ;

The rapid increase of the United States of Ame-
rica, taken as a whole, has undoubtedly been’ aided
very greatly by foreign commerce, and particularly
by the power of selling raw produce, obtained
with little labour, for European commodities which
have cost much labour, But the cultivation of a
great part of the interior territory has depended in
a considerable degree upon the cause above stated ;
and the facility with which even common work-
men, if they were industrious and economical for
some years, could become new settlers and small
proprietors of land, has given prodigious effect to
that high money price of labour, which could not
have taken place without foreign commerce; and
together they occasioned yearly that extraordinary
increase of exchangeable value, which so distin-
guished the progress of the establishments in North —


SEC. ViI.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 429


America, compared with any others with which we
are acquainted. |
Over almost all Europe a most unequal and
vicious division of landed property was established
during the feudal times. In some states the laws,
which protected and perpetuated this division,
have been greatly weakened, and by the aids of
commerce and manufactures have been rendered
comparatively inefficient. But in others these
laws still remain in great force, and throw very
great obstacles in the way of increasing wealth and
population. A very large proprietor, surrounded
by very poor peasants, presents a distribution of
property most unfavourable to effective demand.
Adam Smith has well described the slack kind
of cultivation which was likely to take place, and
did in fact take place, among the great proprietors
of the middle ages. But not only were they bad
cultivators and improvers ; and for’a time perhaps
deficient in a proper taste for manufactured pro-
ducts; yet, even if they had possessed these tastes
in the degree found to prevail at present, their m-
considerable numbers would have prevented their
demand from producing any important mass of
such wealth. We hear of great splendour among
princes and nobles in every period of history.
The difficulty was not so much to inspire the rich
with a love of finery, as to break down their im-
mense properties, and to create a greater number
of demanders who were able and willing to pur:
chase the results of productive labour. This, it is
obvious, could only ‘be effected very gradually.


:


430 ON.THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES ([CH. VII.


That the increasing love of finery might have as-
sisted considerably in accomplishing this object is
highly probable; but these tastes alone, unaccom-
panied by a better distribution of property, would
have been quite inefficient. The possessor of
numerous estates, after he had furnished his man-
sion or castle splendidly, and provided himself
with handsome clothes and handsome carriages,
would not change them all every two months,
merely because. he had the power of doing it.
Instead of indulging in such useless and trouble-
~ some changes, he would be more likely to keep a


number of servants and idle dependants, to take


lower rents with a view of having a greater com-
mand over his tenants, and perhaps to sacrifice the
produce of a considerable portion of his land in
order to encourage more game, and to indulge,
with more effect and less interruption, in the plea-
sures of the chase. Thirty or forty proprietors,
with incomes answering to between one thousand
and five thousand a year, would create a much
more effective demand for wheaten bread, good
meat, and manufactured products, than a single
proprietor possessing a hundred thousand a year.
It is physically possible indeed for a nation,
with a comparatively small body of very rich pro-
prietors, and a large body of very poor workmen, to
push both the produce of the land and manufac-
tures to the greatest extent, that the resources and
ingenuity of the country would admit... Perhaps
under such a division of property the powers of
production might be rendered the greatest possible ;


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 43 1


but, in order to call them forth, wemust suppose a
passion among the rich for the consumption of ma-
nufactures, and the results of productive labour,
much more excessive than has ever been witnessed
in human society. And the consequence is, that no
instance has ever been known of a country which
has pushed its natural resources to a great extent,
with a small proportionate body of persons of pro-
perty, however rich and luxurious they might be.
Practically it has always been found that the ex-
cessive wealth of the few is in no respect equiva-
lent, with regard to effective demand, to the more
moderate wealth of the many. A large body of
manufacturers and merchants can only find a mar-
ket for their commodities among a numerous class
of consumers above the rank of mere workmen and
labourers. And experience shews us that manufac-
turing wealth is at once the consequence of a bet-
ter distribution of property, and the cause of further
improvements in such distribution, by the increase

-in the proportion of the middle classes of society,
which the growth of manufacturing and mercantile
capital cannot fail to create.

But though it be true that the division of landed
property, and the diffusion of manufacturing and
mercantile capital to a certain extent, are of the
‘utmost importance to the increase of wealth; yet
it is equally true that, beyond a certain extent,
they would impede the progress of wealth as much
as they had before accelerated it. There is a cer-
_tain elevation at which the projectile will go the


432 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cn. vITy


farthest; but if it be directed either higher of —


lower, it will fall short. With a comparatively
small proportion of rich proprietors, who would
prefer menial service and territorial influence to
an excessive quantity of manufactured and mer-


cantile products, the power of supplying the re-


sults of productive labour would be much greater
than the will to consume them, and the progress of
wealth would be checked by the want of effective
demand.* With an excessive proportion of small


proprietors both of land and capital, all great im- _


provements on the land, all great enterprizes in
commerce and manufactures, and all the wonders
described by Adam Smith, as resulting from the
division of labour, would be at an end; and the
progress of wealth would be checked by a failure
in the powers of supply.

It will be found, I believe, true that all the
great results in political economy, respecting
wealth, depend upon proportions ; and it is from
overlooking this most important truth, that so
many errors have prevailed in the prediction of
consequences; that nations have sometimes been
enriched when it was expected that they would be
impoverished, and impoverished when it was ex-


* It is perhaps just possible to conceive a passion for menial
service, which would stimulate landlords to cultivate‘lands in the
best way, in order to support the greatest quantity of such atten-
dants. This would be the same thing as the passion for popula-
tion adverted to ina former section. Such a passion, to the extent
here supposed, may be posszble ; but meee any supposition can
be less probable.


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 433


pected that they would be enriched ; and that such
contradictory opinions have occasionally prevailed
respecting the most effective encouragements to .
the increase of wealth. But there is no part of the
whole subject, where the efficacy of proportions in
the production of wealth is so strikingly exempli-
fied, as in the division of landed and other property ;
and where it is so very obvious that a division to a
certain extent must be beneficial, and beyond a
. certain extent prejudicial to the increase of wealth.
’ On the effects of a great sub-division of property,
a fearful experiment is now making in France.
The law of succession in that country divides pro-
perty of all kinds among all the children equally,
without right of primogeniture or distinction of
sex, and allows but a small portion of it to be dis-
posed of by will.

‘This law has not yet prevailed long enough
to shew what its effects are likely to be on the
national. wealth and prosperity. If the state of
property in France appears at present to be fa-
vourable to industry and demand, no inference
can thence be drawn that it will be favour-
able in future. It is universally allowed that
a division of property to a certain extent is ex-
tremely desirable; and so many traces yet re-
main almost all over Europe of the vast landed
possessions which have descended from the feudal
times, that there are not many states in which
such a law as that of France might not beof use,
with a view to wealth, for a certain number of
years. But if such a law were to continue per-

FF


434 - ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


manently to regulate the descent of property in
France; if no modes of evading it should be in-
vented, and if its effects should not be weakened
by the operation of an extraordinary degree of pru-
dence in marriage, which prudence such a law
would certainly tend to discourage, there is every
reason to believe that the country, at the end of a
century, will be quite as remarkable for its extra-
ordinary poverty and distress, as for its unusual
equality of property. The owners of the minute
divisions of landed property will be, as they always
are, peculiarly without resource, and must perish
in great numbers im every scarcity. Scarcely any
will be rich but those who receive salaries from the
government.

In this state of things, with little or none of the
natural influence of property to check at once the
power of the crown and the violence of the people,
it is not possible to conceive that such a mixed
government as France has now established can
be maintained. Nor can I think that a state of
things, in which there would be so much poverty,
could be favourable to the existence and duration
of arepublic. And when, in addition to this, we
consider how extremely difficult it is, under any
circumstances, to establish a well-constituted re-
public, and how dreadfully the chances are against
its continuance, as the experience of all history
shews ; it is not too much to say, that no well-
grounded hope could be entertained of the perma-
nent prevalence of such a form of government.

But the state of property above described would
be the very soil for a military despotism. If the


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 435


government did not adopt the Eastern mode of
considering itself as sole territorial proprietor, it
might at least take a hint from the Economists, and’
declare itself co-proprietor with the landlords, and
from this source, (which might still be a fertile one,
though the landlords, on account of their numbers,
might be poor,) together with a few other taxes, the
army might easily be made the richest part of the
society; and it would then possess an overwhelming
influence, which, in such a state of things, nothing
could oppose. The despot might now and then
be changed, as under the Roman emperors, by the
Pretorian guards ; but the despotism would cer-
tainly rest upon very solid foundations.

It is hardly necessary to enter into the question,
whether the wealth of the British empire would ,
be essentially increased by that division of landed
property which would be occasioned by the aboli-
tion of the right of primogeniture, and the law of
entails, without any interference with testamentary
dispositions. It is generally acknowledged that
the country, in its actual state and under its actual
laws, presents a picture of greater wealth, espe-
cially when compared with its natural resources,
than any large territorial state of modern times.
By the natural extinction of some great families,
and the natural imprudence of some others, but,
above all, by the extraordinary growth of manufac-
tures and commerce, the immense landed properties
which formerly prevailed all over the country
have been ina great degree broken down, notwith-
standing the right of primogeniture. And the few

FF2


436 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


which remain may perhaps be of use in furnishing
motives to the merchant and master-manufacturer,
to continue the exercise of their skill and powers
till they have acquired large capitals, and are able
to contend in wealth with the great landlords. If,
from the abolition of the right of primogeniture,
the landed fortunes were all very inconsiderable,
it is not probable that there would be many large
capitals among merchants; and in this case, much
productive power would unquestionably be lost.
But however this may be, it is certain that a _
very large body of what may be called the middle
classes of society has been established in this coun-
try ; while the right of primogeniture, by forcing
the younger sons of the nobility and great landed
proprietors into the higher divisions of these classes,
has, for all practical purposes, annihilated the dis-
tinctions founded on rank and birth, and opened
the fairest arena for the contests of personal merit
in all the avenues to wealth and honours. (It
is probable that the obligation generally imposed
upon younger sons to be the founders of their
own fortunes, has infused a greater degree of
energy and activity into professional and commer-
cial exertions than would have taken place if pro-
perty in land had been more equally divided... Al-
together, the country possesses a very large class
of effective demanders, who derive their power of
purchasing from the various professions, from com-
merce, from manufactures, from wholesale and
retail trade, from salaries of different kinds, and
from the interest of public and private debts ; and


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 437


these demanders are likely, perhaps, to acquire tastes —
more favourable to the encouragement of wealth
than the owners of small properties on the land.

Under these circumstances, which, to the extent-
in which they prevail, it must be allowed are almost
peculiar to this country, it might be rash to con-
clude that the nation would be richer if the right
of primogeniture were abolished. But even if we
were able to determine the question in the affirma-
tive, it would by no means determine the policy
of such a change. In all cases of this kind there
are higher considerations to be attended to than
those which relate to mere wealth.

It is an historical truth which cannot for a mo-
ment be disputed, that the first formation, and sub-
sequent preservation and improvement, of our pre-
sent constitution, and of the liberties and privileges
which have so long distinguished Englishmen, are
mainly due to a landed aristocracy. ‘And we are
certainly not yet warranted by any experience to
conclude that without an aristocracy, which can-
not certainly be supported in an effective state but
by the law of primogeniture, the constitution and
liberties so established can be in future maintained.
If then we set a value upon the British Constitu-
tion ; if we think that, whatever may be its theo-'
retical imperfections, it has practically given a
better government, and more liberty to a greater
mass of people for a longer time than any which
history records, it would be most unwise to venture
upon any such change as would risk the whole
structure, and throw us upon a wide sea of experi-

FF 3


438 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. YII.


- ment, where the chances are so dreadfully against
our attaining the object of our search.

It is not perhaps easy to say to what extent the
abolition of the law of primogeniture and entails
would divide the landed property of this country. ©
If the power of testamentary bequest were left un-
touched, it is possible that past habits might still
keep many estates together for a time ; but the pro-

‘babilities are, that by degrees a considerable sub-
division of land would take place; and _if there
were few estates of above a thousand a year, the
mercantile classes would either be induced to mo-
derate their exertions in the acquisition of wealth,
from the absence of the motive of competition with
the landlords, as I stated above; or, if the mer-
chants and manufacturers were still to acquire great
wealth, excited either by a competition with each
other or by political ambition, they would be the
only persons, who could possess great influence in
the state; and the government of the country.
would fall almost wholly into their hands. In
neither case, probably, could our present consti-
tution be maintained. In the first, where the pro-
perty of individuals would be so inconsiderable,
and so equal, the tendencies would be either to
democracy or military despotism, with the chances
greatly in favour of the latter. And in the second
case, whatever might be the form of goyernment,
the merchants and manufacturers would haye the
greatest influence in its councils; and it is justly ob-
served by Adam Smith, that the interests of these


SEC. VII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 439


classes do not always prepare them to give the
most salutary advice.

Although therefore it be true that a better
distribution of landed property might exist: than
that which actually prevails in this country at
present; and although it be also true, that to
make it better, the distribution should be more
equal ; yet it may by no means be wise to abolish
the law of primogeniture, which would be likely
to lead to a subdivision of land greater probably
than would be favourable even to the wealth of
the country; and greater certainly than would
bé consistent with those higher interests, which
relate to the protection of a people equally from
the tyranny of despotic rulers, and the fury of a
despotic mob.

But, whatever conduct the wisdom and policy of ,
a legislature may dictate ‘respecting the laws of
succession, the principle will still be true, that the
division of landed property is one of the great
means of the distribution of wealth, which tends
to keep up and increase its exchangeable value,
and toencourage further production ; and that the
distribution so occasioned will, as it extends, con-
tinue to produce amore favourable effect on wealth,
till it meets its antagonist principle, and begins to
interfere with the power of production. This will
take place sooner or later, according to circum-
stances, depending chiefly upon the activity of
foreign and domestic commerce, and the mass of
effective demanders besides the landlords. If the
demand be great, independently of the land, a

FF4


440 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


slight diminution in the power of production may
turn the scale; and any change which is unfavour-
able to accumulation, enterprize, and the division
of labour, will be unfavourable to the progress of
wealth. But if the country be ill situated for foreign
commerce, and its tastes, habits, and internal com-
munications be such as not to encourage an active
home trade, nothing can occasion an adequate de-
mand for. produce, but an easy subdivision of landed
property ; and without such a subdivision, a coun-
try with great natural resources might slumber for
ages with an uncultivated soil, and a scanty yet
starving population. .


SECTION VIII.


Of the Distribution occasioned by Commerce, internal and
external, considered as the Means of increasing the ex-
changeable Value of Produce.


The second main cause favourable to that in-
crease of exchangeable value, which depends upon
distribution, is internal and external commerce.
Every exchange which takes place in a country,
effects a distribution of its produce better adapted
to the wants of the society. It is with regard to
both parties concerned, an exchange of what is
wanted less for what is wanted more, and must
therefore raise the value of both the products. If
two districts, one of which possessed a rich copper


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 441


mine, and the other a rich tin mine, had always
been separated by an impassable river or mountain,
there can be no doubt that on the opening of a
communication, a greater demand would take place,
and a greater price be given both for tin and cop-
per; and this greater price of both metals, though
it might only be temporary, would alone go a
great way towards furnishing the additional capital
wanted to supply the additional demand; and the
capitals of both districts, and the products of both
mines, would be increased both in quantity and
value to a degree which could not have taken
place without this new distribution of the produce,
or some event equivalent to it.

The Economists, in their endeavours to prove
the unproductive nature of trade, always insisted
that the effect of it was merely to equalize prices,
which were in some places too high and in others

. too low, but in their amount the same as they
would be after the exchange had taken place. This
position must be considered as unfounded, and
capable of being contradicted by incontrovertible
facts. The increase of price at first, from the ex-
tension of the market, is unquestionable. And
when to this we add the effect occasioned by the
demand for further produce, and the means thus
afforded of rapid accumulation for the supply of
this demand, it is impossible to doubt for a moment
the direct tendency of all internal trade to increase
the value of the national produce. vi)

If indeed it did not tend to increase the value

of the national produce, it would not be carried


449 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAusEs [cH. vit.


on. It is out of this increase that the merchants
concerned are paid ; and if some London goods are
mot more valued in Glasgow than in London, and
some Glasgow goods more valued in London than
in Glasgow, the merchants who exchange the
articles in which these towns trade, would neither
be doing themselves any good, nor any one else.
It isa mere futile process to exchange one set of
commodities for another, if the parties, after this
new distribution of goods has taken place, are not
better off than they were before. The giving one
article for another has nothing to do with effectual
demand, unless the commodity received so far ex-
ceeds in value the labour employed on the commo-
dity parted with, as to yield adequate profits to the
capitalists concerned, and to give them both the
power and the will to set fresh labour to work in
the same trade.

It has been said that the industry of a country
is measured by the extent of its capital, and that
the manner in which this capital is employed,
though it may make some difference to. the enjoy-
ment of the inhabitants, makes very little in the
value of the national revenue. . This would be true
on one supposition, and on one supposition only ;
namely, that the inhabitants could be persuaded to
estimate their confined productions just as highly,
to be as eager to obtain and consume them, and
as willing to work hard for them, and to make
great sacrifices for them, as for the commodities
which they obtain from a distance. But are we at
liberty to make such a supposition? It is specifi-


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 443


cally to overcome the want of eagerness to pur-
chase domestic commodities that the merchant
exchanges them for others more in request. Could
we but so alter the wants and tastes of the people
of Glasgow as to make them estimate as highly
the profusion of cotton goods which they produce,
as any articles which they could receive in return
for them under a prosperous trade, we should hear
no more of their distresses.. It may be allowed
that the quantity of productive industry main-
tained in a country is nearly proportioned to the
quantity of capital employed; but the value of the
revenue will be greater or- less, according to the
market prices of the commodities produced. These
market prices must obviously depend upon the
interchange of goods ; and consequently the value
of the revenue, and the power and will to increase
it, must depend upon that distribution of com-
modities which best adapts them to the wants and
tastes of the society.

The whole produce of a nation may be said to
have a market price in money and labour. When
this market price is high, that is, when the prices
of commodities rise so as to command a greater
excess of labour above what they had cost in
production than before, while the same capital
and number of people had been employed upon
them, it is eyident that more fresh labour will
be set in motion every year, and the increase of
wealth will be certain and rapid. On the other
hand, when the market prices of commodities are
such as to be able to.command yery little more


444 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. ‘VII-


labour than the production of them has cost, it is
as evident that the national wealth will proceed
very slowly, or perhaps be quite stationary.

In the distribution of commodities, the circu-
lating medium of every country bears a most im-
portant part; and, as I intimated before in a note,
we are much more likely to obscure our reasonings
than to render them clearer, by throwing it out of _
our consideration. It is not easy indeed, without

reference to a circulating medium, to ascertain

whether the commodities of a country are so dis-

tributed as to give them their proper value.

It may be said, perhaps, that if the funds for the
maintenance of labour are at any time in unusual
abundance, it may fairly be presumed that they _
will be able to command a more than usual quan-—
tity of labour. But they certainly will not be able
to command more labour, nor even so much, if the
distribution of them be defective; and in a country
which has a circulating medium, the specific proof
of the distribution being defective is, that the
whole produce does not exchange for so large an
amount of circulating medium as before, and that
consequently the producers have been obliged to
sell at a great diminution of money profits, or a
positive money loss.

From the harvest of 1815 to the harvest of 1816,
there cannot be a doubt that the funds for the
maintenance of labour in this country were unu-
sually abundant. Corn was particularly plentiful,
and no other necessaries were deficient; yet it is
an acknowledged fact, that great numbers were


SEC, VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 445


thrown out of employment, partly from the want
of power, and partly from the want of will to em-
ploy the same quantity of labour as before. How is
this fact to be accounted for? As I have said before,
it would not be easy to account for it without
referring to a circulating medium; because, with-
out such reference, the proof of a delechiee distri-
bution would be extremely difficult. But the mo-
ment we refer to a circulating medium, the theory
of the fact observed becomes perfectly clear, It is
acknowledged that there was a fall in the money
value of the raw produce, to the amount of nearly
one third. But if the farmer sold his produce for
only two thirds of the price at which he had
before sold it, it is evident that he would be quite
unable to command the same quantity of labour,
and to employ the same quantity of capital on his
farm as he did the year before. And when after-
wards a great fall of money price took place in all
manufactured products, occasioned in a consider-
able degree by this previous fall of raw produce,
it is as evident that the manufacturers would be
unable to command the labour of the same number
of workmen as before. In the midst of the plenty
of necessaries, these two important classes of society
would really have their power of employing labour
diminished, while all those who possessed fixed
incomes would have their power of employing
labour increased, with very little chance of an in-
crease of will to extend their demand in propor-
tion; and the general result would resemble the
effects of that partial distribution of products which


446 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


would arise from the interruption of accustomed -
communications. The same, or a greater quantity
of commodities might be produced for a short time;
but the distribution not being such as to propor-
tion the supply in each quarter to the demand, the
whole would fall in exchangeable value, and a
very decided check to production would be ex-
perienced in reference to the whole country. It
follows, that the labouring classes of society may
be thrown out of work in the midst of an abun-
dance of necessaries, if these necessaries are not in
the hands of those who are at the same time both
able and willing to employ an adequate quantity
of labour. .

It is of no use therefore to make suppositions
about a great increase of produce, and, rejecting all
reference to a circulating medium, to conclude that
this great increase will be properly distributed and
effectively consumed. It is a conclusion which
we have no right whatever to make. We know,
both from theory and experience, that if the whole
produce falls in money value, the distribution. must
be such as to discourage production. As long as
this fall in the money price of produce continues
to diminish the power of commanding domestic
and foreign labour, a great discouragement to pro-
duction must obviously continue; and if, after
labour has adjusted itself to the new level of prices,
the permanent distribution of the produce and the
permanent tastes and habits of the people should
not be favourable to an adequate degree of con-
sumption, the clearest principles of political eco-


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 447


nomy shew that the profits of stock might be lower
for any length of time than the state of the land
rendered necessary ; and that the check to produc-
tion might be’as permanent as the faulty distri-
bution of the produce and the unfavourable tastes
and habits which had occasioned it.

It is scarcely possible for any essential change
to take place in the value of the circulating me-
dium of a country without occasioning an altera-
tion in the distribution of its produce. The impru-
dent use of paper money must be allowed to be the
principal cause of these changes. But even with-
out 4 paper currency, or with one always maintain-
ing the same value as bullion, every country is
liable to changes in the value of its produce, com-
pared with its money; and as such changes must
have a great effect on the distribution of produce,
partly temporary, and partly permanent, a deter-
mination to reason on these subjects, without taking
into account the effects of so powerful an agent,
would be: purposely to shut our eyes to the truth.
Referring therefore ultimately to the command over
labour, domestic and foreign, as the best practical
measure of the value of the whole produce, it will
be useful to refer previously to its bullion value,
in order to ascertain whether the distribution of
the produce is such as to enable it to command
labour in some proportion to the increase of its
quantity. If the bullion value of a country’s pro-
ducts so increases as to command yearly an in-
creased quantity of domestic and: foreign labour,
we may feel pretty well assured that it is pro-~


448 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


ceeding without check in wealth and prosperity.
But, if there is merely an increase of commo-
dities, it is impossible to’ say, without further
inquiry, that they may not be so distributed as
to retard, instead of promote, the progress of
national wealth.

It has been fully stated and allowed, that a period
of stagnation must finally arrive in every country
from the difficulty of procuring subsistence. But.
an indisposition to consume in large quantities the
goods produced at home, and a want of the means
of advantageous barter may occasion, and has
often occasioned, a similar stagnation at a very
early period of a nation’s progress. _No country
with a very confined market, internal as well as_
external, has ever been able to accumulate a large
capital, because such a market prevents the forma-
tion of those wants and tastes, and that desire to
consume, which are absolutely necessary to keep
up the market prices of commodities, and to occa-
sion an increasing demand for them, and for the
capital which is to produce them. The distribu-
tion of commodities occasioned by internal trade
is the first step towards any considerable increase
of wealth and capital ; and if no exchanges could
have taken place in this country, at a greater dis-
tance than five miles, it is probable that not a fifth
part of our present capital could have been, em-
ployed before the effective encouragement to
accumulation and the further progress of wealth
had ceased.

The motives which urge individuals to engage


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 449


in foreign commerce are precisely the same as
those which lead to the interchange of goods be-
tween the more distant parts of the same country,
namely, an increase in the market price of the
local products; and the increase of profits thus
made by the individual, or the prevention of that
fall of profits which would have taken place if the
capital had been employed at home, must be con-
sidered as a proportionate increase in the value of
the national produce.

Mr. Ricardo begins his Chapter on Foreign Trade
by stating that “No extension of foreign trade
will immediately increase the amount of value in
a country although it will very powerfully con-
tribute to increase the mass of commodities and
therefore the sum of enjoyments.” ‘This state-
ment is quite consistent with his peculiar view of
value, as depending solely upon the labour which a
commodity has cost. However abundant may be
the returns of the merchant, or however greatly
they may exceed his exports in value according to
the common acceptation of the term, it is certain
that the labour employed in procuring these ex-
ports. will at first remain the same. But, as it is so
glaring and undeniable a fact that the returns from
an unusually favourable trade will exchange for
an unusual quantity of money, labour and domes-
tic commodities ; as this increased power of com-
manding money, labour and commodities is in
reality what is meant by the merchant when
he talks of the extension of the foreign market
and a favourable trade, it appears to me that such

GG


450 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


a state of things which may, and often does last a
sufficient time to produce the most important re-
sults, is alone, and at once, a decisive proof that
the view of exchangeable value, which makes it
depend exclusively upon the cost of production, is
essentially incorrect, and utterly useless in solving
the great phenomena which attend the progress of
wealth.
_ Mr. Ricardo seems to think that value cannot
increase in one department of produce without di-
minishing it in some other.* This again may be
true according to his view of value, but is-utterly
unfounded according to that more enlarged view
of exchangeable value which is established and
confirmed by experience. If any foreign power
were to send toa particular merchant commodities
of .a new description which would sell in the
London market for fifty thousand pounds, the
wealth of such merchant would be increased to
that extent ; and who, I would ask, would be the
poorer for it? It is no doubt true that the pur-
chasers of these commodities may be obliged to
forego the use of some of the articles which they
had before been in the habit of buying, + and so


* It appears to me that if the two first sentences in Mr. Ri-
cardo’s Chapter on Foreign Trade were well founded, there
would be no such intercourse between nations.

+ This, however, will not necessarily happen. The greater
temptation offered to consumption may induce some persons to
spend what they otherwise would have saved, and in many cases
the wealth of the country, instead of suffering by this change, will
gain byit. The increased consumption, as far as it goes, will oc-
casion an increase of market prices and profits. The increase of


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 451


far in some quarters may diminish demand; but,
to counterbalance this diminution, the enriched


merchant will become a purchaser of additional


goods to the amount perhaps of the whole fifty
thousand pounds, and thus prevent any general
fall in the value of the native produce consumed


in the country, while the value of the foreign pro- -


duce so consumed has increased to the amount of
the whole of the new produce imported. I see no
difference between a present from abroad, and the
unusual profits of a new foreign trade, in their
effects upon the wealth of a state. They are
equally calculated to increase the wealth of the
community, by an increase both of the quantity
and value of the produce obtained.

It will be said perhaps that, neither the people
nor the money of the country having been by
supposition increased, the value of the whole pro-
duce estimated in labour or money cannot be
increased.

With regard to labour I would observe that,
when I speak of the value of the whole produce
of a country being able to command more labour


than before, I do not mean to refer specifically to


a greater number of labourers, but to say that it
could either purchase more at the old price, or pay
the actual labourers higher; and such a state of


. things, with a population which cannot imme-


profits will soon restore the capital which for a short time had
been diverted from its destined office ; and the country will be left
with habits of greater consumption, and at the same time if
proportionate means of supplying them. '

GG2


.


452 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


diately be increased, always occasions that demand
for labour, which so powerfully encourages the ex-
ertions of those who were before perhaps only half
paid and half employed ; and is at once the surest
sign and most effective stimulus of increasing
wealth. It is the natural consequence of the value
of the produce estimated in labour increasing
faster than the population, and forms the true and
healthy encouragement to the further increase bat
numbers.

With regard to money, this most tiiefal measure
of value would perform its functions very indif-
ferently, if it could in no respect accommodate
itself to cases of this kind; and if the importa-
tion of a valuable commodity always proportion-
ably reduced the price of the other parts of the
national produce. But this is far from being the
case, even if we do not suppose any fresh importa-
tion of the precious metals. The occurrence of
such an event is precisely the period, when a
greater velocity is given to the circulation of the
money actually in use, and when fresh paper may
be issued without a fall in the rate of foreign
exchanges, or a rise in the price of bullion and
of goods. One or other, or both of these re-
sources will be applied, except in the most barba-
rous countries; and though undoubtedly, in the
case of the importation of foreign commodities
which come directly into competition with do-
mestic goods, such goods will fall in price, and
the producers of them be for a time rendered
poorer, yet it will very rarely indeed happen that


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 453


other goods not affected by such competition will
fall in money value ; and altogether no. fall will
take place in particular commodities sufficient
to prevent a rise in the money price of the whole
produce.

It may naturally be expected however that more
money will be imported ; and, in fact, a successful
extension of foreign trade is exactly that state of
things which most directly leads to the importation
of bullion. For what is it that the merchant ex-
porter specifically considers as a successful exten-
sion of foreign commerce in dealing with civilized
nations? Undoubtedly the power of selling his
exports abroad for a greater value than usual, esti-
mated in bullion; and of course, if the goods
which he would import in return will not sell at
home so much higher as to warrant their importa-
tion, a part or the whole of the returns will be im-
-portedin money. But if only such an amount be
imported as shall bear the same proportion to the
returns in goods as the whole of the currency of
the country does to the whole of its produce, it is
obvious that no difficulty whatever can occur in
the circulation of the commodities of the country
at their former prices, with the single exception of
those articles with which the foreign goods might
directly enter into competition, which in this case

would never be sufficient to prevent a general in-
crease of value in the whole produce.

I distinctly therefore differ from Mr. Ricardo in
the conclusion implied in the following passage.
“In all cases the demand for foreign and home

663


454 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH, VII.


commodities together, as far as regards value, is
limited by the revenue and capital of the coun-
try. If one increases, the other must diminish.” *
It appears to me that in almost every case of suc-
cessful foreign trade, it is a matter of unquestion-
able fact that the demand for foreign and home
commodities taken together decidedly increases ;
and that the increase in the value of foreign pro-
duce does not occasion a proportionate diminution
in the value of home produce.

I would still however allow that the demand for
foreign and home commodities together, as far as
regards value, is limited by the revenue and capital
of the country ; but, according to my view of the
subject, the national revenue, which consists of the
sum of rents, profits, and wages, is. at once de-
cidedly increased by the increased profits of the
foreign merchant, without a proportionate diminu-
tion of revenue in any other quarter; whereas Mr.
Ricardo is evidently of opinion that, though the
abundance of commodities is increased, the revenue
of the country, as far as regards value, remains the
same ; and it is because I object rather to the con-
clusion intended to be conveyed, than to the actual
terms of the passage quoted, that I have used the
word implied rather than expressed.

It will readily be allowed that an increase m the
quantity of commodities is one of the most de-
sirable effects of foreign commerce; but I wish
particularly to press on the attention of the reader


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. c. vii. p. 188, 2d edit.


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 485


that in almost all cases, another most important
effect accompanies it, expressly rejected by Mr.
Ricardo, namely, an increase in the amount of ex-
changeable value. And that this latter effect is
so necessary, in order to create a continued sti-
mulus to productive industry, and keep up an
abundant supply of commodities, that in the few
cases in which it does not take place, a staguation
in the demand for labour is immediately perceptible,
and the progress of wealth is checked. An exten-
sion of foreign commerce, according to the view
which Mr. Ricardo takes of it, would, in my opi-
nion, place us frequently in.the situation in which
this country was in the early part of 1816, when
a sudden abundance and cheapness of corn and
other commodities, from a great supply meeting a
deficient demand, so diminished the value of the
income of the country, that it could no longer
command the same quantity of labour at the same
price; the consequence of which was that, in the
midst of plenty, thousands upon thousands were .
thrown out of employment—a most painful but
almost unavoidable preliminary to a fall in the
money wages of labour, which it is obvious could
alone enable the general income of the country to
employ the same number of labourers as before,
and, after a period of severe check to the increase
of wealth, to recommence a progressive movement.

Mr. Ricardo always seems to think that it is
quite the same to the labourer, whether he is able
to command more of the necessaries of life by a
rise in the money price of labour, or by a fall in

GG4


456 ° ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


the money price of provisions; but these two
events, though apparently similar in their effects,
may be, and in general are, most essentially dif-
ferent. An increase in the wages of labour, both
nominal and real, invariably implies such a distri-
bution of the actual wealth as to give it an incrtas-
ing value, to ensure full employment to all the
labouring classes, and to create a demand for further
produce, and for the capital which is to obtain it.
In short, it is the infallible sign of health and
prosperity. Whereas a general fall in the money
price of necessaries often arises from, so defective
a distribution of the produce of the country, that
the general amount of its value cannot be kept up;
in which case, under the most favourable circum-
stances, a temporary period of want of employment
and distress is unavoidable ; and in many cases, as
may be too frequently observed in surveying the
different countries of the globe, this fall in the
money price of necessaries is the accompaniment of
a permanent want of employment, and the most
abject poverty, in consequence of retrograde and
permanently diminished wealth.

The reader will be fully aware that a great fall
in the price of particular commodities, either from
improved machinery or foreign commerce, is per-
fectly compatible with a continued and great in-
crease, not only in the exchangeable value of the
whole produce of the country, but even in the ex-
changeable value of the whole ‘produce’ of these
particular articles themselves. It has been repeat-
edly stated that the whole value of the cottons


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. | 457


produced in this country has been prodigiously in-
creased, notwithstanding the great fall in their
price. Thesame may be said of the teas, although
when they were first imported, the price per pound
was greatly higher than at present ; and there can
be little doubt, that if we were to attempt to make
our own wines by means of hot-houses, they would
altogether be worth much less money, and would
give encouragement to much less industry than at
present. >

Even when the commodity is of such a nature
as not to admit of an extension of the market for
it from reduced price, which very rarely happens,
yet the capital and labour, which in this case will
be thrown out of employment, will generally, in
enterprising and commercial countries, find other
channels into which they may be directed, with
such profit as to keep up, and often more than
keep up, the value of the national income. At the
same time it should be observed, and it is a point
of great importance, that it is precisely among
cases of this description, where the few exceptions
occur to the general and powerful tendency of
foreign commerce, to raise the value of the national
income; and whenever these exceptions do take
place, that is, whenever the value of the national
income is diminished, estimated even in money, a
temporary distress from a defective distribution of
the produce cannot fail to take place. If this
diminished value be estimated in labour, the dis-
tress among the labouring classes, and check to
the progress of wealth, will continue as long as the


458 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


diminished value so estimated lasts: and if it could
‘be proved that, under particular circumstances,
any species of foreign trade tended permanently to
diminish the power of the national produce in the
command of domestic and foreign labour, such
trade would certainly have the effect of checking
permanently the progress of wealth and popula-
tion.

The causes of an increase in the effective demand
for particular commodities are of very easy ex-
planation; but it has been considered, and with
reason, as not very easy to explain the cause of |
that general briskness of demand which is some-
times so very sensibly felt throughout a whole
country, and is so strikingly contrasted with the
feeling which gives rise to the expression of trade
' being universally very dead. As the specific and
immediate cause of this general increase of effec-
tive demand, I should decidedly point to such a
distribution of the produce, and such an adapta-’
tion of it to the wants and tastes of the society as
will give the money price for which it sells an
increased command of domestic and foreign labour ;
and I am inclined to think that, if this test be ap-
plied to all the striking cases that have occurred,
it will rarely or never be found to fail.

It cannot fora moment be doubted, for instance,
that the annual increase of the produce of the
United States of America, estimated either in bul-
lion or in domestic and foreign labour, has been
greater than that of any country we are acquainted
with, and that this has been greatly owing to their


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 459


foreign commerce, which, notwithstanding their
facility of production, has given a value to their
corn and raw produce equal to what they bear in
many of the countries of Europe, and has conse-
quently given to them a power in commanding
the produce and labour of other countries quite
extraordinary, when compared with the quantity
of labour which they have employed. It can
as little be doubted that in this country, from 1793
to 1814, the whole exchangeable value of the
produce, estimated either in domestic and foreign
labour, or in bullion, was greatly augmented every
year. In this increase of value, as well as riches,
the extension of our foreign commerce has been
considered, almost without a dissentient opinion,
as a most powerful agent; and certainly till 1815,
no appearances seemed to indicate, that the in-
creasing value of our imports had the slightest
tendency to diminish the value of our domestic pro-
duce. They both increased, and increased greatly,
together, estimated either in bullion or labour.
But while in every country. to which it seems
possible to refer, an increase of value will be found
to accompany increasing prosperity and riches, I
am inclined to think that no single instance can
be produced of a country engaged in a successful
commerce, and exhibiting an increasing plenty
of commodities, where the value of the whole
produce estimated in domestic and foreign labour
was retrograde or even stationary. And of the
two ways in which capital may be accumulated,
as stated by Mr. Ricardo in his chapter on Fo-


460 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


reign Commerce, namely an increase of revenue
from increased profits, or a diminished expendi-
ture, arising from cheap commodities,* I believe
the latter never has been, nor ever will be, expe-
rienced as an effective stimulus to the perma-
nent and continued production of increasing
wealth.

Mr. Ricardo will perhaps say, and say truly, that
according to his own view of value, foreign com-
merce will increase it, as soon as more labour has

been employed in the production of all the com-
modities taken together, which the country obtains;
and that the plenty produced by foreign trade will
naturally encourage this employment. But what
I wish specifically to state is, that the natural ten-
dency of foreign trade, as of all sorts of exchanges
by which a distribution is effected better suited to
the wants of society, is immediately to increase the
value of that part of the national revenue which
consists of profits, without any proportionate dimi-
nution elsewhere, and that it is precisely this zm-
mediate increase of national income arising from
the exchange of what is of less value in the coun-
try, for what is of more value, that furnishes both
the power and will to employ more labour, and
occasions the animated demand for labour, produce
and capital, which is a striking and almost uni-
versal accompaniment of successful foreign com-
merce; whereas, a mere abundance of commodities
falling very greatly in value compared with labour,


* Princ. of Pol. Econ. ch. vii. p. 139. 2d edit.


SEC. VIII.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 461


would obviously at first diminish the power of
employing the same number of workmen, and a
temporary glut and general deficiency of demand
could not fail to ensue in labour, in produce, and
in capital, attended with the usual distress whieh
a glut must occasion.

Mr. Ricardo always views foreign trade in the
light of means of obtaining cheaper commodities.
But this is only looking to one half of its advan-
tages, and I am strongly disposed to think, not the
larger half. In our own commerce at least, this
part of the trade is comparatively inconsiderable.
The great mass of our imports consists of articles
as to which there can be no kind of question about
their comparative cheapness, as raised abroad or at
home. If we could not import from foreign coun-
tries our silk, cotton and indigo, our tea, sugar,
coffee and tobacco, our port, sherry, claret and
champagne, our almonds, raisons, oranges and
lemons, our various spices and our various drugs,
with many other articles peculiar to foreign cli-
mates, it is quite certain that we should not have
them at all. To estimate the advantage derived from
their importation by their cheapness, compared
with the quantity of labour and capital which
they would have cost, if we had attempted to raise
them at. home, would be perfectly preposterous.
In reality, no such attempt would have been
thought of. If we could by possibility have made
fine claret at ten pounds a bottle, few or none
would have drunk it; and the actual quantity of
labour and capital employed in obtaining these


462 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


foreign commodities is at present beyond com-
parison greater than it would have been if we had _
not imported them. ;

We must evidently therefore estimate the ad-
vantage which we derive from such a trade upon a
very different principle, This is the simple and
obvious one often adverted to as the foundation of
- every act of barter, whether foreign or domestic,
namely, the increased value which results from
exchanging what is wanted less for what is wanted
more. After we had, by our exports of home com-
modities, obtained in return all the foreign articles
above-mentioned, we might be very much puzzled
to say whether we had increased or decreased the
quantity of our commodities, but we should feel
quite certain that the new distribution of produce
which had taken place, by giving us commodities
much better suited to our wants and tastes than
those which had been sent away, had decidedly
increased the exchangeable value_of our posses-
sions, our means of enjoyment, and our wealth.

Taking therefore a very different view of the
effects of foreign commerce on exchangeable value
from Mr. Ricardo, I should bring forwards the ex-
tension of markets as being, in its general tendency,
pre-eminently favourable to that increase of value
and wealth which arises from distribution.


SEC.1X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 463


SECTION IX.


Of the Dastribution occasioned by unproductive Consumers,
considered as the Means of increasing the exchangeable
Value of the whole Produce.


The third main cause which tends to keep up and
increase the value of produce by favouring its dis-
tribution is the employment of unproductive la-
bour, or the maintenance of an adequate propor-
tion of unproductive consumers.

It has been already shewn that, under a rapid
accumulation of capital, or, more properly speak-
ing, a rapid conversion of unproductive into pro-
ductive labour, the demand, compared with the
supply of material products, would prematurely
fail, and the motive to further accumulation be
checked, before it was checked by the exhaustion
of the land. It follows that, without supposing
the productive classes to consume much more than
they are found to do by experience, particularly
when they are rapidly saving from revenue to add
to their capitals, it is absolutely necessary that a
country with great powers of production should
possess a body of unproductive consumers.

In the fertility of the soil, in the powers of man
to apply machinery as a substitute for labour, and
in the motives to exertion undera system of private
property, the great laws of nature have provided
for the leisure of a certain portion of society ; and


464 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH, VII.


if this beneficent offer be not accepted by an ade-
quate number of individuals, not only will a posi-
tive good, which might have been so attained, be
lost, but the rest of theysociety, so far from being
benefited by such self-denial, will be decidedly
injured by it.

What the proportion is between the productive
and unproductive classes of a society, which af-
fords the greatest encouragement to the continued
increase of wealth, it aaa before. been said that
the resources of political economy are unequal
to determine. It must depend upon a great
variety of circumstances, particularly upon ferti-
lity of soil and the progress of invention in machi-
nery. A fertile soil and an ingenious people can
not only support a considerable proportion of un-
productive consumers without injury, but may
absolutely require such a body of demanders, in
order to give effect to their powers of production.
While, with a poor soil and a people of little inge-
nuity, an attempt to support such a body would
throw land out of cultivation, and lead infallibly
to impoverishment and ruin.

Another cause, which makes it impossible. to
say what proportion of the unproductive to the
productive classes is most favourable to the in-
crease of wealth, is the difference in the degrees
of consumption which may prevail among the
producers themselves.

Perhaps it will be said that there can be no oc-
casion for unproductive consumers, if a consump-
tion sufficient to keep up the value of the produce


&


SEC. IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. +465


takes place among those who are engaged in pro-
duction.

With regard to the capitalists who are so en-
gaged, they have certainlysthe power of consuming
their profits, or the revenue which they make by
the employment of their capitals; and if they
were to consume it, with the exception of what
. could be beneficially added to their capitals, so as
to provide in the best way both for an increased’
production and increased consumption, there might
be little occasion for unproductive consumers.
But such consumption is not consistent with the
actual habits of the generality of capitalists. The
great object of their lives is to savea fortune, both
because it is their duty to make a provision for
their families, and because they cannot spend an
income with so much comfort to themselves, while
they are obliged perhaps to attend a counting-
house for seven or eight hours a day.

It has been laid down as a sort of axiom among
some writers that the wants of mankind may be
considered as at all times commensurate with their
powers ; but this position is not always true, even
in those cases where a fortune comes without
trouble; and in reference to the great mass of capi-
talists, it is completely contradicted by experience.
Almost all merchants and manufacturers save, in
prosperous times, much more rapidly than it would |
be possible for the national capital to increase, so
as to keep up the value of the produce. Byt if
this be true of them as a body, taken one with an-
other, it is quite obvious that, with their actual

HH


466 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES , [CH. VII,


habits, they could not afford an adequate market
to each other by exchanging their several products.
There must therefore be a considerable class of
other consumers, or the mercantile classes could
not continue extending their concerns, and rea-
lizing their profits. In this class the landlords no
doubt stand pre-eminent ; but if the powers of pro-
duction among capitalists are considerable, the
consumption of the landlords, in addition to that
of the capitalists themselves and of their work-
men, may still be insufficient to keep up and in-
crease the exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, that is, to make the increase of quantity
more than counterbalance the fall of price. And
if this be so, the capitalists cannot continue. the
same habits of saving. They must either consume
more, or produce less ; and when the mere pleasure
of present expenditure, without the accompani-
ments of an improved local situation and an ad-
vance in rank, is put in opposition to the continued
labour of attending to business during the greatest
part of the day, the probability is that a consider-
able body of them will be induced to prefer the
latter, alternative, and produce less. But if, in
order to balance the demand and supply, a perma-
nent diminution of production takes place, rather
than,an increase of consumption, the whole of the
national wealth, which consists of what is produced
and consumed, and not of the excess of produce
above consumption, will be decidedly diminished.
Mr. Ricardo frequently speaks, as. if saving’
were anend instead.of a means. Yet even with


SEC, 1X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 467


regard to individuals, where this view of the sub-
ject is nearest the truth, it must be allowed that
the final object in saving is expenditure and enjoy-
ment. But, in referenc to national wealth, it can
never be considered either immediately or perma-
nently in any other light than as a means. It
may be true that, by the cheapness of commodi-
ties, and the consequent saving of expenditure in
consumption, the same surplus of produce above
consumption may be obtained as by a great rise of
profits with an undiminished consumption; and, if
saving were an end, the same end would be ac-
complished. But saving is the means of furnish-
ing an increasing supply for the increasing na-
tional wants. If however commodities are already
so plentiful that an adequate portion of them is
not consumed, the capital so saved, the office of
which is still further to increase the plenty of
commodities, and still further to lower already low
profits, can be comparatively of little use. On
the other hand, if profits are high, it is a sure sign

that commodities are scarce, compared with the
' demand for them, that the wants of the society
are clamorous for a supply, and that an increase in
the means of production, by saving a considerable
part of the new revenue created by the high pro-
fits, and adding it to capital, will be specifically
and permanently beneficial.

National saving, therefore, considered as the
means of increased production, is confined within
much narrower limits than individual saving.
While some individuals continue to spend, other

HH 2


468 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. vIT.


individuals may continue to save to a very great
extent; but the national saving, or the balance of ©
produce above consumption, in reference to the
whole mass of producers and consumers, must
necessarily be limited by the amount which can be
advantageously employed in supplying the demand
for produce; and to create this demand, there
must be an adequate consumption either among
the producers themselves, or other classes of con-
sumers,

Adam Smith has observed “that the desire of
food is limited in every man by the narrow capa-
city of the human stomach ; but the desire of the
conveniences and ornaments of building, dress,
equipage, and household furniture, seems to have
no limit or certain boundary.” That it has no cer-
tain boundary is unquestionably true; that it has
no limit must be allowed to be too strong an ex-
pression, when we consider how it will be practi-
cally limited by the countervailing Juxury of indo-
lence, or by the general desire of mankind to better
their condition, and make a provision fora family; a
principle which, as Adam Smith himself states, is
on the whole stronger than the. principle which
prompts to expense.* But surely it is a glaring mis-
application of this statement in any sense in which
it can be reasonably understood, to say, that there is
no limit to the saving and employment of capital
except the difficulty of procuring food. It is to
found a doctrine upon the unlimited desire of man-


* Wealth of Nations, Vol, ii. B. ii. ch. ii. p. 19. Oth edit.


SEC.IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 469


kind to consume; then to suppose this desire li-
mited in order to save capital, and thus completely
alter the premises; and yet still to maintain that
the doctrine is true. Let a sufficient consumption
always take place, whether by the producers or
others, to keep up and. increase most effectually
the exchangeable value of the whole produce ;
and I am perfectly ready to allow that, to the em-
ployment of a national capital, increasing only at
such a rate, there is no other limit than that which
bounds the power of maintaining population. But
it appears to me perfectly clear in theory, and uni-
versally confirmed by experience, that the employ-
ment. of a capital, too rapidly increased by parsi-
monious habits, may finda limit, and does, in fact,
often find a limit, long before there is any real
difficulty in procuring the means of subsistence ;
and that both capital and population may be at the
same time, and for a period of great length, redun-
dant, compared with the effective demand. for
produce..:

Of the wants of mankind in general, +s may be
further observed, that it is a partial and narrow
view of the subject, to consider only the propen-
sity to spend what is actually possessed. It forms
but a very small part of the question to determine
that if a man has a hundred thousand a year, he
will not decline the offer of ten thousand more ; or
to lay down generally that mankind are never dis-
posed to. refuse the means of increased power and
enjoyment. The main part of the question re:
specting the wants of mankind, relates to their

HH 3


470 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [cH. Vil.


power of calling forth the exertions necessary to
acquire the means of expenditure. It is unques-
tionably true that wealth produces wants; but it
isa still more important truth, that wants produce
wealth. Each cause acts and re-acts upon the
other, but the order, both of precedence and of
importance, is with the wants which stimulate to
industry; and with regard to these, it appears
that, instead of being always ready to second the
physical powers of man, they require for their de-
velopement, “all appliances and means to boot.”
The greatest of all difficulties in converting un-
civilized and thinly peopled countries into civi-
lized and populous ones, is to inspire them with
the wants best calculated to excite their exertions
in the production of wealth. One of the greatest
benefits which foreign commerce confers, and the
reason why it has always appeared an almost ne-
cessary ingredient in the progress of wealth, is, its
tendency to inspire new wants, to form new tastes,
and to furnish fresh motives for industry. Even
civilized and improved countries cannot afford to
lose any of these motives. It is not the most plea-
sant employment to spend eight hours a day ina
counting-house. ‘Nor will it be submitted to
after the common necessaries and conveniences of
life are attained, unless adequate motives are pre-
sented to,the mind of the man of business. Among
these motives is undoubtedly the desire of ad-
vancing his rank, and contending with the Jand-
lords in the enjoyment of leisure, as well ‘as ‘of
foreign and domestic luxuries.


SEC. Ix.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 471


But the desire to realize a fortune as a perma-
nent provision for a family is perhaps the most
general motive for the continued exertions of those
whose incomes depend upon their own personal
skill and efforts. Whatever may be said of the
virtue of parsimony or saving, as a public duty,
there cannot be a doubt that it is, in numberless
cases, a most sacred and binding private duty; and
were this legitimate and praiseworthy motive to.
persevering industry in any degree weakened, it
is impossible that the wealth and prosperity of the
country should not most materially suffer. But if,
from the want of other consumers, the capitalists
were obliged to consume all that could not be ad-
vantageously added to the national capital, the
motives which support them in their daily tasks
must essentially be weakened, and the same powers
of production would not be called forth.

It has appeared then that, in the ordinary state of
society, the master producers and capitalists,
though they may have the power, have not the
will, to'consume to the necessary extent. And
with regard to their workmen, it must be allowed
that, if they possessed the will, they have not the
power. It is indeed most important to observe
that no power of consumption on the part of the
labouring classes can ‘ever, according to the com-
mon motives which influence mankind, alone fur-
nish an encouragement to the employment of
capital. As I have before said, nobody will ever
employ capital merely for the sake of the demand
occasioned by those who work for him. Unless

HH 4


472 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES ([CH. VII.


they produce an excess of value above what they
consume, which he either wants himself in kind,
or which he can advantageously exchange for
something which he desires, either for present or
future use, it is quite obvious that his capital will
not be employed in maintaining them. When
indeed this further value is created and affords a
sufficient excitement to the saving and employ-
ment of stock, then certainly the power of con-
sumption possessed by the workmen will greatly
add to the whole national demand, and make room
for the employment of a much greater capital.

It is most desirable that the labouring classes
should be well paid, fora much more important
reason than any that can relate to wealth; namely,
the happiness of the great mass of society. But
to those who are inclined to say that unproductive
consumers cannot be necessary as a stimulus to the
increase of wealth, if the productive classes do
but consume a fair proportion of what they pro-
duce, I would observe that as a great increase of
‘consumption among the working classes must
greatly increase the cost of production, it must
lower profits, and diminish or destroy the motive
to accumulate, before agriculture, manufactures,
and commerce have reached any considerable
degree of prosperity. If each labourer were ac-
tually to consume double the quantity of corn
which he does at present, such a demand, instead
of giving a stimulus to wealth, would probably
throw a great quantity of land out of cultivation,


SEC. IX.| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 473


and greatly diminish both imternal and external
commerce. :

There is certainly however very little danger
of a diminution of wealth from this cause. Owing
to the principle of population, all the tendencies are
the other way; and there is much more reason to
fear that the working classes will consume too
little for their own happiness, than that they will
consume too much to allow of an adequate in-
crease of wealth. I only adverted to the circum-
stance to shew that, supposing so impossible a
case as a very great consumption among the work-
ing producers, such consumption would not be of
the kind to push the wealth of a country to its
greatest extent.

It may be said, perhaps, that though, owing to
the laws which regulate the increase of popula-
tion, it is in no respect probable that the corn
wages of labour should continue permanently
very high, yet the same consumption would take
place if the labouring classes did not work so
many hours in the day, and it was necessary to
employ a greater number in each occupation. I
have always thought and felt that many among
the labouring classes in this country work too hard
for their health, happiness, and intellectual im-
provement; and, if a greater degree of relaxation
from severe toil ‘could be given to them with a
tolerably fair prospect of its being employed in
innocent amusements and useful instruction, I
should consider it as very cheaply purchased, by
the sacrifice of a portion of the national wealth


474 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES ([CH. VII.


and populousness. But I see no probability, or
even possibility, of accomplishing this object. To
interfere generally with persons who are arrived at
years of discretion in the command of the main
property which they possess, namely their labour,
would be an act of gross injustice; and the at-
tempt to legislate directly in the teeth of one of
the most general principles by which the business
of society is carried on, namely, the principle of
competition, must inevitably and necessarily fail.
It is quite obvious that nothing could be done in
this way, but by the labouring classes themselves;
and even in this quarter we may perhaps much
more reasonably expect that such a degree of pru-
dence will prevail among them as to keep their
wages permanently high, than that they should
not enter toa competition with each other in
working. A man who is prudent before marriage,
and ‘saves something for'a family, reaps the benefit
of his conduct, although others do not follow his
example; but, without ‘a simultaneous resolution
on the part of all the labouring classes to work
fewer hours in the day, the individual who should
venture so to limit his exertions would necessarily
reduce himself to comparative want and wretched-
ness. If the supposition here made were accom-
plished, not by a simultaneous resolution, which is
scarcely possible, but by those general habits ‘of
indolence and ignorance, which ‘so frequently pre-
vail in the less improved stages of society, it is
well known that such leisure would be of little
value; and that while these habits would pre-


SEC.IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 475


maturely check the rate of profits and the progress
of population, they would bring with them no-
thing to compensate the loss.

It is clear therefore that, with the single ex-
ception of the increased degree of prudence to be
expected among the labouring classes of society
from the progress of education and general im-
provement, which may occasion a greater con-
sumption among the working producers, all the
other tendencies are precisely in an opposite direc-
tion; and that, generally, all such increased con-
sumption, whether desirable or not on other
grounds, must always have the specific effect of
preventing the wealth and population of a country,
under a system of private property, from being
pushed so far, as it might have been, if the costs
of production had not been so increased.

It may be thought perhaps that the landlords
could not fail to supply any deficiency of demand
and consumption among the producers, and that
between them there would be little chance of any
approach towards redundancy of capital. What
might be the result of the most favourable distri-
bution of landed property it is not easy to say from ,
experience ; but experience certainly tells us that,
under the distribution of land which actually takes
place in most of the countries in Europe, the de-
mands of the landlords, added to those of the pro-
ducers, have not always been found sufficient to
prevent any difficulty in the employment of capi-
tal. In the instance alluded to in a former chapter,
“which occurred in this country in the middle of


,


476 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES. [CH, VII.


last century, there must have been a considerable
difficulty in finding employment for capital, or the
national creditors would rather have been paid off
than have submitted to a reduction of interest
from 4 per cent. to 34, and afterwards to 3. And
that this fall in the rate of interest and profits
arose from a redundancy of capital and a want of
demand for produce, rather than from the difficulty
of production on the land, is fully evinced by the low
price of corn at the time, and the very different state
of interest and profits which has occurred since.

A similar instance took place in Italy in 1685,
. when, upon the Pope’s reducing the interest of his
debts from 4 to 3 per cent., the value of the prin-
cipal rose afterwards to 112; and yet the Pope's
territories have at no time been so cultivated as to
occasion such a low rate of interest and profits
from the difficulty of procuring the food of the
labourer. Under a more favourable distribution
of property, there cannot be a doubt that such a
demand for produce, agricultural, manufacturing,
and mercantile, might have been created, as to
have prevented for many many years the interest
of money from falling below 3 percent. In both
these cases, the demands of the landlords were
added to those of ‘the productive classes.

But if the master-producers, from the laudable
desire they feel of bettering their condition, and
providing for a family, do not consume sufficiently
to give an adequate stimulus to the increase of
wealth; if the working producers, by increasing


their consumption, supposing them to have the


SEC.IX.] ‘OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 477


means of so doing, would impede the growth of
wealth more by diminishing the power of produc-
tion, than they could encourage it by increasing
the demand for produce ; and if the expenditure
of the landlords, in addition to the expenditure
of the two preceding classes, be found insufficient
to keep up and increase the value of that which is
produced, where are we to look for the consump-
tion required but among the unproductive labourers
of Adam Smith?

Every society must have a body of unproductive
labourers; as every society, besides the menial ser-
vants that are required, must have statesmen to
govern it, soldiers to defend it, judges and lawyers
to administer justice and protect the rights of in-
dividuals, physicians and surgeons to cure diseases
and heal wounds, and a body of clergy to instruct
the ignorant, and administer the consolations of
religion. No civilized state has ever been known
to exist without a certain portion of all these
classes of society in addition to those who are
directly employed in production. Toa certain ex-
tent therefore they appear to be absolutely neces-
sary. + But it is perhaps one of the most important
practical questions that can possibly be brought
under our view, whether, however necessary anid
desirable they may be, they must be considered as
detracting so much from the material products of
a country, and its power of supporting an extended
population ; or whether they furnish fresh motives
to production, and tend to push the wealth of a
country farther than it would go without them.


478 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII,


The solution of this question evidently depends,
first, upon the solution of the main practical ques-
tion, whether the capital of a country can or can-
not be redundant; that is, whether the motive to
accumulate may be checked or destroyed by the
want of effective demand long before it is.checked
by the difficulty of procuring the subsistence of
the labourer. And secondly, whether, allowing
the possibility of such a redundance, there is suffi-
cient reason to believe that, under the actual habits
of mankind, it is a probable occurrence.

In the Chapter on Profits, but more particularly —
in the Third Section. of the present Chapter, where
I have considered the effect of accumulation as a
stimulus to the increase of wealth, I trust that the
first of these questions has been satisfactorily an-
swered. And in the present Section it has been
shewn that the actual habits and practice of the
productive classes, in the most improved societies,
do not lead them to consume so large a proportion
of what they produce, even though assisted by
the landlords, as to prevent their finding frequent
difficulties in the employment of their capitals.
We may conclude therefore, with little danger of
error, that such a body of persons as I have
desctibed is not only necessary to the government,
protection, health, and instruction of a country,
but is also necessary to call forth those exertions
which are required to give full play to its physical
resources. ,

With respect to the persons constituting the un-
productive classes, and the modes by which. they


SEC. IX.]| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 479


should be supported, it is probable that those which
are paid voluntarily by individuals, will beallowed _
by all to be the most likely to be useful in exciting
industry, and the least likely to be prejudicial by
interfering with the costs of production. It may
be. presumed that a person will not take a menial
servant, unless he can afford to pay him; and that
he is as likely to be excited to industry by the
prospect of this indulgence, as by the prospect of
buying ribands and laces. Yet to shew how much
the wealth of nations depends upon the proportion
of parts, rather than on any positive rules respecting
the advantages of productive or unproductive la-
bour generally, it may be worth while to remind
the reader that, though the employment of a cer-
tain number of persons in menial service is in every
‘respect desirable, there could hardly be a taste
more unfavourable to the progress of wealth than
a strong preference of menial service to material
products.* We may however, for the most part,
trust, to the inclinations of individuals in this re-
spect; and it will be allowed generally, that there
is little difficulty in reference to those classes which
are supported voluntarily, though there may be,
much with regard to those which must be sup-
ported by taxation.

With regard to these latter classes, such as states-
men, soldiers, sailors, and those who live upon the
interest of anational debt, it cannot be denied, that
they contribute powerfully to distribution and de-


* See Ch. i, p. 35.


480 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


mand; they frequently occasion a division of pro-
perty more favourable to the progress of wealth


.than would otherwise have taken place; they en-


sure that consumption which is necessary to give
the proper stimulus to production; and the desire
to pay a tax, and yet enjoy the same means of gra-
tification, must often operate to excite the exertions
of industry quite as effectually as the desire to pay a
lawyer or physician. Yet to counterbalance these
advantages, which so far are unquestionable, it
must be acknowledged that injudicious taxation
might stop the increase of wealth at almost any


period of its progress, early or late ;* and that the


most judicious taxation might ultimately be so
heavy as to clog all the channels of foreign and
domestic trade, “and almost prevent the possibility
of accumulation. ap

The effect therefore on national wealth of those
classes of unproductive labourers which are sup-
ported by taxation, must be very various in dif-
ferent countries, and must depend entirely upon
the powers of production, and upon the manner in


* The effect of obliging a cultivator of a certain portion of rich
land to maintain two men and two.horses for the state, might in
some cases only induce him to cultivate more, and create more
wealth than he otherwise would have done, while it might leave
him personally as rich as before, and the nation richer ; but if the
same obligation were to be imposed on the cultivator of an equal
quantity of poor land, the property might be rendered at once not
worth working, and the desertion of it would be the natural con-
sequence. An indiscriminate and heavy tax on gross produce
might immediately scatter desolation over. a country, capable,
under a better system, of producing considerable wealth.


SEC. IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 481


which the taxes are raised in each country. As
great powers of production are neither likely to be
called into action, or, when once in action, kept in
activity without great consumption, I feel very
little doubt that instances have practically occurred
of national wealth being greatly stimulated by the
consumption of those who have been supported
by taxes. Yet taxation is a stimulus so liable in
every way to abuse, and it is so absolutely neces-
sary for the general interests of society to consider
private property as sacred, that one should be ex-
tremely cautious of trusting to any government
the means of making a different distribution of
wealth, with a view to the general good. But
when, either from necessity or error, a different dis-
tribution has taken place, and the evil, as far as it
regards private property, has actually been com-
mitted, it would surely be most unwise to attempt,
at the expense of a great temporary sacrifice, a
return to the former distribution, without very
fully considering whether, if it were effected, it
would be really advantageous ; that is, whether; in
the actual circumstances of the country, with re-
ference to its powers of production, more would
not be lost by the want of consumption ‘than
gained by the diminution of taxation.

If there could be no sort of difficulty in finding
employment for capital, provided the price of la-
bour were sufficiently low, the way to national
wealth, though it might not always be easy, would
be quite straight, and our only object need be to
save from revenue, and repress unproductive con-

II


ut


482 ON THE IMMEDIATE Causes [CH. II.


sumers. But, if it has appeared that the greatest
powers of production are rendered comparatively
unless without adequate consumption, and that a
proper distribution of the produce is as necessary
to the continued increase of wealth as the means
of producing it, it follows that, in cases of this
kind, the question depends upon proportions ; and
it would be the height of rashness to determine,
under all circumstances, that the diminution of a
national debt and the removal of taxation must
necessarily tend to increase the national wealth,
and provide employment for the labouring classes.
If we were to suppose the powers of production
in a rich and well peopled country to be so in-
creased that the whole of what it produced could
be obtained by one third of the labour before ap-
plied, can there be a reasonable doubt that the
principal difficulty would be to effect such a ‘distri-
bution of the produce, as to call forth these great
powers of production? To. consider the gift of
such powers as an evil would indeed be, most
strange; but they would be an evil, and practi-
cally a great and grievous one, if the effect were
to be an increase of the neat produce at the ex-
pense of the gross produce, and of the population,
But if, on the other hand, a more favourable dis-
tribution of the abundant produce were to take
place; if the more intelligent among the working
classes were raised into overseers of works, clerks
of various kinds, and retail dealers, while many
who had been in these situations before, together
with numerous others who had received a tolerable


SEC. Ix.} OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 483


education, were entitled to an income from the
general produce, and could live nearly at leisure
upon their mortgages; what an improved. struc-
ture of society would this state of things present ;
while the value of the gross produce, and the
numbers of the people would be increasing with
rapidity! As I have before said, it would not be
possible, under the principle of competition, (which
can never be got rid of,) to secure much more lei-
sure to those actually engaged in manual labour ;
but the very great increase in the number of prizes
which would then be attainable by industrious and
intelligent exertion, would most essentially im-
prove their condition ; and, on the whole, the so-
ciety would have gained a great accession of com-
fort and happiness. It is not meant to be stated
that such a distribution of the produce could be
easily effected; but merely that, with such.a distri-
bution, the powers supposed would confer a pro-
digious benefit on the society, and without such a
distribution, or such a change of tastes as would
secure an equivalent consumption, the powers sup-
posed might be worse than thrown away.

Now the question is, whether this country, in its
actual state, with the great powers of production
which it unquestionably possesses, does not bear
some slight resemblance to the case here imagined;
and whether, without such a body of unproductive
consumers as these who live upon the interest of
the national debt, the same stimulus would have
been given to production, and the same powers
would have been called forth. Undel the actual

ER ,


484 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


division of landed property which now takes place
in this country, I feel no sort of doubt that the
icomes which are received and spent by the na-
tional creditors are more favourable to the demand
for the great mass of manufactured products, and
tend much more to increase the happiness and in-
telligence of the whole society, than if they were
returned to the landlords.

I am far, however, from being insensible to the
evils of a great national debt. Though, in many
respects, it may be a useful instrument of distribu-
tion, it must be allowed to be a very cumbersome
and very dangerous instrument. In the first place,
the revenue necessary to pay the interest of such
a debt can only be raised by taxation ; and, as this
taxation, if pushed to any considerable extent, can
hardly fail of interfering with the powers of pro-
duction, there is always danger of impairing one
element of wealth, while we are improving another.
A second important objection to a large national —
debt, is the feeling which prevails so very gene-
rally among all those not immediately concerned in
it, and consequently among the great mass of the
population, that they would be immediately and
greatly relieved: by its extinction; and, whether
this impression be well founded or not, it cannot
exist without rendering such revenue in some
degree insecure, and exposing a country to the
risk of a great convulsion of property. A third
objection to such a debt is, that it greatly aggra-
vates the evils arising from changes in the value of
money. When the currency falls in value, the an-


SEC. IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 485


nuitants, as owners of fixed incomes, are most un-
justly deprived of their proper share of the national
produce; when the currency rises in value, the
pressure of the taxation necessary to pay the in-
terest of the debt, may become suddenly so heavy
as greatly to distress the productive classes ;* and
this kind of sudden pressure must very much en-
hance the insecurity of property vested in public
funds.

On these and other accounts it might be desir-
able slowly to diminish the debt, and to discourage
the growth of it in future, even though it were
allowed that its past effects had been favourable
to wealth, and that the advantageous distribution
of produce which it had occasioned, had, under the
actual circumstances, more than counterbalanced
the obstructions which it might have given to com-
merce. Security with moderate wealth is a wiser
choice, and better calculated for peace and happi-
ness than insecurity with greater wealth. But,


* In a country with alarge public debt, there is no duty which
ought to be held more sacred on the part of the administrators of
the government than to prevent any variations of the currency be-
yond those which necessarily belong to the varying value of the
precious metals. I am fully aware of the temporary advantages
which may be derived from a fall in the value of money ; and
perhaps it may be trie that a part of the distress during the last
year, though I believe but a small part, was occasioned by the
measure lately adopted, for the restoration of the currency to its
just value. But some such measure was indispensably necessary ;
and Mr. Ricardo deserves the thanks of his country for having
suggested one which has rendered the transition more easy than
could reasonably have been expected.


rs


486 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [eH. vin.


unfortunately, a country sidbiaitormed toa distribu-


tion of produce which has at once excited and
given full play to great powers of production, can-


not withdraw into a less ambitious path without _


passing through a period of very great distress.


It is, I know, generally thought that all would .


be well, if we could but be relieved from:the
heavy burden of our. debt.. And yet I feel per-
fectly convinced that, if a spunge could be applied
to it to-morrow, and we could put out of our con-
sideration the poverty and misery of the public
creditors, by supposing them to be supported com-
fortably in some other country, the rest of the
society, as a nation, instead of being enriched,
would be impoverished. It is the greatest mistake
to suppose that the landlords and capitalists would
either at once, or in a short time, be prepared for


so great an additional consumption as such a.


change would require; and if they adopted the
alternative suggested by Mr. Ricardo in a former
instance, of saving, and lending their increased in-
comes, the evil would be aggravated tenfold. The
new distribution of produce would diminish the
demand for the results of productive labour ; and
if, in addition to this, more revenue were converted
into capital, profits would fall to nothing, and a
much greater quantity of capital would emigrate,
or be destroyed at home, and a much greater num-
ber of~ persons would be starving for want of em-
ployment, than before the extinction of the debt.
It would signify little to be able to export cheap
goods. If the distribution of property at home were


=
SEC. IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 487


not such as to occasion an adequate power and

will to purchase and consume the returns for these

- goods, the quantity of capital which could be em-
ployed in the foreign trade of consumption would
be diminished instead of increased. Of this we
may be convinced if we look to: India, where low
wages appear to be of little use in commerce, while
there are no middle classes.of society to afford a
market for any considerable quantity of foreign
goods.

The landlords, in the event supposed, not being
inclined to an adequate consumption of the results
of productive labour, would probably employ a
greater number of menial servants ; and perhaps, in
the actual circumstances, this would be the best
thing that could be done, and indeed the only way
of preventing great numbers of the labouring
classes from being starved for want of work. It is
by no means likely, however, that it should soon
take place to a sufficient extent; but if it were
done completely, and the landlords paid as much in
wages to menial servants as they had before paid
to the national creditors, could we for a moment
compare the state of society which would ensue to
that which had been destroyed?

With regard to the capitalists, though they would

_be relieved from a great portion of their taxes, yet
there is every probability that their habits of saving,
combined with the diminution in the number of
effective demanders, would occasion such a fall in
the prices of commodities as greatly to diminish
that part of the national income which depends

114


,
488 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII-


upon profits; and I feel very little doubt that, in
five years from the date of such an event, not only
would. the exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, estimated in domestic and foreign labour, be
decidedly diminished, but a smaller absolute quan-
tity of corn would be grown, and fewer manufac-
tured and foreign commodities would be brought
to market than before.

It is not of course meant to be said that a
country with a large quantity of land, labour, and
capital, has not the means of gradually recovering
itself from any shock, however great, which it may
experience ; and after such an event, it might cer-
tainly place’itself in a situation in which its pro-
perty would be more secure than with a large na-
tional debt. All that I mean to say is, that it would
pass through a period, probably of considerable
duration, in which the diminution of effective de-
mand from an unfavourable distribution of the
produce would more than counterbalance the in-
creased power of production occasioned by the
relief from taxation ; and it may fairly be doubted
whether finally it would attain a great degree
of wealth, or call forth, as it ought, a great de-
gree of skill in agriculture, manufactures, and com-
merce, without possessing, in some way or other,
a large body of unproductive consumers, or sup-
plying this deficiency by a much greater ten-
dency to consume the results of productive labour
than is generally observed to prevail in society.

It has been repeatedly conceded, that the pro-


SEC. IX.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 489.


ductive classes have the power of consuming all
that they produce ; and, if this power were. ade-
quately exercised, there might be no occasion, with
a view to wealth, for unproductive consumers. But
it is found by experience that, though there may
be the power, there is not the will; and it is to
supply this will that a body of unproductive con-
sumers is necessary.. Their specific use in encou-
raging wealth is, to maintain such a balance be-
tween produce and consumption as to give the
greatest exchangeable value to the results of the
national industry. If unproductive labour were
to predominate, the comparatively small quantity
of material products brought to market would keep
down the value of the whole produce, from the
deficiency of quantity. If the productive classes
were in excess, the value of the whole produce
would fall from excess of supply. It is obviously
a certain proportion between the two which will
yield the greatest value, and command the greatest
quantity of domestic and foreign labour; and we
may safely conclude that, among the causes neces-
sary to that distribution, which will keep up and
increase the exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, we must place the maintenance of a certain
body of unproductive consumers. This body, to
make it effectual as a stimulus to wealth, and to
prevent it from being prejudicial, as a clog to it,
should vary in different countries, and at different
times, according to the powers of production; and
the most favourable result evidently depends upon


490 | ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


the proportion between productive and unpro-
ductive consumers, being best suited to the natural
resources of the soil, and the eee tastes —
habits of the people.


-


SECTION X.


Application of some of the preceding Principles to the
Distresses of the Labouring Classes since 1815, with
General Observations.


It has been said that the distresses of the labouring
classes since 1815 are owing to a deficient capital,
which is evidently unable to employ all that are
in want of work. That the capital of the country
does not bear an adequate proportion to the popu-
lation ; that the capital and revenue together do
not bear so great a proportion as they did befote
1815; and that such a disproportion will at once
account for very great distress among the labour-
ing classes, I am most ready to allow. But it isa
very different thing to allow that the capital. is
deficient compared with the population; and to
allow that it is deficient compared, with the demand
for it, and the demand for the commodities pro-
cured by it. The two cases are very frequently
confounded, because they both produce distress
among the labouring classes ; but they areessentially
distinct. They are attended with some very dif-


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 491


ferent symptoms, and require to be treated i ina
very different manner.

If one fourth of the capital of a country. w were
suddenly destroyed, or entirely transferred to a dif-
ferent part of the world, without any other cause
occurring of diminished demand, this scantiness of
capital would certainly occasion great distress
among the working classes ; but it would be at-
tended with great advantages to the remaining
capitalists. Commodities, in general, would be
scarce, and bear a high price on account of the
deficiency in the means of producing them. No-
thing would be so easy as to find a profitable
employment for stock ; but it would by no means
be easy to find stock for the number of employ-
ments in which it was deficient ; and consequently
the rate of profits would be very high. In. this
state of things, there would be an immediate and
pressing demand for capital, on account of there
being an immediate and pressing demand for com-
modities ; and,.the obvious remedy: would be, the
supply of the demand in the only way in which it
could take place, namely, by saving from revenue
to add to capital. This supply of capital would,
as 1 stated in a former section, take place just
upon the same principle as a supply of population
would follow a great destruction of people on the
supposition of there being an immediate and press-
ing want of labour evinced by the high real wages
given to the labourer. '

On the other hand, if the capital of the country
were diminished by the failure of some branches


492 ON THE IMMEDIATE.CAUSES [CH. VII?


of trade, which had before been very prosperous,
and absorbed a great quantity of stock ; or even if
capital were suddenly destroyed, and from peculiar
circumstances a period were to succeed of dimi-
nished consumption and slack demand, the state
of things, with the exception of the distresses of
the poor, would be almost exactly reversed. The
remaining capitalists would be in no respect bene-
fited by events which had diminished demand in
a still greater proportion than they had diminished
capital. Commodities would be every where cheap.
Capital would be seeking employment, but would
not easily find it; and the profits of stock would
be low. There would be.no pressing and imme-
diate demand for capital, because there would be
no pressing and immediate demand for commodi-
ties ; and, under these circumstances, the saving
from revenue to add to capital, instead of affording
the remedy required, would only aggravate the
distresses of the capitalists, and fill the stream of
capital which was flowing out of the country.
The distresses of the capitalists would be aggra-
vated, just upon the same principle as the dis-
tresses of the labouring classes would be aggravated,
if they were encouraged to marry and increase,
after a considerable destruction of people, although’
accompanied by a still greater destruction of capital
which had kept the wages of labour very low.
There might certainly be a great deficiency of
population, compared with the territory and powers
of the country, and it might be very desirable that
it should be greater; but if the wages of labour


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH, 493


were still low, notwithstanding the diminution of
people, to encourage the birth of more children
would be to encourage misery and mortality rather
than population.

Now I would ask, to which of these two suppo-
sitions does the present state of this country bear
the nearest resemblance? Surely to the latter.
That a great loss of capital has lately been sus-
tained, is unquestionable. During nearly the whole
of the war, owing to the union of great powers of
production with great consumption and demand,
the prodigious destruction of capital by the govern-
ment was much more than recovered. To doubt
this would be to shut our eyes to the comparative
state of the country in 1792 and 1813. The two
last years of the war were, however, years of extra-
ordinary expense, and being followed immediately
by a period marked by a very unusual stagnation
of demand, the destruction of capital which took
place in those years was not probably recovered.
But this stagnation itself was much more disastrous
in its effects upon the national capital, and still
more upon the national revenue, than any previous
destruction of stock. It commenced certainly with
the extraordinary fall in the value of the raw pro-
duce of the land, to the amount, it is supposed, of
nearly one third. When this fall had diminished
the capitals of the farmers, and still more the reve-
nues both of landlords and farmers, and of all those
who were otherwise connected with the land, their
power of purchasing manufactures and foreign
products was of necessity greatly diminished... The


494 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


failure of home demand filled the warehouses of
the manufacturers with unsold goods, which urged
them to export more largely at all risks. But this
excessive exportation glutted all the foreign mar-
kets, and prevented the merchants from receiving
adequate returns; while, from the diminution of
the home revenues, aggravated by a sudden and
extraordinary contraction of the currency, even
the comparatively scanty returns obtained from
abroad found a very insufficient domestic demand,
and the profits and consequent expenditure of
merchants and manufacturers were proportionably
lowered. While these unfavourable changes were
taking place in rents and profits, the powerful sti-
mulus which had been given to population during
the war continued to pour in fresh supplies of |
labour, and, aided by the disbanded soldiers and
sailors and the failure of demand arising from the
losses of the farmers and merchants, reduced gene-
rally the wages of labour, and left the country
‘witha generally diminished capital and revenue ;—
not merely in proportion to the alteration of the
value of the currency, but in reference to the bul-
lion value of its produce, and the command of this
bullion value over domestic and foreign labour.
For the four or five years since the war, on account
of the change in the distribution of the national
produce, and the want of consumption and demand
occasioned by it, a decided check has been given
to production, and the population, under its former
impulse, has increased, not only faster than the
demand for labour, but faster than the actual pro-


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 495


duce; yet this produce, though decidedly deficient,
compared with the population, and compared with
past times, is redundant, compared with the effec-
tual demand for it and the revenue which is to
purchase it. Though labour is cheap, there is
- neither the power nor the will to employ it all;
because not only has the capital of the country
diminished, compared with the number of la-
bourers, but, owing to the diminished. revenues of
the country, the commodities which those labourers
would produce are not in such request as ensure
tolerable profits to the reduced capital.

But when profits are low and uncertain, when
capitalists are quite ata loss where they can safely
employ their capitals, and when on these accounts
capital is flowing out of the country; in short,
when all the evidence which the nature of the
subject admits, distinctly proves that there is no
effective demand for capital at home, is it not ‘con-
trary to the general principles of political economy,
is it not a vain and fruitless opposition to that
first, greatest, and most universal of all its princi-
ples, the principle of supply and demand, to re-
commend saving, and the conversion of more
revenue into capital? Is it not just the same sort
of thing as to recommend marriage when people
are starving and emigrating ?

I am fully aware that the low profits of stock,
and the difficulty of finding employment for it,
which I consider as an unequivocal proof that the
immediate want of the country is not capital, has
been attributed to other causes; but to whatever


496 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VIT.


causes they may be attributed, an increase in the
proportion of capital to revenue must aggravate
them. With regard to these causes, such as the
cultivation of our poor soils, our restrictions upon
commerce, and our weight of taxation, I find it
very difficult to admit a theory of our distresses so
inconsistent with the theory of our prosperity.
While the greatest quantity of our poor lands were
in cultivation; while there were more than usual
restrictions upon our commerce, and very little
corn was imported ; and while taxation was at its
height, the country confessedly increased in wealth
with a rapidity never known before. Since some
of our poorest lands have been thrown out of cul-
tivation; since the peace has removed many of
the restrictions upon our commerce, and, notwith-
standing our corn laws, we have imported a great
quantity of corn; and since seventeen millions of
taxes have been taken off from the people, we have
experienced a degree of distress, the pressure of
which has been almost intolerable.

Iam very far from meaning to infer from these
striking facts that restrictions upon commerce and ©
heavy taxation are likely in general to be benefi-
cial to a country. But the facts certainly shew
that, whatever may be the future effect of the
causes above alluded to in checking the progress of
our wealth, we must look elsewhere for the im-
mediate sources of our present distresses. How
far our artificial system, and particularly the
changes in the value of our currency operating
upon a large national debt, may have aggravated


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESSOF WEALTH. 497.


the evils we have experienced, it would be ex-
tremely difficult to say.. But I feel perfectly con-
vinced that a very considerable portion of these
evils might be experienced by a nation without
poor land in cultivation, without taxes, and with-:
out any fresh restrictions on trade.

If a large country, of considerable fertility, and
sufficient inland communications, were surrounded
by an impassable wall, we all agree that it might
be tolerably rich, though not so rich as if it en-
joyed the benefit of foreign commerce. Now,
supposing such a country gradually to indulge in
a considerable consumption, to call forth and em-
ploy a great quantity of ingenuity in production,
and to save only yearly that portion of its: revenue
which it could most advantageously add to its
capital, expending the rest in consumable com-
modities and unproductive labour, it might evi-
dently, under such a balance of produce and con-
sumption, be increasing in wealth and population
with considerable rapidity. But if, upon the princi-
ple laid down by M. Say, that the consumption of a
commodity is a diminution of demand, the society
were greatly and generally to slacken their con-
sumption, and add to their capitals, there cannot
be the least doubt, on the great principles of de-
mand and supply, that the profits of capitalists
would soon be reduced to nothing, though there
were no poor land in cultivation ; and the popula-
tion would be thrown out of work and would be
starving, although without a,single tax, or any
restrictions on trade.

K kK


498 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH, VII.


The state of Europe and America may perhaps
be said, in some points, to resemble the case here
supposed ; and the stagnation which has been so
generally felt and complained of since the war,
appears to me inexplicable upon the principles of
those who think that the power of production is |
the only element of wealth, and who consequently
infer that if the powers of production be in-
creased, wealth will certainly increase in propor-
tion. Now it is unquestionable that the powers of
production were increased by the cessation of war,
and that more people and more capital were ready
to be employed in productive labour; but not-
withstanding this obvious increase in the powers
of production, we hear every where of difficulties
and distresses, instead of ease and plenty. In the
United States of America in particular, a country
of extraordinary physical resources, the difficulties
which have been experienced are very striking,
and such certainly as could hardly have been ex-
pected. These difficulties, at least, cannot be at-
tributed to the cultivation of poor land, restric-
tions upon commerce, and excess of taxation.
Altogether the state of the commercial world, since
the war, clearly shews that something else is ne-
cessary to the continued increase of wealth be-
sides an increase in the power of producing.

That the transition from war to peace, of which
so much has been said, is- a main cause’ of the
effects observed, will be readily allowed, but not
as the operation is usually explained. It is gene-
rally said that there has not been time to transfer


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 499


capital from the employments where it is redun-
dant to those where it is deficient, and thus to
restore the proper equilibrium. But I cannot
bring myself to believe that this transfer can re-
quire so much time as has now elapsed since the
war; and I would again ask, where are the
under-stocked employments, which, according to
this theory, ought to be numerous, and fully
capable of absorbing all the redundant capital,
which is confessedly glutting the markets of
Europe in so many different branches of trade ?
It is well known by the owners of floating ca-
pital, that none such are now to be found ; and if
the transition in question is to account for what
has happened, it must have produced some. other
effects besides that which arises from the difficulty
of moving capital. This I conceive to be a great
diminution of the whole amount of consumption
and demand. The necessary changes in the chan-
nels of trade would be effected in a year or two;
but the general diminution of consumption and
demand, occasioned by the transition from such a
war to a peace, may last for a very considerable
time. The returned taxes, and the excess of in-
dividual gains above expenditure, which were so
largely used as revenue during the war, are now in
part, and probably in no inconsiderable part, saved.
I cannot doubt, for instance, that in our own coun-
try very many persons have’taken the opportunity
of saving a part of their returned property-tax,
particularly those who have only life-incomes, and
who, contrary to the principles of just taxation,
KK2


500 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. vi.


had been assessed at the same rate with those
whose incomes were derived from realized pro- >
perty. This saving is quite natural and proper,
and forms no just argument against the removal
of the tax; but still it contributes to explain the
cause of the diminished demand for commodities,
compared with their supply since the war. If
some of the principal governments concerned
spent the taxes which they raised in a manner to
create a greater and more certain demand for la-
bour and commodities, particularly the former, than
the present owners of them, and if this difference
of expenditure be of a nature to last for some
time; we cannot be surprised at the duration of the
effects arising from the transition from war to
peace.
The diminished consumption however, which
has taken place so generally, must have operated
very differently upon the different countries of the
commercial world, according to the different cir-
cumstances in which they were placed; and it
will be found generally, as the principles which
have been laid down would lead us to expect, that
those states which have suffered the most by the |
war have suffered the least by the peace. In the
countries where a great pressure has fallen upon
moderate or scanty powers of production, it ishardly
possible to suppose that their wealth should not
have been stopped in its progress during the war,
or perhaps rendered positively retrograde. Such
countries must have found relief from that‘dimi-
nution of consumption, which now allows them to


SEC. x. ] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 501


accumulate capital, without which no state can

permanently increase in wealth. But in those

countries, where the pressure of the war found

great powers of production, and seemed to create

much greater; where accumulation, instead of being

checked, was accelerated, and where the vast con-

sumption of commodities was followed by supplies"
which oceasioned a more rapid increase of wealth

than was ever known before, the effect of peace

would be very different. In such countries it is.
natural to suppose that a great diminution of con-

sumption and demand would decidedly, check the

progress of wealth, and occasion very general and

severe distress, both to capitalists and the labour-

ing classes. England and America come the

nearest to the countries of this latter description.

They suffered the least by the war, or rather were

enriched by it, and they are now suffering the most

by the peace.

I cannot but consider it as a very unfortunate
circumstance that any period should ever have oc-
curred in which peace should appear to have been,
in so marked a manner, connected with distress ;
but it should always be recollected that it is owing
to the very peculiar circumstances attending the
late war that the contrast has been so striking.
It was very different in the American and former
wars; and, if the same exertions had been at-
tempted, without the same powers of supporting
them, that is, without the command of the greatest.
part.of the commerce of the world, and a more
rapid and successful progress in. the use of machi-

KK 3


502 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


nery than was ever before known, we might have
been ina state to have felt the greatest relief at
the cessation of hostilities. When Hume and
Adam Smith prophesied that a little increase of
national debt beyond the then amount of it,
would probably occasion bankruptcy; the main
cause of their error was. the very natural one, of |
not being able to see the vast increase of pro-
ductive power to which the nation would sub- _
sequently attain. An expenditure, which would
have absolutely crushed the country in 1770, might
be little more than what was necessary to call
forth its prodigious powers of production in 1816.
But just in proportion to this power of production,
and to the facility with which a vast consumption
could be supplied, consistently with a rapid accu-
mulation of capital, would be the distress felt
by capitalists and labourers upon any great and
sudden diminution of expenditure. ~

On this account, there is reason to doubt the
policy of raising the supplies of a long and ex-
pensive war within the year, a policy which has
been recommended by very able writers. If the
country were poor, such a system of taxation
might completely keep down its efforts. It might
every year positively dimimish: its capital, and
render it every year more ruinous to furnish the
same supplies ; till the country would be obliged
to submit to its enemies from the absolute inabi-
lity of continuing to oppose them with effect.
On the other hand, if the country were rich, and
had great powers of production, which were likely


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 503


to be still further called forth by the stimulus of a
great consumption, it might be able to pay the
heavy taxes imposed upon it, out of its revenue,
and yet find the means of adequate accumulation ;
but if this process were to last for any time, and
the habits of the people were accommodated to
this scale of public and private expenditure, it is
scarcely possible to doubt that, at the.end of the
_ war, when so large a mass of taxes would at.once
be restored to the payers of them, the just balance
of produce and consumption would be completely
_ destroyed, and a period would ensue, longer or
shorter, according to circumstances, in which a
very great stagnation would be felt in every branch
of productive industry, attended by its usual con-
comitant general distress. . The evil occasioned by
imposing a tax is very rarely compensated by the
' taking it off. We should constantly keep in mind
that the tendency to expenditure in individuals
has most formidable antagonists in the love of im-
dolence, and in the desire of saving, in order to
better their condition and provide for a family ;
and that all theories founded upon the assumption
that mankind always produce and consume as much
as they have the power to produce and consume, are
founded upon a want of knowledge of the human
character and of the motives by which it is usually
influenced.

It will be said, perhaps, that as it is sknoubleidaiad
that the capital of this country compared with
the population has been diminished since the

KK4


504 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


war, partly by the unrecovered destruction which
it sustained during the last two years of the con-
test, but still more by the sudden want of con-
sumption and demand which occurred on its ter-
mination; how is the lost capital ever to be re-
covered, if we are not active in accumulation? I
am very far indeed from saying that we must not
accumulate. It is perfectly true that there is no
other possible way of recovering our lost capital
than by accumulation. ll that I mean to say is,
that, in looking to this most desirable object, the
recovery and increase of our capital, we should
listen to the dictates of those great general laws
which do not often fail to direct us in the right
course. If population were ever so deficient ina
state compared with its territory, yet, if the wages
of labour still continued very scanty, and the
people were emigrating, the great general laws. of
demand and supply would instruct us that some
previous change in the state of things was neces-
sary, before we ought to wish for an increased
proportion of marriages, which in fact, under the
actual circumstances, would not accomplish the
object aimed at. In the same manner, if a portion
of our profits be destroyed, and yet the profits of
the remainder are low, and its employment attended
with such frequent losses as, joined to its ten-
dency to emigrate, make it stationary or even re-
trograde; surely the great general laws of demand
and supply cannot more clearly shew us that some-
thing else is wanted before we can accumulate
with effect.


SEC. X.] | OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 505


What is now wanted in this country is an m-
creased national revenue,—an increase in the ex-
changeable value of the whole produce estimated
in bullion,—and in the command of this bullion
over domestic and foreign labour. When we have
attained this, which can only be attained by in-
creased and steady profits, we may then begin
again to accumulate, and our accumulation will
then be effectual. But if, instead of saving from
increased profits, we save from diminished expen-
diture ; if, at the very time that the supply of
commodities compared with the demand for them,
clearly admonishes us that the proportion of capi-
tal to revenue is already too great, we go on saving
from our revenue toadd still further to our capital,
all general principles concur in shewing that we.
must of necessity be aggravating instead of al-
leviating our distresses.

But how, it will be asked, are we to obtain this
increase of revenue? What steps are we to take
in order to raise the exchangeable value of the
whole produce, and prepare the way for the future
saving which is acknowledged to be necessary ?
These questions I have endeavoured to answer in
the latter Section of this very long Chapter On
the immediate Causes of the Progress of Wealth,
where it has appeared that a union of the means
of distribution with the powers of production is
absolutely necessary to create an adequate stimulus
to the continued increase of wealth ; and that the
three causes, which, by favouring distribution, tend


506 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


most to keep up and increase the exchangeable
value of the whole produce, are, the division of
landed property, the extension of domestic and
foreign trade, and the maintenance of unproduc-
tive labourers.

The mention of these causes is alone sufficient
to shew that they are much less within our im-
mediate controul than the common process of ac-
cumulation. If it were true that, in order to
employ all that are out of work, and to create at
the same time a sufficient market for what they
produce, it is only necessary that a little more
should be saved from the revenue and added to the
capital of the country, I am fully persuaded that
this species of charity would not want contri-
butors, and that a change would soon be wrought
in the condition of the labouring classes. But
when we know, both from theory and experience,
that this proceeding will not afford the relief
sought for, and are referred to an increase in the
exchangeable value of the whole produce as the
only cause which can restore a healthy and effec-
tive demand for labour, it must be allowed that
we may be at a loss with respect to the first steps
which it would be advisable to take, in — to
accomplish what we wish.

Still, however, it is of the utmost importance to
know the immediate object which ought to be
aimed at; that if we can do but little actually to
forward it, we may not, from ignorance, domuch
to retard it. With regard to the first main cause


SEC. X.]| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 507


which I have mentioned, as tending to increase
the exchangeable value of the national produce,
namely the division of landed. property, I have,
given my reasons for thinking that, in the actual
and peculiar state of this country, the abolition
of the law of primogeniture would produce more
evil than good ; and there is no other, way in which
a different.division of land could be effected, con-
sistently with an adequate respect for the great
fundamental law of property, on which all pro-
gress in civilization, improvement, and wealth,
must ever depend. But if the distribution of
wealth to a certain extent be one of the main
causes of its increase, while it is unadvisable directly
to interfere with the present division of land in
this country, it may justly become a. question,
whether the evils attendant on the national debt
are not more than counterbalanced by the distri-
bution of property and increase of the middle
classes of society, which it must necessarily create ;
and whether by saving, in order to pay it off, we
are not submitting to a painful sacrifice, which, if
it attains its object, whatever other good it may
effect, will leave us with a much less favourable
distribution of wealth? By greatly reducing the
national debt, if we are able to accomplish it,
we may place ourselves perhaps in a more safe
position, and this no doubt is an important. con-
sideration; but grievously will those be disap-
pointed who think that, either by greatly reducing
or at once destroying it, we can enrich ourselves,
and employ all our labouring classes.


508 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


With regard to the second main cause of an in-
crease in the exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce—namely, the extension of domestic and fo-
reign trade, it is well known that we can by no means
command either of these at pleasure, but we may
do much to impede both. We cannot indeed rea-
sonably attribute any sudden deficiency of trade to
causes which have been of long duration; yet there
can be little doubt that our commerce has been
much impaired by unnecessary restraints, and that
much benefit might be derived from the removal of
them. While it is necessary to raise a large sum by
taxation for the expenses of the government and
the payment of the interest of the national debt, it
would by no means be advisable to neglect so fair
and fruitful a resource as the customs. In regulat-
ing these taxes, it is also natural that those foreign
commodities should be taxed the highest, which
are either of the same kind as the native commo-
dities which have been taxed, or such as, for special
reasons of health, happiness, or safety, it is desirable
to grow largely at home. But there seems to be
no reason for the absolute prohibition of any com-
modities whatever; and there is little doubt that,
upon this principle, a much greater freedom might
be given to foreign commerce, at the same time that
a greater revenue might be derived from the cus-
toms. I have already stated, in more places than
one, why, under all the circumstances of the case,
I think it desirable that we should permanently
grow nearly our own consumption of corn. But I
see no sufficient cause why we should permanently


SEC.X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 509


prefer the wines of Portugal and the silks of
London to the wines and silks of France. For the
same reason that more British capital and labour is
even now employed in purchasing claret than would
be employed in attempting to make it at home,
we might fairly expect that, in the case of an ex-
tended trade with France, more British capital
would be employed in purchasing the wines and
silks of France, than is now employed in purchas-
ing the wines of Portugal and making the silks of
Spitalfields and Derby.

At the same time it should be remarked that,
in looking forward to changes of this kind, it is
always incumbent upon us, particularly in the ac-
tual situation of our people, to attend to the wise
caution suggested by Adam Smith. Fully con-
vinced ofthe benefits of unrestrained trade, he ob-
serves, that “The case in which it may sometimes
be a matter of deliberation. how far, and in what
manner, it is proper to restore the free importation
of foreign goods, after it has been for some time
interrupted, is, when particular manufactures, by
means of high duties and prohibitions upon all
foreign goods which can come into competition
with them, have been so far extended as to employ
a great multitude of hands. Humanity may in this
case require that the freedom of trade should be
restored only by slow gradations, and with a good
deal of reserve and circumspection. Were these
high duties and prohibitions taken away all at
once, cheaper foreign goods of the same kind might
be poured so fast into the home market as to de-


510 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH.' VII.


prive all at once many thousands of their ordinary
employment and means of subsistence.”* The cau-
tion here given by Adam Smith certainly applies
in a very marked manner to the silk trade ; and,
however desirable it may be (and it is so most un-
questionably) to open the trade with France, a
sudden and incautious admission of a large quantity
of French silks would tend to aggravate, instead
of to relieve the present distresses of our working
classes.

In all cases where, under peculiar circumstances,
the distress of the country would be aggravated by
the opening of certain trades, which had before
been subject to restrictions, the exchangeable value


of the whole produce estimated in domestic and


foreign’ labour would for a time be diminished.


But, in general, as I have endeavoured to shew
in the 8th Section of this Chapter, the natural and


permanent tendency of all extension of trade both
domestic and foreign, is to increase the exchange-
able value of the whole produce. This is more
especially the case when, instead of changing the
channels of commerce, we are able to make large
and distinct additions to them. The good is then un-
allayed by partial and temporary evil. This better
distribution of the produce of the country, this bet-
ter adaptation of it to the wants and tastes of the
consumers, will at once give ita greater market
value, and at once increase the national revenue,
the rate of steady profits, and the wages of labour.


* Wealth of Nations, Book iv. ch. vii. p. 202. 6th edit.


P|


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 511


With regard to the third cause of an increase in
the exchangeable value of the whole produce, the
maintenance of unproductive consumers—though
many have no power to be of use in this re-
spect, others may do something; and it must cer-
tainly be advantageous that the truth, whatever
it may be, relating to the effects of unproductive
- labour, should be fully known, that we may not
aim at what will obstruct the progress of wealth,
‘and clamour at what is calculated to advance it.

Whatever it may be thought advisable to do re-
specting the diminution of unproductive consumers,
with a view to the placing ourselves in a safer po-
sition, we shall be led to proceed with more deli-
beration, if we are not hurried on by the impres-
sion that, by this diminution, we are affording im-
mediate relief to the labouring classes.

It is also of importance to know that, in our
endeavours to assist the working classes in a period
like the present, it is desirable to employ them
in unproductive labour, or at least in labour, the
results of which do not come for sale into the mar-
ket, such as roads and public works. The objec-
tion to. employing a large sum in this way, raised
by taxes, would not be its tendency to diminish
the capital employed in productive labour; because
this, to a certain extent, is exactly what is wanted;
but it might, perhaps, have the effect of concealing
too much the failure of: the national demand for
labour, and prevent the population from gradually
accommodating itself to a reduced demand. This
however might be, in a considerable degree, cor-


512 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES — [CH. VIT.


rected by the wages given. And altogether I
should say, that the employment of the poor in

roads and public works, and a tendency among.
landlords and persons of property to build, to im-

prove and beautify their grounds, and to employ,
workmen and menial servants, are the means most

within our power and most directly calculated to

remedy the evils arising from that disturbance in

the balance of produce and consumption, which

has been occasioned by the sudden conversion of ;
soldiers, sailors, and various other classes which the
war employed, into productive labourers.

If by the operation of these three causes, either
separately or conjointly, we can make the supply.
and consumption bear a more advantageous _pro-
portion to each other, so as to increase the ex-
changeable value of the whole produce, the rate of
profits may then permanently rise as high as the .
quality of the soil in cultivation combined with :
the actual skill of the cultivators will allow,* which |
is far from being the case at present. And as soon
as the capitalist can begin to save from steady and»
improving profits, instead of from diminished ex-
penditure, that is, as soon as the national revenue,


* The profits of stock cannot be higher than the state of the
land will allow, but they may be lower in any degree. (see p. 300.)
The great difference between Mr. Ricardo and. me on this point
is, that Mr. Ricardo thinks profits are regulated by the state of
the land; I think they are only limited by it one way, and that
if capital be abundant, compared with the demand for commo-
dities, profits may be low in any degree, in spite of the fertility
of the land.


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 513


estimated in bullion, and in the command of this
bullion over domestic and foreign labour, begins
yearly and steadily to increase, we may then begin
safely and effectively to recover our lost capital
by the usual process. of saving a portion of our
increased revenue to add to it...
It is, I believe, the opinion’of many persons,
particularly among the mercantile classes, that
nothing would so soon and ‘so effectively increase
the revenue and consumption of the country asa
free issue of paper. But in holding this opinion,
they have mistaken the.nature of the great ad-


vantage which the national wealth may sometimes


unquestionably derive from a fall in the value of
the currency. The specific effect of this fall is to
take away property from those who have fixed in-
comes, and give a greater command over the pro}
duce of the. country to those who buy and sell.
When the state of the national expenditure is such
that there isa difficulty of supplying it, then what-
ever tends to throw a greater proportion.of the
produce into the hands of capitalists, as it must
increase the, power of production, must be just
calculated to supply what is wanted. And, though
the continuation of the act of restriction beyond
the immediate necessity of the case, can hardly: be
considered in any other light than as an act of
positive injustice towards the possessors of fixed
incomes; yet. I cam feel very little doubt that the
fall in the value of money, and. the facility of
credit which it occasioned, acting in the way
described, must have contributed greatly to that
LL


514. ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES = [CH. VII.


rapid recovery of vast capital: destroyed, which,
in the same degree, never probably occurred in: ‘the
history of any nation before. US Uae
But, if we were now to make similar issues of
, paper, the effect would be very different. | Perhaps
a sudden increase of currency and a new facility
of borrowing might, under any circumstances,
give a temporary stimulus to trade, but it would
only be temporary. Without a large expenditure
on the part of the government, and a frequent con-
version of capital into revenue, the great powers of
production acquired by.the capitalists, operating
upon the diminished power of purchasing possessed


by the owners of fixed incomes, could not fail‘to


occasion a still greater glut of commodities than
is felt at present ; and experience has sufliciently


shewn us, that paper cannot support prices under -


such circumstances. In the history of our paper
transactions, it will be found that the abundance
or scantiness of currency has followed and’ ag-
gravated high or low prices, but seldom or never
led them; and it is of the utmost importance
to recollect that, at the end of the war, the prices
failed before. the contraction of the currency
began. It was, in fact, the failure of prices,
which destroyed the country banks, and shewed
us the ‘frail foundations on ‘which the excess of
our paper-currency rested. This sudden contrac-
tion no doubt aggravated very greatly: the dis-
tresses of the merchants and of the country; and
for this very reason we should use our utmost en-
deavours to avoid such an event in future; not, how-


‘
*


45


SEC. X.]| OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 515


ever, by vain efforts to keep up prices by forcible
issues of paper, in defiance at once of the laws of
justice and the great principles of supply and de-
mand, but by the only effectual way, that of
steadily maintaining our paper of the same value
with the coin which it professes to represent, and
subjecting it to no other fluctuations than those
which belong to the precious metals. ,

In reference to the main doctrine inculcated in
the latter part of this work, namely, that the pro-
gress of wealth depends upon proportions; it will be
objected, perhaps, that it necessarily opens the way
to differences of opinion relating to these proposi-
tions, and thus throws a kind of uncertainty over
the science of political economy which was not sup-
posed to belong to it. If, however, the doctrine
should be found, upon sufficient examimation, to be
true; if it adequately accounts for things as they
are, and explains consistently why frequent: mis-
takes have been made respecting the future, it will
be allowed that such objectors are answered. We
cannot make a science more certain by our wishes
or opinions ; but we may. obviously make it much
more uncertain in its application, by believing it to
be what it is not. ¥

Though we cannot, however, lay down a certain
rule for growing rich, and say that:a nation will
increase in wealth just in the degree in which it
saves from its revenue, and adds to its capital:
yet even in the most uncertain parts of the science,
even in those parts which relate to the proportions
of production and consumption, we are not left

LL@


516 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES” [CH. VII.


without guides; and if we attend to the great
laws of demand and supply, they will generally
direct us into the right course. It is justly ob-
served by Mr. Ricardo that “ the farmer and
manufacturer can no more live without profit than
the labourer: without wages: Their motive for
accumulation will diminish with every diminution
of profit, and will cease altogether when their
profits are so low as not to afford them an ade-
quate compensation for their trouble, and the
risk which they must necessarily encounter in
employing their capital productively.* Mr. Ri-
cardo applies.this passage to the final and neces-


sary fall of profits occasioned by the state of the —


land. I would apply it at all times, throughout all
the variable periods which intervene between the
first stage of cultivation and the last. Whenever
capital increases too fast, the motive to accumula-
lation diminishes, and there will be a natural ten-
dency to spend more and save less.. When profits
rise, the motive to accimulation will increase,
and there will be a tendency to spend a smaller
proportion of the gains, and to save a greater.
These tendencies, operating on individuals, direct
them towards the just mean, which they would
more frequently attain if they were not. inter-
rupted by bad laws or unwise exhortations. If
every man who saves from his income is neces-
sarily a friend to his country,” it follows that all
those who spend their incomes, though they may


* Princ. of Polit. Econ. ch. vi. p. 127.


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 517


not be absolute enemies, like the spendthrift, must
be considered as failing in the duty of benefiting
their country, and employing the labouring classes,
when it is in their power ; atid this cannot be an
agreeable reflection to those whose scale of ex-
penditure in their houses, furniture, carriages and
table, would certainly admit of great retrenchment,
with but little sacrifice of real comfort. But if, in
reality, saving is a national benefit, or a national
disadvantage, according to the circumstances of
the period ; and, if these circumstances are best
declared by the rate of profits, surely it is a case
in which individual interest needs no extraneous
assistance.

Saving, as I have before said, is, in numerous
instances, a most sacred private duty. How fara
just sense of this duty, together with the desire of
bettering our condition so strongly implanted in
the human breast, may sometimes, and in some
states of society, occasion a greater tendency to |
parsimony than is consistent with the. most effec-
tive encouragement to the growth of public wealth,
itis difficult to say; but whether this tendency, if
let alone, be ever too great or not, no one could
think of interfeing with-it, even in its caprices.
There is no reason, however, for giving an addi-
tional sanction to it, by calling it a public duty.
The market for national capital will be supplied,
like other markets, without the aid. of patriotism.
And in leaving the whole question of saving to
the uninfluenced operation of individual interest
and individual feelings, we shall: best conform to

LL3


«


518 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAusEs. [cH. vu.


that great principle of political economy laid down
by Adam Smith, which teaches us a general maxim,
liable to very few exceptions, that the wealth of
nations. is best secured by allowing every person,
as long as he adheres to the rules of justice, to
pursue his own interest in his own way.

Still it must be allowed that this very doctrine,and
the main doctrines of the foregoing work, all tend to
shew, as was stated in the Introduction, that the
science of political economy bears a nearer resem-
blance to the sciences of morals and politics, than to
the science of mathematics. But this truth, though
it detracts from its certainty, does not detract from
its importance. While the science of political
economy involves some of the. questions which
have the nearest connection with the well-being
of society, it must always be a subject of the
highest interest. The study of it is calculated to
be of great practical. use, and to prevent much
positive evil. And if its principles be carefully
- founded on an experience sufficiently extended,
we have good reason to believe, from what they
have already done, that, when properly applied,
they will rarely disappoint our just expectations.

There is another objection. which will probably
be made to the doctrines of the latter part of this
work, which I am more anxious to guard against,
If the principles which I have laid down be true,
it will certainly follow that the sudden removal
of taxes will often be attended with very different
effects, particularly to the labouring classes of so-
ciety, from those which have been generally ex-


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 519


pected. And an inference may. perhaps be drawn
from this conclusion in favour of taxation. But
the just inference from it is, that taxes should
never be imposed, nor to a greater amount, than
the necessity of. the case, justifies, and particularly
that every effort should be made, consistently. with
national honour and security, to prevent a,scale
of expenditure so great that it. cannot proceed with-
out ruin, and cannot be stopped without distress.

Even if it be allowed that the excitement of
a prodigious public expenditure, and of the taxa-
tion necessary to support it, operating upon extra-
ordinary powers of production, might; under, pecu-
liar circumstances, increase the wealth of a country
in a greater degree than, it otherwise would have
increased; yet, as the greatest powers of produc-
tion must finally be overcome by excessive. bor-
rowing, and as increased misery among the labour-
ing classes must be the. consequence, whether we
go on or attempt, to return, it would surely have
been much better for the, society if such. wealth
had. never existed... It. is like the unnatural
strength occasioned by, some. violent stimulant,
which, if not absolutely. necessary, should be by
all means avoided, on. account. of the exhaustion
which is sure to follow it.

In the Essay on Population I have observed,
that. “In the whole compass of human eyents, I
doubt if there be.a more fruitful source of, misery,
or.one more invariably: productive, of disastrous
consequences, than a sudden start of population
from two or three years of plenty, which must

LL4


520 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES [CH. VII.


necessarily be repressed by the first return of scar-
city, or even by average’ crops.”* The great
demand for labour which took place during the
war must have had an effect precisely of a
similar kind, and only aggravated by duration ;
and as this is a state of things which cannotin its
nature continue, it is obviously the duty of all
governments, if they have any regard for the hap-
piness of their subjects, to avoid all wars and ex-
cessive expenditure as far as it is possible; but if
war be unavoidable, so to regulate the necessary
expenditure as to occasion the least pressure upon
the people ‘during the contest, and the least con-
vulsion in the state of the demand at the termina-
tion of it. We may have good reason to lament
that such taxation and consumption should ever
have taken place, and that so great’ an impetus,
which could only be temporary, should have been
given to the wealth and population of the country ;
but it is a very different question, what is the best
remedy now that the evil is incurred? « If the po-
pulation had made a start during a few years of
plenty, we should surely make great efforts to pre-
vent, by importation, the misery which would be


occasioned by the sudden return of average crops. _


If the human body had been subjected to a very
powerful stimulus, we should‘surely be cautious
not to remove it too suddenly. And, if the coun-
try had been unfortunately subjected to the ex-
citement of a long continuance of excessive ex-


* Vol, ii. p. 170. 4th edit,


a


SEC. X.] OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH. 521


penditure, it surely must be against all analogy
-and all general principles, to look.for the imme-
diate remedy of it in a great and sudden contrac-
tion of consumption.

There is every reason to believe that the work-
ing classes of society would be severely injured by
attaining the object which they seem so ardently
to wish for. To those who live upon’ fixed ‘in-
comes, the relief from: taxation’ is a great and
unmixed good; to the mercantile and trading
classés it is sometimes a ‘good and sometimes an
evil, according to circumstances ; but to the work-
ing classes, no taking off of taxes, nor any degree
of cheapness of corn, can compensate a want of de-
mand for labour. If the general demand for Ja-
bour fail, particularly if the failure be sudden, the
labouring classes will be wretched in the midst
of cheapness; if the demand for labour be con-
siderable, they will be comparatively rich in the
midst of dearness.

To state these facts is not to favour taxes; but
to give one of the strongest reasons against them ;
namely, that they are not only a great evil on
their first imposition, but that the attempt to get
rid of them afterwards, is often attended with
fresh suffering. They are like those injudicious
regulations of the mercantile system noticed by
Adam Smith, which, though acknowledged to be
pernicious, cannot be removed without producing
‘a greater evil for an interval of considerable length.

Theoretical writers are too apt, in their calcula-
tions, to overlook these intervals; but eight or ten


522 ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES, &c. [CH. vi.


years, recurring not unfrequently, are serious. spaces
in human life. They amount to 4 serious| sum of
happiness or misery, according as they are pros-
perous or adverse, and leave the country ina very
different state attheir termination... _In prosperous —
times the mercantile classes often, realize fortunes,
which go far towards securing them against the
future; but unfortunately the working classes,
though they share in the general prosperity, do
not share so largely as in the general adversity.
They may suffer the greatest distress in a period
of low wages, but cannot be adequately compen-
sated by a period of high wages. To them fluc-
tuations must always bring more evil: than good ;
and, with a view to the happiness of the great
mass of society, it should be our object, as far as
possible, to maintain peace, and an scloganie ex-
penditure. I


SUMMARY


OF THE CONTENTS OF THE FOREGOING WORK.


,


INTRODUCTION,

Tur science of political economy resembles more the
sciences of morals and ae than the science of mathe-
matics soe

This conclusion, pia a on a view of the anche about
which political economy is conyersant, is further strength-
ened by the differences of opinion which have prevailed


among those who have directed a great cmpent their
attention to this study .


The Economists and Adam Smith aiden on some iempoanand :


PAGE


questions in political economy, though on eon on. others.


still more important ©. . oritnase

Among the most distinguished aadeie wieia, Miu
of opinion continue to prevail on — of _ im-
portance ‘

The correct demon e" res questions is seh great
practical consequence.

An agreement among __ the prinefpal seidiers.s in " Political
Economy is. very desirable with a view to the authority of
the science in its practical application

In the present state of the science, an saree to settle
some important yet controverted points may be more use-
ful than an attempt to frame a new and complete treatise ..

The principal cause of the differences of opinion among the
scientific writers on political economy is a precipitate at-
tempt to simplify and generalize


524 SUMMARY.


PAGE


The desire to simplify has occasioned an unwillingness to
acknowlédge the operation of more causes than one in the.
production of effects observed

The rule of Newton, which teaches us ine i ‘admit more
causes of any phenomenon than are necessary to account
for it, implies that those which are necessary must be

The same tendency to simplify occasions the rejection of li-
mitations and exceptions

The necessity of limitations and acpi: illustrated i in ‘the
doctrines laid down by Adam Smith respecting frugality
and saving

The same necessity illustrated i in the Hlés Which, i to the
, division of land


The tendency to premature etieidiiation! waldo. panieigaa eco-


nomists occasions also an ees Pesta to bring‘ their
theories to the test of experience . . ; oy


The first business of peg cd is to account for things as ‘


they are
A comprehensive attention to nen is neceisiny ‘both to fire


vent the multiplication of ee and to confirm those”


which are just ’

The science of political Secbidty is eéactitiatly iractiesl; and!
applicable to the common business of human life

Some eminent political economists think that, though excep-
tions may exist to the general rules of political economy,
they need not be noticed ‘

But the most perfect sincerity; together with the greatest de!
gree of accuracy attainable, are necessary to give that cre-
dit and circulation to re principles, which is ‘so de-
sirable e

Another class of pebebid Seem to be oidatied! with white ine
been already done in political economy, and shrink from
further inquiries, if they do not peer or see the ra
cal results to which they lead.

Such a tendency, if indulged too far, mist’ 4 at the’ root of all
improvement in science

More of the propositions in wiolitidabie eoanary will Wes the


ib.


12


13


14


15


ib.


SUMMARY.


test of cuz bono than those of any other department of
human knowledge

Further inquiries, fowwever: difficult, ‘devel be Hib Ry both
with a view to the improvement and completion of the
science, and the aes eae likely to — from
them


525


PAGE


16


It is of spree teaisci ae to see a dine, with cheese peed 3


sion, between those cases where the expected results are
certain, and those where they are uncertain
Practical statesmen, who have not leisure for the modeatsleh
inquiries, should not object, under the guidance of a
sound discretion, to make’ use of the leisure of others
The principle of non-interference, necessarily limited in


17


ib.


practice—Ist,. By some duties. connected with political’


economy, which it is Seeman acknowledged belong
to the sovereign :

2dly, By the prevalence, in shbaaoit etal deomtin ie bad
regulations, which require to be amended or removed

3dly, By the necessity of taxation :

The propriety of interfering but little, does slob srpergerl de in
any degree, the use of the most extensive professional
knowledge either in a statesman ora physician. .

One of the specific objects’ of the present work is to fit ‘the
general rules of political economy for practice, by endea-
vouring to consider all the causes which concur in the s
duction. of particular phenomena F

This mode of proceeding is-exposed to a dimnge ab an eae


21


site kind to that which arises from a tendency to simplifi- —
cation, a danger which Adam Smith has not aoe


avoided .

A just mean between the two ‘eiitibeage is the paint sinned at
with a view of arriving at the truth . . . ..

With a great wish to avoid controversy it was iaporsibles that
to notice specifically and largely Mr. Ricardo’s distinguished
work on the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation

The questions which it discusses are so Pa that they
should, if possible, be settled 2.0. 1 freee he


526 SUMMARY.


CHAPTER I. - ; |
ON THE DEFINITIONS OF WEALTH AND PRODUCTIVE LABOUR.


—_ —_—


Sgcr. I.—On the Definitions of Wealth. _ PAGE


A definition of wealth. is desirable, though it may not be easy
to give one not liable to some, objection... 25


The liberty of a writer to define his texte onlin acnebdiens
vided he always uses them in the sense proposed, may be»
doubted, as-an inquiry may be rendered futile —
adequate or unusual definition 2.0.04. 2.5 26

The. comparative merits of the systems of the ‘Bailey
and of Adam Smith, depend nantes their different
definitions of wealth .. i ib.

The Economists have confined the sai 1 wealth within a0 ;
narrow limits . 127

Lord Lauderdale and others writers pais sled definitions: which
extend ittoo far... ib.

The line which it seems most oleae to peweart is, that: which
separates material from immaterial objects. . 28

Adam Smith’s definition of wealth is not free from abjashiien
though confined’ to material products. |. ib.

The material objects which are necessary, siabbods. or sgresable
to mankind, proposedias a definition of wealth . . ib.

In the application of this definition, a useful distinction one
be made between a rich country and a rich people... 29


Szcr. IL—Of Productive Labour.


The question of productive labour is dependent upon the defi-
nition of wealth; both in the system of: the Economists,
and in that of Adam Smith . . . 29

The. application of the term productive to the Anson which is
productive of wealth, however defined, is obviously useful’. 30

Adam Smith’s definition of productive labour has been
thought by some to be too extended, and ri others ren
confined . 1: “ib.

It would be difficult to imaeteed i in our Piaguiriel into nd na-
ture and causes of the wealth of nations, without some
classification of the different kinds of labour . . . . . ib.


SUMMARY.


527


PAGE


Such a classification is necessary—1 st. To explain the nature
of capital, and its. effect. in increasing national wealth .

2dly, ‘To explain’ the nature and eer of pues
contradistinguished from spending : H f

3dly, To explain the causes which render. faventlable ihe iene
portant balance of produce and consumption . N

And generally, to explain the causes oe one Histon rw
thriving, while another is declining -. ,

The increasing riches and prosperity’ of Europe ‘tie ‘the
feudal times could hardly be explained, if mere’ personal
services were considered as equally productive ‘of wealth
with the labours of merchants and manufacturers ‘

If some distinction be necessary between the different keds
of labour, the next tdqatry is, what this’ regen gi should
bet... -. + soy F

The distinetion adopted: by: the Beotioihists would not Silos
us to. explain those. appearances in different’ countries,


31


ib.


33


34


ib.


which, in common language, are allowed to pak from *


different degrees’ of wealth

‘The opposite opinion to that of the Regusstobiin’ hat aie ab:
ready discussed, in the endeavour to shew ‘that some dis-
tinction in the different kinds of labour is necessary


A distinction . between. the different kinds of labour ‘is the +


corner-stone of Adam Smith’s work . :

Another. sort of distinction, however, might ‘be mind diffe.
rent from that’of Adam Smith, which would not invali-
date his reasonings

All paid labour might be called protinotive of pats “bat pio
ductive in different degrees, according as the value of their
results might exceed the value paid .. :

Upon this principle, the labours of SE ctsaleare woulib gel
rally be the most productive, ‘the labours in manufactures
the next, and mere personal ‘services the least

This mode of considering the subject would establish a seaie
of. productiveness, tae of dividing labour into two
kinds

The unproductive Iebbuieds of Adam Smith woudl, pout hts
system, be placed in the lowest scale of productiveness

The*great objection to this system is, that it makes the pay-


36


ib.


38


39


40


528 ; SUMMARY.


ment for labour, instead of ‘the quantities of the nee
the criterion of productiveness .. . 7 .


Yet if we once desert matter, we must doit this cciaeslah,!


or every human exertion to avoid me and obtain pleasure
is productivelabour . . «4 .


PAGE


41


42 .


And if we do adopt this criterion, the sian same ekinl: i sols


bour will be qe or not, — it is paid for,
or not . * ie

Unproductive ‘Jehousetn) are wilh ious ‘seiaticiah in n the wei
duction of wealth indirectly, as demanders, but they can-
not, with propriety, be said to create the wealth which pays
them, .. swisioeinnamt hen eteodsaoor kherdteleh ods

Adam Smith’s distinction, which draws the line between what.
is matter and what is not matter, is “SS the most use-
ful and the least objectionable . . ..

Susceptibility of accumulation .is essential to our usual con-
ceptions. of wealth . . .. ‘

Capability of definite valuation is meonenalce to eneba us ars
estimate the amount of wealth obtained by any kind of la-
bour . ;


The labour realized upon material products is the only la- a
bour which is at once mascara of accumulation and. ;


definite valuation

The objection of M. Garnier, nando’ sailieds Saabs tien.
and the tunes played upon them, answered ;

Objections of M. Garnier, poepesting the servants of oeuaeas
ment, answered .. . ;

Some unproductive labour is om puch more use ad inipblte
ance than productive labour, but is incapable of being
the subject of the gross calculations which relate to. na-
tional wealth . «

Having confined the definition of wealth t to sadaal Objects
productive labour is that labour which is productive of
wealth, that is, so directly productive of it, as to be esti-
mated in the value of the objects produced

The object of this discussion is not to make subtle dietinms
tions, but to bespeak assent to a useful classification...


*


suddb.


. 43


48


49


SUMMARY,


CHAP. II.
OF THE NATURE AND MEASURES OF VALUE,


Sect. L—Of the different Sorts of Value.

Two sorts of value are generally admitted—value in vas and
value in exchange . . .

The term value is so rarely sadbeancill as aisles “the mere
utility of an object, that if this interpretation of it be re-
tained, it should never be oven without the addition—
muse. .

Value in ccna is Seamed aa the veld ah power on ex-
change one commodity for another

If nature had, in the first instance, made such a s distribution
of commodities as now takes place previous to consump-
tion, their exchangeable values could not have been known

An exchange implies not only the power and will to give one


529


PAGE


article for another more wanted, but a reciprocal demand


in the owner of the article wanted for the one es to
be exchanged for it .
When this reciprocal demand exitie, the enc. a: one com-
modity which is given for another, depends upon the rela-


53


tive estimation in which each is held, founded upon the ©


desire to: possess, and the difficulty or net: of procuring
possession

Owing to the difierinits of: denives sal hontai the Weigle
thus made were, in the first instance, very different from
each other .

By degrees, a current ‘allie i all cchthiceities in  fresantit
use would be established, and each commodity would be

_ in some ews both a representative and measure of
value . ‘

But the Seog’ want of ere iBviand: secigh in silage
fairs, would throw great obstacles in the way of an ene
valuation of commodities

To secure this reciprocal demand, geet 3 man so tenalt edie
vour to keep by him some commodity so generally in request
that it would rarely be refused in exchange for what he
might want. . . . .

MM


ib.


ib.


54


5)


s


530 . SUMMARY.


Cattle were mn for this purpose among pastoral nations, on
account of the facility of keeping them, and of the frequent
exchanges of which they must have been the subject

It is necessary that the commodity adopted for the medium of
exchange and measure of value should be in eqn use,
and its value well known ...

Notwithstanding the peculiar aptitude "” disiprectols vis
for a medium of exchange and measure of value, they
had not been used for that purpose in Mexico when first
discovered .


, PAGE


55


56


ib.


In the old wel praen the arts of sinelting and reidanp € ores —


seem to have been known at a very remote period, the ap-


propriate qualities of the precious metals pointed them out
in the earliest times as the commodity best fitted for a me-
dium of exchange and measure of value 5

When they had been adopted as a general measure of ike;
they would almost always be the article named, and the
quantity of the precious metals for which commodities
would exchange, sig as id be called their nominal
value .

This nominal vite 7 sheet éeniveriniies ‘dean By ithe
term price, which thus scabs a more confined sense of
the term value .

The introduction of a measure of theninal ‘ad relative vail,
was a step of the highest we Sehr a in the progress =

society

. It is the nominal vine iY pte, or ibaeie pales nly, raves
the merchant has occasion to consider

But the precious metals completely fail as a measure ‘be the
exchangeable value of objects in different countries, or at
different periods . . . . :

Nominal wages and incomes dtonié, without faite more
tion, will not enable us to ser whether a are good or
bad :

We want some estimate af a nature which’ may be called at
value in exchange, implying the quantity of the necessaries
and conveniences of life which nominal wages and incomes
will enable us to command


57


58


59


ib.


60


SUMMARY.


A correct measure of real value in exchange; as thus described,
though very desirable, is not attainable. All that can be
hoped for is, an approximation to it . ;

We are not justified, on this account, in giving a different
definition of real value in exchange, so as to confound the
important distinction between cost and value. . . . .

There is no other meaning of value, in addition to value in
use, but what relates to exchange .

The distinction between real and nominal edie’ in watlikahjes
is absolutely necessary in comparing the wealth of two
nations together, or in estimating the value of the gen
metals in different places and times . i

There are then three sorts of value ;—1. Value in use, or the
utility of an object. 2. Nominal value in exchange, or value
in money. 3. Real value in exchange, or value in neces-
saries, conveniences and labour 2

These distinctions are in the main those of Alte Smith, de
belong to his system .


531
PAGE


60


61


62


ib.


Secr. I1—Of Demand and Supply as they affect Exchangeable


Value.

The terms, demand and supply, though in constant use, are
not applied with’precision. It is necessary, therefore, on
account of their universal influence, to clear the ground on
this part of the subject before we proceed farther :

Demand may be defined to be, the will combined with the
power to purchase ; and supply, the production of commo-
dities combined with the intention to sell them. There is no
instance of a change of price, but what may be traced to
some causes which affect the demand or supply .

It must be remembered, that prices are determined, not by
the demand alone, or the supply alone, but by their relation
to each other

In one sense of the terms, demi ay Ws ead to be pres
equal to supply, but it is not in this sense in which me
determine prices .

The more of the will and ss to ‘faitdiae! vials, with re-
gard to any particular commodity, the greater or more in-
tense is the demand for it .

MM 2


63


64


65


66


532 SUMMARY.


The prices of commodities depend upon the causes which
call forth, or render unnecessary; a great or intense de-
mand . a de ;

An increase in the noniier ‘ef the purchasers ne an aitiole; or
its diminished supply, will raise its price ; a diminution in
the number of purchasers, or its abundant pp, will
lower its price . i

The first class of causes calls forth a pettehe intensity wi ge,
mand, the second a less .

Whatever may be the state of the apis acne with ‘the
wants of the purchasers, if they have not the power and
will to make a more intense demand, the price cannot
Tis@ 60 wtp oS cal tone alle he ee ee

If the cost of production be increased, those only can be sup-
plied who will submit to a greater sacrifice to obtain what
they want, and make a more intense demand . ners

If a commodity be abundant compared with the number of
purchasers, the same intensity of demand or sacrifice be-
comes unnecessary ;

If the cost of production be dhntabehied: a sala excess of
supply will always be contingent upon the price not falling
proportionably . .

Whenever an advance of price paves haces it is ae mite


advance is necessary to the supply of the consumer ; and .


whenever a fall takes place, it is because it is necessary to
prevent the supply from being greater than the saa on
tion ecrent eye”) he lee R .
In this discussion, no new meaning ia We ip. inet to ‘the
terms, demand and supply. It is intended that they should
be understood in the sense in which they have always
hitherto been understood, when applied to market prices


PAGE


66


ib.


67


ib.
ib.
68


69


70


71


Secr. III.—Of the Cost of Production as it affects Exchangeable


Value.

The system which determines prices by demand and supply,
is essentially different from the system which refers to the
costs of production, though they touch each other in many
points .

In all transactions of teegein ad ‘ales Dieu is clingy a


72


SUMMARY.


533


PAGE


principle which determines prices, quite sect of
the costs of their production

This is acknowledged with regard to all uscaiipiliged commo-
dities ; and is strikingly true in reference to the market
prices cof raw products . . 4, .*.

Of commodities which are the least westiles the coli of pro-
duction will be found only to influence their prices as it is
the necessary condition of their supply .

The principle of demand and supply iiicaeliiee what ‘Adnan
Smith calls natural prices as well as market prices :

This is proved by attending to the immediate and specific
cause which alters amp upon an alteration in the costs of
production .

The costs of pili peirese to be of no einill bvut'ts in sub.
ordination to the dominant principle of supply and demand

This position may be illustrated by the effects upon sou of
all sorts of bounties

The value given to Bank paper rip ficnitiniy its sates hive
that the cost of producing gold only influences its ome as it
influences its supply . .

The true way of viewing the sit of produsiial:3 in their
effects upon prices, is as the necessary conditions of the sup-
ply of the objects wanted “

The first necessary condition of this spl is, ihe poyinent of
the labour employed .

The second condition is the payment of the ceviliniy pri
of stock . .

The third condisionsa is, that the priv of the chommpdity should
be such as to pay rent on all but the very worst lands in
cultivation . J

The price which fulfils ieee conditians:i is the natatad sii us
Adam Smith, which it might be better to call necessary
price, as susceptible of a more simple definition .


The natural or necessary price of a commodity is the rey


necessary to bring it regularly to market ms
Natural and necessary prices are determined by pati soe
supply, as well as market prices . . 2 2 1. 6 1 ee


MMS


73


ib.


74


77


78
79


80


81


534 SUMMARY.


Secr. IV.—Of the Labour which has been employed on a Commodity
considered as a Measure of its Exchangeable Value. ace


Adam Smith, in proposing labour as a measure of —— has
not applied it always inthe same sense. . . .

Labour, applied in the sense of the quantity of lahat em-
ployed in the production of a commodity, is radically de-
fective as a measure of exchangeable value .

In this sense it cannot be applied positively, kennel if all
commodities were at the same time to require more labour
in their production, their ren values would remain
the same

Understood rédiivelapit it is not true “chat it in ch edattind lage
of society “ the proportion between the quantities of labour
necessary for acquiring different objects is the only cireum-
stance which can afford a rule for exchanging them” .

At a very early period of society, advances are necessary to
some products, and the time during which these advances
are employed, forms a necessary clement of price quite
unconnected with labour

It follows, that the rule which judinn € es that como
never vary in value, unless more or less labour be em-
ployed on them, cannot apply even in the early —_ of
society”

In improved cauanied the same causes of rth ‘ailie
pendently of the quantity of labour employed, must prevail,
as in the early stages of asin with the addition of some
others”); Gams .

Mr. Ricardo’s proposition, that the prides of some Sidenote
fall when labour rises, is true, and it would not have ap-
peared paradoxical if it had been stated more naturally

The fall of price is occasioned by the fall of profits in those
commodities, the prices of which had before consisted
chiefly of the necessary remuneration for’a large capital

Generally, when labour rises and profits are lowered, some
commodities will rise, some will fall, and a very few remain
stationary, according to the varying proportions of capital y
applied to set in motion the same quantity of labour . .

The prices of all commodities on which the same quantity of


85


ib.


87


88


90


91


ib.


92


SUMMARY.


labour has been employed, vary when the price of labour
varies, with a very small number of exceptions

In improved countries, the importation of foreign commo-
dities, the prevalence of taxes, and the payment of rent,
occasion further variations of pric megendeenly of the
labour employed

The circumstance of the cost of the main nl pap a pea
being resolvable almost entirely into wages and profits, does
not prevent rent from forming a component part of the price
of the great mass of commodities «

Other products of land have more the character of a aA
than the main food of the country, and their prices cannot
be resolved into wages and profits &

All cattle pay arent, and in penmertien to their sults yan
an equal rent ;

It may be said that, though the vom of cattle i is not ‘eccnlaies
directly by the quantity of labour and capital employed in
their production, yet that it is, indirectly, through a chain
of dependences on the cost of producing corn

But one of the links of this chain will not hold, as the Sai
both of arable and pasture land, may rise without a rise in
the price of corn

Many other important Preece Fess pane fae will
be affected as to their prices by a rise of rents, without a
rise of corn or labour

We cannot then get rid of rent Bie the i bas intempeetas
tion of the term labour, and Adam Smith’s component parts
of price must be admitted .

If one term only were used, it would be edter cS pe to
capital, which generally pays both rent and labour ; but the
three terms are preferable, as more correct, and conveying
more information . er

But if we cannot get rid of pes on the mass of a a


it must greatly affect the amount of capital, and aggravate .


all the variations of price occasioned by the variations in
the quantity of capital, and the time during which it is
employed :
Under all the variations Pe Sasieasd re othens causes,
it cannot be the quantity of labour employed which deter-
MM 4


ib.


97


98


99


- 102


. 103


ib.


536 © SUMMARY.
PAGE
mines the relative values of commodities at the same time
and place . . . PR ade
Still less can the fOaitnd apical os Secu cisiphangae be
a measure of exchangeable ’ value at different times and
places . . - 105
The instance anitoned by Mr. Ricardo‘ to ie the superiodity
of his measure of value over that most frequently referred
to by Adam Smith, shews at once that the labour employed
on a commodity is a most incomplete and unsatisfactory
measure of its value in exchange. . . hee - 106
_ Labour is the principal ingredient in the ssp ees of
price, but to consider it as the sole ingredient must lead to
the greatest practical errors . . . 107
It must be concluded then, that the ips of abies em-
ployed on a commodity is neither a correct measure of its
exchangeable value at the same time and place, nor at dif-
ferent times and‘places’.*. . 4 yb.


Secr. V.—Of Money, when uniform in its Cost, considered as a
Measure of value.
If, to procure a given quantity of money, the same quantity
of labour were always expended, it has been thought that
such money might be proposed as a standard measure of
value: cuet parse - 108
But as the money prices or comirieniitae vachild still epee
their exchangeable values at the same place, it follows, from
what was said in the last section, that they would not re-
present the quantity of labour employed upon them . . . 109
If the precious metals required for their production a certain
quantity of fixed and circulating capital, then, on a rise of
labour and fall of profits, all’ commodities would rise or
fall in money price, which were not produced by the same
sort of capital employed for the same time . . . . a
If the precious metals were obtained by mere advances in ‘the
payment of labour for a year, on arise of labour and fall
of profits all commodities would rise or fall which were not
circumstanced in the same peculiar manner . . . . 110
If the precious metals were obtained by mere labour, without
any advances beyond the food of a day, on a fall of profits


SUMMARY. * 537
PAGE


all commodities in which.any capital had been ewes
would fall

We cannot then safer: Eva the chit: siied of com-
modities, the relative quantities of labour which have been
employed upon them

Other variations would arise, pam the durability of the piesiitik
metals, and the difficulty with which they accommodate
themselves to a sudden diminution of demand ta

The use made of the precious metals in foreign commerce
would occasion further variations . . :

On the supposition that the metals were prockities are in
particular countries, but always with the same quantity
of labour and capital, their present distribution shews us
how inadequate a measure of real value in ee they
would be in different countries :

The same commodity which would cfuiasgiad pte one day? 8
labour in England might still command five or six aes
labour in Bengal .

The different values of silvers in Bengal wai England i is wre
bably not occasioned principally by the lateness of the dis-
covery of the American mines, as the relation between
gold and silver is now nearly the same as in Europe

In the different European countries the value of silver is very
different, though not so much so as in Ps pi se
with the principal states of Europe


- 110


- Ill


ib.


112


- 113


. 114


ib.


- 115


Theoretically it is obvious that the Sdabiadelh ¢ cost of hos


ducing commodities cannot facilitate the purchase of the
precious metals :

Though they may be distsibuted ninong the stmmnniliies oh
the same country according to the costs of production,
they cannot be so distributed in different countries

No conceivable regularity in the production of the precious
metals could possibly render the prices of commodities an
accurate measure of the quantity of labour which had been
employed upon them

If, however, they were. obtained in sath: atetn by day-lsetes
only, without any capital, they would approach near to a
measure of real value in exchange, because their value in
labour would in this case be the same as their cost in la~


ib.


anh l6


- 117


538 SUMMARY.
PAGE
bour; but still the money prices of commodities would
not measure the quantity of labour bestowed onthem . . 118


Secr. VI.—Of the Labour which a Commodity will command, con-
_ sidered as a Measure of real Value in Exchange. —

The labour which a commodity will command unites, more
nearly than any one commodity, the qualities of a real and
nominal measure of exchangeable value . . - 118

Ist. In looking for a general measure of qrékadendiil ide,
we should naturally direct our attention to that object
which is most extensively the subject of — and
thisis certainly labour . . . ni lD

2. The value of commodities in aichaianl fe kien can eres
express generally the degree in which they are suited to
the wants of the society . . ib.

3. The efficiency of capital in the increase we ool besitos
entirely upon the power of setting labour to work, or, in
other words, of commanding labour . . . . 120

Labour, understood in the sense proposed, is, like the eriniate
metals, an accurate measure of relative value at the same


time and place. . . . et


All other commodities are sujet to rete sid more indie P
variations . . . . . 122
While labour is thus shbant an accurate measure ial pre at
the same time and place, it approaches the nearest of any
one commodity to such a measure in different eo and
at distant periods of time . . . - 123
Adam Smith has taken corn as the’ iets measure of labolin
from century to century, which is the same as considering
labour as the best measure of the necessaries of life, at dis-
tant times and in different countries . . . ib,
The conveniences of life depend more upon labieny sven
corn; and, all other things being equal, the quantity of la-
bour which a commodity will command will be in propor- :
tion to the quantity it has cost ... . - 124
The labour which a commodity will a ee tekes 3 in all ‘the
circumstances which influence exchangeable value ; the la-
bour which it has cost only one, although the most con-
siderable tone 3.02 a amyy pai, wi) ON ae ge eta cui abs


SUMMARY. 539

PAGE
No commodity can be a good measure of real:value in ex-
change at different times and places, which is not a good

measure of exchangeable value at the same time and place 124
In the progress of improvement, when labour will command
the greatest quantity of corn, it will generally command
the smallest quantity of the conveniences of ia and vice

versd . go cungenhs 125
On the whole, it eppedaideoh the’ nearest a nine one object to
a measure of real value in exchange, but still, as labour is
subject to variations from demand and supply, like all

other things, it cannot be considered as a standard . . ib.


Secr. VIL.—Of a Mean between Corn and Labour considered as a
Measure of real Value in’ Exchange.


Two objects might in some cases be a-better measure of real
value in exchange than one alone, and yet be eye
manageable for practical application . . . 126

A certain quantity of corn, of a given quality, ae a definite

value in use ; but its value in exchange, both nominal and
real, is found to be subject to considerable variations, both
from year to year, and from century to century ... . ib.

Labour, in the same manner, is found at different petiods to
command-very different —— of the first necessary
of life, com . . . . 128

Though neither of diel two aaa akes igi a can wie
considered as a satisfactory measure of value, by com-
bining the two we may approach to greater accuracy . . ib.

When corn, compared with labour, is dear, labour, compared
with corn, must be cheap ; and if we take a mean between
the two, we shall have a measure corrected by the con-
temporary variation of each in opposite directions . . ib.

For this purpose we must fix upon some specific quantity of
corn, which, on a large average, is equivalent to a day’s
common labour, such as a peck of wheat, which would
suit this country ; and any commodities which, at different
periods, will purchase the same number of days’ labour,
and of pecks of wheat, may be considered as of the same
real value inexchange . . . srige set) 229

In comparing different countries, ‘hie average ree of


540 SUMMARY.


a day's labour in the prevailing food, whatever it may be,
must be substituted for a peck of wheat ; and the differentes
in the money values of such commodities as are of the
same real values in exchange thus estimated, will express
the different values of silver, in different periods and coun-
tries
“No measure can ike into onc the effects of capital je
skill; and they may be neglected without much error,
when the main object is value in exchange . . r
Mr. Ricardo asks, why should corn, or labour, or the si mass wat
commodities, be preferred as a measure to coals or iron, all
being liable to fluctuations ? But some one or more com-
modities must be taken to express exchangeable value ; be-
cause they include evéry oe that can be “tin in ex-
change .
We must choose heen an ate = ry measure, one one
which is fundamentally erroneous, such as a measure of
cost. . .
Value, as mel w Mr, Rade phe mean Hepat ne
value ; and the reasons are obvious for preferring corn or
labour, or a mean between the two, as a measure of ex-
changeable value, to coals or iron, or any such commo-


Oiti6S  sicpra cabas vane k-byy «dy bdienine fier Ries acts oa


CHAPTER III.


OF THE RENT OF LAND.


Secr. I.—Of the Nature and Causes of Rent.
Rent is that portion of the value of the whole produce of land
which remains after all the expenses of cultivation have
been paid, including the usual agricultural profits
The first object of inquiry is the cause or causes of this
excess
Most writers haté \inaibliered rent as too nearly rescialiig
in its nature and the laws by which it is governed, that
excess of price above. the cost of production, which is the
characteristic of a common monopoly ; :
Rent has some affinity to a natural monopoly ; but it is still
essentially different, and is governed by different laws .


PAGE


- 130


ib.


- 131


i32


. 134


~ 135


. 139


SUMMARY. 541
PAGE
Three causes combine to form rent:—1. The fertility of the
soil ;—2. The power of food to create its own demand ;—
and 3. The comparative scarcity of fertile land . . . . 139
The first, of these causes is so necessary to rent that, without it,
no excess of price above the expenses of cultivation could
possibly exist . . - 140
The power of land to yiald rent is pty ohigentictien “ its
fertility, though the actual rent may be very different . ib.
Still the surplus, which is the result of this power, might re-
main of little use without the Os of food to create
itsowndemand . . . . 141
The machine which produces the necessaries 1 life'i is s diffe-
rent from every other machine known to man, and the use
of it is attended with peculiar effects . . . . . . 142
A family which has land that will produce necessaries for five
other families, may be sure to have effective demanders
for them; but if the same family had a machine which -
would make fifty hats or coats, no efforts could, secure
theirbeing all wanted . . . . . ib.
These peculiar qualities of the soil, aor of its ripedeiiee; hove
been strongly noticed by the Economists, and often by
Adam Smith, as asource of rent ; but modern writers have
been apt to consider it as regulated upon the principles of
a common nay ote the distinction is arn
and striking . . . 144
If the fertility of the mines were to bbe diaitetatiedd one half,
they might still yield the same rents, wages, and profits ;
but if the fertility of the soil in this country were to be
diminished one half, tillage would be nearly destroyed, and
rents, profits, wages, and a would be reduced in
proportion 50 sae . ib.
The produce of certain i nllapar tal in _— nigtie: rise to
almost any value from external demand; but no external
demand can ever make a bushel of corn permanently worth
more than the quantity of labour which it will support . 146
In the production of necessaries, the demand being depen-
dent on the production itself, it is impossible that the de-
manders should increase, while the aren of ane
diminishes . . .. . 147
In common monopolies the excess ee pie show the’ cost of


542 SUMMARY.

PAGE
production, has no definite limit ; in the production of ne-
cessaries it is strictly limited by the fertility of the soil . 148

The price of necessaries cannot then be regulated upon the
principles of a common monopoly . . . 149

Rent is evidently a part of that general satplag a ‘the
land, without which. none could-exist but the mere eul-
tivator!) Gop ytd, Wa RS NEST EIDE OF O00) Ae


Secr. II.—Of the necessary Separation of the Rent of Land from
the Profits of the Farmer and the Wages of the Labourer.
In the early periods of society the surplus produce is divided
chiefly between profits and wages, and appears but little
in the shape of rent . . . 150
When, by the increase of pila aiid popislatiol ellis em
wages have fallen, and land of an inferior quality has been
cultivated, the value of food will be in excess above the
costs of production on the most fertile lands, and rent
will be separated . . 2... - 11
A comparative scarcity of fertile ae cotesilenand be thei in-
crease of population, is necessary, in addition to the two
causes before-mentioned, to separate a portion of the sur-
plus produce into the specific form of rent . + . . ib.
A portion of the rents of the landlord must consist - a
transfer from profits and wages, but this transfer is the ne-
cessary condition of increasing cultivation and resources . 152
Cultivators of the richer land, who pay no rent after profits
and wages have fallen and poorer land is cultivated, are
proprietors as well as farmers . . : «(153
As profits and wages fall, poorer and poorer land will’s succes-
sively be taken into cultivation, and at every step rents
‘will Tise 8.4 : . 154
In the progressive culsiration sual Bae ae be a fee state,
the progressive separation of rents, as a kind of fixture
upon lands of a certain quality, is a law as invariable as
the principle of gravity . . . - 155
When the sovereign is owner of the incl the reguladisineg
this progress is interrupted, and rents are prematurely
created and increased . . : . ib.
On fertile soils a high rent may he seeited immediatly by


SUMMARY.


543


PAGE.


taking a large portion of the gross produce; but in this case
~ only the most fertile lands can be cultivated, and profits,
wages, and population, will come to a premature stop
To a certain extent this has been done in many eastern
states, and it is the reason why their population has ceased
to be progressive, although much good land remains waste.
In these states, the almost entire = 2S mi” of rent on
fertility is particularly conspicuous ;
The premature fall of profits and wages in wach states casi
be prevented by the employment of capital and labour i in
other branches of industry besides agriculture
In such states the interest of money is a most imperfect cri-
terion of the general rate of —_ pres on the
land . 4
Similar causes jeevidled hough: not to the same extent, in
the early periods of most European states, and the rate of
profits on the land had not much connection either with
the profits of stock in manufactures and commerce, or with
the interest of money
Under all circumstances, rent sepsis Len the genliatia sur-
plus produce whenever a scarcity of fertile land takes place,
either naturally or artificially


. 156


. 158


. 159


- 160


Sec, II —Of the Causes which tend to raise Rents in the ordinary


Progress of Society.

Four causes may be stated as mainly tending to diminish the
expenses of production prim iat with the 4 gir of ler
and so to raise rents .

The two first, profits and wages, are sometimes affected i in op-
posite directions, and counterbalance each other, but this is
only a temporary effect. In general, profits and real wages
fall together, and this may take place by a progressive money
rise of corn and labour, as described by Mr. Ricardo

But profits and real wages may fall, and rent be regularly
separated, under any variations in the value of money

The third cause which raises rents, by lowering the ~iate
of cultivation, is agricultural improvements

If the improvements be such as to diminish the costs of sas
duction, without increasing the quantity produced, the price


- 160


544 SUMMARY.
PAGE
will remain the same, and the whole diminution of cost will
go immediately torent . . . . . «2.013 UGS
Jf the improvements be such as to increase the oid the
price will fall, pulation will very soon increase, and
in a short ne a land will be cultivated without a rise
of price, and rents will rise. . . . + <> are epee a4
The very great improvements in sartenilinien which have taken
place in this country have gone almost wholly to the in-
crease of rents and the payment of taxes . .). . . . 165
Local improvements in agriculture go immediately, on the re-
newal of leases, to the landlords, and occasion, in particular
districts, a very great rise of rents, without any diminution
of the ordinary rates of*profits and wages . . . . . . ib.
Facility of production in necessaries is never attended, as in
all other commodities, with a permanent fall of price, and
therefore it always increases rent. . . . . . . . . ib.
The fourth cause which tends to raise rents is, such an increase
in the value of agricultural produce as will increase the
difference between the ne of this produce and the costs
of production Shah Kin eras
The rise in the price of corn pieiinel “ti ‘naenall labour
employed upon it is, after a certain period, confined within
very narrow limits . . . ape
A rise in the money price of corn, ‘Dategoudl ty sealan: anal
terminating in a fall in the value of money, encourages
cultivation and increases rents, without necessarily lowering


wages and profits. . . . : ; 167,


The state of money prices, in the Dnited States of. huate
tends strongly to illustrate this position. . . . ae
Effects of a similar kind, occasioned by a great Adm’ oe
corn and high money prices, took place in our own country
from 1793 to the end of 1813, and rents rose without a fall
of profits . . . 1056S ee
A similar effect would be pcan by a Paces ai increasing
demand for manufactures ; or great improvements in ma-
chinery, accompanied by a sufficient vent for the produce . 170
When the stimulus to agriculture originates in a prosperous
state of commerce and manufactures, labour sometimes rises
first; but this is mot necessary. 5 . < «+ 2) Wee sie ae


SUMMARY.


545


° - PAG
When the price of corn rises, it is scarcely possible that. all


the materials of capital should rise at the same time, or even
finally in the same proportion . >. ge ae

A fall in the value of money can danced anently to
increase the power of raha poor lands , and of ne
rents .


It is not necessary that all the Sou causes which tend ia raise


renits, by diminishing the relative costs of production, should
operate at the same time, in order to produce a rise .

In this country cultivation has been extended and rents have
risen, although one of the instruments of production—capi-
tal, has been dearer, or profits have beenhigh . .

Improvements in agriculture might raise rents, notwithstand-
ing ariseofwages . . .

No fresh land can be taken into cultivadiod: till weit have
risen, or would allow of a rise, on what is a eul-


tivated: «.-.." +. <


No new capital can be ‘enplovea on ald lend, at an inferior
profit, without the same tendency to a rise of rents . .
The rise of rents will not be in proportion to the extension of
cultivation, or the increase of produce
Rents in this country bear a less proportion to the salale a
duce now than formerly, although they are both nominally
and really much increased . . . =e
A progressive rise of rents is nstiateiily eonasactid aah accu-
mulation of capital, increase of population, improvements
in agriculture, and the high price of raw produce . . .


Sect, IV.—Of the Causes which tend to lower Rents.
Rents are lowered by diminished capital, diminished popula-
tion, a bad system of cultivation, and the low price of raw
produce... . o Corte le sate! gasats
The three first are such ested causes of low rents, that the
fourth only need be considered . . ‘
The effect of the fourth cause may be illustrated by the a
thrown out of cultivation, and the fall of rents in this
country at the end of the war. . . me


bel


- 175


. 176


177


178


178


ib,


179


When the produce of a country is dilaton: iter eos are»


NN


i
»


546 SUMMARY.
PAGE

falling, it is not necessary that all the instruments of pro-
duction should be dearer. . 180


When land is thrown out of llivatdbe ‘the diminished
amount of rent will bear a nae Las to the rx
and produce. ae . 181
If, under the impression that cits is injanisias * diss consumer,
the price of corn were kept down so as to yield no rent, all


except the very best land would be thrown out of cultiya-
tion’ -;* -. 74 were


——-


Secr. V.—On the Dependance of the Actual Quantity of Produce —


obtained from the Land upon the existing Rents, and the existing
Prices.
The price of corn, in every progressive country, will be equal
to the cost of production on land of the poorest quality
actually in use, with the addition of the rent it would yield
in its natural state . . . . 183
Corn, therefore, in reference to the Wace thai slip is
sold at its natural and necessary price, as well as all other
unmonopolized commodities . . . vee sat
The soil-consists of a great number of cindlitert in erndidielas
of very different original qualities ease powers, ae all
susceptible of improvement . . *. ; . 184
In manufactures, as the most.improved haiti sl ti np
plied in the quantity wanted, the use of inferior ones is
superseded, and the price of the commodity falls to the
cost of production from the improved machinery.» . . . ib.
In agriculture, the rich lands are never sufficient to supply the
population ; and when poor lands are employed, the price
compared with the cost of production must be such as to
yield rents on all the richer lands, in proportion to their
goodness. : . . . 185
The illustration eh aba of a spunea af mechlitilas for
producing corn, shews at‘ence the necessity of the actual
price to the actual produce, in the existing state of most
countries; and the different effects which would attend a.*
reduction in the price of a manufacture, and a reduction in”
the price of corn . .


ib.


SUMMARY.


We must not infer, however, that this gradation of soils is
strictly necessary to the formation and rise of rent; all that
is required is, limited nara combined with fertility and


demand . , y a8 Oa

If all the lands ¥) a limited penrisiiry were Mey: rich, rents,
after a certain time, would be high in proportion to the fer-
tility of the soil 3

Nor would the effect be dierent if the quantity of capital laid
out upon the same land could not be increased; capitals
would increase in other employments, and profits fall .

In these cases, rent is obviously not regulated by the grada-
tions of the soil, or the different returns of the same amount
of capital employed on the same soil . ;

Another incorrect inference which has been draws freak this
theory of rent is, that when land is thrown out of cultiva-
tion, profits will be high in proportion to the pense of
the soil then employed . . . .

As in an improved country, piieilitinaedd land iat: arent in
proportion to its power of feeding cattle or growing wood,
the whole produce of the last land in cultivation, under
such circumstances, could not be divided between profits
and wages . .

The probable fall in the shit ytiea of corn, greases enaii'd in
the materials of the farmer's capital, will tend further to
diminish profits; and often more than counterbalance the
difference of natural fertility

The returns of the last capital eanhigel on nese same oii
without. paying a rent, must always follow and can never
lead or regulate profits . . «

When land is thrown out of eiabsbvatibne by the fnpioctatlon of
foreign corn, capital will probably be redundant; and, in
that case, whatever may be the state of the last land in
cultivation, profits must be low

The rents paid for land in its natural state wal tok ina
"the doctrine, that, in progressive countries, with gradations
of soil, corn is sold at its natural or necessary price :


NN 2


. 187


ib.


. 188


ib.


548 SUMMARY.


Srcr. VI.—Of the Connection between great comparative Wealth
and a high comparative Price of Raw Produce. PAGE
Adam Smith, in explaining the causes of the rise of many
sorts of raw products compared with corn, has omitted to
consider the causes of the differences in the value of corn
at different times, and in different countries . . . seh 92 -
The two main causes of these differences are, a difveniors in
the value of the precious metals, and a difference in the
cost of producing com . . ot saline oy A9S
To the first cause is to be attributed the main ditieeeed in
the prices of corn in different -countries, particularly in
those situated at a great distance from each other . . . ib.
If the value of money were the same in all countries, then
the differences of price would arise exclusively from the
different costs of production, under all the actual circum-
stances of each country. . . 194
Nations richer than others must, be sitpiled ibeichaaliidian,
either have their corn at a higher price, or be dependant
upon their neighbours for their support. . . . - 195
High price, or the importation of necessaries, are the sain
alternatives belonging to a great increase of wealth, though ’
liable to various modifications from circumstances . . . 196
Corn has a natural tendency to rise in the progress of society, :
from the increasing cost of production, and manufactures
have a constant tendency to fall from an opposite cause . 197
Whichever of the two causes of the high price of corn we
consider, this high price is generally connected with wealth,
contrary to the statement of Adam Smith . . . . . . ib.


Secr. VIL.—Of the Causes which may mislead the Landlord in lett-
ing his Lands, to the injury of both himself and the Country.
The landlord, under all the circumstances of his situation,
may naturally expect to raise his rents on the renewal of
leases, but in doing this he may fall into errors pean
to himself and the country. . . 199
By letting his lands to the best bidder, ee sn farther
attention ; or by mistaking a temporary for a permanent
rise of peice, he may prevent the improvement of his
Farms) ."% < soco tape ee - 200


SUMMARY. 549
PAGE
In the progress of prices, even when likely to be permanent,
rents ought always to be alittle behind . . . . . 201
If the landlords were to give the whole of their rents to their
tenants, there is no reason to think _ would be
more plentiful or cheaper . . ab.
But when a proper spirit of industry sel dhileetuciee —
among a tenantry, it is of importance that they should
have the means of accumulation and improvement . . 202
Irregularities in the currency are another source of error to
the landlord. When they continue long he must raise his
rents accordingly, and lower them again when the pir of
money is restored . . * 203
With these cautions, the landlord as fairly leci we @ per-
manent increase of rents, and if in a country, the cultiva-
tion of which is extending, they do not rise more than in
proportion to the of corn, it can only be owing to
taxation . ib.
Though it is not wots as stated: by the Hodisiodatin that all
taxes fall on the landlords ; yet it is true that they have
little power of relieving themselves . . . . . « + 204


Secr. VIII.—-On the strict and necessary Connection of the Interests
of the Landlord and of the State, in a Country which supports
ats own Population. :

The interests of the landlord are considered by Adam
Smith as closely connected with those of the state, and
this seems to be confirmed by the ns of rent, as laid
down in the present chapter . . . . 204

But Mr. Ricardo considers these interests as directly oped
to each other. To this opinion he has been led by the
peculiar and confined view which he has taken of rent as
arising preregy from ae ie and difficulty of pro-
duction . . . 7 205

If this view were Siarneti the pilin ‘bie tated Sight be
well-founded ; but if the landlord’s income is practically
found to depend chiefly upon facility of production, the
opinion cannot be maintained . . ib

It is allowed that if a most extraordinary de git il fertility

NN3


550 SUMMARY.
PAGE
were suddenly to take place in a comy, the rents of land
. would for a time be lowered . . ‘ solen telsion! aaa
But it is of no use to dwell upon extravagant suppositions ;
what we want to know is, whether, in the existing and
probable state of things, the interests of the landlord and
of society are at variance . . . + qqube BE
No improvements in agriculture which we as ever seen or
heard of equal in any degree the power of population to
increase up to the additional means of subsistence . . . ib.
Practically, improvements in agriculture, by cheapening the
instruments of production, instead of throwing land out of
cultivation generally cause more to be cultivated . . . 206
Improvements in agriculture have hitherto been, and may be
expected in future to be, the main source of the increase
OF PREIKB i) semairss see . 207
Although rents rise ale caiaisiont: is ‘pail eg othe
lands, the connection between rent and fertility is still
shewn by its being the rich lands which yield the rents,
not the poor ones . . ib.
The difficulty of piomaetibess on Ay iia te sia: ‘sad little
connection with rent, except as itisa consequence of an
increase of capital and population, and of a fall of profits
and wages... . 208
The increase of rent, wwii pee kes jee the inca
price, occasioned by difficulty of production, is much more
limited than has been supposed ; and very much inferior
to the increase from improvements in agriculture . . . ib.
This position may be illustrated by the state of England,
Scotland, Ireland, Poland, India, and South America . . ib.
In all these’ countries the future increase of rents will
depend mainly upon an improved system of agriculture . 209
The United States of America seem to be the only country
which would admit of any considerable rise of rents by a
mere transfer from profits and wages . . . ee} |)
In old states, an operose and ignorant system of culsceaniens
may keep the profits of stock and the wages of labour low
with much good land remaining uncultivated ; and this
seems to be a very frequent case. . . ib.
But if, independently of importation, Srey tinea ‘which


-
SUMMARY.


tends to enrich a country increases rents, and every thing
which tends to impoverish it, diminishes them; it must
be allowed that the interests of the landlord and of the
state are closely united . 2
Mr. Ricardo takes only one simple view p ee, iaeke em-
braces but a small part of the subject : .
The peculiar language of Mr. Ricardo separates te donee
sions still further from the truth, in iNew than in
reality '
He estimates rents, peas oad profita, ee the phe 2p
which they severally bear to the whole, and not by the ac-
tual quantity of produce which goes toeach . :
This mode of estimating rents and wages is quite mB
and would lead to perpetual confusion and error
Into this unusual language Mr. Ricardo has been betrayed
by confounding value and cost, and aaron corn in the
same light as manufactures
The exchangeable value of the corn which ‘falls to ithe oe of
the landlord will increase with its quantity ; and rents and
wages, must always be practically estimated by their real
value in exchange , :
In speaking of the interests of the landlord, iia real casted
of wealth, or the real value in exchange of his rents, is
always referredto in thiswork . . . . .. . 5 «


531
PAGE


metals


ib.


. 212


ib.


. 213


. 215


ib.


216


Secr. IX.—On the Connection of the Interests of the Landlord and


of the State, in Countries which import Corn.

The only doubt respecting the strictest union of interests be-
tween the landlord and the state relates to importation ;
and here his interests cannot be more opposed to those of
the state, than the interests of others under similar cir-
cumstances |

Adam Smith was of pada that the adlccies were not in-
jured by foreign competition, —_— he allowed that ma-
nufacturers were

The statement of Adam Smith 3 is too “aiid ; fe it is cer-
tainly true that the prodiicers of corn and cattle are less
injured by foreign competition than the producers of par-
ticular manufactures

nn4


. 217


ib.


. 218


the


552 SUMMARY.
PAGE
On the question of importation it is important to remark that,
in the way in which capital is practically employed upon
the land, the interests of the state and the cultivator are not ©
proportioned toeachother . . . . » 218
The cultivation of the country is chiefly. debited on wy te-
nants, and a large part of the permanent improvements in ©
agriculture, of late years, has been effected by the capitals
of the same class of people . . . . 219
If this be true, the advantage derived by the ite pat: the
employment of such capitals must have been much greater.
‘than the advantage derived by the individuals employing
them 288 Se, es
To put a tenant for a term of years on a footing with mer-
chants and manufacturers, he must make greater yearly
profits to compensate for that portion of his capital which -
he cannot withdraw at the end of his lease, and which is
left as a benefit to the state unshared by him. .-. . 220
The profits to the state of a capital employed in agriculture
might be 14 or 15 per cent., in commerce 12; while in
both cases the individuals received only 12, . . . . 221
The rent and profits together, derived from a capital em-
ployed on land, are the true measure of the wealth which
goes to the country, though the rent so created cannot
have operated as a’ motive to the tenant . . . 2 ib.
By the difficulties thrown in the way of importing eden
corn during the war, the capital of the country may have
been directed into a channel of higher national, though not
higher individual profits . . . . o hee, E2EE
This must always be the case, when the | te domestic
corn is such that the profits of cultivation, joined to the
rents created, exceed the profits of commerce and manufac-
tures’. 0"; : . » (223
The rapid increase en ttiilatton, as well ag , wealth, dati
the period of the difficulties of importation, seems to con-
firm the supposition that the great quantity of capital
which went to the land was productively employed . . ib.
The position here laid down is limited, and depends upon
permanent improvements being made by capitalists who
have only a temporary interest intheresults . . . ... 224


SUMMARY, > 553
PAGE
Under all the circumstances, it may be safely asserted that
’ the interest of no other class is so nearly connected with the
interests of the state as that of the landlord . . . . . 225


Secr. X.—General Remarks on the surplus Produce of the Land.
It is extraordinary that the very great benefit which society
derives from that surplus produce of the land which forms
rent, should not yet be fully understood and acknowledged 226
Tt has been called a bountiful gift of Providence; but Mr.
Ricardo considers it in a very different Pontes
quoted . . . ib.
In referring to the watts of any rery we » aia sitet ab itin
relation to the laws and constitution of our nature, and of
the world in which we live; and there could not be a more
disastrous present to man than an unlimited power of pro-
ducing food in a limited space . . . . 227
But if both land and food must in the sical “ idisiet be
limited, the value of the land which man receives must
depend upon the number it will support, compared with
the number required to work it, or, in other be a on the
surplus produce . . . . 228
If manufactures, by prapisioas in hi mibchhnes were to yi :
arent, man would, as-Mr. Ricardo says, labour more ;_ but
the surplus produce of the land, which is the foundation of
rent, is a measure of his relief from labour . . . . . 229-
Mr. Ricardo, who generally looks to permanent and final
results, has always pursued an opposite course in reference __
‘to the rents of land . . . . 230
It is only by looking to eeatapeieary vetialls, that he coaid
object to Adam Smith’s statement, that the cultivation of
rice, or of potatoes, would yield higher rents than corn. ib,
Practically, there is reason to believe that, as a change from
corn to rice must be gradual, not even a ware fall of
rent would take place . . . - 231
In Ireland the cultivation of the goles fund? esis ‘aie’ main
cause of the great increase of population and of rents
during the last century . . .. . . lo . 232 =
In comparing countries, under similar recageanee’, oa Te- .
"spect to extent and quantity of capital employed, rent will


554 SUMMARY.
‘ PAGE
in general be nearly in proportion to natural or acquired
fertility . « 232


If this island had wee doubly Senile it anil probally at
this time have been doubly rich and populous, and the rents —
more than double what they are at present, and the reverse
would have happened if it had been only half as fertile . 233
But though high rents and fertility generally go together,
they cannot bear a similar proportion to each other, in
countries so differently circumstanced as ee and
South America . . aid.
The fertility of the land, either sieteit or aenuinell is ‘the
only source of permanently high returns for capital ; be-
cause the high profits of commerce and manufactures must
necessarily be destroyed by competition . . . . 234
The taxable income derived from the capitals laid ee neta
land in this country was above three times as great as that
derived from commerce and manufactures . . .« ib.
The prosperity of a fertile territory does not, like that hs a
manufacturing state, depend upon low wages; and while
prudential habits among the poor, in a country mainly
depending on manufactures, might ruin it; they would, in
an agricultural state, be the greatest blessings . . - 235
It is not the least advantage of the surplus produce from the
land that, under a system of private property, it affords a
security against the whole of the otek being employed
in procuring necessaries . . 2 237
Profits and wages may so a as * afford aiiiptdadiesty
few means of enjoyment; but rents will always increase,
and furnish funds for arts, ere and leisure, so as to
leaven the whole mass . . « ib.
Rents are attached to the soil, not to satin ecovitting 5
they are the reward of present, as well as of past exertions,
and as they increase will be divided among yas num-
DETS grec ces . 238
The importance of the seis ee atic ceriaitadii in
rent, can only be underrated by those who labour under
some mistake as to its nature and its effects on society. . 239


SUMMARY. 555


CHAPTER IV.
OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR.


Scr. I1.—On the Dependance of the Wages of Labour upon Supply
and Demand, PAGE
The wages of labour are the remuneration to the labourer
for his personal services, and may be eee ae into
nominalandreal . . . . 240
Nominal wages are the money ona ne the Salas ‘Real
wages are the necessaries and conveniences which that
money will command . ib.
Wages are determined by the shenionand id supply és dhleesly
compared with the demand and supply of what is es for
labour. . ib.
The principle of deunetia a supgip deiesinini the adhe of
labour, not only temporarily but permanently . . . . 241
The prices of the necessaries of life only affect wages as they
affect the supply of RES by affecting the cost of pro-


ducing it . . i ae (oe
In all cases, where Re cost t of gredacina iad not affect the
supply of labour, wages are not affected . . . . Hib


Adam Smith's position, that the money price of labour is re-
gulated by the demand for labour, and the price of neces-
saries, is practically quite true ; but it is of importance to
keep constantly in view the mode in which the price of ne-
cessaries affects the price of labour . . . . 243

In all the cases of different prices of labour in different « em-
ployments, which Adam Smith has illustrated, the effect
obviously depends upon causes which affect the Pe of
labour . . . . ib.

Adam Smith has, in gues sheen to adhe pitiieigle of oop
ply and demand, in cases of this kind, but he has occasion-
ally forgot: itis Al 20 oltet Gnyequiames Yolo) egertied5


Scr. Il.—Of the Causes which principally affect the Habits of
the labouring Classes.
Mr. Ricardo’s definition of the natural price of labour implies
an unusual and unnatural state of things . . . 247
The natural or necessary price of labour is that bie wile)


od


.-


556 SUMMARY-
PAGE
in the actual circumstances of the eginn is apes for
the required supply . ... . . 247
The condition of the labouring dune? Aenends pede upon
the rate at which the resources of the country are increas-
ing, and partly upon the habits of the people. . .. . 248
Both these causes are ae is to cheney and often pel
together. . 2. tvedb.
Still, however, habits are different with the same increase of
resources ; and an inferior mode of peti: is a cause as well
as a consequence of poverty . . : . 249
It would be desirable, though difficult, to essai the wee
cipal causes of the different modes of subsistance which
prevail among the poor of different countries... . . . ib.
From high wages. two results. may arise—either a rapid in-
crease of population, or a decided rahe in the mode
of living. . . . 25e
Whatever tends to pt the chirioies of the vl tial
butes to the first of these results; whatever tends to elevate
them, tothesecond . . .. . . . ib.
The most efficient causes of liegtieellgyd ca are, -deepbdiat opgeea
sion and ignorance; the most efficient causes of elevation
are, civil and political liberty and education . . . 251
Of the causes which tend to generate prudential habits, the
most essential is civil liberty; and to the maintenance of


civil liberty, political liberty is generally necessary . . . ib.


Education may prevail under a despotism, and be deficient
under a free constitution ; but it can do little under a bad
government, though much under a goodone . . . . . ib.

Ireland is an instance where increasing produce has occa-
sioned a rapid increase of popes without improving
the condition of the people . . . 252

England, in the first half of the last pasate is an a: tnasolehiteh
high wages leading to an improved mode of a without
a rapid increase of population. . . . 253

The change from bread of an inferior wjudlity to "the best
wheaten bread was probably aided by a change in the rela-
tive values of wheat, oats and barley, occasioned ‘i adven-
titious circumstances. . » 254

When wheaten bread had bethiane cualinigtels in some o-ditisiets,


SUMMARY. 557


; PAGE
it would spread into others, even at the expense of comforts
of a different descrigtion. .-.° 4) 5 7) 3 le eaves te a 200


Secr. III.—Of the Causes which principally influence the Demand
- ~ for Labour, and the Increase of the Population.
A fall in the value of produce, compared with the price of ~
labour, will not always occasion a es increase
of population . . . . 257
This disagreement setae enniaien oie 08 tie eget
of population will be further aggravated in those countries
where poor laws prevail. . . . . . 258
The actual application of a greater quan of foal of some
kind or other, to the maintenance of labouring families, is
necessary to an increase of population ; and may generally
be:tpaced 5.4.5. heals . 259
The increase of pa: in ‘Saucon, toast ifaaad iid
Scotland, of late years, may be traced to this cause. . . 260
What is mainly necessary to a rapid increase of population is,
a great demand for labour, which demand is proportioned,
not to an increase of cae 8 alone, but of capital and reve-
nue together . . . 261
It has been thought that it is pit fg ae which
influences the demand for labour, not fixed; but this dis-
tinction, though just in individual Rasces, is not neces-
sary in reference to the value of the whole produce. . . ib,
In general, the use of fixed capital is extremely favourable to
the abundance of circulating capital. This is shewn in


almost all our manufactures . - 262.
On the use of fixed capital in erie aly pED.. the
cultivation of barren soils . . . . 263


When however fixed capital increases so Ey pace
with the demand for commodities, as to lower the value of
the whole produce, a want of employment, and temporary


distress will be felt among the labouring classes . . . . 264
The exchangeable value of the produce of a country SR at
partly upon price, and partly upon quantity . . . 265


It is from the union of the two, in the most favourable pro-
portions that, under the existing physical resources of a ©


558 SUMMARY.

; PAGE
‘country, the increase of wealth and the demand _ for labour
aré-amakinioni) |. 6.2 be


Secr. IV.—On the Effect of a Fall in the Value of Money upon
the Demand for Labour, and the Condition of the Labourer.
The unfavourable effects of a fall in the value of money on
the condition of the lsbourer, are not so certain as have
been supposed. . . . 267
The fall in the real wages bf boa hie the teil of the 15th
to the end of the 16th century, contemporary with the
fall in the value of money, is ge te from authentic docu-
MCN, ys aD,
But the question is, which wiged were the x nba extraordinary,
the high orthelow . . ' - 269
During the reign of Edward In, the real vie of ‘their
seem to have been as low as in the reign of Elizabeth . . 270 ~
In the intermediate period, they varied considerably with the
varying prices of corn and labour; but from 1444 they =
were uniformly very high to the end of the century . . . 272
The very slight rise in the nominal price of grain, from the
middle of the 14th to the end of the 15th century, in no
respect made up for the diminished quantity of silver in
the coin, so that the bullion price of corn fell considerably 274
But the bullion price of lab 2 considerably during the
time that the bullion price of corn fell; and if Adam Smith
had taken either labour or a mean between corn and labour
as his measure, instead of corn, his conclusions respecting
the value of silver would have been very different . . . ib.
But to shew that the wages of labour were peculiar during the
last sixty years of the 15th century, it is necessary further
to compare them with periods after the Tob att of
money had ceased . . . 275
The earnings of the ey Giulia i ‘last sixty ja of
the 17th century, after the depreciation of money had ceased,
were lower than in the reigns of Elizabeth and Edward III. 276
From 1720 to 1750 the price of corn fell and the wages of
labour rose, but still they could command but little more
than the half of what was earned in the 15th century . . 279


SUMMARY. 559
PAGE
From this period corn began to rise, and labour not to rise
quite in proportion ; but during the forty years from 1770
to 1810 and 11, the wages of labour in the command of
corn seem to have been nearly stationary . . . . . . 279


Secr. V.—On the Conclusions to be drawn from the preceding
Review of the Prices of Corn and Labour during the Five last
Centuries.

From this review it appears, that the great fall of labour in
the 16th century must have been occasioned more by the
unusual elevation it had before attained, than by the dis-
covery of the American mines; and that the high wages
of the 15th century could only have been occasioned by
some temporary causes, which increased the relative ia
of corn compared with labour. . . . 281

Such high wages, whatever might have ‘bias their causes,
must have fallen during the next century, if the American
mines had not been discovered . . . . ma. sabe

There is reason to think that a rise in the ora of corn,
occasioned merely by a fall in the value of money, would
not injure the labouring classes for more than a few years 283

Another inference which we may draw from this review is,
that, during the last 500° years, the corn wages of labour
in England have been more ently under than above
a peck of wheat. ; jj iter 9S 6D a, 284

A third inference is, that the seasons have a very great in-
fluence on the prices of corn, bo the real wages of labour,
not only for two or three years occasionally, but for fifteen
or twenty years together. . » 284

The periods of the lowest wages ate pen serehicits wee
a rise in the price of corn has taken place under circum-
stances not favourable to a rise in the price of labour;
it was the rapid increase of population during the reigns
of Henry VIII. and Elizabeth, which prevented wages
from rising with the price of corn. . 286

If the discovery of the American mines had found the Toile
earning less than a peck of wheat instead of half a bushel,
the increase of resources, during the 16th century, would


560 SUMMARY.
PAGE
have raised the corn price-of labour, poles the
increasing money price of corn. . . 287


If the price of labour from 1793 to 1814 had not ede “kept
down by artificial means, it would have risen quite in pro-
portion to the price of corn. . * ~ 1D.

In estimating corn wages it has not indies spaahis to make a
distinction between a fall of corn and a rise of labour, al-
though they have a different effect on the demand for
labour, and the increase of population . . . . 288

Wheat has been taken, as the usual grain pee in ais
country, but wherever or whenever that is not the case,
wheat wages are not the proper criterion of the encourage-
ment given to population . . + 290

The quantity of the customary food which a \eboucing Sanity
can actually earn throughout the year, is at once the mea-
sure of the encouragement to pars rane and of the condi-
tion of the labourer . . * ei

The prudential habits of the pan ‘can is eae "Go ‘the
command over a fair proportion of the necessaries and
conveniences of ne from the earliest stage of society to
the latest . . . 291

Mr. Ricardo’s measure of the is of shoe po Ae Bak to-
the rate of profits than the condition of the labourer, and
will be considered in the next chapter . . . . . . . ib.


—
CHAPTER V.
OF THE PROFITS OF CAPITAL.


Secr. 1.—Of Profits as affected by the increasing Difficulty of pro-
curing the Means of Subsistence.


Capital ought, properly speaking, to be distinguished from
stock. Definition of each. . - 293
Profits are the difference between the an of ‘the at
necessary to produce a commodity, and the value of the
commodity when produced . yd ° D>
The rate of profits is the proportion ‘which this diffetenge
bears to the value of the advances, and it varies with all the


|
4
:
A


vO ————


SUMMARY. 561


causes which alter the proportions between the values of the

advances and of the produce . . . . 294
The main advances necessary to valine sahigles fr sainees

and the two chief causes which influence the expense of

_ labour are the difficulty of procuring food, and the cant:


given to each labourer. . . » ib.
Each of these causes is alone suificient to occasion all ‘the
variations of which profits are susceptible . . . . . 295


If the first cause operated alone, and the wages of labour were
always the same, profits would ne fall as agit land
" was taken into cultivation . . eID.
In this case, profits would be penile in pnioietion: ‘is the
fertility of the last land taken into cultivation . . . 296
But uniform corn wages during the regular progress of culti,
vation and population involve a contradiction. . . . 297
We may suppose, however, an - uninterrupted sential of
capital and population; and then, as poorer land was culti-
vated, less and less must be divided between labour and
profits .. nig 1D.
If the ee could dicginish his shall ea in sa :
portion to the difficulty of production, the rate of profits
might remain the same; but as he cannot, labour will
absorb a larger proportion of the produce, and profits must
fall:snatr sns.e) Intech eR ithe d 0 Mbebashe- bleed 29S
Profits and r--l wages, would be highest at first, and would
gradually diminish together ‘they both came to a stand
at the same time . . 9. -— aoe eos . 299
Profits in ninteasaial and commerce cedili ie fall, rate
to the high value of corn and labour compared with other
commodities, and the consequent increased expense of pro-
ducing these commodities, nana with their value when
produced . . . 300
In this progress, the He Pe aoe is imited by. the | nomen of
the last land taken into cultivation ; but limitation is essen-
tially different from regulation . . . ... +. « . ib,
Secr. Il.—Of Profits as affected by the Proportion which Capital
bears to Labour.
The second main cause which, by increasing the amount of
oo


562 - SUMMARY
PAGE
the advances, influences profits in the arn which ©
capital bears to labour . . 239801


When capital is really abundant ioskipianl with: labour, pro-
fits must be low, and no facility of peionioaiee occasion
high profits, unless-capital is scarce. 2. 2. 1. AD,
If, while the capital of a country continued iebeteatieng ‘its”
population were checked by some miraculous influence,
every sort of gradation might take place in the rate of


profits, from this cause alone . . . - 302 -


Profits would be high at first, and would be ‘gradient dim
nished, as capital continued to increase faster than ~—


till the motive to accumulation ceased . . . ; ib. -


Profits, in the case supposed, would be‘affected in the same


way as at present, but rents and wages very differently. . 303.


Rents and profits would be low, because the supply both at
land and of capital would be abundant, and the wages of
labour would be high because labour would be scarce; and
thus the value of each would be determined by the we
ciple of supply and demand . . ib.

If the land of a country were énippouell to ‘be ‘all of the same
quality, and all fertile, ‘but limited in quantity, profits and
corn wages would finally be low, and rents very high . . 304

The effects which would result from these suppositions shew.
that the successive cultivation: of poorer land is not neces-

. sary either to low profits or high rent . . . . - . 805

“The effects of the former of suppositions on vilaaglin
shew the prodigious power which-the labouring classes pos-
sess, if they chuse to exercise it, of securing to themselves
a large share of what they produce . . . ib.

In the progress of wealth, capital and pmpdibtion: de sa nae
pace with each other, and their different rates of increase at
different times ‘occasion ve rem auth variations in the
rate of profits . . . oe B06

Though the government tthe annuities are rendiing constantly
toa diminution of value, yet, from an abundance of capital,
they may be higher instead of lower, after the “pe of above
twenty years .. - 307

Upon the same principles we chotla fall i into ae areca
errors, if we were to estimate the rate of profits with re-


ced.


SUMMARY. 563
PAGE

ference only to the tin of procuring the food of the
‘labourer... - 308

Yet it is on this cause aan that Mr. Ricardo dwells in i
Chapter on Profits . ib.

If the premises were such as Mr. ert eugene, bie con-
clusions would be just ; but as other powerful causes are in
operation besides those which he has thai his con-
clusions must contradict experience . , . 308

Profits do not depend, as stated by Mr. Ricasdo, on the Pome,
tity of labour ieee: to provide the necessaries of the
labourer... . . 809

If by the necessaries ae the lions: ba ahi what Mr. Ri-
cardo calls the natural wages of labour, the proposition is
untrue; because profits must obviously be affected by the
varying quantity as well as value of necessaries paid to the
labourer. . .

If by necessaries be ant the aes was of the labionnees
the proposition is essentially incomplete, as it quite omits
the causes of high or low corn wages . . 310

In determining the quantity of food, awarded ne the idiot,
the principle of demand and supply and competition
brought forward by Adam Smith, and rejected by Mr. Ri- -


ib.


cardo, must be referred to . . ib.
There is no other cause of ‘iia high wales ints a
deficiency in the supply of capital . . . 3ll


The differences in the rate of profits, ator ie the dif.
ferent proportions of capital to labour, in such countries as
Poland and America, hardly form any bat of Mr. Ricardo’s
theory of profits .

It is not meant to underrate the: inaportnep or ‘that cause wo
the fall of profits, which has been almost exclusively consi-
dered by Mr. Ricardo, It is of such a nature as tae to
overwhelm every other .. “ - 312

But though its final power be so eats its itiaii is at
slow, and other causes are producing effects which entirely
overcome it for a considerable length of time. . . . .. ib,


ib.


002


564 SUMMARY.


Secr. III. rag Profits as affected by the Causes practically in
operation. «© . - : - PAGE


In the ies state of things, the two causes alteaity noticed
will act in poe dinein's and. will be: “—. inten
by others

If, at the same time hint popres lanai is daociilitvely Giainngsby
agricultural improvements are taking place, the influence

- of the latter cause in raising profits may more than coun-


terbalance that of the former in lowering them . . 2. |


The same effect in checking the natural tendency to a fall of
profits will be produced by an increase of Gopi exertions
among the labouring classes. 4

The two circumstances just noticed sanas to ainiinli the ex-
pense of production; but profits vary also with prices, as
well as costs . . . 4

A considerable effect on wean therefor ‘iy ia occasioned
by a rise in the price of corn, without a Labs ater rise


in the costs of production . . . cies:


These . three circumstances have all a venidleney" to citi
the effects of cultivating poorer land ; and it is not easy to
say to what extent they may Dallaincdt or overcome them

The reason why agricultural profits are chiefly dwelt upon
is, that the whole stress of the Se aor py ain upon
them .

But fully allowing the final celia of that cause bf the ‘fall
of profits, which depends upon the state of the land, yet
from its slow progress, and the counteraction of other causes,
ample play is left for the principle of competition

This may be illustrated by facts which have occurred in our
own country ete : :

In the early part of the last beenaiey, the | icitereat of money,
and the profits of stock, were much lower than at the


aid! - )
vous |
;
q


3


beginning of the present, notwithstanding great quantities ~


of fresh land had been taken ihto cultivation in the in-
terval ,

The different rates of interest ind pies at thiede two jie
are diametrically opposed to the theory of profits founded
on the natural quality of the last land taken into culti-
vation oe Sen


. 318


320


SUMMARY, 565
PAGE
The circumstances under which these facts took: place.shew .
that they were connected with redundancy or deficiency of
capital ; and the question is, whether this principle could
operate so freely as to overcome the effect of taking poorer
land into cultivation . “sate . 320
In the first period, apparently a saad of ee eulilie corn:
fell, and wages rather rose, which would account at once
for low profits of stock . . . la . 821
In the second period, a period when aides was in sseelih oles
mand, all those causes seemed to be in operation which
tend to counteract the effects of taking poorer land: into
cultivation... . 322
The increased rate of ccatinlianah sails at 1793 : 1813
- arose more from the increased amount of agricultural pro- _
duce, obtained by the same number of families, than from
a diminution of corn wages. .°. , ore . 323
Though some of the causes noticed were in es sagkiesital yet
in contemplating a future period, we may lay our account
to their operation, in a considerable Pebitte when the occa-
sion calls forthem . .« . 324
The profits of stock will vodelie * higlies at the incekrdiins
of the 20th century than during the next twenty years, if
the more distant era should bea period of war with a great
demand for capital, and the nearer one a pene of sit
with a redundant capital . . . . 325
In dwelling exclusively upon the relative siiigl iii asia com- ~
petition of capital, as the cause of falling profits, Adam
Smith is practically nearer the truth, than those who dwell
almost exclusively on the quality of the last land taken into
cultivation: q borrecushusuiyniened 2 Ob Ghng S Ep ad'tb.


Secr. IV.—Remarks on Mr. Ricardo’s. Theory of Profits.
_Mr. Ricardo’s. Theory. of Profits. depends upon the position,
that wages and profits always form together the same value,
under any variations, of money wages ; but this’ position
being unfounded, the money wages of labour cannot regu-
late the rate of profits . ... . . 326
This conclusion: will appear still more siaikinkis ‘ania fi we
suppose the precious metals to be obtained by a uniform
003


566 SUMMARY.


PAGE
quantity of labour unassisted by capital, in which case


they would retain more rier thre same value than in


any other . . = BLT
On this supposition, all the same eet ‘on p which Mr. ©
Ricardo ascribes to the rise of money ould take
place from a fall in the money prices of commodities and a
small rise in the price of com. . 3! eee ePZ8


The principle of demand and supply “weit decent the
degree in which prices would fall; and these prices, com-
pared with the uniform price of ‘ubiotit; would ony the
rate of profits . . . . ; ae? tb.

Mr. Ricardo never ccibeigibisien shi ‘all Wf paioek as occasion-
ing the fall of profits, although in many cases it will be the
main cause of such fall, and will ree be occasioned by
competition . . . 828

Upon the principle of competition, chane is ‘amie 0 think that
the profits of stock in this country would not be higher
if the price of corn were greatly reduced by importation . 330

Permanent improvements in agriculture afford the largest arena
for the ee of capital without a diminution ‘of -
profits: 5° 7'". . 331

A very extensive deariaey with the ill wt a pee cpaality! yet
nearly all capable of cultivation, might, by continued im-
provements in agriculture, employ a vast mass of Ta
for hundreds of years with little fall of profits . . . - 332

A small fertile territory, though it should freely import corn,
might have its profits greatly reduced before it had em-
ployed one third of the rent which had been laid out in
the former case. . ib.

The fall of profits ina pti whic dnmpented a “conebihes
able part of its corn would probably be occasioned, not by
a rise in the bullion price of corn, but by a fall in the bul-
lion price of the goods with which it was purchased . . ib.

In the largest article of our exports—cottons, the fall in the
wages of labour, which ought to have’been accompanied
by high profits, according to this theory of profits, has, in
fact, been attended with falling profits . . . . . « «333

If it be said that the cotton trade is confessedly glutted, it
may be asked whether any considerable trade can be


——— OO


SUMMARY, . a = Oh
PAGE
pointed out where high anes call for additional ca-
pital 2, <4, xstme : 3. 83
It must be allowed > that, in lghiae re fy causes of the
fall. of profits, we take a view of but one half of the
question. if we consider only the rise of wages and not
the fall ‘of commodities . . . - 334
On every supposition, however, the sae ‘Toeiting enidaieion
which depends upon the increasing difficulty of procuring
subsistence, is always ready to act, and must finally lower
profits ; but even this principles acts according to the laws
of supply and demand . . ib.
The reason why profits must fall as 5 the land a more
exhausted is, that the effective demand for necessaries can-
not possibly increase in vical to the increased ex-
pense of producing them . . . - 335
Tihe ‘finther demand fog nok. anes, ceneh tiem the Inst land
taken into cultivation will but just replace the capital and
support the population engaged in cultivatingit . . . . ib.
But what would be the effect on profits of any particular
“amount of accumulation could not be predicted before-
hand, as it must always depend upon the principles of de-
mand and. supply... 6 +g. feiediece: 26 ce Venceles oh: os 50836


CHAPTER VI.
OF THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN WEALTH AND VALUE.


A country possessitig the greatest abundance of commodities
without labour might be rich without exchangeable value . 337
But in the real state in which man is placed on earth, wealth
and exchangeable value are more nearly connected than
they have sometimes been supposed to be -. , ‘ . ib.
When more commodities of the same quality are pret Lory by
improved machinery at the same cost, the distinction be-
tween wealth and value is obyious ; yet even here the pos-
sessor of the increased quantity is only richer with a view
to consumption, not to exchange . . . +. + + + + 338
In comparing objects of different kinds, there is no other way
of estimating the degree of wealth which they confer, than
004°


A 568 -_ SUMMARY.

. € | PAGE
i the relative estimation in’ which they are held evinced- |
by their relative exchangeable values . . . . . . . 338

Wealth, however, does not always increase in proportion to

increase of value; but neither does it increase in propor-

_ tion to the mere quantity of commodities, if me: are not —
suited to the wants of the society . . + 339

Wealth depends partly upon the quantity of tnnsibuioe) wn partly
upon such adaptation of it to the wants and powers of the
society as to give it the greatest value . . . 340

But where wealth and value are the most mesity cities
is, in the necessity “ the latter to the production of the
foriger=) Pe : - ib.

It is the value of etic or the dectifted which ‘people ;
are willing to make in order to obtain them, that, in the
actual state of things, may be said to be the sole cause of
the existence of wealth in any quantity . . . . . . 341

The market prices of commodities are the immediate causes —
of all the great movements of society in the production of
wealth, and these market prices aia their exchange-
able values... . 342

The term value, or ahi 1 in ec cieidigh, is valine eendeteededsi
here in the enlarged sense explained in Chap. II., and never
in the more confined sense used by Mr. Ricardo. . . . 343


et ee


CHAPTER VII.
ON THE IMMEDIATE CAUSES OF THE PROGRESS OF WEALTH.


Secr. I.—Statement of the particular Object of Inquiry. -
The particular object of inquiry is to trace the causes which
are most effective in calling forth the powers of paren
in different countries. . . 345
Moral and political causes are, in this Heaploct/ of primers im-
portance ; but it is intended chiefly to consider those which ~
are more directly within the province of political economy ib.
Many countries, with great powers of production, are poor, —
and many, with scanty powers of production, are compa- —
ratively rich, without any very essential difference in the
security of property... -. 346
If the actual wealth of a bantiry be not, ahers a certain ie.


SUMMARY. .* 569
Mace
riod, in some degree proportioned to its powers of
tion, there must have been a want of stimulus to producti y
and the practical question for consideration is, what is the
most —a and effective stimulus to the —— of
‘wealth: .. tbe. ‘ « 347


Secr. I1.—Of an Increase of Population considered as a Stimulus
to the continued Increase of Wealth.
If want alone, or the desire of the necessaries of life among the ~ _
labouring classes, were a sufficient stimulus to production,
the earth would have been ie aia full of inhabi- ©
tants... -. . 347
A man whose ce penne ol is’ “his ee can any; no ee
fectual demand for produce if his labour be not wanted . 348
To justify the employment of capital, there must be a demand
for the produce of it, beyond that which may be created by
the demand of the workmen employed . . . . 349
The effect of the increase of population to raise pints iy
' lowering wages must be very limited, and must soon be
checked by wantof demand . . . . a aD:
By a reference to experience, it will be found that 2 ee
often make the slowest progress in wealth where the sti-
mulus arising from population alone is the greatest . . . 350
The practical question is, whether the pressure of the popu-
lation hard against the limits of subsistence is an ade-
quate stimulus to the increase of wealth? And the state
of most countries of the world determines the question in
tHE ORRTING ie eee ee a eee eee ee


Secr. III.—Of Accumulation, or the Saving from Revenue to add
to Capital, considered as a Stimulus to the Increase of Wealth.
Those who reject meré population as an adequate stimulus to *
the increase of wealth make every thing depend upon ac-
cumulation.; and.there. is. certainly: no other mode of in-
creasing capital than the saving from revenue to add to it 351
But we have to inquire what it is that disposes nations to ac- -
cumulate, and renders accumulation effective to the con-
tinued increase of wealth . 6 0. 2 852


waa


570 _ SUMMARY.
. _ PAGE
The saving from revenue to add to capital may increase-pro- —
duce faster than the demand for it . . . . . «4 « 852
It-has been thought by some able writers that a glut of com-
modities cannot be general; but this doctrine seems tobe
unfounded. . 1. ee 7 eee OPT
As a matter of fact, it is not true that ‘coaanéoidities are al- 4
ways exchanged for commodities. The great mass of —
commodities is exchanged for labour, and baad in value ~
compared with such labour : . . ib.
A general fall in the value of Sitioornsiidibe Sosnaaatt with
Jabour, so as to lower. profits almost to nothing, is pre-
cisely what is meant by a general glut. . . . . 354
M. Say, Mr. Mill, and Mr. Ricardo appear to bine! fallen
into some fundamental errors in the view they have taken _
of this subject . . . ib.
Ist. They have considered dcimahedistea in alklion calle to
each other, and not in relation to the wants of the con-
sumers . ad . 355
If cominodilie were pes re be cocnpaiea ‘with eae
their doctrine would be true; but compared with the .
wants of the consumers, they may fall so as to check oor i
the power and will toaccumulate . . . ib.
Effectual demand is not merely the offering of one aah ;
for another: they may both command no more labour
than they have cost, in which case there would be no ef-
fectual demand for either of them . . ; - ib
A new commodity thrown into the roel AN which vyiella
high profits, is very different from a mere increase of quan- |
tity, and will certainly increase demand; because it implies _
a better adaptation of the produce to the wants of the so-~
ciety . 4 - 356
Mr. Ricardo aikciowleldges that ithete may be a tevriperacy
glut of commodities when capital increases faster than la-
‘ bour; but this is eee that capital may be often. re-
dundantt . . . vetotus os Kobe Soyedpla DG
Another error on this wulijent 4 is, the not cianaicoeies the in-
fluence of so important a principle in human nature as
indolence, or the love of ease. . «oe B58
It has been supposed that if a body of rene sind a body of


SUMMARY. ; 571
: PAGE
manufacturers produced each luxuries as well as necessaries,
there never could be any difficulty as to a market for them 358
But this is taking for granted that luxuries are preferred to
indolence, and that the profits of each party are consumed
as revenue—the very points in dispute . . . ai, s0t 3D.°
A preference of indolence to luxuries, in either of the atilon,
would immediately occasion a want of demand; and his-
tory informs us, that such a taste for luxuries as will pro-
perly stimulate industry is a plant of slow growth . . . 359
The third, and most important error, consists in supposing


that accumulation ensures effectual demand . . aabs -


Mr. Ricardo considers 10,0002. spent or saved, as omni de-~
mand, though for different objects . . % . «+ + + ib.
On this principle it is thought that a general saving in con-
veniences and luxuries would only lead to the production
of a greater quantity of necessaries; but: this could not
happen iniaseein a total nom in the motives to accumula-
tion . . - 360
The detmmotion fe fertile land is iden which will ain a
much greater number of persons than are necessary to cul-
tivate it; and if the landlord were to save this surplus,
that is, employ it in setting more labourers to work on the
land, he would impoverish instead of enrichhimself . . 361
When the cultivators found that they could not realize their
surplus, they would cease to employ the same quantity of
labour on the land; and such parsimonious habits, by
destroying the motive to cultivate well, would render
a country, which had been rich and populous, compara-
tively poor and unpeopled . . . ib.
In the case of the body of farmers nai sommatnekstrees ‘before
supposed, all would go on well while they mutually con-
sumed each other's products and luxuries; but if they
began to save for the future, a want af demand would be
immediately felt . . . . 363
If the cultivator were a tenant, the padisionsl. care oid labour
bestowed upon the land would be entirely thrown away ;
- if he were @ landlord, he could not cultivate his land to
the greatest advantage with regard to the future, without
altering his habits or throwing away the surplus. . . . 364


672. : _ SUMMARY.


TAs PAGE
The body of manufacturers would be still less able to°im-
prove their condition by saving ; and it appears quite cer-—

tain that a passion for accumulation must lead to a aeppey

of commodities beyond the demand for them . . . . 365
It is a most important error therefore to couple the passion

for expenditure and the passion for accumulation together, —

as if they were equally calculated to ensuredemand . . ib.
In the division of the produce, labour might absorb the value

of a large proportion of manufactured commodities, owing

to their cheapness, although it reg be ill paid in neces-

saries ... . 366
In agriculture, all the parte of ‘the same prods night notibe

of the same value.. The wages of the labourer cannot

sink below a certain point, but a part of the sappy re corn

might lose the character of wealth . 2. . 2 367
If the cultivator could only employ a diminished epi on

his land at a tolerable rate of profits, and could find no use ~

for the remainder, it would be the same to him as if profits

were generally lowered . . . 368
If all that was lost by the eeiplealing were w(guitied by the la-

bourer, the evil would be temporary, as stated by Mr. Ri- |

cardo; but saving, pushed beyond a certain point, will

destroy profits, and throw labourers out of employment at

the same time. . . . 369
Parsimony and even a ceniapiognry diminatich of -conaflnpliga

are often useful and necessary; but no nation can possibly —

grow rich by an accumulation ‘of capital arising from a

permanent diminution of consumption. . . . ib.
The limits.to such an accumulation of capital as shall m8 be

attended with a rapid diminution of the motive to accumu-

late may very easily be passed .. . 370
The laws which regulate the rate of profits acl the proj ¥

of capital bear a striking resemblance to the laws, which —

regulate the wages of labour and the progress of population ib.
Mr. Ricardo has not been satisfied with shewing that the dif-

ficulty of procuring the food of the labourer is the only

absolutely necessary cause of the fall of profits ; but he has’

gone on to say that there is no other cause that has any

degree of permanence , . . s,s 40. 4 laps e871


,


SUMMARY. 573


PAGE,
Population may be redundant compared with the demand for


it and the actual means of supporting it, although it may

be greatly deficient compared with the extent and ee

ties of .the territory . . . . : . 371
In the same manner, capital may be giistelsy deficient com-

pared with the territory and population, though redundant

compared with the effectual demand for commodities and

the capital that is to produce them... 4. 2. 1 2). 4 872
The first thing wanted in both these cases is a demand for

commodities by those who are able and willing to ee an

adequate price for them... ib.
The recovery of capital lg a war is ts:lopd; foie the same

reason that the recovery of usnee: is op _ it has


been. suddenly diminished .. .. .. 2 ai) B93
In neither case would the same rate of increase hie taken
place without the previous diminution . . . * . 374


It is equally vain, with a view.to a permanent increase of wealshi
to push saving to excess, as to push population to excess. . 375


Secr. IV.—Of the Fertility of the Soil considered as a Stimulus to

the continued Increase of Wealth.

A fertile soil gives at once the greatest natural capability of
wealth that a country can possess ; and in speaking of the
deficient wealth of a fertile country, it is meant to speak
comparatively rather than positively . 60. 21. - 375

The settlers upon avery rich soil, with a vicious division of
property at first, and unfavourably situated with regard to
markets, might increase very slowly in wealth and popula-
tion, and would be very likely to acquire indolent habits . 376

It is found by experience that those who have the command
of labour do not always employ it so as adequately to ad-
minister to their-wants-and wishes. The establishment of
the finer manufactures has always been found to be a work
of time and difficulty. . 2. . 377

An individual workman has the power of devoda gti more ime!
to luxuries, the less time he is obliged to employ in pro-
curing food ; a whole nation neg a similar € trai but :
it is practically very seldom exerted . Ak . 378

The conveniences and luxuries of life _ be deat if the


‘574 SUMMARY.

PAGE
actual producers of them had no other motives than the -
desire of enjoying them: it is the want of necessaries
which mainly stimulates the labouring clases to produce
luxuries . - . 379

At an early period of Galtinatic whet only the richieal =“
are worked, it is generally found that the greatest propor-
tion of the people is employed upon the land, which is just
contrary to what would happen if it were true that, the
more easily food is procured, the more time will be spent in
the production of luxuries . . ib.

In England, which has pushed its ‘culGuaiins farther pen .
most countries, a smaller proportion of the people is em-
ployed on the land than in any large nation of ern or
of the world . . . 380

If facility of production siteenne the growl wr iesadansl in-
dustry, the most fertile land — igs avi set
ductive. 9. . - 381

In the same manner, " the facility of pete food singin
habits of indolence in the individual, he may prefer the
luxury of working little to the _— of ee conye-
niences and comforts. ib.

The state of the Spanish Jecbulege’ in vdipelon: as esrb -
Humboldt, strongly illustrates these positions... « 382

The produce of the banana, compared’ with the ahi ¢ em-
ployed upon it, is so prodigious, that the inhabitants of the
districts where it prevails will never, it is said, be roused
from their excessive indolence till the cultivation of it has
been prohibited . . . . 383

Though the labouring classes ave sip pm site to meee for
conveniences and comforts, they are almost destitute of
them ; and from improvident habits, suffer at times even for
want of ROD ult) this sere Fs . 384

This poverty is not confined to ie! ae ‘adteia a ewe Seaite
In ascending the Cordilleras to the finest climates in the
world, the state of things is not very different . . . 385

Maize, which is the chief food of the people on the Cordil-
leras, very greatly exceeds in productiveness the grains of
Europe. . . of baer.

Even in Mexico wali Sin rn Diadael ‘ one or two


SUMMARY. : 575
PAGE
days’ labour in the week, yet the people are wretehedly -
poaristihas. : : - + « 386
The same poverty remit in nite in didteioths 5 in famines,
from the failure of the crops of maize, combined -with the
indolence and improvidence of the people, are frequent,
and are mentioned by Humboldt as the most destructive
check to populatio . . . . . «+ 387
Such habits of indolence and oot Moe: necessarily act as
formidable obstacles in the way of a rapid increase of
wealth and population . . . . . - 388
The indolence of the natives is pn a ‘m their political
‘situation ; but still it yields to excitement and demand, as
is proved by the rapid cultivation which takes ane in the
neighbourhood of new mines . . . ib.
Except in the neighbourhood of the mines, aaa near erent
towns, the effective demand for produce is not such as to
induce the great proprietors to bring their immense tracts
of land under cultivation , . . . 889
An Indian tenant, cultivating grain, alt widows ~* ab to
pay a rent equal to what the land would yield in pasture . -ib,
Though the landlords have ample power to support a large
population on their estates, they have not the will, and
under a deficiency of commerce and manufactures, Spanish
America might remain for ages poor and ii lias
compared with her natural resources. . 390
The actual poyerty of New Spain, compared with its Soman
is justly attributed by Humboldt to a want of RABE, :
that is, a want of effective demand . . .. . . 392
That it is the want of demand rather than the want of anal
which retards the progress of wealth in New Spain, may
be inferred from the abundance of capital noticed by Hum-
- bolder x ib.
Altogether, the state of New Spaia strongly iMtastrates the
“position, that fertility of soil alone is not an es) sti-
mulus to the increase of wealth . . . 393
A similar conclusion-nay be drawn from the its of Gea,
where the introduction’ of the potatoe as the general food
of the working classes renders the labour necessary to
maintain a family unusually small . . . . . . . . ib.


— *. ar ae *
» al > * .
—_ - — “" - .
.* -
° € P -
576 SUMMARY.


. PAGE

Treland maintains a larger population than is rr f

the-quantity of work to be done, which naturally produces _

habits of indolence ; and practically, those who have the

command of necessaries and labour donot obtain what they

want in return. . 21 IG rrp:
The time which the Irish laboider el to pane des not, as

appears from: experience, put him in possession of an ps

quantity of conveniences and luxuries... : $082
The Irish peasant has not been exposed’ to the sina sielithoe

ments which create industry, owing to the abundance of ;

people compared with the work to be done’ . . . . . 396°
If the labour of the Trish peasant, whether in the house or in

the field, were ee in demand, his habits might soon

change : : ; Waly
Capital alone would not sicbatiptith the objees fojuired; as in

the actual’ state of the foreign and domestic markets, or

in their probable state after the employment of such

capital, there would not be an adequate demand for its

products . . . . 398
In general, the cltlids whidh with masini and pro-.

ductions have received, have been more owing to want

of demand than want of capital. Demand has generally

produced capital, though capital has sometimes failed to

produce demand . . . 2iny saben
Ireland might be anch richer tlds England if aby redundant |

population were employed in commerce and manufactures ;

but to accomplish this object, a change of habits would

be more effectual than a premature supply of capital . iY - 400
The state of Ireland leads to nearly the same conclusions re-

specting the causes which mainly influence the —_ of

wealth as the state sh New i a Dra as hie 401


.


Secr.-V.—Of Inventions to abridge Labour, considered as a Stimulus
to the.continued Increase of Wealth.
Inventions to save manual labour are generally called forth
by the wants of mankind in the progress of improvement; —
and therefore seldom much exceed those wants... . 401
But the same laws apply to machinery as to fertile land: a


SUMMARY. » 577
PAGE

full use cannot be made of either without an adequate
market... - 402


The natural cision, of sands is, care Aichining ie
commodity produced, so to extend the market for it, as to
increase its whole value. This has been strikingly the case
in the cotton trade; and when machinery has this effect,
its enriching power is prodigious . . quads

When capital and labour are thrown out of sierticidiania em-
ployments by machinery, the advantage derived from it
may still be great, but it depends upon a contingency . . 403

If, to try the principle, we push it to a great extent, and sup-
pose that, without any extension of the foreign market, we
could obtain all the commodities at present in use with
one third of the labour now applied, there is every reason
to think that the exertions of industry would slacken .. . 404

When the incomes of a country greatly depend upon indus-
try and exertion, there must be something desirable in the
object to be attained, or the as and exertion will not
be called forth . . . . «;j fepheontienars S405

If, under a loss of foreign commerce, the site to aaielyis
tastes already formed could be supposed to maintain the
wealth actually acquired, there is little chance of its in- .
creasing ; and it certainly would not have reached thesame
amount, without the market of foreign commerce . . . 406

Of this we shall be convinced, if we look at the quantity of
our exports occasioned by machinery, and the returns we
receive for them. We could not have found effective sub-
stitutes for such returns at home. . . . 407

If, from the time of Edward I. we had hess no eilgooe com-
merce, our revenue from the land alone would not have
approached to what it is at present, and still less our re-
venue from trade and manufactures. . . . - 408

Most of the states of Europe, with their actual divisions of
landed property, would have been comparatively unpeopled,
without the excitements arising from manufactures and
extended markets. . . . ialanib,

The effects of our penicuniitiens during the late war, la
have been greatly diminished if we could-not have ep wie
their products... . wes - . 409


PP


578 SUMMARY.

PAGE
By the application of machinery to the mines of America, the —
King of Spain might obtain great wealth; but the ad-

vantage would be comparatively nothing, if the pede

could not be exported fora market... , 410
If, in this country, the products of our. wiiladnsden’ ocala prs

be exported, there are no plausible grounds for saying, that.

the capitals thrown out of Pa would as bie

increase the national revenue . . end?
A country. has unquestionably the alte a denier all it

produces, and it has also the power of applying much more

labour than it actually applies to. production; but it does not

follow that these powers will be put into. activity without

the usual excitements . . . 411
The presumption always is, that facility or peediclanis will

open adequate markets ; but it must be allowed that, if

it does not, its advantages are ina great degree lost . . 412
Accumulation of capital, fertility of soil, and inventions to

save labour, are the three causes most directly favourable

to production ; but as they all act in the same direction,

and without reference to demand, they cannot afford an

adequate stimulus to the continued increase of wealth . . 413


Secr. VI.—Of the Necessity of a Union of the Powers of Produc-
tion with the Means of Distribution, in order to ensure a con-
tinued Increase of Wealth.

To give effect tothe powers of production, it is necessary that
there should be such a distribution of the produce, and
such an adaptation of it to the wants of those who are
to consume it, as constantly to increase its exchangeable
value’sl Sy. Litas ods Laval debt rach Gonna er

The stimulus to the increase of particular commodities is an
increase in their market prices; and in the same way, the
greatest stimulus to the increase of the whole produce of _
a country, is an increase of its value, from a better dis-
tribution of it; before more labour. and capital have been .
employed. .. > « » aoaages (pole

If the produce of a comitagin were so miditeibuell as not to: be
suited to the wants and tastes of the consumers, it would
greatly fall in value;.and if it were distributed so as to


SUMMARY. 579

PAGE
be better suited to their wants —_ tastes, it would rise in

vali 2s se - 414
Upon the imprewpinalens of the tobinanantedticat with then me-
tropolis in this country, by turnpike roads and- canals, the
whole value of the produce rose considerably, and encou-
ragement was given to the employment of a greater


capital .. ib.
The saidaigeible: vals ik ‘the visit prothudi es a ooeniny
may be measured for short periods by bullion. . . - 415


For longer periods it may be measured by the labour, do
mestic and foreign, which the bullion price of the produce
will command. . . 416
General wealth, like puichandal poreteds “of it, will abivag fol-
low effective demand. When the whole produce will com-
mand more labour, wealth will increase; when it will
command less, the progress of wealth will be checked . . 417
Mr. Ricardo states that a given quantity of necessaries will
set in motion the same labour, whether they have been pro-
duced by the exertions of a hundred or two hundred men; |
but this cannot be true, unless we suppose that the real
wages of labour are every where, and at all times, alike . ib.
In the case of a diminished demand for produce, the capitalist
would soon lose both the will and the power to employ the
same quantity of labour as before . . . 418
An increase in the value of the produce eit in pan
seems to be absolutely necessary to an unchecked increase
of wealth ; and to support this value, it is necessary that
there should be such a distribution of the produce as to
effect a proper rae lee between store and consump-
tinh: SNES . 419
If this value cannot be ‘diddidtadijet i a rapid & conversion
of revenue into capital, how is that saving, which is ac-
knowledged to be necessary, to take place without pro-
ducing the diminution of value apprehended? . . . . ib.
it may take place, and generally does take place, in conse- ~
quence of a previous increase of revenue. It is this previous
increase which gives the great stimulus to accumulation and
makes it effective in the continued production of wealth . ib.
M. Sismondi limits the value of the produce of any year to ”
pPP2


580 >) SUMMARY.
; PAGE


the value of the revenue’ of. the preceding year; but this —
would preclude increase of value. A great increase of ex-_
changeable value and demand may take place in any one
year by a better distribution of produce, and a better mii?
tation of it to the wants of the society . . . 420
The fortune of a country, like that of most <a giabiamiade
made by savings from increased ee not from a di-
minished expenditure . . . 421
To estimate the increasing needa ba a esate re pe in-
creasing value of its gross produce, is not to exalt the gross
produce at the expense of the neat ; because improvements
which increase the neat produce, generally increase at the
same time the gross produce . . ». 422
No definition of wealth can be just that seat se pilin
the gross produce. Those who live on wages are the most
numerous and important part of the society . . . 423
The interests of individual capitalists prompt them on save
labour ; and both theory and experience tend to show that
these efforts tend on the whole greatly to increase the ex-
changeable value of the whole produce. . . 425
Production and distribution are the two great clenbanta of
wealth, which, combined in due aBicartensryon are able to
carry it to its utmost possible limits . . . ov Shee


Secr. VII.—Of the Distribution occasioned by the Division of
Landed Property considered as the means of increasing the Ex-
changeable Value of the whole Produce.


The three causes most favourable to distribution are, the di-
vision of landed property ; internal and external com-
merce ; and the maintenance of unproductive consumers. 427

In the first settlement. of new colonies, an easy subdivision of
the land is necessary to give effect to the principle of popu-
lation, <4). - ib.

The rapid increase Pe the PN A noe, in ‘North ‘Auice
depended greatly upon the facility of settling new families
on the land as they branched off from their parent stocks . 428

The vicious distribution of landed property almost all over
Europe, derived from the feudal times, was the main cause


SUMMARY. 581_
PAGE
which impeded the ee etal and wealth in
the middle ages... . 429
The difficulty was not so ois to Anahi the iy with oir
of finery as to divide their immense properties and create a
greater number of demanders, which could se be effected
very gradually. . See eD-
It is physically possible fer a oul earn of ety ee wig 5
prietors and capitalists to create a very large demand; but
practically, it has always been found that the excessive
wealth of the few is never equivalent, in effective demand,
to the more moderate wealth of the many . . - 430
But though it be true that the division of landed eng to
a certain extent is favourable to the increase of wealth,
is equally true that beyond a certain extent it is unfa-
vourable .. . 431
It will be found that all the nine reels in wer atarn eco-
nomy respecting wealth, depend upon proportions; and this
important truth is particularly obvious in te division of
landed property . . - 432
On the effects of a great sailiviaion of swopierty)*e an experi
ment is now making in France. The law of succession
divides property equally among all the children, and allows
but a small portion of it to be disposed of by will . . . 433
Such a law would be of use in most countries of Europe for
atime ; but if it continue to be the law of France, it will
lead to great poverty as well as equality . . ib.
Such a state of property would neither be Sanggtebti to the
maintenance of the present mixed government, nor to the
continuance of a well constituted republic . . . « . 434
But it would be.a favourable soil for a military despotism.
The army might easily be made the richest class in the
country, and it would then possess an influence which, in
such a state of things, nothing could resist . . . ib.
In the British empire, the immense landed possessions which
formerly prevailed have been divided by the rik of
commerce and manufactures . . + 435
A large body of middle classes has heat pare onte com-
merce, manufactures, professions, &c. who are likely
be more effective demanders than small proprietors of land 436
PP3


582 SUMMARY.


P,

Under these circumstances, it ‘might be rash to conclude that

the abolition of the right of primogeniture would increase’

the wealth of the country; but if we could come to this

conclusion, it would not determine the policy of a change 437
There is reason to think that the British constitution could —

not be maintained without an aristocracy ; and an effective

aristocracy could not be maintained without the right of

primogeniture . . ib.
It is hot easy to say to tint extent the abolition of the lewiet

primogeniture would divide the landed property of the

country ; but. the division would probably be unfavourable

to good government .° . Hyg) 488
Although therefore a more equal ‘diveribvatdoas of landed pro-

perty might be better than that which actually prevails, it

might not be wise to abolish the law of primogeniture . 439
But whatever laws may prevail, the principle will remain true,

that the division of landed property is one of the great

means of distribution which tends to keep up and increase

the exchangeable value of the whole produce . . . . ib.


Secr. VIII.—Of the Distribution occasioned by Commerce, internal
and external, considered as the Means of increasing the pur
able Value of Produce.

Every exchange which takes place in a country effects ‘a dis-
tribution of its commodities better adapted to the wants of
the society, and calculated to site: a a market value to
the whole produce... . 440

The Economists insisted that commerce ‘enily ‘cognates
prices which were in some places too high, and in some too
low; but the effect of an advantageous exchange is to in-
crease the amount of the value of both products . . . 441

If internal commerce did not tend to increase the value of the
national produce, it would not be carried on ; as it is out of
this increase that the merchants concerned are paid. . . ib.

If it be allowed that the industry of a country is determined by
the extent of its capital, still the value of the revenue so
derived must itt? upon the way in which this capital is
employed . . . - 442

The whole produce of a nation may be ‘eda to nave a alaves


‘


_ SUMMARY. 583
PAGE
price in money and labour. When this price rises, produce
increases; when it falls, the increase of produce is checked 443
It is only by referring commodities to a circulating medium
that we can ascertain whether they are so distributed as to
command a greater quantity of domestic and foreign la-
beak eis} aelthumues. seed bie agdoncliguinhagdesh ofttt
From the harvest of. 1815 to the harvest of 1816, the funds
for the maintenance of labour were more plentiful than
_usual, yet, from defective distribution, they would not com-
mand so.much labour as before . . ib.
We have no right to assume that a great Mites will aaa
be effectively distributed and consumed. _ If the whole pro-
duce falls in money value, the distribution must be such as
to lower profits and to discourage production . - 446
Referring to labour as the final measure of the value of the
whole produce, its bullion value should be previously re-
ferred to, in order to ascertain whether its distribution be
such as.to enable it to command labour in some proportion
toitsquantity . 2. « 447
The distribution of emuteliilaid ea by ineenial roi
is the first step towards any considerable increase of wealth
and capital . . ; - 448
The motives which lead to Shahaa commerce are these same as
those which lead to an extension of the home trade—
namely, an increase of profits, or the prevention of that fall
which would otherwise have taken place... sriat eb.
Mr. Ricardo says, that no extension of hntidoue commerce
can immediately increase the amount of value in a country ;
but this is quite contrary to facts, according to the common
meaning of the termused . . 1... + 449
A present. from a foreign. country, or the conten sales of a
prosperous adventure, may enrich some merchants, without
proportionately impovetishing others, and therefore may
increase the value of the whole . . . . « 450
The increased value so obtained will either ick ee more
labour, or pay the former quantity of labour better... . 451
Though the quantity of money be not immediately increased,
yet the whole produce will be estimated at a higher value . 452
ped


584 SUMMARY.


PAGE
In general, however, a very favourable foreign trade leads to —
an importation of bullion from some quarter or other. . 453
If the demand for foreign commodities increases, it does not
follow that the demand for home commodities must othe
portionately diminish . . « ib.
The demand for foreign and ‘itn: contain ferras to--
gether, may be limited by the national revenue; but the
national revenue is at once increased by the increased pro-—
fits of the foreign merchant, without a ee dimi-
nution of revenue in any other quarter. . . 454
When the increase of commodities derived rare inion
commerce is not accompanied by an increase of value, a
stagnation in the demand for labour is immediately per-
ceptible, and the progress of wealth is checked . . . «° ib.
It isnot the same to the labourer whether wages rise, or pro-
visions fall. In the first place he is sure of full employ-
ment; in the other case, he may probably be thrown out
of wotk . . . titel 455
A great fall in the bale co ipustiosilan commodities’ is perfectly
compatible with a continued and great increase in the
whole value, both of the commodities themselves and of
the general produce . . . - 456
Even in the cases where the wade vile of the panicled
article diminishes, it does not follow that the value of the
general produce will be diminished; but if it be, either
temporary or permanent distress will be felt . . . . . 457
The specific and immediate cause of a general briskness of
- demand is such a distribution of the produce, and such an
adaptation of it to the tastes and wants of the society, as
will give its. money price an increased command of do-
mestic and foreign labour . . . . 458
The progress of the United States of Anions! aiid a els
country from 1793 to 1814, and all the striking instances
of a rapid increase of demand and wealth, will answer to
this test 2... sili.
But no instance can hel devdticed of a pointy nmelil ina f
successful foreign commerce, and exhibiting an increasing
plenty of commodities, where the value of the whole pro-


SUMMARY. 585
PAGE
duce estimated in domestic and hee labour has been
retrograde or stationary . . . 459
The natural tendency of foreign mig as of all wand of ex-
changes, by which a distribution is effected, better suited to
the wants of society, is immediately to increase the value of
that part of the national revenue which consists of profits 460 _
Mr. Ricardo considers foreign trade chiefly as the means of
obtaining cheaper commodities ; but this is only looking to
one half of its advantages, and probably not the a
half ee Lagwi; - 461
We must excision the wiventagen of the greuuens ple of our
foreign commerce upon a different principle, namely, that
of exchanging. what is wanted less, for what is wanted
more bess wiord. eee aa DANO soa esy TyemGhag?
Foreign commerce therefore, and all extension of markets,
must be considered as pre-eminently favourable to that in-
crease of value which arises from distribution . . . . . ib.


Sect. IX.—Of the Distribution occasioned by unproductive Con-
sumers, considered as the Means of increasing the exchangeable
Value of the whole Produce.

If, under a rapid conversion of unproductive into productive
labour, the demand, compared with the supply of material
products, would prematurely fail, it follows that a country
with great powers of Laas send must possess a body of
unproductive consumers. - 463

In the fertility of the soil, the powers és iaetatiedy} ain ‘the
motives to exertion, under a system of private property, na-
ture has made a provision for leisure ; and if it be not ac-
cepted, the progress of wealth will be impeded rather than
accelerated... ib.

The most edvemagentsr propentiant of the tinprodiaettve! to ‘the
productive classes cannot be determined. It will vary with
the fertility of the soil and the ingenuity of the people . 464

It will .vary also with. the different degrees of consumption
which may prevail among the producers themselves. .~ ib.

Capitalists, though they have the power of consuming all
their. profits, have seldom the will, as it is cui son the
great object of their lives to save a fortune . 2... 465


586 SUMMARY.
; PAGE
It is not true that the desire of consumption is commensurate
with the power. Merchants and manufacturers, as a body,
have such a tendency to save, that they could not, among
themselves, find an adequate market for what they produce 465
Without a sufficient number of other consumers to enable
the merchant to realize his profits, he must either consume:
more himself, or produce less; and if he adopt the latter
course, the wealth of the country must necessarily suffer . 466
Mr. Ricardo seems to consider saving as an end; but, inre-
ference to national wealth, it can only be considered as a
means; and a saving owing to cheap commodities has a
totally different effect from a sai in consequence of _
profits . . ib.
National saving, aiiedd as ssieall means she iaenaned aunt
duction, must be limited by the amount which can be ad-
vantageously employed in ouppiving the actual demand for +
produces}! “debt is + 467
The tendency to consume is is piveanialle conmbetaletal ne the
love of indolence, and the desire to save in order to better
our condition. Both capital and population may be redun-
dant compared with the effective demand for produce .. . 468
It is true that wealth produces wants; but it is a still more
important truth that wants produce wealth. The greatest
difficulty in civilizing and enriching countries is, to inspire
them with wants . . 3 . 469
The desire to realize a fttins i in onda to outta ri a fainily,
is a powerful motive to exertion; but the motive would not
operate to the same extent, if, from the want of other con-
sumers, the producers were obliged to consume o_o all
that they produced themselves... . - 471
If the master producers have not the will satiny to increase
their consumption, the labouring producers have not the
power; and further, no consumption, on the part of work-
men alone, can give ee to the — of
capital . .. 4. ib.
If each workman were ie consume double all peat land
would be thrown out of cultivation, and the power and will —
to accumulate would soon cometo astop . . . . 472
There is little danger, howeyer, of the labouring cline con-


SUMMARY. 587
PAGE:
suming too much. Owing to the principle of yee
the tendencies are all the other way... - 473
It might be desirable, on other accounts than with a view to
wealth, that the labouring classes should not work so hard ;
but as this could only be accomplished by a atrial
resolution among workmen, it cannot take place . . . ib.
With the single exception of the effects to be expected from
prudential habits, there is no chance of an increased con-
sumption among the working classes; and if there were,
it is not the kind of consumption best calculated to encou-
rage the employment of capital . . . . 475
When the demands of the landlords have ties ‘aie to thee
of the productive classes, it appears from oe that
profits have often prematurely fallen . . 3 sib:
But if the master producers have not the will to consume wile
ficiently, and the working producers have not the power,
then, if the aid of the landlords be not found sufficient, the
consumption required must take place among the unpro-
ductive labourers of Adam Smith . . . 476
Every country must necessarily have a body ve wtpmcidiidione
labourers ; but it is a most important practical question to
Seneiiaiady whether they detract from the wealth of a coun-
try, or encourage it... . 477
The solution of this question ani cig ‘the chet: of os
greater questions, lst. whether the motive to accumulate may
be checked from the want of demand, before it is checked
by the difficulty of procuring food ; and 2dly, whether such
check is probable. . . . 478
An attempt has been made to rdeisilig thee tito ested
in different parts of the present work, and if the determina-
tion be just, we may conclude that a body of unproductive .
labourers is necessary as a stimulus to wealth. . . . . ib.
Of the persons constituting the unproductive classes, those
which are paid voluntarily will be considered in general as
the most useful in exciting industry, and the least likely
to be prejudicial by “PING with the costs of pro-
duction .. 478


Those which are conhesipd by sade are aniaaill wich with
regard to distribution, but. may be prejudicial by occasion-


588 SUMMARY.
P , PAGE
ing an increased cost of rire and eB ene: a
"merce oaieerebarn 3047 9


Taxation, though it maily svscnntiiis sitketblate: to weil is so ~
dangerous an instrument of distribution, that it can never
be recommended with this view; yet, when a different dis-
tribution of property has actually been effected pice it, the ~
policy of afresh change may be doubtful. . >. . 480
If distribution be a necessary element of wealth, it wield be
rash to affirm, that the abolition of a national debt must —
certainly increase wealth and employ the people. . . . 481
If the powers of production in a well peopled country were
tripled, the greatest difficulty would be the means of distri-
bution; and it would depend upon the circumstance of
proper means of distribution being found, whether the in-
creased powers were a great good, ora greatevil. . . . 482
It may be a question, whether, with the great powers of pro-
duction possessed by this country, and with its actual divi- ©
sion of property in land, the same stimulus could be given
to the increase of wealth, without the distribution occa-
sioned by a nationaldebt . . . . 483
Still there are serious evils Sebetadninedi toa riational deli’ a
is both a cumbersome and a dangerous instrument of dis-
tribution .. . 484
On these accounts it inigh be desitabhe to -dieniataly the delay
and discourage its growth in future; but after being accus-
tomed to a great consumption, we cannot recede without
passing through a period of great distress... - 485
If a sponge were applied to the national debt, the rest ‘al ‘the
society, instead of being richer, would be the poorer for it.
More labourers would be thrown out of employment, and
more capital would emigrate 2°... - 486
The landlords would probably employ more mein ictal
"and this would be the best remedy that in the actual ©
circumstances could be applied; but the structure of so-
ciety would be greatly deteriorated by the change . . . 487
The profits of capitalists, notwithstanding their relief from
taxation, would fall from the want of distribution and de-~
mand, and in a few years the whole ap would be re-
daced».0 uel “ stdintt. gine sab.


SUMMARY. 589
PAGE
A country with land, labour, and capital, has certainly the
power of recovering from this state of things ; but it would
have passed through a period of great stagnation ; and finally
a considerable body of unproductive labourers may be ab-
solutely necessary to call forth its resources... . 488
The most desirable proportion between the productive ei un-
productive classes is that which will give the greatest ex-
changeable value to the national produce, and this propor-
tion must vary git to the powers of production . . 489


Secr. X.—Application of some hu the preceding Principles 4 to the
Distresses of the Labouring Classes, since 1815, with general Ob-
servations.

The distresses of the labouring classes have been attributed to
deficient capital. The capital may be deficient compared
with the population, and yet not deficient Pet with
the effective demand for it . . . - 490

If one fourth of the capital of a colntrys were sudhasiity ‘aa
stroyed, or transported to a different part of the world, pro-
fits would be high and saving would be the hemosiyia re-
quired . . - 491

If, on the other hil sinless were ditnitiished by the Siders
of some branches of trade which had formerly been very
prosperous, profits would be low, and — would not be
the remedy required . . . . ib.

The state of England at present bears the etn eden
to the latter case. Its capital has been diminished, but its
revenue and effective demand for produce have been di-
minished still more, and profits are low and uncertain . . 493

But when profits are low, and capital is on that account flow-
ing out of the country; to encourage saving, is like the
policy of encouraging marriage when the peers is
starving and emigrating . . . 495

Our present low profits have been atiributed to the cailkivas
tion of poor land, heavy taxation, and restrictions on com-
merce ; but it is difficult to admit a theory of our distresses
incomanabeal with the theory of our prosperity . . . . db.

Whatever may be the final tendency of these causes ; yet as
the amy was more than usually prosperous when they


.


590 SUMMARY.
‘PAGE
prevailed in a greater degree than at present, we must look
elsewhere for the immediate sources of the pees oe
tress - . 496
A conta dupvonnste by an ‘despite oral might expe-—

rience similar distress from a sudden diminution of demand

and consumption, although there were no — ars no

taxes, nor any restrictions on trade . . - 497
The state of Europe and America since the war is snail

cable upon the principles of those who think that the >i

of production is the only element of wealth . . . - 498
The transition from war to peace, as usually explained, will

not account for so long a period of stagnation as has taken

place since the war: but it may be accounted for, by sup-

posing that the whole consumption compared with the

supply has diminished . . . ib.
This diminished consumptiom must hate operisea vary differ-

ently in different countries. Some it must have relieved,

others it has distressed. ‘Those which suffered the least by

the war have suffered the most by the peace. . 500
The distress which has attended the peace is an vafobbanate

association ; but it should be recollected that it has arisen

from peculiar circumstances, which in the same degree are

not necessarily connected with the termination of a war . 501
On account of the evils likely to be felt from a sudden di-—

minution of consumption, the policy which has often been
_ recommended of raising the supplies for a war within each

year may fairly be doubted .  . . . 502
Although it is necessary to save, in order 66 recover ‘the caps

tal which the country has lost; yet if profits are low and

uncertain, saving is not the first step wanted. . . . . 503
What the country wants is an increased national revenue, or

an increase of the exchangeable value of the whole pro-

duce. When this has been attained we may save with

effeet «iter aust "3 - 505
The question, how this increase oft revenue is r ee. anailied)

has been attempted to be answered in the latter sections of

this chapter. . . . ib.
An increased revenue is not so ‘eusty attained as an ‘ecbeadel

proportion of capital torevenue . . . . . ... . . 506


Still it is of erleiial to know the immediate. object. to be


SUMMARY. 591k
PAGE


aimed at, that, if we cannot forward it, we may not retard it 506
A greater freedom might be given to commerce without

diminishing the revenue of the customs, The permanent

effects of opening the trade with France would mag be

beneficial . . . 508
But in looking festa re chal of this kind.» we phan at-

tend to the caution given by Adam Smith, which would be

particularly applicable to the silk trade. . . . 509
When the opening of any trade would produce siaitierany

distress, it is because it would diminish for a time the ex-

changeable value of the whole produce ; but, in reap the’

extension of trade increases it . . > tase S10
A knowledge of the effects of pendessinaich consumers on na-

tional wealth will make us proceed with more caution in

our efforts to diminish them , . . 51
Public works, the making and pailatel of ried. fas a ret

dency among persons of fortune to improve their grounds, .

and keep more servants, are the most direct means within

our power of restoring the demand for labour . . . . ib.
When the national revenue has been increased, and the pro-

fits of sfock have been raised, we may then i with

effect to recover our lost capital by saving. . . . 512
It is thought by many that the revenue of the country imtoo

be most effectually increased, and the balance of consump-

tion restored, by an abundant issue of paper; but this

opinion is founded on a mistaken view of the effects of a

depreciated currency. . . 513
A great issue of paper now srotild ‘Pat a pai different effect

from that which it had during the war. It would increase

the glut of: commodities, and in a short time aggravate the

distresses. of the eerie by reducing still farther the

rate of profits . . . . 514
The doctrine that the Beate ve wealth apes ip ees

portions may be objected to as ering the science of

Political-/Economy more uncertain ; but if it be found true,

it is a sufficient answer to the objection . . » 015
Though no certain rule can be laid down for scrpardihe rich

the fastest, yet if we attend to the great laws of demand


592 SUMMARY.
PAGE
and supply, we shall generally be directed into the ’
course . . eT Ae eons e]


The market of esiooel) capital will be dipidicd without the
aid of patriotism, and the whole question of saving may
safely be left to the uninfluenced operation of individual
interests and feelings. . . 2hge517
Though the science of Political events asta, ia its
nature, resemble more the science of morals or of politics
than that of mathematics, yet if its principles be founded
on a sufficiently extended experience, they will rarely in
their application disappoint our just expectations . . .518  ~
Another objection may be made, that the doctrines of the lat-
ter part of this work are favourable to taxation ; but this
would not be a just inference... . ib.
Even if we allow that taxes and expeniiGaal wale ile some
circumstances, increase wealth, yet if such wealth is only
temporary, and when its progress stops is attended with
distress, it would have been better that it had not existed 519
It is the duty of governments to avoid war if possible; but >
if it be unavoidable, so to regulate the expenditure as to
produce the least fluctuation of demand .. . oil
Other classes are often relieved by the taking off of Ry $i
but nothing can compensate to the ae classes the
want of demand for labour. . . . cl, Syston
To state these facts is not to favour betas but to bring for-
ward additional reasons ret. imposing het without a
strong necessity . . . ib.
The labouring classes Hen more nthiaas wwe pitta in ideal
sity than they are benefited by high wages in prosperity.
To'them fluctuations are most unfavourable. The interests
of the great mass of ae require Pesce and equable ex-
penditure . . . 4 4a) Me SPA)


(398°)


A.

Aceumutatron of capital, influence
of, in raising rents, 161—accamula-
tion, or the saving from revenue to
add to capital, considered as a stimu-
lus to the increase of wealth, 351—
375.

Agriculture, influence’ of improvements
in, on raising rents, 165, 166—and

’ of an increase in the price of agricul-
tural produce, 166—178—improve-
ments in agriculture, a practical

source of the increase of rents, 207,

208—why such improvements are

chiefly effected by the tenants, 219,

220—probable effects of disysing

horses in agriculture, 263—observa-
tions on spade-cultivation, ib. note.
the distribution occasioned by the
division of landed property, consi-
dered as a means of increasing the
exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, 427—440—state of agriculture

during the middle ages, 429.

America, the United States of, almost
the only country where rents may, be
increased without agricultural im-
provements, 210, 211—their rapid
increase accounted for, 428—causes
of the distresses in those states since
1815, 498—500. ‘


B.
Bank paper, the value given to it, by
limiting its quantity, shews that the
cost of producing gold only influ-
ences its price as, it influences its sup-
ply, 77.
British Empire, prosperous state of,
435—its causes, ib, 436, 437.
Buchanan (Mr.), erroneous views of,
on the nature of rent, 137—139. 149.
Bullion :—an increase in the exchange-
_ able value of the whole produce, es-


ee


timated in bullion, and in the coum
maud of this bullion over foreign and


domestic labour, absolutely neces-


sary to extricate the country from
its distresses, 505. 508—520.


c.

Capital, ahsolute necessity of, to farm~
ers, 200, 201—fertility of land the
only source of permanently high re-
turns for capital, 234—striking illus-
tration of the effects of capitals em-
ployed on Jand compared witly
others, ib. 235—the use of fixed ca-
pital, in general favourable to the
abundance of circulating eapital, 262,
263—the profits of capital, what, 295
—how they are affected by the in-
creasing difficulty of procuring the
means of subsistence, 294—301—
also by the proportion which capital
bears to labour, 301—313—and by
causes practically in operation, 313
—320—probable effect of an aboli-
tion of public debt upon capitalists,
-487, 488—deficient capital the cause
of the distresses of the labouring
classes, since 1815, 444—446—this
cause further considered and eluci-
dated, 490. et seq.—injudicious po-
licy of recommending the conversion
of more revenue into capital, when
profits are low and uncertain ; and
when, in consequence of capitalists
not knowing where they can safely
employ their capitals, capital is flow-
i t of the country, 495, 496.

Cai y rent, and in.proportion to
their qualities nearly an equal rent,
99—their price is indirectly regu-
lated by the cost of producing corn,
100.

China, high rate of interest in, 158—
cause of it, 159. :


594


Circulating medium of a _ country,
change in the value of, alters the dis-
tribution of its produce, 447, 448.
Civil liberty produces prudential habits


in the lower classes of society, 251. |’


Comfort, standard of, various in differ-
ent countries, 249. sie Si
Commerce, interval and external, con-
sidered as a means of increasing the
exchangeable value of produce, 440

—462.

Commodities, prices of, depend upon
the causes which call forth, or render
unnecessary, a great or intense de-
mand, 66—the prices of commodities,’
how influenced by supply and de-
mand, 64—72—also by the cost of
production, 72—80—natural and
necessary prices of commodities,
what, 83, 84—the prices of commo-
dities further influenced by the la-
bour which they have cost, 84—108
—and by the labour which they will
command, 118—126—a mere ex-
change of commodities useless, 442
—the actual value of them how to be
estimated, 416.

Consumers (unproductive), difficulty of
ascertaining what proportion of to
the productive classes, is most fa-
vourable to the increase of wealth,
464—the distribution occasioned by
them considered as a means of in-


creasing the exchangeable value of


the whole produce, 465—490.
Corn, on the value of, 126—128—a
mean between it and labour, consi-
dered as a measure of real value in
exchange, 128--133—rise in the
rice of, raises rents, 165, 166—fall
im its price, terminating in altering
the value of the precious metals,
lowers rent, 179—on the dependence
of the actual quantity obtained from
land, upon the existing rents and the
existing prices, 183—191—differ-
ence between the price of ‘corn and
that of manufactures, with regard to
natural or necessary price, 184—the
price of corn, how influenced by a
difference in the value of the precious
metals, 193—and by the biagco™-
parative cost of production, 194—
198—corn would not be cheaper, or
more plentiful, if landlords were to
give the whole of their rents to their
tenants, 201, 202—influence of the
importation of corn, on the connec-
tion of the interests of the landlord,


INDEX.


and of the state importing it, 217—
225—influence of the cost of p
ducing corn on the wages of labour,
241, 242—-prices of wheat in the
15th and 16th centuries, 271—273
—in the 17th century, 277—in the
18th century, 279—and in the former
part’ of»the 19th century, 280—ge-
neral observations on the prices of
corn during the last five centuries,
281-—292—particularly as affected
by the seasons, 284—286.

Cost of production, considered as it
affects exchangeable value, 72—76
—the true way of -viewing the costs
of production, in their effects upon
prices, is, as the necessary conditions
of the supply of the objects wanted,
78—these conditions stated, 79, 80,
81—the high comparative cost of
production, how far a cause of the
high comparative price of corn, 194
—198.

Cotton manufactures of Great Britain,
causes of the increased demand for, .
402, 403.

Cultivation does not always proceed
equally with population, and why,
127—in what manner the high com-
parative cost of, affects the price of
corn, 194—198. /

Cultivator, on the necessary separation
of the profits of, from the rent of

fe land, 150—1 oa " sities
urrency, irregularities in, a tempo
pigeon hi & price that may mislead
landlords in letting their lands to
their own injury, and to the injury
of the country, 203, ,


D.

Demand and Supply, these terms con-
sidered, 63, 64—the relation between
them, how to be ascertained, 65—
demand and supply, considered as a
measure of value, 66—72—the prin-
ciple of demand and supply deter-
mines both natural prices and market
prices, 75, 76—influence of demand
and supply, on the wages of labour,
240—4%46—effective demand will
command general wealth, 417.

Distresses of the labouring classes sinee
1815, caused by deficiency or loss of
capital, 444—446—490—504—the
remedies for these distresses are,
first, an inereased national revenue,
505—which can be obtained only by
an union of the means of distribution


OS


INDEX. 598


with the powers of production, 505—
507—413—426—and secondly, an
increase in the exchangeable value of
the whole produce, estimated in bul-
lion and in the command of this bul-
lion over foreign and domestic labour,
505, 508—520. ;

Distribution, a union of the means of,
with the powers of introduction, ne-
cessary in order to ensure a conti-
nued increase of wealth, 413—426
—of the distribution occasioned by
the division of landed property, con-
sidered as a means of increasing the
exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, 4297—440—the distribution
occasioned by commerce, internal
and external, considered as a means
of increasing the exchangeable. value
of produce, 440—46z—the distribu-
tion occasioned by unproductive
consumers, considered as the means
of increasing the value of the whole
produce, 463—490.


E.

Economists, strictures on the differences
between, and Adam Smith, 2, 3—the
comparative merits of their systems
and of that of Adam Smith, depend
chiefly on their different definitions
of wealth, 26—which term the Eco-
nomists have confined within too nar-


row limits, 27—the opinion of the]


Economists, that the term productive
Jabour should be confined exclusively


to labour employed upon land, con-}.


sidered and shewn to be erroneous,
36, 37—erroneous views of the eco-
nomists, respecting the unproductive
nature of trade, 441, 442. See Po-
litical Economy.

Education, influence of, on the condi-
tion of the labouring classes, 252.

England, population of, why not in-
creased in the same proportion as that
of Ireland, during the same period,
253, 290—rates of wages there, in
the 15th and 16th centuries, with re-
marks thereon, 268, 269—especially
in the 16th century, 281, 282—
prices of wheat there, in the 15th
and 16th centuries, 271, 272—in the
17th century, 277—in the 18th cen-
tury, 279—and in the former part of
the 19th century, 280—the different
values of silver in England and in
Bengal, accounted for, 114.


value in exchange, defined, 62—
real value in-exchange, ib.—of de-
mand and supply, as they affect ex-
changeable value, 63—72—cost of
production, as it affects exchange-
able value, 72—84—of the labour
which a commodity has cost, consi-
dered as a measure of exchangeable
value, 84—108—of the labour which
a commodity will command, consi-
dered as a measure of real value in
exchange, 118—126—of a mean be-
tween corn and labour, considered
as a measure of real value in ex-
change, 126—133—the exchange-
able value of a commodity ceases,
where such commodity exists in a
great excess above the wants of those
_who use it, 186, 187—the distribu-
tion occasioned by the division of
landed Fea considered as a
means of increasing the exchangeable
value of the whole produce, 427—
440—the distribution occasioned by
commerce considered as a means of in-
creasing such exchangeable value, 440
—462—an increase in the exchange-
able value of the whole produce, neces-
sary to remove the existing distresses
of this country, 505, 508—520.
Exceptions. See Limitations,
Exports (British), amount of, in conse-
quence of machinery, 407.


F,

Fertility of land, the only source of
permanently high returns for capital,
234, 235—other advantages result-
ing from a fertile soil, 285—238—
fertility of soil, considered as a sti-
mulus to the continued increase of
wealth, 375—401. ee

Fortune, the desire of realizing one, a
sacred duty in private life, 471.

France, rates of wages of labour in, for
the last two centuries, 284—succes-
sion to pro there, how regu-
lated, dah -tenicatatites on ya
probable results, 433—435. '


. G:

Garnier (M.), refutation of the opi-
nions of, that performers on musical
instruments are unproductive la-
bourers, while the instruments them-
selvés are considered riches, 46—
and that the servants of Government
are unproductive labourers, 47.


Exehange, of value in, 5¢—nominal|Gold. See Metals, (precious.)


eg?


596.


oR ie * @ td o
Habits, influence of, on, the condition of
the labouring classes, 248—257.


L

Importation of Corn, how it affects the
price of that. commodity, 195, 196—
its influence on the counexion of the
interests of the landlord and of the
state importing corn, 217—225.

Improvements in agriculture, influence
of, on rent, 165, 166—a main source
ob the increase o* rents, 207, 208—
the United States of America, almost
the only country where rents may
be increased without agricultural
improvements, 210, 211—agricul-
tural improvements, why effected
chiefly by the tenants, and not by
the land owners, 219, 220.

Interest, rate of, in China, 158—cause
of the high rate of, there and in
India, 159—rate of in England, dur-
ing the reign of George II., 318—
reduction of it, accounted for, 476—
and also the reduction of interest in
Italy, in 1685, ib.

Interference. See Non-interference.

Ireland, state of wages of labour, and
of profits of stock in, cannot be re-
duced, and why, 209—cause of the

. increase of its population, 232—252,
290—the power of supporting la-
bour exists there, to a greater extent
than the will, 394, 395—the charac-
ter of the Irish peasantry vindicated,
396—the deficiency of wealth in
this country, owing more to a want
of demand than of capital, 398—400
—prodigious capabilities of Ireland
for manufacturing and commercial
wealth, 400, 401.


L.

Labour, divided into productive and
unproductive, 29—Adam Smith’s de-
finition of productive labour consi-

- dered, 30, 31—a classification of the
different kinds of labour necessary,
and why, 31—S4—the distinction of
the Economists considered 35, 56—
real nature of productive labour
stated, 38, 49— examination of
Adam Smith’s definition of unpro-
ductive labour, 39—45—the labour
realized upon material products is
the only labour susceptible of accu-
njulation and defiuite valuation, 46
—the labour, which a commodity
has cost, considered as a measure of


INDEX.


exchangeable. yalue, 7
da hich }
Saree


influence the demand ‘orb 257

of a fall in the value
“4 money on. the demand for labour,
267—280—the effective demand for
labour not likely to be affected by
the introduction of fixed opus ops
-—how far the profits of capital are
affected by ip a which
capital bles to Pah ox 301—S13—
inventions to save labour labour considered
as a stimulus to the. continued in-
crease of wealth, 401—413.

Labourer, the w , to be necessa-
rily separated the rent of land,
150—160—influence of the rate, at
which the resources of the: country
and the demand for Jabour are in-
creasing, upon the condition of the
labouring classes, 248—influence of
the habits of people in respect to
their food, clothing, and lodging, on
their condition, 249—254—effect of
a fallin the value of money, on the
condition of the labourer, 467—280
—difference between the ings of
labourers in Poland and in America,
311—Ilabourers are stimulated by the
want of, necessaries to produce lux-
uries, 379, 380—deficient capital,
the cause of the distresses of la-
bourers, since 1815, 444—446—
further elucidation of this subject, |
490—504—remedies for these dis-
tresses ; first, an increased national
_Trevenue, 505—this to be obtained
only by an union of the means of
distribution with the powers of pro-
duction, 505, 507, 413—426—
secondly, an increase in the ex-
changeable value of the whole pro-
duce, estimated in bullion, es in
the command of this bullion over
foreign and domestic labour, 505,
508—520.

Land, rent of, defined, 134—its nature
and causes investigated, 135, et seq.
—in what manner the. fertility of
land gives a power of yielding rent,
145—150—on the necessary sepa-


ration.of the rent of land from the
profits of the cultivator, and. the
wages of the labourer, 150—160—
causes of the rise of rents of land in
the ordinary progress of society, 160
—178—and of the fall of them, 178
~—182—on the dependence of the ac-
tual quantity of produce obtained from
the land, upon the existing rents and
the existing prices, 183—191— gene-
ral remarks on the surplus produce of
Jand, 226—233—fertility of land, the
only source of permanently high re-
turns for capital, 234—striking illus-
tration of the effects of capitals em-
ployed on land compared with
others, 234, 235—other advantages
resulting from the fertility of land,
235—239—its fertility considered as
a stimulus to the continued increase
of wealth, 375—401—the distribu-
tion occasioned by the division of
landed property, considered as a
means of increasing the exchangeable
value of the whole produce, 4¢7—
440—See also Rent.

Landlord, positive wealth of, ought to
increase gradually, in the progress
of a country towards a high rate of
improvement, 199—investigation of!
the causes, which may mislead him
in letting his lands, to the injury of
himself and of the country, 199—
204—on the strict and necessary
connexion of tle interests of the
landlord and of the state, in a coun-
try which supports its own popula-
tion, 204—217—and in countries
which import corn, 217—225—pro-
bable effect of an abolition of public
debt upon landlords, 487.

Lauderdale (Lord), definition of wealth
by, 27—remarks on it, ib. 28.

Limitations and exceptions, why rejected
by some scientific writers on political
economy, 7—the necessity of them
illustrated, in the doctrines laid down
by Adam Smith, respecting frugality
and saving, 8—and in the rules
which relate to the division of land,
9—refutation of the opinion of some
political economists, that though ex-
ceptions may exist to the general
rules of political economy, yet they
need not be noticed, 13—15.


Machinery, influence of, on the. prices
of commodities, 185, 186—machines


INDEX.


597


to save labour, considered as a sti-
mulus to the continued increase of
wealth, 401—412.


Maize, extraordinary productiyeness of,


in New Spain, 385, 386.


Manufactures, difference between the


natural or necessary price of, and
that of corn, 184—effect of ma-
clfinery on their prices, 185, 186.

Markets, the opening of, promoted by
facilities of production, 412—market
prices, how regulated, 83, 84.

Measures of value, general observations
on, 53—62—demand and supply,
considered as a measure of exchange-
able value, 67—72—cost and sup-
ply, considered as such a measure,
72—84—also tle labour which a
commodity has cost, 84 —88—and the
labour which a commodity will com-
mand, 118—126—of money, when
uniform in .value, considered as a
measure of value, 108—118—of a
mean, considered asa measure of real
value in exchange, 126—133.

Metals, the precious, when uniform in
their cost, considered as a measure
of value, 109—118—how a differ-

-ence in their value, in different
countries, and under different cir-
cumstances, affects the price of corn,
193—error of Adam Smith’s opinion,
that the low value of gold silver
is no proof of the wealth and flourish-
ing state of the country where it
takes place, 197, 198.

Mexico or New Spain, extraordinary

fertility of, 382, 583—indolence of

its inhabitants, 384, 388, 389—

causes of its thin population, 385—

extraordinary productiveness of the

Mexican maize, ib.—poverty of the

Mexicans, 386—obstacles to the

progress of population in this coun-

try, 387—want of demand, the chief
cause of the slow progress of New

Spain in wealth and population, com-

pared with its prodigious resources,

392, 393.

Money, when uniform in its cost, con-
sidered as a measure of value, 108—
118. The effect of a fall in the value
of money, on the demand for labour
and the condition of the labourer,
267—280.


N.
National Debt, evils of a great one, 484
—reasons why it should be slowly
reduced, but not annihilated, 485,


598 INDEX.


486—probable effects of annihilating
the public debt, 486—particularly on
landlords, 487—and on capitalists, ib.
488, 489.

New Spain. See Mexico.

Non-interference, the principle of ne-
cessarily limited in practice ; first, by
some duties connected with political
economy, which it is universally ac-
knowledged belong to the sovereign,
18 ; secondly, by the almost universal
prevalence of bad regulations, which
require to be amended or removed,
19; and thirdly, by the necessity of
taxation, ib.—the propriety of inter-
fering but little does not supersede
in any degree the use ofthe most ex-
tensive professional knowledge, 20.


oO.
Oats, unfavourable operation of prohi-
bitory laws, and of bounty on the
growth of, 255, 256.


Pi

Political Economy, importance and na-
ture of the science of, 1, 2—stric-
tures on the differences between the
Economists and Adam Smith, 2, 3,°5
causes of the differences in opinion
among the principal writers on poli-
tical economy, 5—21—motives and
design of the present work, 21—24,

Population and cultivation do not al-
ways proceed with equal ne) 197
—influence of the increase of popu-
lation on rents, 161, 162—cause of
the increase of the population of Ire-
fand, 252, 252—why the population
of England did not increase in pro-
portion to that of Treland, duriig
the same period, 253, 290—causes
of the increase of population in Scot-
and, 254—of the causes which prin-
cipally influence the increase of po-
pulation, 257—-266—the increase of|
population, considered as a stimulus
to the continued increase of wealth,
347—351—the thin population of
soine parts of New Spain accounted
for, 385—obstacles to the progress
of population in that country, 387.

Potatoes, the culture of in Ireland a
cause of the increased population of
that island, 232, 252.

Prices of commodities, how influenced
by demand and supply, 64—72—by
the cost of production, 72—84—
bythe Jabour, which a commodity


has actually cost, 84—108—and b

the labour which it: will catitithd,

.118—126—prices of commodities,

how influenced by money, when uni-

form so rage coon atur

or necessary price, w' |, 84—

the causes & the cxobayor the! petce

of raw produce above the costs of
production, 139—150—the depend-
ence of the actual quantity of pro-
duce obtained from the land upon the

existing price, illustrated, 183—191

—a temporary rise of prices, not suf-

ficient to warrant an increase of rent,

200—rent ought always to be a little
behind prices, 201—the natural price
of labour, what, 247—and what the
market price, ib. 248—prices of wheat
in the 15th and 16th centuries, 271,
272, 273—in the 17th century, 277
—in the 18th century, 279—and in
the former part of the 19th int de
280 — general observations on
prices of corn during the last five
centuries, 281—292— particularly as
affected by the seasons, 284—286.

Primogeniture, right of, ought not to
be abolished in this country, and
why, 437—440.

Produce (agricultural), influence of the
increase of price in, on raising rents,
166—178—and also in diminishing
them, 181, 182—on the dependence
of the actual quantity of produce ob-
tained from the land upon the exist-
ing rents and existing prices, 183—
191—the connexion between great
comparative wealth, and a high com-
parative price of raw produce, 192—
199--of the distribution occasioned by
the division of landed property, con-
sidered as the means of increasing
the exchangeable value of the whole
produce, 427—440—of the distriba-
tion occasioned by commerce, consi-
dered as the means of increasing the
exchangeable value of produce, 440
—462—the distribution occasioned
by unproductive consumers, consi-
dered as a means of increasing the
exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, 463—490—an increase in the
exchangeable value of the whole pro-
duce, necessary to extricate the la-
bouring classes of this country from
their present distresses, 505, 508—
520. -

Production, cost of, considered as it
affects exchangeable value, 72—76


INDEX. 599


—is subordinate to the relation of the
supply to the demand, 76—78—the
true way of considering the cost of
production,?8—83—in whatrespects
the high comparative cost of produc-
tion isa cause of the high comparative
price of corn, 194——-198-—the value of
the whole produce ofa country how to
be estimated, 265, 266—facilities of
production promote the opening of
markets, 412—an union of the powers
of production with the means of distri-
bution, necessary, in order to ensure
a continued increase of wealth, 413
—426—and to remove the present
distresses of the labouring classes,
505—507.

Productive labour, defined, 38—exami-
nation of Adam Smith’s definition of
it, 30—37.

Profits of the cultivator, on the neces-
sary separation of, from the rent of
land, 150—160—refutation of the
error, that when land is successively
thrown out of cultivation, the rate of
profits will be high in proportion to
the superior natural fertility of the
land, which will then be least fertile
in cultivation, 189—191.

Profits of capital, defined, 293—in what
manner they are affected by the in-
creasing difficulty of procuring the
means of subsistence, .294—301—
also by the proportion which capital
bears to labour, 301—313—and by
the causes practically in operation,
313—S26—remarks on Mr, Ricardo’s
theory of profits, 326—336.

Property, succession to, how regulated
in France, 433, 434. See Lund,
Wealth. '

Proportions, importance of considering,
in forming great results on political
economy, 432, 433.


Q.
Quality of land, how far a primary
eause of the high price of raw pro-
duce, 140—142.


R.

Rent of land, defined, 134—its nature
and causes, 135—150—the circum-
stance of the cost of the main food of
a country being almost entirely re-
solvable into wages and profits, does
not prevent rent from forming a com-
ponent part of the price of the great
mass of commodities, 97—on the ne-


cessary separation of rent from the
profits of the cultivator, and the wages
of the labourer, 150—160—rent is.
paid by cattle, and in what manner
and proportions, 99, 100--what causes
tend to raise rentsin the ordinary pro-
gress of society, 160 — 178 — what
causes tend to lower the rents, 178—~—
182—on the dependence of the actual
quantity of produce obtained from
the land, upon the existing rents and
the existing prices, 183—191-—pros-
pect of exorbitant rent, from a com=
petition of farmers, in what respect a
cause of injury to landlords and to
the country, 200—cautions to them
in raising their rents, 200—204—im-
provements in agriculture, a main
source of the rise of rents, 207—
210.

Resources of a country cannot be al-
tered by humanity, 246,

Restrictions on the importation of corn,
effect of, 229—724,

Revenue, saving from, to add to the
capital, considered as a stimulus to
the increase of wealth, 351—375—
an jncreased national revenue wanted
to extricate this country from its pre-
sent distresses, 505—an union of the
means of distribution with the powers


of production is absolutely negesary
for this purpose, 413—426, 505—_


507.
Ricardo (Mr.), character of his princi-

ples of political economy, 23, 214,

note+—observations on his opinion


on the influence of demand and syp-—


ply on prices, 71,72—his proposi-
tion, that a rise'in the price of labour
lowers the price of a large class of
commodities, proved to be true, 91
-—96—his opinion considered on the
influence’ of fertility of land on the
increase of rents, 145, 146, 159—
his theory of rent controverted, 205,
206, 212—216— strictures on his
notion of the surplus of land, 226—


_ 231—his definition of the natural,


price of labour erroneous, 247—re-
marks on his theory of profits, 326
—336—and on his theory of accu-
mulation, or saving from revenue to
add to capital, considered as a stimu-
lus to the increase of wealth, 356—
362, 366, 367—375—correction of
his statement as to the effect of the
powers of production on the increase
of wealth, 417, 418—his position


7


i. ss


4


* controverted that saving isan end i in-
- stead of a means, 466, 467.
Riches, defined, 337, 338,


Ss.


savings national and individual consi-|Stock, defined, 293. f


ered, 466—472,
(ML), erroneous views of the .na-
ture of rent, 1


INDEX.


: oe ae
| connected with those of the:
, ina country which supports —


¥


ite own population, 204—217—and


in countries which i import corn, 217
—425.
ivy


Subsistence, the increasi of
procuring the means ot bow it
profits, 293—301,


Scotland, increase of rents in, ac-|Supplies, itapolicy- of raisiop tints


. counted for, 209—causes of its in-
creased population, 254.


te 502—504.—See Demand and


Seasons, influence of, on the price of Sin produce of land, general re-


corn, 284—286.

Silver, different values of, in Bengal
and and, accounted for, 114—
its value very different in different
European countries, though not so
much as in India, compared with the
piipel states of Europe, 115.—
See Metals, precious.

Simplification and generalization, pre-
cipitate attempts at, are the principal
causes of “the differences of opinion
among scientific writers on political
_ economy, 5—this leads them unwil-
* lingly to admit the operation of more
than one cause, in the production of
effects observed, 6—and also to re-
ject limitations and exceptions, which

"nevertheless are necessary, 7—9—

as well as to be unwilling to bring

' their theories to. the test of expe-

rience, 10—14.

Sismondi (M.), erroneous views of, on
the nature of rent, 136, 137, 149—
correction of his sentiments on the

limits of accumulation, 420, 421.

Smith (Adam), remarks on his system of

political economy, 2, 3—particularly

on his definition of wealth, 28—ex-
amination of his definition of pro-
ductive labour, 30—37—and of un-
productive labour, 39— 50—his
definition of natural price, consi-
dered, 83, 84—inaccuracy of his
language respecting the real and no-

minal value of commodities, 85—87

—his erroneous definition of mono-

poly, 135, 136—mistake in his opi-

nion, that the low value of gold and
silver is no proof of the wealth and
flourishing state of the country where

it takes place, 197, 198.

Soil, quality of, how far a primary
cause of the’high price of raw pro-
duce, 140—142.

Spade-cultivation, observations on, 263,
note.

State, interests of, strictly and neces-


marks on, 226 — i


Tees
pe heavy, whether benefici ;
a country or not, ‘considered, | Bs
497—impolicy of raising supplies on
taxes, within the year, 502—504—
effects of taxation, 52i—evils of
taxes, 521, 52%.
Transition from war to peace; effects of,
498—500.


:


U.

Unproductive labour, Adam Smith's de-
finition of, considered, ‘and its real
nature stated, 39—50—unproduc-
tive labourers must ly be in
society, 477—solution of the ques-
tion, whether they must be con-
sidered as detracting so much from
the material products of a country,
and its power of supporting an ex-
tended production ; or whether they
furnish fresh motives to production,
and tend to push the wealth of a
country farther than it would go
without them, 477—490.


Vie ‘
Value, different sorts of, 51, 62—of
value in use, ib. 52—value in ex-
change, 52--measures of value, 53—
62—three kinds of value established,
62—of demand and supply, as they
affect exchangeable values, 63—72—
cost of production, considered, as. it
affects exchangeable value, 72—84
—of the labour which a commodity
has cost, considered as a measure of
exchangeable value, 84—108—the
labour which a commodity will com-
mand, considered as a of
real value in exchange, 118—126—
money, when uniform in its cost,
considered as a measure of real value
in exchange, 108—118—of a mean
between corn and labour, considered


.


INDEX.


as a measure of real value in ex-
change, 126—133—the value of the
whole produce of a country, how to
be estimated, 265, 266—elfect of a
fall in the value of money, on the
demand for labour, and the condition
_ of the labourer, 267—280—the dis-
tinction between value and wealth,
stated, 337—344—the distribution
occasioned by the division of landed
property, considered as the means
of increasing the exchangeable value
of the whole produce, 427—440
—the distribution occasioned by
commerce, considered as the means
. of increasing the exchangeable value
of produce, 440—462—the distribu-
tion occasioned by unproductive con-
sumers, considered as a means of in-
creasing the exchangeable value of
the whole produce, 463—490—an


increase in, the exchangeable value}’


of the whole produce, absolutely ne-
cessary to extricate this country from
its present distresses, 505, 508—520.


Ww.

Wages of labour, defined, 240—on the
necessary separation of the wages of,
the labourer from the rent of land,
150—160—illustrations of the de-
pendence of the wages of labour on
demand and supply, 240—246—in-
fluence of high wages on population,
260—rates of wages in the 15th and
16th centuries, with remarks thereon,
268, 269—especially on the high
rate of wages in the 16th century,
281, 282—rates of wages in France,
during the last two centuries, 284—


THE


are not parents lowered on the


increase of population, 349, 350.
Wealth, defined, 29—observations on
the different definitions given of it
by political economists, 25—27—
especially that by Lord Lauderd
27—and Adam mith, 28—suacepti-
bility of accumulation, essential to
our usual conceptions of wealth, 14
—on the connexion between great
comparative wealth and a high com- _
parative price of raw produce, 192—
199—the distinction between value
and wealth, stated, 337—344—the
increase of population considered as
a stimulus to the continued increase
of wealth, 347—351—of accumula-
tion, or the saving of revenue to add
to a capital, considered as a stimulus
to the increase of wealth, 351—
875—the fertility of the soil con-
sidered as a stimulus to the con-
tinued increase of wealth, 375—401
—inventions to save labour consi-
dered as a stimulus to the continued
increase of wealth, 401—413—of the
necessity of the union of the powers of


production with the means of distri- oe ay
bution, i in order to ensure a continued - ete


increase of wealth, 413—426.
Wheat, prices of, in the 15th and 16th


centuries, 271, 272—in the 17th —


century, 277—in the 18th centu f
279—and in the former part of
19th century, 280—general prvbers
“tions on the prices of wheat during
the last five centuries, 281, et seq.—
particularly on the influence of the
season on those prices, 284—286.


END,


ee
Loudon : Printed by C. Roworth,
Beli-yard, Temple-har.


oh: ,


®


ni


ie.


tenes
Su


Baye nck MID Z tkecee
eenisbiponne Digitale Bibliothek


