The Fourth Dimension Simply Explained
Henry Parker Manning (ed.), 1910
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Manning's 1910 Scientific American prize-essay collection — the contest that popularized the fourth dimension in America: the essential primary on hyperspace's public debut. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/fourthdimension00manngoog). This 1910 publication is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



Cnp'fi. LiiKMrv 



f ^ 



% 



The Fourth Dimoision 
Simply Explained 



A COLLECTION OF ESSAYS SELECTED FROM 

THOSE SUBMITTED IN THE SQENTIHC 

AMERICAN'S PRIZE COMPETITION 

WITH AN INTRODUCnON 
AND EDITORIAL NOTES 

By 
HENRY P?' jJlANNINa Ph.D. 

Anockte Fnhmat of M^heBMlios m Brown Vainaky 




NEW YORK: 

MUNN & COMPANY. Inc. 

1910 



Copyright 19x0 

BY 
MtTNN & COMPANY, INC. 



Entered at Stationbrb' Hall, I«ondon, 19x0 



ALL RIGHTS RESERVED UNDER BERNE CONVENTION 



PRINTED IN THE UNITED 
STATES OP AMERICA BY 
MAC60WAN & SI^PBR 
New York, N. Y. 



PREFACE 

N January, 1909, a friend of the Scientific Ameri- 
can, who desired to remain unknown, paid into 
the hands of the publishers the sum of Five Hun- 
dred Dollars, which was to be awarded as a prize for 
the best popular explanation of the Fourth Dimension, 
the object being to set forth in an essay not longer 
than twenty-five hundred words the meaning of the 
term so that the ordinary lay reader could understand 
it. The essays, 245 in number, were submitted under 
pseudonyms, in accordance with the rules drawn up by 
the Editor of the Scientific American, and were judged 
by Prof. Henry P. Manning, of Brown University, and 
Prof. S. A. Mitchell, of Columbia University. 

The Five Hundred Dollar prize was awarded by 
the judges to Lieut.-Col. Graham Denby Fitch, Corps 
of Engineers, U. S. A. The prize-winning essay was 
published in the Scientific American of July 3rd, 1909, 
and three essays, which received honorable mention, 
made their appearance in the issues of July loth, 17th, 
and 24th, 1909. 

Despite the character of the subject, extraordinary 
interest was manifested in the contest. Competi- 
tive essays were received not only from the United 
States, but from Turkey, Austria, Holland, India, 
Australia, France, and Germany. In fact, almost every 
civilized country was represented. Because of this 
unexpected interest in the subject, it has seemed advis- 
able to preserve in permanent form a few of the essays 



206107 



4 PREFACE 

which were submitted. Accordingly Prof. Henry P. 
Manning has chosen from the essays those which lend 
themselves best for the purpose of a popular book on 
the Fourth Dimension; in other words, those which 
present the subject from as many different points of 
view as possible. With the exception of the prize- 
winning and honorably mentioned essays, no attempt 
lic4S been made to arrange the essays in the order of 
merit. 

The publishers trust that the brief expositions of 
the Fourth Dimension here offered may serve to 
popularize a topic which has hitherto been unfor- 
tunately classed with such geometrical absurdities as 
the squaring of a circle and the trisection of an angle. 



CONTENTS 



PAOS 

Introduction 7 

I. An Elucidation of the Fourth Di- *"• 
MENSION 43 

ii. non-euclidean geometry and the 

Fourth Dimension 52 

III. Fourth Dimension Absurdities 60 

"TV. The Boundary of the Four-Dimen- 
sional Unit and Other Features of 
Four-Dimensional Space yo 

V. How the Fourth Dimension May be 

Studied 81 

VI. Space and Hyperspace 91 

VII. An Interpretation of the Fourth 

Dimension 100 

VIII. Length, Breadth, Thickness, and 

Then What? no 

IX. The Fourth Dimension Algebraic- 
ally Considered 1 18 

X. Difficulties in Imagining the Fourth 

Dimension 125 

XL Some Fourth Dimension Curiosities. . 134 

XII. Characteristics of the Fourth Di- 
mension 144 . 



6 CONTENTS 

PAGK 

XIII. The Fourth Dimension^ the Play- 

ground OF Mathematics 154 

XIV. The True and the False in the 

Theory of Four Dimensions 163 

XV. The Ascending Series OF Dimensions 172 

XVI. The Mind^s Eye and the Fourth 

Dimension 182 

XVII. Other Dimensions Than Ours 192 

XVIII. The Meaning of the Term 'Tourth 

Dimension^^ 201^ 

XIX. A Pupil in Geometry Quizzes His 
Teacher About the Fourth Di- 
mension 211 

XX. Possible Measurements and Forms 

IN A System of Four Dimensions 220 

XXI. The Fairyland of the Fourth Di- 
mension 232 

XXII. The Properties of Four-Dimen- 
sional Space 242 



INTRODUCTION 

BY HENRY P. MANNING, ASSOCIATE PROFESSOR OF 
MATHEMATICS IN BROWN UNIVERSITY. 

I. 

THE geometry studied in the schools is divided 
into two parts, Plane Geometry, or Geometry 
of Two Dimensions, and Solid Geometry, or 
Geometry of Three Dimensions, and the study of 
these geometries suggests an extension to geometry of 
four or more dimensions. In a plane, for example, one 
line may be perpendicular to another, and the position 
of any point can be determined by starting from a 
known point and measuring in two given perpendicu- 
lar directions. In Solid Geometry there may be three 
mutually perpendicular lines, and the position of any 
point can be determined by starting from a known 
point and measuring in three given perpendicular di- 
rections. Thus the question arises : Why may there 
not be a geometry with four mutually perpendicular 
lines, in which the position of a point is determined 
by measuring in four perpendicular directions ? Again, 
the area of a rectangle is expressed as the product of 
its base and altitude, and in Plane Geometry the things 
that are studied are made up of straight or curved 
lines or are bounded by such' lines. The volume of a 
rectangular solid is expressed ais the product of its 
three dimensions, and the things that are studied in 
Solid Geometry are mostly made up of flat or curved 
surfaces or are bounded by such surfaces. Why then 



8 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

may there not be rectangular figures of four dimensions 
and a study of things which we may call flat or curved 
spaces? 

The Geometry of Three Dimensions is more ex- 
tensive than Plane Geometry, yet nearly everything in 
it is more or less analogous to something in the plane ; 
and so the Geometry of Four Dimensions would be still 
more extensive, yet related to the three-dimensional 
geometry as the three-dimensional geometry is related 
to the two-dimensional, so that it would seem almost 
possible to tell at once what the details of such a 
geometry would be. 

These suggestions come more readily when the real 
subject matter of geometry and the nature of geometri- 
cal reasoning are understood. Geometry does not deal 
with material things like a string or sheet of paper, but 
with abstract lines and surfaces. Nor does geometry 
deal with actual facts. It only shows what would be 
true if certain other things were true. We apply some 
statement of gec«netry to a string or to a sheet of 
paper whenever the conditions of the statement seem 
to be fulfilled, and the correctness of the result depends 
upon whether the conditions are fulfilled. 

Even the axioms of geometry, formerly regarded as 
self-evident truths, are now understood to be merely 
hypotheses. The mathematician does not say that the 
axioms are true. He develops a set of propositions 
that follow necessarily from the axioms and are in- 
volved in the axioms themselves, but the axioms them- 
selves he can change, and by taking different sets of 
axioms he can build up different geometries, each 
geometry mathematically true, true in that it is a set 
of statements (theorems) necessarily involved in the 
set of axioms upon which it is built. It is necessary 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 9 

that the axioms chosen for a geometry shall be consis- 
tent ; they must not contradict one another. They ought 
also to be independent; no statement should be taken 
as an axiom if it necessarily follows from the other 
axioms. Finally, the set of axioms should be complete, 
so that the geometry is completely determined without 
requiring additional axioms. 

We choose, then, one of these geometries and apply 
it to our lives. We choose that geometry whose axioms 
and resulting theorems seem best to express the con- 
ditions of our existence, but this choice is not a part of 
mathematical reasoning; it is a matter of experiment 
and of experience. 

Finally, the mathematician may go still further and 
leave undefined the subject matter of his geometry. He 
takes certain elements, calling them points and lines, 
and certain relations which he calls relations of position 
and magnitude. Without defining the elements or the 
relations he assumes that the elements have these re- 
lations. The statements that the elements have the re- 
lations are his axioms. From the axioms he derives 
other relations which necessarily follow. The state- 
ments of these relations%re his theorems. 

This is abstract geometry.* The terms used are 
meaningless, whether they are the words point, line, 
intersect, etc., borrowed from the ordinary geometry, 
or new words invented for the purpose. It is easier, 
of course, to assign meanings to the terms at the be- 
ginning and g^ve to the geometry a concrete form as 
it develops, especially if the concrete form is not too 
difficult for us to picture in our minds, but it is possi- 
ble to construct the geometry abstractly and then to 
apply it by giving concrete meanings to its terms. By 

* This theory of abstract geometry is referred to in Bssay II., p. 58. 



lO THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

changing the meanings of the terms we can give to the 
same geometry more than one interpretation even when 
the geometry is first constructed in concrete form. 

When the student gets this view of geometry fixed 
in his mind he is more ready to entertain the notion 
of a geometry of four or more dimensions. He sees 
no difficulty in assuming a set of axioms which includes 
the hypothesis that there are points outside of a given 
space of three dimensions when points and space are 
themselves words without meaning. The difficulty 
which he meets in contemplating such a geometry or 
any geometry comes when he attempts to apply it to 
our existence or to some imagined existence where its 
application seems to contradict or to transcend our 
experience. 

We have said that the same geometry can have 
more than one interpretation. Thus we shall see 
presently that a certain two-dimensional geometry may 
be interpreted as spherical geometry if we make the 
term straight line mean great circle. With a proper 
definition of length or distance our ordinary geometry 
may be interpreted as a geometry in which the circles 
through a certain fixed point are taken for straight 
lines. And so we might give other illustrations. Now 
the abstract geometry of four dimensions may be 
realized as a concrete geometry by letting the word 
point mean straight line in our space. It takes four 
numbers to determine the position of a straight line, 
and all the relations of the Geometry of Four Dimen- 
sions are represented by relations of these lines and by 
figures formed of them.* 

But these interpretations seem far-fetched, and the 

* See Essay XIII., p. xs9 ; see also C. J. Keyaer, " Mathematical Emancipa- 
tions/* The Monist, 1906. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED II 

abstract geometry itself is of interest chiefly to those 
few even among mathematicians who have made the 
theories of geometry their special study. The geometry 
of straight lines in space, for example, is of interest and 
value in itself, but that which especially interests us 
now is the interpretation of Geometry of Four Dimen- 
sions in its most natural way, where points mean points 
and straight lines mean straight lines and the relations 
considered are the same as those which we have in ap- 
plying two-dimensional and three-dimensional geom- 
etry to our actual existence. Even when the mathe- 
matician makes use of this geometry in the study of 
some other branch of mathematics it is in this natural 
interpretation that he wants it. 

The most notable of the geometries developed from 
different sets of axioms are two, commonly called non- 
Euclidean geometries. These geometries are quite 
fully explained in the second essay of this collection.* 
Neither Lobachevsky ncr Bolyai thought of geometry 
in the abstract way that we have indicated, but the 
Hyperbolic Geometry, which they discovered, was one 
which would seem to fit very well with our experi- 
ence if we confined our attention to a small portion of 
a plane or to a small region of space. The same is 
true of the Elliptic Geometry. We cannot even say 
that the geometry of our space is Euclidean and not 
one of these two. Now the non-Euclidean geometries 
of two dimensions can be applied to certain curved 
surfaces in ordinary space (the space of Euclidean 
Geometry) if we interpret the term straight line to 
mean geodesic or straightest line. Some writers have 
taken this as an explanation of the non-Euclidean 

*See also ** Non-BucUdean Geometry," by Henry P. Manning. Ginn & 
Company. 



12 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

geometry and supposed that the plane of this geometry 
is not a plane and that the straight line is not a 
straight line. 

In the same way that we have curved surfaces in 
ordinary space to which we can apply the non-Euclid- 
ean geometries of two dimensions, so in space of four 
dimensions we have curved spaces or hypersurf aces to 
which we can apply the non-Euclidean geometries of 
three dimensions, and some have taken this fact as com- 
pleting the explanation of these geometries, erroneously 
supposing that they assume our space to be a curved 
space in space of four dimensions. Some have even 
thought that the Geometry of Four Dimensions was 
invented for the purpose of explaining the non-Eu- 
clidean geometries. The non-Euclidean geometries do 
not themselves assume that space is curved, nor do the 
non-Euclidean geometries of two and three dimensions 
make any assumption in r^[ard to a fourth dimension. 
In fact, we may suiq)ose that space of four dimensions, 
if there is such a space, is itself non-Euclidean, elliptic 
or hyperbolic as the case may be, and that our space is 
a three-dimensional space of the same kind without 
any curvature whatever. The noticm of a geometry 
of four dimensions does not owe its origin to the non- 
Euclidean geometries. We have the same breaking 
away from tradition in both and both grow out of 
modem theories of the general nature of geometry, but 
the geometries of higher dimensions owe their origin 
to a natural extensicm from two and three dimensions 
and the mathematician has other uses for them equally 
as important as is their relation to the non-Euclidean 
geometries. 

Thr notion of geometries of higher dimensions takes 
on its chief importance in Mathematics from the paral- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 3 

lelism between Algebra and Geometry. Algebra had 
been used to some extent in the proofs of theorems 
which involve proportion and other relations of mag- 
nitude, but the study of Algebra and Geometry to- 
gether was first systemized in Anal3rtic Geometry and 
became thereafter the basis of a great part of Mathe- 
matics. Now certain forms of Algebra correspond to 
Plane Geometry and certain other forms to Solid 
Geometry. Besides these there are also what might 
be called one-dimensional forms, and no difficulty is 
found in realizing the corresponding geometry as a 
geometry of points on a line, although this geometry 
would hardly have attracted attention had it not been 
for the needs of Algebra. 

This combination of Algebra and Geometry, which 
appears at first sight to serve chiefly as an aid to Geom- 
etry, turns out to be of greater service to Algebra. 
This happens in two ways. The language of Geometry 
furnishes a number of convenient terms for things 
which would otherwise have to be awkwardly de- 
scribed, and the visual conceptions of Geometry ap- 
plied to the forms of Algebra make them seem less 
abstract and easier to understand. We have these ad- 
vantages for the forms of Algebra which correspond 
to geometries of one, two, and three dimensions. Yet 
there is no reason in Algebra for the distinction be- 
tween these forms and oth^r forms, and when we have 
become accustomed to apply geometrical terms in Alge- 
bra we b^n to use them in connection with all alge- 
braic forms and thus to secure the first of the two 
advantages mentioned as derived from the combination 
of Algebra and Geometry.* 

But it is from the vi sual conceptions of Creotpetry 

See Essays V., IX., and XIV. 



14 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

that the mathematician gets his chief assistance when 
he applies Gec»netry to Algebra, and since the geome- 
tries of higher dimensions are necessary to the com- 
plete parallelism of the two, he seeks to acquire these 
conceptions here also by trying to imagine our exist- 
ence in a space to which these geometries apply. This 
is especially true of the Four-Dimensional Geometry 
to which correspond some of the most important forms 
of Algebra. 

We find, then, two ways in which the geometry of 
four or more dimensions is of importance to the mathe- 
matician. \ The notion of such a geometry as a logical 
system of theorems involved in a set of axioms is im- 
portant to the student of abstract geometry, and the 
conception of space to which these geometries apply 
is of great assistance in the application of geometry 
to other mathematics.! No one can consider himself 
completely equipped as a mathematician without some 
knowledge of the geometries of higher dimensions, 

11. 

The notion of geometries of n dimensions b^an to 
suggest itself to mathematicians about the middle of 
the last century. Cayley, Grassmann, Riemann, Clif- 
ford, and some others introduced it into their mathe- 
matical investigations. Then from time to time dif- 
ferent mathematicians took it up in different ways. 
Thus the first volume of the American Journal of 
Mathematics b^ns with an article in which Professor 
Newcomb shows that a sphere may be turned inside 
out in space of four dimensions without tearing, and 
in the third volume of the same journal Professor 
Stringham has given us a full account of the regular 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 5 

figures in space of four dimensions corresponding to 
the regular polyhedrons of our three-dimensional 
space. Others have written on the theory of rotations 
and on the intersections and projections of different 
figures. The great Italian geometer Veronese has an 
extensive work on Geometry of n Dimensions with 
theorems and proofs like those of the text-books stud- 
ied in our schools. In the last few years there have 
been many articles in the popular magazines, and some 
books have been published to explain more particularly 
what the fourth dimension is.* The fourth dimension 
is the first of the higher dimensions and in this book 
it alone is considered. 

Geometry of Four Dimensions is not only of im- 
portance to the mathematician, but it is also of interest 
in certain other lines of study. Thus it involves ques- 
tions of space which concern the philosopher; efforts 
to understand it call into exercise our space perceptions 
and so attract the attention of the psychologist; and 
attempts to utilize the theories of hyperspace in the 
explanation of physical and other phenomena serve to 
bring the subject under the notice of those working in 
other branches of science. Moreover, the many curi- 
ous forms and relations that appear in its development 
excite popular interest; for example, the relation of 
symmetrical forms as one of position only, a form 
hneing changeable into its symmetrical by mere rota- 
tion ; the plane as an axis of rotation, and the possi- 
bility that two complete planes may have only a point 
in common ; the possibility that a flexible sphere may 
be turned inside out without tearing, that an object 
may be passed out of a closed box or room without 
penetrating the walls, that a knot in a cord may be 

* Some references are given at the end of this introduction. 



1 6 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

untied without moving the ends of the cord, and that 
the links of a chain may be separated unbrdcen. 

These curious features of space of four dimensions, 
while exciting our interest, baffle us in our study. Not 
only the possibility of such things but the facts them- 
selves seem beyond our comprehension. In Plane and 
Solid Geometry we can draw figures and construct 
models ; we are constantly seeing the things themselves 
and therefore, even when they are complicated, we can 
readily picture them in our minds. Geometry of Four 
Dimensions, however, in its ordinary application, deals 
with things which no one has known in experience or 
can imagine. Its very words seem to have no mean- 
ing. This is especially true at first, and any facility in 
perceiving the relations of these words, if acquired at 
all, must come slowly and of itself. In our efforts to 
♦ understand the subject we naturally desire a perception 
of these things at the beginning. All that we should 
try to do, however, is to remember the various rela- 
tions and to become familiar with them. In time they 
may perhaps acquire some of the vividness of the con- 
ceptions of three dimensional geometry. If we expect 
too much when we b^n this study we shall be disap- 
pointed and discouraged. If we understand at the out- 
set how little we should expect, we shall be in an atti- 
tude toward the subject that will be most conducive to 
success in its mastery. 

It follows that we shall not find this subject an easy 
one to understand. It is something that we have to 
read a little at a time, to read repeatedly and to think 
over. We have to look at it from different points of 
view and to examine different ways of expressing it. 
Thus there are distinct advantages in having the sub- 
ject presented in several short essays by different 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 7 

writers. There are advantages in the repetition, in the 
different points of view, and in having brief indepen- 
dent chapters that can be taken up and studied each 
by itself. 

The essays in this book are all non-mathematical or 
popular in their treatment. It will assist us, therefore, 
if we tmderstand the limitations of this form of pre- 
sentation. From a cc»nparison of the lower dimen- 
sional geometries we derive analogies for the Geometry 
of Four Dimensions and the analogies are so complete 
that the subject can be very fully explained in a non- 
mathematical way. The analogies are a guide, even 
to the mathematician, but the geometry does not de- 
pend on these analogies. As a system of theorems and 
proofs it is built up from its axioms by a process of 
logical reasoning just as the lower geometries are built 
up. If we wish to be convinced of the consistency of 
this geometry, of its truth as a mathematical system, 
we should study it mathematically. A non-mathemat- 
ical exposition should be received solely as an explana-« 
tion of the geometry itself, and the reader should un- 
derstand clearly that it is designed not to convince him 
even of the possibility of such a geometry, but only to 
show him what it is. 

The adoption of such an attitude on the part of the 
reader will be a long step toward accomplishing all 
that can be achieved through a non-mathematical treat- 
ment of the subject. If, however, the analogies are 
viewed as arguments, a person of skeptical mind will 
be apt to suspect that there is some fatal defect beneath 
their plausible exterior. Even if a philosophical writer 
wishes to use the analogies as well as the consistency 
of this geometry as an argument for the actual exist- 
ence of four-dimensional space, such a consideration of 



l8 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

the subject had better be postponed by the reader until 
after he has become familiar with the geometry itself. 
As regards some of these essays it is proper to caution 
the reader that they sedc to advocate certain views 
rather than merely to give a clear description of the 
fourth dimension. 

There is another way in which the principle of ana- 
logy may be used. By imagining two-dimensional 
beings living in a plane and unable to perceive anything 
of a third dimension we get a vivid idea of our own 
relation to four-dimensional space. A consideration of 
what ought to be their attitude toward any concep- 
tions of a space of three dimensions makes clearer what 
should be our attitude toward conceptions of a higher 
space. This point of vie\Y is made more interesting by 
presentation in story form of a picture of life as it 
might be supposed to exist in a two-dimensional world. 
It is not necessary for such a presentation to go into 
all the details of the two-dimensional existence. A too 
minute description of such an existence would over- 
burden the narrative with tedious explanations that 
would cause us to lose sight of its main purpose. But 
a story written so as to bring out skillfully a few of 
these relations does very much to help us in under- 
standing what should be our attitude toward the higher 
geometry.* 
V The Geometry of Four Dimensions based on a suit- 

* Such a book has recently been written by C. H. Hinton : " An Bpiaode of 
Platland.'* But much better is a little book by K. A. Abbot called " Platland.*' 
There the interest rests entirely on the relations of space whidi this book is 
intended to eacplain, and we never for a moment lose sight of these relations. 
In Hinton's book the interest rests largely on the personalities and fortunes 
of the characters, and our attention is called away from the geometrical cir- 
cumstances of their lives. Moreover, his circle-world is more unreal than the 
world of ** Flatland/* although, perhaps, more closely analogous to our earth 
as it exists in space of three dimensions. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 9 

able set of axioms and applied in the ordinary way to 
points, lines, etc., forms a definite system. But there is 
much that is arbitrary when we come to clothe our 
ideas in physical form and undertake to present a ma- 
terial world either of two or four dimensions, filled 
with two-dimensional or four-dimensional matter. 
Even to the physicist matter is a mystery and we can 
develop different theories of it very much as we build 
up geometries from different sets of axioms. Some 
writers of these essays have made quite imwarranted 
statements as to what must be the nature of matter. 
We cannot say that we have perceived all the proper- 
ties of matter as it exists, and we cannot call it absurd 
to put matter with other properties into an imagined 
space. Thus in order to throw light upon our rela- 
tions to a supposed space of four dimensions we might 
suppose the existence of two-dimensional beings even 
if such an existence were impossible, just as we might 
imagine the moon inhabited by intelligent beings in 
order to give a more vivid description of the appear- 
ance of the moon's surface by describing what they 
would see. We do not know, indeed, but that the 
moon is inhabited by beings with bodies adapted to 
their environment, capable in some way of life, growth, 
and motion, without air or water. 

In thus supposing the existence of two-dimensional 
beings it would be interesting in itself to see how far 
we can go in these details. Thus we may suppose that 
what we call two-dimensional matter is really three- 
dimensional, and that the two-dimensional beings are 
really three-dimensional, either with a slight thickness 
in the third dimension, or at least with a thickness 
which the beings themselves are unable to recognize. 
But we may also suppose them all to be really two- 



20 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

dimensional, and we can try to cany out the details of 
such an existence. It may be that a particle of matter 
is only a bundle of forces, attractive and repellent, and 
there is no difficulty in thinking of such forces lying 
entirely in one plane. A two-dimensional being, meet- 
ing some object, might find it, that is, its contour, hard 
or soft; light waves traveling in this plane might be 
reflected by objects, the edges of objects, and produce 
images on the retina line of the two-dimensional 
being's eye ; and sound waves might strike a vibrating 
chord in the two-dimensional being's hearing cavity. 
Objects could be fastened together, either by adhesion 
or by one object grasping another. Mechanical con- 
trivances and organic bodies would be of comparatively 
simple structure, if, as in our world, two entirely sep- 
arate objects had no appreciable influence on each 
other. No object could have an opening through it 
like a hole and there would be nothing to correspond 
to our pipes. If a house had more than one outside 
door open, or if its windows were opened, it would be 
divided into separate parts. It would seem as though 
such simple forms and structures as would make up a 
two-dimensional existence would allow but little mental 
development to the inhabitants, but we find nothing 
impossible in the supposed structure of such a world. 

When we come to consider a two-dimensional space 
and a three-dimensional space together, the two-dimen- 
sional . space lying within the three-dimensional, we 
have a considerable choice as to the nature of matter 
in these spaces, and any apparent difficulties may be 
ignored without affecting the usefulness of these sup- 
positions for purposes of analogy. We may, however, 
be interested in the question for its own sake and try 
to see how far we can carry the details of such a com- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 21 

bination of spaces. Let us suppose that the twoKlimen- 
sional matter of the plane inhabited by our two-dimen- 
sional beings has the property of reflecting in some 
measure light that comes from outside of this plane, so 
that three-dimensional beings are able to see the two- 
dimensional matter. They can see, then, the insides 
of the two-dimensional beings and the insides of their 
houses and within all their closed compartments. If 
also they are able to take objects out of this plane and 
put them back wherever they please, they can take them 
out of the closed compartments. 

A study of the laws of four-dimensional matter. 
Four-dimensional Physics, would be very interesting, 
but we can give some idea of the various forms which 
occur, and the possible motions of things, without 
going too carefully into the theory or using the terms 
of science with great exactness. Our object is to give 
some idea, something as near a picture as we can, of 
the space of four dimensions, and we shall impose 
limitations upon the beings which we describe, or re- 
move limitations, according to the course which seems 
best adapted to our object. 

We observe the forms and positions of objects very 
largely by sight. Now the organs of sight of a being 
. confined to some particular space may be supposed 
suited to the dimensions of his space. The picture 
formed in the retina of our eye is two-dimensional, the 
retina is a surface. A two-dimensional being, unable 
to perceive anything outside of his plane would have 
a one-dimensional retina, or at least his picture of an 
object in his world would be a mere line, diflferent 
pictures being distinguished by the lengths, colors, and 
shading of these lines. The retina of a four-dimen- 
sional being would be three-dimensional if he is to 



22 THE FOURTH DIMENSIOX 

receive sq>arate impressions frcxn all the rays of light 
within a given ang^e of vision. In fact, the boundary 
of an opaque object, the part which alone he can see, 
is three-dimensional as is always the boundary of ob- 
jects in space of four dimensions. 

It is not easy for us to imagine such pictures, and 
so we can attempt to get an impression of the shcq)es 
of objects by supposing that a three-dimensional being, 
a person like ourselves, could pass through a series of 
parallel three-spaces (three-dimensional spaces) and in 
each three-space examine that portion of the object 
which lies in this space, that section of the object. 
This is just as we might suppose a two-dimensional 
being able to pass through a series of planes and in 
each plane to see the section of an object made by that 
plane. The section which we should see of a four- 
dimensional object would be a solid whose surface 
forms a part of the three-dimensional boundary of the 
object. This way of studying foiir-dimensional objects 
is discussed quite fully in Essay VII. (See also Essay 
V, page 85.) 

Tliere is another somewhat similar way of studying 
an object that we may find quite useful. We can im- 
agine ourselves turning from one three-space into 
another perpendicular three-space. That is, by dis- 
carding one of the directions in our space we can sup- 
pose that we take into view the fourth direction, which 
goes away from our space, and so get its relation to 
two of our directions. We shall describe the section 
of an object made by any three-space as what we can 
see in that three-space. We shall do this particularly 
with reference to the different sections of an object 
obtained at any point by taking different perpendicular 
three-spaces. 



■ r 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 2$ 

ilOne of the first things, for example, that we con- 
sider in studying Geometry of Four Dimensions is the 
line perpendicular to a three-space; such is the line 
which goes out from a point in our space in a new 
fourth direction perpendicular to all the lines of our 
space through that point.*? If we can let go of one of 
the dimensions of our space, keeping only that part 
which lies in a certain plane, and take into view the 
new fourth dimension, we shall see a^ plane an J a line 
going out from it, perpendicular to all the linA of it, 
something with which we are perfectly familiar. 

As another example consider two abscJtttely per- 
pendicular planes. If we take a plane throu|ii a point 
O and the line which is perpendicular to the plane at O, 
all in our space, and then take the line through O in 
the fourth direction perpendicular to all the lines 
through O in our space, we shall have a plane through 
O and two lines both perpendicular to the plane and 
perpendicular to each other. These two lines them- 
selves determine a plane every line of which through O 
is perpendicular to the first plane. The two planes are 
said to be absolutely perpendicular. (See Essay I, page 
45, where the expression completely perpendicular is 
used.) The most that we could see in any three-space 
of two absolutely perpendicular planes would be one; 
of the planes and a single line of the other plane, a line 
passing through O perpendicular to the plane that we 
see. The other plane cuts through the space along 
this line. These planes meet only at the point O. 
Indeed, two planes which do not lie entirely in one 

* A point starting f xx>m the center of a sphere in onr space and moving: off 
on a line perpendicdlar to onr space will not approach any portion of the 
surface of the sphere, but will move away at the same rate from ail points of 
this surface. This is the way an object can pass out of a closed room or box 
without penetrating the walls, as stated in many of the essays. 



24 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

three-Space can never have more than a point in com- 
mon, and when two planes have just a point in commctfi 
the most that we could see in any three-space would 
be one of the planes and a single line of the other. 

If two planes are absolutely perpendicular to a third 
at two points O and O' they lie in a single three-space. 
In this three-space we should see them completely, and 
only a single line of the third plane. The line passes 
through O and O' and we see it as perpendicular 
to the two planes. On the other hand, in a three-space 
containing the third plane we can see all of it but only 
a single line of each of the two planes absolutely per- 
pendicular to it. 

^ III. 

We proceed to give some further account of the 
Four-dimensional Geometry. We do not intend to re- 
peat what is given in the essays except so far as may 
be necessary in order to correct possible erroneous im- 
pressions, or to amplify certain points. It may be that 
the reader will find it better to read some of the essays 
before going on with this Introduction.* 

When two planes are absolutely perpendicular at a 
point O, any point in one can go completely aroimd O 
and around the other plane keeping all the time at the 
same distance from O and from the other plane. Thus 
we can go around a plane in space of four dimensions 
just as in our space we can go around a line. A two- 
dimensional being cannot go around a line in his 
plane; it divides the plane completely. And so we 
cannot go around a plane in our space for it divides 

* There is quite a diversity in the use of terms in Geometry of Pour Dimen. 
sions. Host of the terms used in this book, however, are defined when used 
or are readily understood. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 2$ 

our space completely. But in space of four dimen- 
sions a plane, though having two dimensions, lacks 
two, and in these we can go around the plane keeping 
all the time at a given distance from one particular 
point of it. If we can discard one of the dimensions 
of the plane, taking from the plane only a line, and 
put ourselves into a three-space that contains the ab- 
solutely perpendicular plane, we shall find that the 
path of the motion is all in view, appearing to us now 
as a path going around a line. 

A plane can rotate on itself around one of its points* 
If two planes are absolutely perpendicular at a point O, 
one of them, rotating on itself in this way, remains 
absolutely perpendicular to the other. We may speak 
of the plane as rotating about the fixed plane as axis 
plane. At each point of a fixed plane is an absolutely 
perpendicular plane and these absolutely perpendicular 
planes may all rotate together about the fixed plane. 
This is the same as when we have in our three-space a 
fixed line and at each point a plane perpendicular to 
the line. Thus we think of objects in our space or of a 
porticm of space as rotating about a fixed axis line; 
and in the same way we can think of objects in four- 
space or of a portion of four-space as rotating about a 
fixed plane as axis plane. In this rotation the parts 
are not distorted; they retain their form rigidly and 
need not be flexible. 

We may also use a curved surface as axis of a rota- 
tion if we allow for a slight amount of distortion. We 
will use the term material surface for a substance hav- 
ing two dimensions of considerable extent and two 
dimensions very small, just as we may say in our space 
that a piece of cloth has two dimensions of considerable 
size and one dimension very small, or that a string has 



26 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

one principal dimension and two dimensions very 
small. If we have such a material surface that is 
flexible, we may rptate it, each portion on itself, so 
that two opposite sides of it shall exchange places 
A material surface, like a piece of cloth with a slight 
thickness in the fourth dimension, will have surfaces 
all around it. We may say that a turning of such 
a substance on itself through i8o deg. brings the 
same two sides back into our space, each on the 
side originally occupied by the other. The different 
parts of the surface do not interfere with one another 
in this process, and so it may take place whether 
the surface is open, any piece of a material surface, 
or completely closed like a hollow rubber ball. In our 
space a rubber band may be twisted on itself so as to 
be turned inside put. This corresponds exactly to the 
turning of a sphere inside out in space of four di- 
mensions. 

The relation of symmetrical figures is referred to in 
several of these essa3rs but not always quit^ correctly. 
Symmetrical figures can best be understood by consid- 
ering positions of symmetry with respect to a point, 
line, or plane. 

Figures in a plane symmetrical with respect to a 
point are equal, for one can be turned about the point 
to the position of the other. Figures in a plane sym- 
metrical with respect to a line, however, cannot be 
made to coincide without turning one of them over, 
turning it through space. Such figures would be re- 
garded by two-dimensional beings as truly symmet- 
rical, with corresponding parts equal, but arranged in 
opposite orders, so that it would never be possible to 
make them coincide. 

Figured in space of three dimensions symmetrical 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 2/ 

with respect to a line can be made to coincide by turn- 
ing one of them about the line. On the other hand, 
figures symmetrical with respect to a point and figures 
s)mimetrical with respect to a plane, unless they are 
actually plane figures, are truly symmetrical and can 
never be made to coincide by a motion in space. Fig- 
ures symmetrical with respect to a plane can be made 
to be symmetrical with respect to a point, and figures 
sjrmmetrical with respect to a point can be made to be 
sjrmmetrical with respect to a plane. Suppose, for 
example, two figures are S3rmmetrical with respect to 
a plane. We connect them by a rod perpendicular to 
the plane and join pairs of corresponding points by 
lines, say elastic cords. Then if we turn one of them 
half-way around on the rod as axis the elastic cords 
will all cross one another at the point where the axis 
rod meets the original plane of symmetry, and they 
will become S3rmmetrical with respect to this point. 

Now in Space of four dimensions figures may be 
s)anmetrical with respect to a point, a line, a plane, or 
a three-space. Figures S3rmmetrical with respect to a 
point may be made to be symmetrical with respect to a 
plane and vice-versa, and figures symmetrical with re- 
spect to a line may be made to be S)mimetrical with 
respect to a three-space and vice-versa. Figures sym- 
metrical with respect to a three-space are truly sym- 
metrical and can never be made to coincide by any 
motion in four-dimensional space. They may be said 
to have their parts arranged in opposite orders. But 
figures S3rmmetrical with respect to a plane may be 
made to coincide by rotating one of them about the 
plane as axis plane through a rotation of i8o degrees, 
and this is true whether they are four-dimensional fig- 
ures or three-dimensional figures. Thus to a four- 



28 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

dimensional being things which we call symmetrical 
do not differ at all except in position. 

This is a very striking fact. A right glove turned 
over through space of four dimensions becomes a left 
glove, a right shoe becomes a left shoe. A right-handed 
man becomes a left-handed man. He does not use a 
different hand after the operation, but the hand which 
he uses now appears to everybody else as his left hand. 
In fact, his point of view is turned around, so that to 
him everybody else appears to be changed. Letters 
appear to him to be turned backward like printer's type, 
the hands of a clock go backward, the world becomes 
to him a looking-glass world. 

There is a distinction not understood by some of 
these writers between turning an object over and turn- 
ing it inside out. A right glove turned inside out in 
our space becomes a left glove and a right glove turned 
over in space of four dimensions becomes a left glove, 
but when the glove is turned over it is not turned inside 
out.* On the other hand, a right glove may be turned 
inside out in space of four dimensions in the same way 
that a closed rubber ball may be turned inside out. 
This process has been described in a preceding para- 
graph. The fingers and thumb do not come out ' 
through the wrist, but every part by itself in its own 
place is turned over with only a little possible stretch- 
ing and a very slight changing of the positions of the 
different particles of matter which go to make up the 
glove. In this process, however, the glove does not . 
become a left glove, but remains a right glove. We 
can get the analogy by supposing that we have in a 
plane a nearly closed figure. This can be turned into 

* Even SchubMt makes this mistake in his article, ** The Fourth Dimension,** 
The Monist, Vol. III., page 429. 



I . 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 29 

its S3nnmetrical form by opening it out straight and 
bending it over the other way so that it is turned inside 
out This process takes place entirely in the plane and 
can be performed by a two-dimensional being. The 
figure may also be dianged into its symmetrical form 
by being turned over, but in this process it is not turned 
inside out at all. On the other hand, if it is sufficiently 
flexible, it may be turned inside out by twisting each 
part upon itself through i8o d^^ees, and in this pro- 
cess it is not changed into its S3rmmetrical form. 

A hypersolid, that is, a portion of four-dimensional 
space, may be separated into two parts by a three-space. 
Thus a section, cutting a hypersolid into two partii, 
will be three-dimensional. A plane cannot separate 
two parts of a hypersolid any more than a line can 
separate two parts of a solid in our space. We may 
make a line go through a solid, cutting out a hole. This 
may happen also to a hypersolid. A rod or material 
line, having one principal dimension and the other three 
very small, will pierce a hypersolid and make a hole 
through it. But we may also pierce a hypersolid with 
a flat plate, something having two principal dimensions 
and two dimensions very small. The plate passing 
through the hypersolid could extend indefinitely in its 
two principal dimensions but the hypersolid would not 
fall apart. Thus we have two kinds of holes in space 
of four dimensions, one-dimensional holes and two- 
dimensional holes. 

A one-dimensional hole may pass through an object 
in a direction away from our space and the object will 
appear to us entirely closed but hollow like a hollow 
sphere. A rod or cord may be passed through such a 
hole and held by it in position, but a rod or cord passed 
through a two-dimensional hole will slip away at once 



30 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

even if we hold its ends. A rod bent around so that 
its ends can be welded together becomes a ring. The 
hole through a ring is two-dimensional. Two rings 
fall apart, but a ring and a hollow sphere may be linked 
together. Thus we may form a chain of alternate 
rings and hollow spheres. In an ordinary knot one 
end of a cord is passed through a ring formed of the 
cord itself and slips away at once in space of four 
dimensions.* 

A wheel of four-dimensional matter, in two dimen- 
sions of the shape of a circle and in the other two di- 
mensions very small, would have for axis a flat plate 
instead of a rod. This axial plate could extend indefi- 
nitely in all the directions of its planet without any 
interference with the wheel. The wheel can slip all 
around over the axial plate unless held to some position 
on it, just as with us a wheel may slip along on its 
axis unless held to some position on it. We may sup- 
pose that in a three-space we can see the axial plate 
and a pair of opposite radii (spokes) of the wheel, ap- 
pearing to us entirely separate; in this way we can 
see a two-dimensional hole. Or we can see the entire 
wheel with a hole through it and an axial rod, cut from 
the axial plate by our three-space. 

We can fasten the wheel rigidly to the axial plate so 

* Some of the writers speak of a loop or *' two-dimensional knot ** as analo- 
gous to an ordinary knot made with a string in our space. This analogy seems 
to have been used by ZOllner, but there is the objection that the loop is not 
two-dimensional if one part of the string passes over the other part, however . 
closely they may be pressed together. A better analogy would be obtained by 
fastening a string at one end to a small object and winding it around this 
object. In the plane this would be possible only by cariying the free end of 
the string completely around, but we could do it in space of three dimensions 
by lifting a part of the string over the object without moving the free end 
away from its position. 

t Sometimes we shall speak roughly of the plane of the wheel or the plane 
of the plate just as we might in our three-dimensional worldj^ 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 3 1 

that it will turn with the wheel, the wheel turning in 
its plane and the plate turning on itself. We may put 
more than one wheel on an axial plate, putting differ- 
ent wheels at different points on the plate wherever we 
please. If these wheels are all fastened rigidly to the 
axial plate we turn them all by turning one. Thus we 
have a method of constructing machinery in space of 
four dimensions. 

The axial plate may itself be a wheel. We may 
fasten two wheels together at their centers making 
them absolutely perpendicular to each other. Such a 
figure can revolve in two ways, the plane of one wheel 
being the axis plane of the rotation and the plane of 
the other wheel the rotation plane. 

A wheel may be doubly circular so that a plane ab- 
solutely perpendicular to the wheel cuts it in a small 
circle just as the plane of the wheel itself cuts it in a 
large circle. Such a wheel, then, may turn in two 
ways and in either kind of rotation it rotates completely 
on itself without passing through any new portions of 
its four-dimensional space. (See below, page 38.) 

We might have a spherical wheel; something in 
three dimensions of the shape of a sphere and its fourth 
dimension very small. Such a wheel with a one-dimen- 
sional hole through it may turn on an axial rod, but its 
motion is not confined to a definite direction of rotation 
as is the case with the flat wheel turning in its plane. 
For machinery requiring definite rotations we should 
use flat wheels with axial plates.* A spherical wheel 

* Binton speaks of the ** four-dimensional being's shaft, a disk rotating 
around its central plane," and of the spherical wheel, ** the four-dimensional 
wheeL" (**The Fourth Dimension,** pages 6x and 71-3.) By associating these 
he leases an impression that the axis of his wheel is his disk, whereas his 
wheel has a one-dimensional axis and is not the kind of wheel to be used with 
his fonr-dimensional shafting. 



32 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

may be used for vehicles. If four dimensional beings 
lived on a four-dimensional earth ; that is, alongside of 
its three-dimensional boundary, a vdiicle with four or 
more wheels of either kind could be used in traveling- 
over this earth. With a flat wheel he could travel only 
in a straight line without friction between the wheel 
and the earth ; with a spherical wheel he could travel 
in any direction in a plane without such friction, but 
would meet with a slight friction in turning from caie 
plane to another. 

A vehicle would require at least four wheels to be 
in equilibrium, and these must have at least two axes. 
Even witfi flat wheels and axial plates it is necessary 
to have at least two of these plates. An3rthing to re- 
main in equilibrium must have at least four points of 
support, not all in one plane. 

It is difficult to comprehend how the boundaries of 
hypersolids, that is, of portions of four-dimensional 
space, are three-dimensional. It is evident that analogy 
requires this, but it is not easy to understand how eadi 
point within a solid can be all that in its place sepa- 
rates the two portions into which the three-space of 
the solid divides four-space. At any point in the three- 
dimensional boundary of the h)rpersolid we can start 
and go in three mutually perpendicular directions 
within this boundary — in as many directions as we 
have altogether in our three-dimensional space. We 
may have to trace curved paths if the boundary of the 
hypersolid is curved, but the paths start out in three 
mutually perpendicular directions just as in our space. 

We can cut open a hypersolid botmded by polyhe- 
drons so as to spread them out in a single three-space. 
Reversing this process, we can form the boundary of 
a hypersolid by putting together suitable solids in a 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 33 

three-Space, say in otir space, and then turning them 
on the faces which join them until they are all brought 
together. The solids are not distorted in any way nor 
separated. Thus if we take a cube, place six equal 
cubes on its six faces and one extra cube on one of the 
six (see Essay IV, Fig. 4 and context), these can all 
be turned and brought together to form the hypercube 
or tesseract which many of the essays describe. We 
have the analogy in the case of polyhedrons whose 
faces can be cut apart sufficiently to spread them out 
in a single plane. The analogy is so very clear that 
we may feel sure of the process, although the result is 
most puzzling. 

We shall mention some of the simpler figures of 
four-dimensional geometry corresponding to the figures 
studied in our solid geometries. 

Among the first to be noticed are the hyperprism 
and hypercylinder with parallel line elements, and the 
h3rperpyramid and hypercone with line elements meet- 
ing at a vertex. These all have for bases polyhedrons 
or solids of some kind, and the element lines extend 
away from the three-space of the base. The h)rpercube 
is a very particular case of the hyperprism. 

The simplest case of a hyperpyramid is a figure 
called a pentahedroid. It has for base a tetrahedron 
or triangular pyramid and thus it has in all five ver- 
tices. Any five points, not all in one three-space, may 
be regarded as the vertices of a pentahedroid. These 
five points, taken four at a time, give us five tetrahe- 
drons and the pentahedroid may be taken in five differ- 
ent ways as a h)rperpyramid. The tetrahedrons are 
placed together face to face, each having one face in 
common with each of the others. We can cut these 
tetrahedrons apart sufficiently to spread them out into 



34 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

one three-space. We then have a single tetrahedron 
with four others resting on its four faces. The penta- 
hedroid is formed by turning these toward one another 
until they are brought completely together again. In 
this process none of the tetrahedrons is distorted nor 
are they in any way separated from one another. When 
brought completely together they form a single closed 
figure inclosing a portion of h)rperspace. This is anal- 
ogous to the way in which we can spread out the faces 
of a tetrahedron in a single plane, and, reversing the 
process, bring them together again and form the tetra- 
hedron. 

In general, the boundary of a hyperpyramid consists 
of the polyhedron base and of lateral pyramids resting 
on the faces of the base. The lateral pyramids are 
joined to one another by their lateral faces in the same 
way that the faces of the polyhedron base are joined 
by the edges. 

A hyperpyramid whose base is a pyramid may be 
regarded in two ways as a hyperpyramid, the vertex 
in either case being the vertex of the pyramid base in 
the other case. The two pyramid bases have, then, a 
common polygon base and the hyperpyramid may be 
considered as determined by a polygon and two points 
not both in a three-space with the polygon. The line 
joining the two points may be called a line-vertex and 
the boundary consists of the two pyramids and a por- 
tion which may be generated by a triangle, varying it 
may be as to size and shape, with one side fixed, and 
with the opposite vertex tracing a polygon which does 
not lie in a three-space with the fixed side. The gen- 
erating triangle may, then, be called a triangle element 

Similarly, a hypercone with a cone for base may be 
regarded in two ways as a hypercone and has for 



i _ 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 35 

boundary the two cones and a portion generated by a 
triangle with one side fixed, the opposite vertex tracing 
a plane curve which does not lie in a three-space with 
the fixed side. 

The boundary of a h3rperprism consists of the two 
polyhedron bases and a set of lateral prisms. The 
lateral prisms have for bases the faces of the polyhe- 
dron bases of the hyperprism and are joined to one 
another by their lateral faces. 

A hyperprism with prism bases has for lateral boun- 
dary two prisms and a set of parallelopipeds. Such a 
figure may be considered in two ways as a hyperprism, 
the two lateral prisms in one case being the two bases 
in the other case. The four prisms are joined in suc- 
cession by their ends and the series of parallelopipeds 
are joined, each to the two next to it, by two opposite 
faces and to a lateral face of each of the four prisms 
by the remaining four faces. If the four prisms are 
cut away from the parallelopipeds and cut apart along 
one common base they can be spread out in a single 
three-space, and if they are right prisms they become 
a single right prism. The parallelopipeds may then 
be cut apart along one common face and spread out in 
like manner, forming when rectangular a single right 
prism (parallelopiped). These two long prisms may 
be placed together on any pair of faces that were orig- 
inally together, one prism placed crosswise to the other, 
and then they may be turned from face to face all over 
one another. In the original figure they were wound 
around each otheir in such a way that every point in 
the lateral surface of one fitted upon a point in the 
lateral surface of the other, and they completely in- 
closed a portion of four-dimensional space. 

If from the four prisms are taken four elements 



36 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

that form a parallelogram, the set of parallelopipeds 
may be generated by moving this parallelogram paral- 
lel to itself, its vertices tracing the ends of the prisms. 
The set of four prisms may also be generated by one 
of the polygon bases moving parallel to itself, its ver- 
tices tracing the parallelograms which join the paral- 
lelopipeds to one another. Thus the parallelogram and 
the polygon play the part of generating elements, each 
with the other for directrix in generating a portion of 
the hyperprism. 

In a similar way we may have a hypercylinder with 
cylinder bases. A part of the lateral boundary consists 
of two cylinders joining the ends of the cylinder bases, 
and the figure may be taken in two ways as a hyper- 
cylinder. Four elements that form a parallelogram 
may be taken from the four cylinders and the remain- 
ing part of the lateral boundary may be generated by 
this parallelogram moving parallel to itself, its vertices 
tracing the ends of the cylinders. Since the cylinders 
may be generated in a similar manner by a plane curve 
moving parallel to itself around any one of the paral- 
lelograms, we have a parallelogram and a closed plane 
curve, each playing the part of generating element with 
the other for directrix in generating one portion of the 
h)rpercylinder. 

The hyperprism with prism bases and the hyper- 
cylinder with cylinder bases are, then, particular cases 
of a class of hypersolids which may be described as fol- 
lows : Two polygons, or two closed plane curves, or a 
polygon and a plane curve are placed together so that 
they intersect but do not lie in a single three-space. 
Their planes will intersect only in the point where the 
curves intersect. One polygon or curve moves parallel 
to itself around the other and generates (with all of its 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 37 

interior points) a ring-shaped three-dimensional figure. 
The other polygon or curve moves in like manner 
around the first, generating a second ring-shaped fig- 
ure. These two ring-shaped figures fit completely, and 
together form the boundary of a hypersolid, indosing 
a portion of four-space. We may call the hypersolid 
a double prism, a prism-cylinder, or a double cylinder 
according as we have two polygons, a polygon and a 
curve, or two curves. When the planes of two gener- 
ating polygons are absolutely perpendicular we have a 
right double prism, and so for the others. 

If either portion of the boundary is separated from 
the other and cut through along one generator it may 
be spread out into a single three-space like our space. 
When the planes of the two generators are absolutely 
perpendicular each portion of the boundary spread out 
into a single three-space becomes a right prism or a 
right cylinder. We may in this case describe these 
figures in another way. To form a right double prism, 
for example, we take two right prisms with the altitude 
of each equal to the perimeter of the other. We can 
then bend these around each other, bring them together 
completely in all parts of their surfaces, and inclose a 
portion of four-dimensional space. In the same way 
we can form a right prism-cylinder or a right double 
cylinder, taking in one case a prism and a cylinder and 
in the other case two cylinders. 

WTien cylinders of revolution are taken in this way 
the double cylinder formed may be called a cylinder of 
double revolution. This can rotate in two ways inde- 
pendently about two absolutely perpendicular planes, 
the planes of the circles formed from the axes of the 
two cylinders. In each of these rotations one of the 
axis circles rotates on itself and the other, lying in the 



38 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

plane which is the axis of the rotation, remains sta- 
tionary. 

When one of the component cylinders has a very 
small radius in comparison with the other, so that the 
second has a very small altitude, one cylinder being 
like a rope and the other like a wheel,* the hypersolid 
is what we have called a doubly circular whed 
(page 31). 

One more figure which we have in four-space is the 
hypersphere mentioned in one or two of the essays, the 
locus of points at a given distance from a fixed point. 
Sometimes the term hypersphere is used to denote the 
hypersolid, the portion of four-space inclosed by this 
locus, which is then called the boundary or hypersur- 
face of the hypersphere. The hypersphere (that is the 
boundary) is three-dimensional, and in it we have 
three-dimensional Elliptic Non-Euclidean Geometry 
just as the ordinary spherical geometry is two-dimen- 
sional Elliptic Non-Euclidean Geometry. 

We will state some of the rules of mensuration for 
Geometry of Four Dimensions. In the case of hyper- 
solids there are rules for computing the volume of the 
boundary or of portions of the boundary, and for com- 
puting the hypervolume, that is, the magnitude of that 
portion of four-space inclosed. These rules may be 
derived for the most part as the corresponding rules for 
area and volume are derived in the ordinary geometry, 
or they may be obtained by the methods of the Calcu- 
lus. They all apply to regular figures and' most of 

* Here we mean a three-dimensional rope sach as we are accustomed to see 
in our ordinary space. All the prisms and cylinders which we have Just h%en 
discussing are three-dimensional, and go to make up the boundaries of hsrper- 
solids. On the other hand, the axial plates and rods, as well as the flat wheels 
and spherical wheels, spoken of on pages 30-32 are four-dimensional, having 
some thickness in all four dimensions. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 39 

them can be extended to certain other classes of figures, 
but these cases need not be taken up here. 
Hyperprism and hypercylinder : 

Lateral volume = Area of the surface of the base 

multiplied by altitude. 
Hypervolume = Volume of the base multiplied by 
altitude. 
H)T)erpyramid and hypercone: 

Lateral volume = Area of the surface of the base 

multiplied by 1/3 of altitude. 
Hypervolume = Volume of the base multiplied by 
1/4 of altitude. 
Double prism, prism-cylinder, and double cylinder: 
Volume of one portion of the boundary = Area of 
generating polygon or curve multiplied by the 
perimeter of the directrix. 
The total volume of the boundary is the sum of two 
such products. We may say that the total volume is 
the sum of the two products formed by multiplying the 
areas of the generating polygons or curves, each by the 
perimeter of the other polygon or curve. 

Hypervolume = Product of the areas of the two 
generating polygons or curves. 

For the cylinder of double revolution of radii R and 
i?' we have the formulae. 

Volume = 2 ^'RR' (R + /?') 
Hypervolume = i^R^R'^ 
Hypersphere : 

Volume (of the boundary) = 2 n^R^ 
Hypervolume (inclosed) =>4«'i?* 
A cylinder of double revolution circumscribed to a 
hypersphere, its radii equal to the radius of the hyper- 
sphere, will have double the volume of the hypersphere 
and double the hypervolume of the hypersphere. 



40 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

IV. 

The question of the existence of space of four di- 
mensions is one which we cannot escape. It may be 
well to remind the reader that this is not a mathemat- 
ical question, though the most interesting of all. The 
possibility that we are a part of a four-dimensional 
space with physical limitations which confine us to a 
three-dimensional space, and with limitations of our 
senses which prevent us from perceiving anything out- 
side of this space — ^this possibility excites the interest 
of all who are inclined to abstract speculation. At- 
tempts may be made to discover physical proofs of such, 
a space, to build up theories on its basis that will ex- 
plain discoveries of modem Physics as yet but little 
understood, or by it to account for various mysterious 
phenomena. Most of us are satisfied that no real 
proofs of the existence of space of four dimensions will 
be found along these lines. Even a workable h)rpothe- 
sis based on the existence of four-dimensional space, 
though it might serve temporarily better than any other 
hypothesis, would hardly justify a belief in this exist- 
ence. But we do say that the existence of space of four 
dimensions can never be disproved by showing that it 
is absurd or inconsistent ; for such is not the case. Nor, 
on the other hand, will the most elaborate development 
of the analogies of different kinds ever prove that it 
does exist. 

The following articles and books treat in a non- 
mathematical way of the fourth dimension or other 
modem ideas of geometry discussed in this book : 

E. A. Abbott, Flatland ; Little, Brown & Co. 

H. A. Bruce, The Riddle of the Fourth Dimension ; 
Scientific American Supplement, vol. 66, p. 146. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 4 1 

T. P. Hall, The Possibility of a Realization of Four- 
fold Space; Science, May 13, 1892. 

C. H. Hinton, The Fourth Dimension; Harper's 
Magazine, July, 1904. 

C. H. Hinton, published by Swan, Sonnenschein 
& Co.: 

Scientific Romances, 
A New Era of Thought, 
The Fourth Dimension, 
An Episode of Flatland. 

C. J. Keyser, Mathematical Emancipations; The 
Monist, vol. 16, 1906, p. 65, 

Simon Newcomb, Modem Mathematical Thought; 
Bulletin of the New York Mathematical Society, vol. 
3, January, 1894, p. 104. 

Simon Newcomb, The Philosophy of Hyperspace; 
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, second 
series, vol. 4, February, 1898, p. 187. 

Simon Newcomb, The Fairyland of Geometry; 
Harper's Magazine, January, 1902. 

"S.,*' Four-Dimensional Space ; Letter to the Editor, 
Nature, vol. 31, March 26, 1885, p. 481. 

Hermann Schubert, The Fourth Dimension; The 
Monist, vol. 3, April, 1903, p. 402. Reprinted in 
Mathematical Essays and Recreations; Open Court 
Publishing CcMnpany. 

J. F. Springer, The Fourth Dimension Simply. Ex- 
plained ; Scientific American, vol. 98, p. 202. 

O. Veblen, The Foundations of Geometry; Popular 
Science Monthly, vol. 68, p. 21. 

A very good treatment of the subject in German is : 

Dr. Carl Cranz, Gemeinverstandliches iiber die soge- 
nannte vierte Dimension ; Sammlung von Virchow und 
Wattenbach, Hamburg, 1890. 



I. 



AN ELUCIDATION OF THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

The Prize- Winning Essay. 

BY "ESSAYONS" (lIEUT.-COL. GRAHAM DENBY FITCH, 

CORPS OF ENGINEERS, U. S. A.) 

It. is impossible to form a mental picture of the 
fourth dimension. Nevertheless, it is not an absurd- 
ity, but a useful mathematical concept with a well- 
developed geometry involving no contradictions. To 
gain a partial and symbolic idea of its meaning, re- 
sort must be had to analogy with dimensions of a 
lower order. 

An aggregate is said to be one, two, or three-dimen- 
sional according as one, two, or three numbers are 
necessary to determine any one of its elements. Con- 
sidering space as an aggregate of points, a line is a 
one-dimensional space, because to determine the posi- 
tion of any point on it one number, giving its distance 
from some fixed point, suffices. Similarly, a plane is 
a two-dimensional space, and the point aggregate of 
ordinary space is three-dimensional. Thus, the exact 
position of any point of the earth is known when its 
latitude, longitude, and elevation above sea level are 
given. Now, if we have four variable, related quanti- 
ties, each capable of assuming, independently of the 
others, every possible numerical value, we obtain a 
four-dimensional aggregate. Such an aggregate, if of 
points, constitutes four-dimensional space. 



44 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

If we connect all points of our space (a 3-space) 
with an assumed point outside of it, then the aggre- / 
gate of all the points of the connecting lines consti- 
tutes a 4-space (hyperspace). Again, just as a point 
moving generates a line, just as a line moving out- 
side itself generates a surface, and a surface moving 
outside itself generates a soUd ; so a solid moving out- 
side of our space generates a'hypersolid, or portion 
of hyperspace. Or hyperspace itself may be conceived 
as generated by our entire space moving parallel to 
itself in a direction not contained in itself, just as otir 
space may be generated by the similar motion of an 
unlimited plane, which may itself be generated by an 
unlimited right line. Any space is that which forms 
the boundary between two portions of a higher space, 
and just as every unlimited plane divides our space 
into two equal infinite parts, so every 3-space divides 
hyperspace into two equal infinite regions between 
which that 3-space forms a boundary of an infinitely 
small thickness in the fourth dimension. 

Two plane figures (say triangles) if in the same 
plane may partially coalesce, but cannot intersect un- 
less in different planes; similarly two volumes (say 
cubes) if in the same 3-space may partially coalesce 
but cannot intersect unless in different 3-spaces. In 
h)rperspace we have the following possible intersec- 
tions : A h)rpersolid and a 3-space intersect in a solid, 
two 3-spaces in a plane, three 3-spaces in a right line, 
four 3-spaces in a point, a 3-space and a plane in a 
right line, a 3-space and a right line in a point, and 
two planes in a point. If the intersections are at an 
infinite distance the intersecting elements are said to 
be parallel, and if two 3-spaces are parallel all figures 
or volumes in one 3-space are at equal distances from 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 45 

the other 3-space. In the case of planes there are two 
kinds of paralleHsm, and parallel planes are either 
completely or incompletely parallel according as they 
are in the same or different 3-spaces, or as their inter- 
section at infinity is a right line or a point. 

To a given right line at a given point one can erect 
in a plane but one perpendicular, while in a 3-space 
one can erect an infinite number of perpendiculars, 
forming together a perpendicular plane, and in hyper- 
space an infinite number of perpendicular planes form- 
ing together a 3-space perpendicular to the given 
right line. A 3-space can also be perpendicular to a 
plane or to another 3-space. Planes may be perpen- 
dicular in two ways, incompletely or completely per- 
pendicular, according as they are in the same 3-space 
or not; in the latter case every right line of either 
plane is pierpendicular to every right line of the other. 

The position of a point in a plane may be de- 
termined by its distance from each of 2 perpendicular 
right lines ; in our space, by its distance from each of 
3 mutually perpendicular planes; and in h)rperspace, 
by its distance from each of 4 mutually perpendicular 
3-spaces. In h)rperspace these distances are accord- 
ingly measured along 4 mutually perpendicular right 
lines, which, taken by twos, determine 6 mutually per- 
pendicular planes ; and, taken by threes, determine the 
above-mentioned 4 mutually perpendicular 3-spaces. 
Just as in our space it requires at least 3 points to de- 
termine a plane, so in hyperspace it requires at least 4 
points to determine a 3-space. A 3-space may also be 
determined by 2 non-intersecting right lines or by a 
plane an<i one point not in it. 

Just as portions of our space are bounded by sur- 
faces, plane or curved, so portions of h3rperspace are 



46 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

bounded by hypersur faces (three-dimensional), i. e,, 
flat or curved 3-spaces. Hyperspace contains not cwily 
an infinite number of flat 3-spaces like ours but also 
an infinite number of curved 3-spaces or hypersurfaces 
of different types. A hypersphere, for instance, is a 
closed hypersurface all the points of which are equally 
distant from its center. Five points not in the same 
3-space determine it, just as 4 points not in the same 
plane determine a sphere, and 3 points not in the 
same straight line a circle. All of its plane intersec- 
tions are circles, all of its space intersections are 
spheres. A hypersphere of radius R passing through 
our space would appear as a sphere with a radius 
gradually increasing from zero to R and then grad- 
ually decreasing from R to zero. 

While in our space there are but 5 regular poly- 
hedrons (solids bounded by equal regular polygons), 
namely, the tetrahedron, cube, octahedron, dodeca- 
hedron, and icosahedron; in hyperspace there are 6 
regular hyper-solids (cells), bounded by equal regular 
polyhedrons. These are Cs (bounded by 5 tetrahe- 
drons), Cs (by 8 cubes), Cie (by 16 tetrahedrons), C24 
(by 24 octahedrons), C120 (by 120 dodecahedrons), 
and Ceoo (by 600 tetrahedrons) . All of them have been 
exhaustively studied by mathematicians, and models of 
their projections on our space have been constructed. 
Of these, Cg (or the hyper-cube) is the simplest, be- 
cause, though with more bounding solids than C5, it is 
right-angled throughout, and therefore the standard 
form for measuring hyperspace. It is generated by a 
cube moving in the direction perpendicular to our space 
for a distance equal to one of its sides. In Fig. i 
where all dotted lines are supposed to be in hyperspace 
the initial cube is symbolically represented hy A B C D 



\ 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 47 

£ F G i/ and the final cube by A' B' C D' E' F G' 
H' , the direction A A' being supposed perpendicular 
to our space. Projecting* the edges of a h)rpercube on 
our space we get a network model of which Fig. 2 is a 
plane projection. The eight bounding cubes are repre- 
sented in the model by the following projections : (i, 
2, 3. 4, S. 6, 7, 8), (s, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, II, 12), (9, 10, 
II, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16), (13, 14, 15, 16, I, 2, 3, 4), (i, 
5, 9, 13, 2, 6, 10, 14), (2, 6, 10, 14, 3, 7, II, 15), (3, 7, 
II, 15, 4, 8, 12, 16), (4, 8, 12, 16, s, 9, 13, i). The 
form of the hypercube is conditioned by the mutual 
relations of these cubes that form its boundaries merely, 
as it contains an infinite number of cubes, just as a 
cube contains an infinite number of squares. In gen- 
erating a hypercube by the motion of a cube, the 
latter's corners generate edges, its edges generate faces 
(squares) and its faces generate cubes. The resulting 
number of elements of the hypercube are therefore : 

In Initial In Filial In Hy- 

Cube, Generated. Cube, percube. 

Corners 8 . . 8 16 

Edges 12 8 12 32 

Faces (squares) .6 12 6 24] 

Cubes I 6 I 8 

Each corner is common to 4 mutually perpendicular 
edges, to 6 faces and to 4 cubes ; each edge is common 
to 3 faces and 3 cubes; and each face is common to 
* 2' cubes. Every cube therefore has one face in com- 
mon with 6 of the 7 others. We must conceive of 
the h3rpercube as composed of cubes starting from 
squares parallel to the faces of the cube and of these 
cubes all that exist in our space are the parallel squares 
from which they start. 

* Not perpendicularly but as from a point at a little distance.— H. P. M. 



48 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



In a plane the only kind of rotation possible is that 
about a point, in 3-space rotation can take place about 
an axis line, and in hyperspace about an a^is pliane. 



/ 


l\ 


r7^\. 




y- 




/ 






\. 


/ 


\ 


\ 


/ 


'\ 


/ 



^ 







Two symmetrical plane figures such as the triangles 
A and B (Fig. 3) cannot be made to coincide by any 
movements in their plane, but by rotating one of them 
180 deg. in the third dimension, it can be made to 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 49 

coincide with the other. Similarly, two symmet- 
rical volumes (with faces equal but in reverse order) 
such as the hollow pyramids C and D (Fig. 4) 
cannot be made to coincide by any movements in our 
space, but by rotating one of them 180 deg. in hyper- 
space this can be done. The rotating pyramid disap- 
pears from our space, and upon its return after rotating 
180 deg. it can be slipped into the other. In our space 
two movements of rotation will combine into a single 
resultant rotation, similar to its component rotations 
except that the direction of the axis is different. In 
hyperspace, however, there is in general no resultant 
for two rotations. Hence there are two different types 
of rotation in h)rperspace and a body subject to two 
rotations is in a totally different condition from that 
which it is in when subject to one only. When subject 
to one rotation a whole plane of the body is stationary. 
When subject to the double rotation no part of the 
body is stationary except the point containing the two 
planes of rotation ; and if the two rotations are equal, 
every point in the body, except that one, describes a 
circle. 

/ Freedom of movement is greater in hyperspace than 
in our space. The degrees of freedom of a rigid body 
in our space are 6, namely, 3 translations along and 3 
rotations about 3 axes, while the fixing of 3 of its 
points can prevent all movement. In hyperspace, how- 
ever, with 3 of its points fixed it could still rotate about 
the plane passing through those points. A rigid body 
has 10 possible different movements in hyperspace, 
namely, 4 translations along 4 axes, and 6 rotations 
about 6 planes, while at least 4 of its points must be 
fixed to prevent all movement. 

In hyperspace, a sphere if flexible could without 



50 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

stretching or tearing be turned inside out. Two rings 
of a chain could be separated without breakage. Our 
knots would be useless. Thus the knot shown in Fig. 
5 could be unknotted without removing the fastened 
ends. Just as in our space a point can pass in and 
oul^of a circle without touching its circumference, so 
in hyperspace a body could pass in and out of a sphere 
(or other inclosed space) without going through the 
surface surrounding it. In short, all of our space in- 
cluding the interior of the densest solids is open to in- 
spection and manipulation from the fourth dimension, , 
which extends in an unimaginable direction from every 
point of space. 

Has h)rperspace a real physical existence? If so, our 
universe must have a small thickness in the fourth di- 
mension, otherwise like the geometrical plane assumed 
to be without thickness, our world too would be a mere 
abstraction (as indeed some idealistic philosophers 
have T ctlntained), that is, nothing but "a shadow cast 
by r more real four-dimensional world." The real 
exi mce of a slight extension in the fourth dimension 
wovxd, moreover, simplify certain scientific theories. 
For instance, in our space 4 is the greatest nimiber of 
points whose mutual distances, 6 in number, are all 
independent of each other; but in h3rperspace the 10 
distances between any 2 of 5 points are geometrically 
independent. If this greater freedom of position were 
permissible to atoms, it would help to explain such 
chemical phenomena as isomerism, where molecules of 
identical composition have different properties. Ag^ain, 
rotation in hyperspace would explain the change of a 
body producing a right-handed into one producing a 
left-handed polarization of light. Further, ProL 
McKendrick said before the British Association: "It 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 5 1 

is conceivable that life may be the transmission to dead 
matter . . . of a form of motion sui generis/' Hyper- 
space has been brought somewhat into disrepute because 
spiritualists have assumed its existence in order to give 
"a local habitation" to their vagaries. Neverthe)fc, 
the possibility of its existence has not yet been showiHo 
be inconsistent with any scientific fact, and the limita- 
tion of space to three dimensions, though probably cor- 
rect, is therefore purely empirical. 

Of what use then is the conception of hyperspace? 
For one thing, it gives a deeper insight into geometry. 
Thus, a circle considered merely as a one-dimensional 
aggregate of points has very few properties, while in a 
plane it has a center, radii, tangents, etc., and in 3-space 
has further numerous geometrical relations with the 
sphere, cone, etc. Similarly, the properties of any g^ven 
line or surface increase in number when investigated 
in hyperspace. Also, just as it requires a 3-space to 
include certain one-dimensional aggregates (the iielix, 
for instance), so in hyperspace hitherto imknown ikies 
and surfaces become mathematically possible. I '^^r 
spaces are contained in higher (if curved, not neifis- 
sarily the next higher) ; and just as the comprehension 
of plane geometry is enlarged by viewing plane figures 
in 3-space, so solid geometry is much illuminated by the 
geometry of h3rperspace. Fields of mathematics hither- 
to inaccessible to geometry are now elucidated by 
geometrical representations. Finally, this conception 
effects a complete divorce between geometric space and 
real space, no longer considered necessarily identical, 
and in other ways also enlarges our mental horizon. 



52 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



i 



II. 

NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY OF THE 
4 FOURTH DIMENSION,* 



BY LIEUT.-COL. GRAHAM DENBY FITCH, 
CORPS OF ENGINEERS, U. S. A. 

The Fourth Dimension is an offshoot of the so-called 
"non-Euclidean" geometry, which has thrown so much 
light on the foundations of mathematics and on the 
nature of space. 

For over 2,000 years Euclid was considered unassail- 
able. His axioms were regarded as indisputable laws 
of real space, and his theorems as rigidly logical deduc- 
tions therefrom. Neither view is correct. His axioms 
are metaphysical assumptions, and his theorems do not 
follow from them alone. The foundation of his method 
consists in establishing by superposition the congruence 
of lines, angles, plane figures, etc., and proof with him 
is thus merely a matter of constructive intuition. The 
axiom of "free mobility" (i. e., the possibility of mov- 
ing figures in space without change of size or shape), 
which for instance does not hold on an egg-shaped sur- 
face but is essential to any system of geometrical meas- 
urement, is assumed by Euclid without being stated. 
(Hilbert discards proof by superposition, for motion 
itself needs a geometric foundation, and so cannot be a 
foundation for geometry.) Another of Euclid's tacit 
assumptions is that the straight line can be infinitely 
extended, which, true of Euclidean, is false of some 
non-Euclidean geometries (e. g. Riemann's). 

* This supplementary essay was written by the winner of the prize after 
the award was made. It is here published as a historical risumi of the subject. 







SIMPLY EXPLAINED 53 

Euclid proves that "if alternate angles are equal, 
then the lines are parallel/' but of the converse propo- 
sitions. 

If alternate angles are unequal, the lines meet." 
If the lines are parallel, alternate angles are 
(either of which, implies the other) he could 
neither, and hence assumed the first, his celebrated 
postulate, without which he could not proceed, as it 
was needed to prove the early important theorem that 
the sum of the angles of a triangle is not ^s than two 
right angles. This postulate of parallels ippeared to 
later mathematicians neither self-evident nor indepen- 
dent of the other axioms. Considered a flaw, fruitless 
efforts were made for centuries to prove it. Yet here 
Euclid is right; this axiom or some equivalent (e. g. 
two intersecting lines cannot both be parallel to the 
same line) is necessary to Euclidean geometry. 

It was from endeavors to improve upon Euclid's 
theory of parallels that non-!S qlidean geometry arose. 
If the fifth postulate is really involved in Euclid's other 
assumptions, its denial must lead to contradictions ; but 
about 1830 the Russian Lobachevsky and the Hun- 
garian Bolyai, independently of each other, showed that 
its denial led to a system of two-dimensional geometry 
as self-consistent as Euclid's. This new geometry is 
based on the assumpti9n that through a given point 
a number of straight lines can be drawn parallel to a 
given straight line. 

Euclid's proof that the sum of the three angles of a 
triangle is not greater than two right angles was still 
considered perfect until the German mathematician 
Riemann in 1854 showed that it must involve a fal- 
lacy, because no premises were used not as true of 
spherical as of plane triangles, yet the conclusion is 



54 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

false of spherical triangles. On this basis Riemann 
further showed that still another self -consistent geom- 
etry of two dimensions can be constructed, based on the 
assumption that through a given point no straight line 
drawn parallel to a given straight line. 
IS we have three self-consistent geometries of 
dimensions, inconsistent as a rule, however, with 
one another. 

Let P C (Fig. i) rotate counter-clockwise about P. 
Three different results are logically possible. When 
the rotating line ceases to intersect the fixed line on the 
right, either it will immediately intersect it on the left, 






Fig. I. Fig. 2. 

or it will continue to rotate for a time before intersec- 
tion on the left occurs, or, lastly, it will intersect the 
fixed line on both sides for a period of time. The first 
possibility gives Euclid's, the second Lobachevsky's, 
and the third Riemann's geometry. 

The straight line of one geometry is not the same as 
the straight line of another, but in all three geometries 
it is the shortest distance between two points. Such 
straightest lines are known as geodetic lines. Inciden- 
tally it may be mentioned that the ordinary straight line 
could not be drawn until recently except by means of a 
straight edge. This of course was equivalent to assum- 
ing it. A method of constructing it was not discovered 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 55 

until 1864, when a Frenchman, M. PeaucelHer, first 
solved the problem, by means of a mechanism of seven 
links. This consists (Fig. 2) of two long links of equal 
length pivoted at the fixed point A, with their other 
ends pivoted to the opposite angles of a rhoq^^^f 
four equal shorter links pivoted together, and ot^^nl 
link pivoted to one free end C of the rhombus an^^ a 
fixed point 5, the distance AB being equal to the link 
BC. If now C be made to describe a circular arc about 
B, P will describe a straight line perpendicular to AB, 
as can be readily proved by elementary geometry. 

Defining space as "any unboimded continuum of geo- 
metric entities," the two non-Euclidean geometries, 
though logically on a par with the Euclidean, were con- 
sidered inconsistent with reality until a space was 
known for which they held true. It was found, how- 
ever, that Riemann's geometry is none other than that 
of a spherical surface (a two-dimensional space of con- 
stant positive curvature) provided arcs of great circles 
be taken as geodetic (straightest) lines. In 1868 the 
Italian Beltrami discovered a surface for which Loba- 
chevsky's geometry held true, the so-called pseudo- 
spherical surface of infinite extent (a two-dimensional 
space of constant negative curvature). In our space 
only limited strips of the pseudo-sphere can be connect- 
edly represented. It is a saddle-shaped surface (like 
the inner surface of a solid ring) ; and as the principal 
curvatures have their concavities turned in opposite 
ways, the curvature is negative. Euclid's geometry 
being true for the plane (a two-dimensional space of 
zero curvature), it will be seen that all three geome- 
tries require a space of constant curvature. On a 
pseudo-sphere the straightest line has two separate 
points at infinity, in a plane one, and on a sphere none. 



56 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

Euclid's axiom that two straight lines — or more gen- 
erally two geodetic lines — include no space, does not 
hold for geometry on the sphere. Euclid's fifth postu- 
late, that two straight — i. e. geodetic — lines intersect 
wb^Hie sum of the interior angles is less than two 
ri^^Bngles, does not hold for geometry on the pseudo- 
sphere. It can now be seen that Euclid's fifth postulate 
does not require nor admit of proof, because it embodies 
the definition of the kind of space to be dealt with (that 
of ordinary geometry). 

Riemann also showed that there are logically three 
kinds of space of three dimensions, with properties 
analogous to the two-dimensional spaces mentioned. 
They are distinguished by a so-called measure of space 
curvature (purely analytical, not denoting curvature 
for sense perception) . If this constant is zero, we have 
Euclidean space; if positive, we have spherical space; 
and if negative, we have pseudo-spherical space. In 
spherical space, straightest lines return upon them- 
selves, and the back of our own head would be the ulti- 
mate background. Space would be unlimited but not 
infinitely great, and the sum of the angles of a triangle 
would exceed two right angles by an amount propor- 
tional to the area. In pseudo-spherical space straight- 
est lines run to infinity as in Euclidean space, but the 
sum of the angles of a triangle is less than two right 
angles by an amount proportional to the area. In both 
spherical and pseudo-spherical space there are no sim- 
ilar figures of unequal size, for in each case the greater 
triangle must have different angles. 

Lie proved that free motion can occur only in the 
above three spaces. There are other forms of non- 
Euclidean space which do not allow of free motion, 
called by Killing the Clifford-Klein spaces. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 57 

With three different self-consistent geometries of 
co-ordinate rank for the investigation of the properties 
of three-dimensional aggregates of points, it was nat- 
ural to regard a space of any type as a locus in space of 
a higher dimension, and this led to the consideration of 
space of four dimensions, the properties of which, wjjerl 
of zero curvature, have been discussed in the main 
essay. 

Euclidean space considered as a region of measure- 
able quantities does not, as we have seen, correspond 
with the most general conception of an aggregate of 
three dimensions, but involves also special conditions. 
It is specially characterized by: i, free mobility of 
rigid figures; 2, the single geodetic line between two 
points; 3, the existence of parallels; or by i, free mo- 
bility ; 2, postulate of similarity. Now these character- 
istics are not necessities of thought, and if they hold of 
real physical space, the fact must be determined by 
experience as in other empirical investigations, that is, 
by observation and experiment, for we cannot logically 
demand that the objective world must conform with 
our subjective intuitions. 

It can never be proven, however, that our space is 
accurately Euclidean, for unavoidable errors of obser- 
vation must always leave a slight margin in our meas- 
urements ; and though within those limits our space is 
apparently Euclidean, this proves merely that the space 
constant is small, but not that it is zero. In spherical 
and pseudo-spherical triangles, the greater the area of 
the triangle the greater the difference of its angle sum 
from two right angles. But as even the interstellar 
triangles of parallax investigations are utterly insignifi- 
cant compared with the dimensions of space itself, it 
must always remain an open question whether, if we 



S8 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

had triangles large enough, the sum of the angles would 
still be two right angles. Even with our imperfect 
measurements, real space, however, might conceivably 
be proven to be Lobachevsky's (or Riemann's) ; for 
instqfice, if angular measurement could be made accu- 
rate to one millionth of a second, and if a lack (or ex- 
cess) of two millionths were then found in the angle 
sum of some interstellar triangle. 

Real physical space cannot be said to be either Eu- 
clidean or non-Euclidean. Geometry therefore throws 
no light on the nature of real space. The study of real 
space is an empirical science, while geometry is a con- 
struction of pure thought, a branch of pure mathe- 
matics. Pure mathematics is a collection of hypothet- 
ical, deductive theories, each consisting of a definite 
system of primitive, undefined, concepts or symbols and 
primitive, unproved, but self-consistent assumptions 
(commonly called axioms) together with their logically 
deducible consequences following by rigidly deductive 
processes without appeal to intuition. Pure mathemat- 
ics thus reveals itself as nothing but symbolic or formal 
logic. It is concerned with implications, not applica- 
tions. On the other hand, natural science, which is em- 
pirical and ultimately dependent upon observation and 
experiment, and therefore incapable of absolute exact- 
ness, cannot become strictly mathematical. The cer- 
tainty of geometry is thus merely the certainty with 
which conclusions follow from non-contradictory prem- 
ises. As to whether these conclusions are true of the 
material world or not, pure mathematics is indifferent. 
As applied, geometry, in short, is not certain, but useful. 

The fact that all pure mathematics, including geom- 
etry, is rigidly deductive, is in fact nothing but formal 
logic, has important philosophical bearings. It defi- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 59 

tiitely and finally refutes Kant, who based his entire 
philosophy on the supposed possibility of forming 
"sjmthetic judgments a priori''; that is, of obtaining 
absolute truth by the intuitions of pure reason quite 
independently of experience. For proof of his stand- 
point he referred to the existence of geometry. This 
argument was irrefutable until the discovery of non- 
Euclidean geometry. Another far-reaching conclusion 
is the following: Metaphysical axioms being mere 
imitations of geometrical axioms will, like the latter, 
have to be discarded. It seems therefore fitting to con- 
clude with the following words of the eminent German 
mathematician Hilbert: "The most suggestive and 
notable achievement of the last century is the discovery 
of non-Euclidean geometry." 



6o THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



III. 

FOURTH DIMENSION ABSURDITIES.* 

BY '^INCREDULUS ODl'^ ( EDWARD H. CUTLER, A.M., 

NEWTON, MASS.) 

The fourth dimension has no real existence in the 
sense in which the external world that we know by 

* First Honorably Mentioned Essay.— This author is attacking arguments 
ofifered in proof of the existence of a space of four dimensions. Writers en- 
thusiastic on the subject have given us details of the four-dimensional geom- 
etry and have tried to explain certain real or alleged phenomena by theories 
based on this geometry. But the possibility of constructing a consistent sys- 
tem, does not prove its existence and we may very well say in answer to these 
writers that no experience has justified a belief in such existence and that no 
well-authenticated facts are explained by these theories any more satisfacto- 
rily than by other theories. Some details, however, have been slightly mis- 
understood by the author, or by the four-dimensional writers whom he is 
answering, and his essay ought not to go out as an explanation of the fourth 
dimension without a correction of his statements on these points. 

He refers first to analogies drawn from the suppositions of a space of one 
dimension and a space of two dimensions and our relation to the inhabitants 
of such spaces. The analogies derived from line and plane geometries and 
the relation of geometry of three dimensions to these geometries are very 
useful in helping us form a conception of the four-dimensional geometry. 
We may even apply these processes to physical conceptions and think of two- 
dimensional and four-dimensional matter with a two-dimensional and a four- 
dimensional physics. Thus two-dimensional matter in a two-dimensional 
space might be impenetrable, one portion furnishing obstruction to the move- 
ments of another portion. While these suppositions may " furnish no basis 
for belief in a fourth dimension," we should not say that they " involve a fatal 
confusion of mathematical with physical conceptions.'* The question of the 
existence or non-existence of such matter is a question of experimental physics 
rather than a question of possible physical conceptions. 

In speaking of lines, squares, and cubes and their boundaries, and of the 
analogy by which we derive a conception of magnitudes in space of four dimen- 
sions bounded by solids, he says that there is no such analogy ; for i* the only 
possible boundary of a solid is a surface, whatever be the number of the di- 
mensions of space.'* Apparently, he supposes that the magnitudes which axe 
bounded by solids are themselves solids, whereas they are portions of the 
space of four dimensions. I«ines are one-dimensional, surfaces are two> 
dimensional, and solids are three-dimensionaV whatever the number of 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 6l 

ineans of our senses has real existence. It is a philo- 
sophical and metaphysical conception, whose actual 
existence cannot be demonstrated by observation or 
by logical reasoning. The existence of the fourth 
dimension is regarded by some as in a high degree 
probable, and as furnishing a basis for metaphysical in- 
vestigation, and a means of explaining some physical 
phenomena, the occurrence of which, however, is not 
universally admitted. It may also, like any supposition, 
true or false, be made the hypothesis for mathematical 
speculations, which are comprehensible, however, by 
the very small and select number only who are endowed 

dimensions of space. This certainly gives us a "regular progression,** lead- 
ing, however, to something which is not a solid any more than a solid is a 
surface. We can think and reason about these figures although we may not 
be able to form any i>icture of them in our imagination. 

Some writers have stated that a right glove tuned into a left glove by 
rotation in space of four dimensions is turned inside out. This is not true 
and, of course, it cannot be explained, but the change from right to left pro- 
duced by a simple rotation is easily explained, and indeed it is exactly analo- 
gous to the case of symmetrical triangles in a plane. This matter is discussed 
quite fully in the Introduction (p. 28). 

If the space of our perceptions did lie within a space of four dimensions, 
then there would be a *' new direction, not connected with any of those which 
we know, but at right angles to them all.** Bach direction which we know is 
at right angles to other directions which we know, but it does not follow that 
the new direction must coincide with them all or with any of them. We may 
** not need to be convinced that there is no such direction,** but there is no 
confusion of thought in describing this direction. 

Nor does the expression ** entering the fourth dimension** seem to be 
** manifestly unintelligible, " even if some slightly dififerent phrase were bet- 
ter. If there were a " new direction ** which we could not perceive, then our 
perceptions would not be unrestricted in direction. A body moving off in this 
direction would indeed *' retain its length, breadth, and thickness,'* but would 
not remain within the range of our perceptions. 

There is no question of the possibility in space of four dimensions of enter- 
ing or passing out of what we call a tightly shut box or room, or of remoidng 
the contents of an egg without disturbing the shell (see foot-note p. 23). 
It is in this new direction that the walls of the room and the shell of the egg 
are supposed not to extend, and if such a direction did exist these movements 
would be possible without any modification of physical laws. 

The space of our sensations and perceptions is only three-dimensional, but 
there is nowhere any contradiction in the Geometry of Pour Dimensions, nor 
anjrthing that is impossible.— H. P. M. 



62 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

by nature with the abiUty to cope with original investi- 
gation in the domain of the higher mathematics. 

The word "dimension" is more readily explained 
than defined. All more or less clearly conceive of space 
as extending indefinitely or infinitely in every direction ; 
and of extension in space there are three "dimensions'* 
—length, breadth, and thickness. Or, in another point 
of view, having three fixed points from which to reckon 
measurement, by three dimensions or measurements we 
can fix exactly the position of any point in space. Thus, 
if the three fixed points be the center of the earth, one 
of the poles, and some other point on the surface, as 
the location of the Royal Astronomical Observatory at 
Greenwich, the length of the line drawn from the center 
of the earth to the point in question in space, as a star, 
however remote, and the latitude and longitude of the 
point in which the line from the center intersects 
the surface, will be three dimensions, which fix exactly 
the position of the point in space, or of the star. Or 
again, starting from any point in space, we may reach 
any other point by proceeding successively in three 
directions at right angles with one another. Thus, mov- 
ing from the starting point, first the proper distance 
east or west, then from the point arrived at the proper 
distance north or south, and finally the proper distance 
up or down, we reach the second point in question. 

In all the ways in which the meaning of the word is 
thus illustrated we see that we can have no fewer and 
no more than three dimensions ; but the believers in a 
fourth dimtosion infer its existence from analogy in 
one of the following deductive processes : 

d ) Conceive, we are bidden, of a space of but one 
dimension. A being in such a space would be limited 
to a straight line, which he would conceive as extending 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 63 

infinitely iifboth directions. His only possible move- 
ment would be along this line, and if he encountered 
another being, neither could pass the other. If he is 
really within a space like ours, although his perception 
is confined to one direction only, and a being in our space 
should lift one of the two beings, and place him on the 
other side of the first, the latter would lose sight of 
the other as soon as the lifting took place, and the 
movement by which the change of position had been 
effected would be utterly unintelligible to him. 

Conceive of a space of but two dimensions, like the 
flat surface of a table. Beings in such a space could 
move around one another, but one of them completely 
surrounded by others would be imprisoned by them. If, 
as before, the two-dimension space is within our space, 
and really depends on the limitation of the perceptive 
faculties of the beings in question, the imprisoned being 
could be lifted by a being in our space, and set down 
outside of the beings surrounding him. The latter 
would lose sight of him during this movement, and not 
imderstand how it had been effected. 

From these suppositions of one-dimension space and 
two-dimension space, the inference is drawn that there 
may be a fourth dimension in our space, and that our 
ignorance of it arises only from the limitation of our 
perceptive faculties. 

These suppositions, however, involve a fatal confu- 
sion of mathematical with physical conceptions. Mathe- 
matical lines and plane figures do not, like matter, 
occupy space, and they present no obstruction to the 
movements of one another. They may freely intersect, 
or pass through one another, or coincide wholly or in 
part with one another. If these supposititious beings 
in one- or two-dimensional space find any obstruction to 



64 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

their movements, it must be because they occupy space, 
and therefore are really in three-dimension space, how- 
ever little they extend except in one or two directions. 
A line or a plane surface can be conceived only with 
space around it in every direction. The supposition of 
a one-dimension or a two-dimension space is therefore 
impossible except as a mathematical abstraction, and 
furnishes no basis for belief in a fourth dimension. 

(2) The straight line, a one-dimension magnitude, 
ends in points ; the square, a two-dimension magnitude, 
is bounded by straight lines, one-dimension magni- 
tudes; the cube, a three-dimension magnitude, is 
bounded by squares, two-dimension magnitudes. It is 
inferred by analogy that three-dimension magnitudes 
bound four-dimension magnitudes, although the latter 
are not known to us. Thus the "four-dimensional 
cube" receives a name, the "tesseract," and is said to 
be bounded by cubes. 

But there is no such analogy as is here assumed. All 
lines end in points, although some lines, like circular 
arcs, require two-dimensional space, and others, like a 
corkscrew curve, three-dimensional. Nor are all two- 
dimensional figures bounded by straight lines. The 
bounding lines of circles and ellipses, for example, 
require two-dimensional space, as much as the figures 
themselves. Still further, solids like spheres or egg- 
shaped bodies, are bounded by three-dimension sur- 
faces. There is, therefore, no regular ; progression 
which would lead us to suppose the existenqe of magni- 
tudes bounded by solids. In fact such a "supposition 
is inconceivable. The only possible boundary of a 
solid is a surface, whatever be the number of the dimen- 
sions of space. \ 

(3) In the series of the successive powers of a 



I- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 6$ 

number, a, a^, a^, a* . . . a^a may be represented 
graphically by a straight line, of which a denotes the 
length ; a^ by a square, of which a denotes the length 
of a side ; a*, by a cube, of which a denotes the length 
of an edge. It is inferred that if we keep on, there 
must be a magnitude corresponding with a*, and so 
on indefinitely up to a**. Such magnitudes are incom- 
patible with three-dimension space, and suggest for 
their possible existence "spaces of higher order." 

To those who have some elementary knowledge of 
analytical geometry, or even of the use of graphs in 
algebra, the origin of the conception of spaces of 
higher order may be presented in a different way. As 
an equation containing two "variables" may be con- 
sidered as representing the locus of a series of points 
in a plane, so an equation with three variables is the 
locus of points in space, referred to three rectangular 
axes. But since, as shown above, in explaining the 
word "dimension," three dimensions or co-ordinates 
fix definitely and exactly the position of a point, equa- 
tions with more than three variables transcend the 
scope of our geometry, and require for analogous in- 
terpretation spaces of more than three dimensions. 

There is no objection to the hypothesis of spaces 
of a "higher order" as a purely mathematical concep- 
tion; but this abstract supposition has no bearing on 
the number of dimensions of actual space as we know it. 

(4) If we connect by a straight line the vertex of 
an isosceles triangle with the middle point of the base, 
we have divided the triangle into two triangles which 
are plainly equal. If we were confined to the two-di- 
mensional surface of which the triangles are a portion, 
we could never move them about so as to apply one to 
the other, and prove them equal by coincidence. Not 



66 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

being under this restriction, but being in three-dimen- 
sion space, we turn one of the triangles a half revolu- 
tion on one of its sides, and then the two figures may be 
made to coincide. Now there are many symmetrical 
solids, for instance, the two hands, which can never 
be brought into identical shape. We cannot prove the 
left hand equal to the right by putting on the left the 
right-hand glove. But if we turn the right-hand glove 
inside out it will fit the left hand. Just as we can prove 
two-dimensional figures equal by availing ourselves of 
the possibilities presented by three-dimensional space, 
it is inferred that in four-dimensional space, not only 
the glove, but the hand within it, might be turned inside 
out, and made identical in shape with the other hand. 
No explanation is offered of the way in which an 
additional dimension would render such an eversion 
possible, and if we could admit that it would do this, 
we are not shown why the actual existence of a fourth 
dimension follows. Some four-dimension enthusiasts 
appear to believe that symmetrical forms in organic 
bodies could not originate without a fourth dimension, 
but no reason is given for this belief. 

The four numbered sections above include virtually 
all the lines of thought along which the effort is made 
to substantiate the existence of a fouith dimension. 
Metaphysical considerations are sometimes added of 
the uncertainty and possible inaccuracy of our concep- 
tion of space, but with no suggestion for correcting 
this inaccuracy, and no argument for the belief in a 
fourth dimension. Admit that the mind must itself 
contribute an a priori element to all knowledge, and 
that the truth oiE things is not limited by the phe- 
nomenal apprehension of them ; it does not follow that 
this apprehension is to be assumed without demonstra- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 6/ 

tion to be false or incomplete. In an investigation like 
the present one it is unnecessary to consider whether 
our conception of the non ego is subjective or objective; 
we must accept the world of matter and of njind in 
which we live as our perceptions present it to us, and 
as it is generally conceived. No observation has ever 
discovered the existence of a fourth dimension in space, 
and it may safely be said that there is no reason for 
believing in its existence. 

The theory of spaces of a higher order, as developed 
in section (3) above, is entirely legitimate as an ab- 
stract mathematical conception, but furnishes no basis 
for the supposition of a fourth dimension in our space. 
It virtually assumes space as we know it to be three- 
dimensional; yet from a suggestion arising from this 
theory apparently (for no other origin for the assump- 
tion is to be found) the four-dimensionists have made 
space as we know it a space of the highest order ; for 
the same analogfies and inferences on which they depend 
would lead us to a fifth, a sixth, an nth dimension. A 
fourth dimension belongs (or rather four dimensions 
belong) to the theoretical four-dimension space; but 
mathematics furnishes no basis for ascribing to our 
space more or fewer than three dimensions. 

The confusion of thought of the four-dimensionists 
characterizes their writings on the subject. The most 
thorough-going devotee of the fourth dimension as- 
serts: "There is nothing mysterious at all about it. 
. . . From every particle of matter there is a new 
direction, not connected with any of those which we 
know, but independent of all the paths we can draw 
in space, and at right angles to them all." It would 
seem indisputable that a direction at right angles with 
all the paths or lines that we can draw in space from 



68 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

any point, would produce lines coinciding with all the 
lines drawn from the point, and therefoie giving no 
**new direction." But we do not need to be convinced 
that there is no "direction" from which we are cut 
off, and in which we cannot direct our perceptions. 

The attempted analogies described in section (i) 
above, are those on which the f our-dimensionists chiefly 
depend, and they rely upon them to show that a fourth 
dimension would explain how a body may become 
invisible. They assert that a body would disappear on 
"entering the fourth dimension." This expression is 
manifestly unintelligible. Every body extends con- 
stantly in all the dimensions of space ; we cannot think 
of it as "entering the dimension" of length, breadth, 
or thickness, or of "entering the fourth dimension," 
if there were one. But the disappearances produced as 
in section (i) depend wholly on removal from the 
limited perceptive faculties of the supposed observers; 
but our normal perceptions are unrestricted in direction, 
and extend to every point in space, unless cut off by 
distance or by an interposed physical obstruction. If 
all the particles of a body moved in the "new direction" 
of the imaginary fourth dimension, the body would still 
retain its length, breadth, and thickness, and would still 
remain within the range of our perceptions. 

The assertion is made on the authority of eminent 
mathematicians, that in space of four dimensions there 
would be no obstruction to entering or emerging from 
space shut in on every side, as a tightly shut box or 
room, and "the fourth dimension" is relied upon to 
explain supposed mysterious occurrences of such en- 
trance or emergence. The modification of physical 
laws in spaces of a higher order, those of unusual 
mathematical ability alone can be expected to under- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 69 

Stand, and in the special instance in question no expla- 
nation is vouchsafed. Until such explanation is 
given, those who can make no claims to excep- 
tional mathematical talent will be unable to believe it 
possible, in space of the fourth, or of any order^ to 
extract the contents of an egg, or to pass an object 
within the egg, and at the same time leave intact the 
continuous material structure that we call the shell. But 
whatever may be possible in theoretical spaces of higher 
order, we need not accept an unintelligfible fourth 
dimension to aid in the explanation of something 
equally unintelligible. 

It may be said in conclusion, that the only "explana- 
tion of the fourth dimension" that can reasonably be 
g^ven, is to say that, in the sense in which the expression 
is used, the fourth dimension is absolutely non-existent. 
It could have meaning only to designate the dimension, 
in addition to the three that we know, belonging to the 
imaginary mathematical hypothesis of four-dimension 
space. The "fourth dimension" has no relation to the 
actual universe in which our sensations and perceptions 
are exercised, and belongs to that realm of thought to 
be entered only by the select few, whose exceptional 
genius includes the development of the mathematical 
imagination. 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



THE BOUNDARY OF THE FOUR-DIMENSIO- 

NAI, UNIT AND OTHER FEATURES OF 

FOUK-DIMENSIONAL SFACE.* 

BY "PLATONIDES." 

The schoolboy early becomes familiar with linear 
measure, square measure, and solid or cubic measure. 
He understands them respectively as "the measure- 
ment of lengths," "the measurement of surface which 
depends on length and breadth taken conjointly," and 
"the measurement of volume which depends on length, 
breadth, and height all taken together." The first in- 
volves one dimension, length ; the second, two mutually 



^^ 



-p^D 



Fig. 



B 



perpendicular dimensions, length and breadth, multi- 
plied together; and the third, three dimensions, each 
perpendicular to the other two — length, breadth and 
height, all multiplied together. Let the units of these 
three kinds of measure (e. g., foot, square foot, and 
cubic foot) be represented by a line AB, a square AB 
CD with that line as side, and a cube ABCD-G with 
.that line as edge and that square as base (Fig. i). 

• Second honorably menlioned essay. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED *J1 

The unit AB may be regarded as made up of an indefi- 
nitely large number M of points arranged continuously 
from A toB; the square ABCD then contains M X M 
= M^ points ; and the cube ABCD-G contains M XM 
X M =M® points. One can go from any point in AB 
to any or every other in AB by moving in the one 
fixed direction of AB; similarly, from any point to 
any or every other in ABCD by moving in the two 
fixed directions of the bounding lines ; and likewise in 
ABCD-G by moving in the three fixed directions of the 
bounding lines (direction forward or backward being 
regarded as the same in every case). Hence, with 
regard to motion from one point to another, the first 
unit is one-dimensional, the second, two-dimensional, 
and the third, three-dimensional. 

Man can make no motion which cannot be resolved 
into a combination of three mutually perpendicular 
directions; he can reach no place which cannot be 
reached by going north or south, east or west, and 
upward or downward ; he can find no point in a room 
which cannot be found by moving in the direction of 
the length, breadth, and height of the room. Sight 
reveals two dimensions directly, the breadth and the 
height of the object beheld, while the third dimen- 
sion, the distance of the object, is estimated by means 
of the muscular turning of the eyes to focus them on 
it. No sense calls for a fourth direction, perpendicu- 
lar to the other three ; in fact, all of man's experience 
leaves him satisfied with three dimensions. 

Leaving experience behind and reasoning wholly 
from analogy, the fourth dimension is introduced as 
follows : Four-dimensional measure depends on length, 
breadth, height, and a fourth dimension, all multiplied 
together. It involves four linear dimensions, each per- 



J2 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

pendicular to the other three ; consequently the fourth 
dimension is at right angles to each of the three dimen- 
sions of the three-dimensional measure. Its unit roust 
have AB as edge, the square ABCD as face, and the 
cube ABCD-G as base. It contains MXM XMX 
M = M * points. To travel from any point to any or 
every other point in it is possible by moving in the 
four fixed directions of its bounding lines. 

The square ABCD (Fig. i) is derived from the line 
AB by letting AB with its M points move through 
a distance of one foot in a direction perpendicular to 
the one dimension of AB; every point of AB in this 
motion describes a line, and ABCD contains, there- 
fore, M lines, as well as M^ points. The cube ABCD-G 
is derived from the square ABCD by letting ABCD 
move one foot in a direction perpendicular to its two 
dimensions ; its M lines and M^ points describe re- 
spectively M squares and M^ lines; accordingly 
ABCD'G contains M squares, M^ lines, and M* points. 
Similarly, the four-dimensional unit is derived from 
the cube ABCD-G by letting that cube move one foot 
in a direction perpendicular to each of its three dimen- 
sions, i. e., in the direction of the fourth dimension; 
its M squares, M^ lines, and M^ points describe respect- 
ively M cubes, M^ squares, and M^ lines ; accordingly 
the four-dimensional unit contains M cubes, Af* 
squares, M^ lines, and Af* points. Considering the 
boundaries of the units, AB has two bounding points, 
ABCD has four, ABCD-G has eight — four each from 
the initial and the final positions of the moving 
square — and the four-dimensional unit has 1 6— eight 
each from the initial and the final positions of the 
moving cube. Of bounding lines, AB has one (or is 
itself one), ABCD has four, ABCD-G has twelve 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 73 

four each from the initial and the final positions of the 
moving square, and four described by the four bound- 
ing points of that square; and the four-dimensional 
imit has 32 — ^twelve each from the initial and the final 
positions of the moving cube, and eight described by 
the eight bounding points of that cube. Similarly, of 
bounding squares, ABCD has one (or is itself one), 
ABCD-G has six — one each from the initial and the 
final positions of ABCD, and four described by the 
bounding lines of the moving square — and the four- 
dimensional unit has 24 — six each from the initial and 
the final positions of the moving cube and twelve de- 
scribed by the bounding lines of the moving cube. 
Finally, of bounding cubes, ABCD-G has one (or is 
itself one), and the four-dimensional unit has eight — 
one each from the initial and the final positions of the 
moving cube, and six described by the bounding 
squares of the moving cube. 

If the bounding lines of the square ABCD are sup- 
posed to be made of a continuous wire and that wire 
is cut at D, the boundary may then be folded down 
into line with AB, forming a one-dimensional figure 
(Fig. 2) of four linear units. The original linear 

til J 

BO O 

Fig 2. 

unit AB has one linear unit at either side of it and 
an extra one, CD beyond on one side. If the cube 
ABCD-G has its bounding squares supposedly made of 
a continuous sheet of tin and that sheet is cut along 
the lines EF, GH, HE, AE, BF, CG, and DH, the 
square faces can be folded down to form a two-dimen- 



74 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



sional figure of six squares. The square ABCD has a 
square at each side of it and an extra one, EFGH, be- 
yond on one side (Fig. 3). Likewise, if the four- 



H, 



£ 



B_ 



■4 



D 
A B 



Fig. 3. 



F B I— 




Fig. 4. 



dimensional unit has its bounding cubes made of con- 
nected solid wood and this wood is cut through the 
appropriate planes, the cubes can be folded down to 
form, by analogy, a three-dimensional figure of eight 
cubes. The cube ABCD-G has a cube at each side of 
it and an extra one beyond on one side (Fig. 4). 
These eight cubes, now forming a three-dimensional 
figure, constituted the boundary of the four-dimen- 
sional unit. 

The following table shows the results obtained for 
the contents and the boundaries of the four units 
considered : 

CONTENTS. 



One-dimensional unit 

Two-dimensional unit.. . . 
Three-dimensional unit... 
Four-dimensional unit.... 



Points. 


I^ines. 


Squares. 


M 


I 





M« 


M 


I 


M3 


M« 


M 


M* 


M« 


M« 



Cubes. 



o 

o 

I 

M 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



75 



BOUNDARIBS. 



One-dimensional nnit. . . . 
Two-dimensional unit. . . . 
Three-dimensional unit. 
Four-dimensional unit. . 



Points. 


Lines. 


Squares. 


2 


I 


o 


4 


4 


I 


8 


12 


6 


i6 


32 


24 



Cubes. 



o 
o 
I 
8 



The reasoning used is capable of extension at once 
to units of five, or even more, dimensions. 

If the one-dimensional unit is extended indefinitely 
to the right beyond B and to the left beyond A so that 
its length becomes greater than any number one can 
name, it represents a one-dimensional space. Simi- 
larly, the indefinitely^ great extension, equally in every 
dimension, of the other units gives a representation 
respectively of two-dimensional, three-dimensional, and 
four-dimensional spaces. 

The one-dimensional unit is separated from the rest 
of the one-dimensional space in which it lies by two 
points, the two-dimensional unit from the rest of its 
two-dimensional space by four lines, the three-dimen- 
sional unit from the rest of its space by six squares, 
and, similarly, the four-dimensional unit is separated 
from the rest of the four-dimensional space in which 
it lies by eight cubes. To inclose an object of any 
number of dimensions in space of the same number 
of dimensions demands, in one-dimensional space, two 
points, in two-dimensional space, at least three lines, 
in three-dimensional space, at least four planes, and, 
in four-dimensional space, at least five three-dimen- 
sional spaces. 

As with the units, so with the spaces, any point can 
be reached from any other in the same space by mov- 



i 



76 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

ing in as many fixed directions, each peq)endicular to 
the rest, as that space has dimensions. 

Time represents a one-dimensional space; for it 
proceeds in one direction only from an indefinitely 
remote past to an indefinitely distant future (Fig. 5). 






Fig. 5. 

The present is a point traveling through time (or 
allowing time to slip past it) with uniform velocity; 
and any point in time can be reached by traveling 
through a definite distance (in years, months, etc.) 
from one chosen fixed point (e. g., the birth of Christ). 

Any portion of the earth's surface, regarded as a 
plane, represents a portion of a two-dimensional 
space; and the two fixed directions are those of lati^ 
tude and longitude. An illustration of three-dimen- 
sional space is that space — ^to man's perception — in 
which the universe is placed. Man can find no illus- 
tration of a four-dimensional space. 

If two lines, AB and B'A^ in the same one-dimen- 
sional space are symmetrical about a point O of that 
space (Fig. 6), AB cannot be so moved in that space 



Fig. 6. 

that the corresponding points shall coincide {A with 
A , B with B\ etc.). To effect such coincidence, it is 
necessary to rotate AB through two-dimensional 
space about O as a center; or, roughly speaking, AB 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



77 



must be taken up into two-dimensional space, turned 
over, and put down on B'A\ Likewise, if two tri- 
angles, in the same two-dimensional space, are sym- 
metrical with respect to a line (Fig. 7), such coinci- 





dence of corresponding points and lines can be effected 
only by rotating one triangle through three-dimen- 
sional space about the line of symmetry; or, roughly 
speaking, one triangle must be taken up into three- 
dimensional space, turned over, and put down on the 





Fig. 8. 

other. Again, if two polyhedral figures in the same 
three-dimensional space are symmetrical with respect 
to a plane (Fig. 8), coincidence of corresponding 
points, lines, and planes can be effected only by rotat- 



78 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

ing one polyhedral figure through four-dimensional 
space about that plane; or, roughly speaking, one of 
the polyhedral figures must be taken up into four- 
dimensional space, turned over, and put down on the 
other. A right hand and its reflection (a left hand) in 
a mirror are symmetrical with respect to the plane of 
the mirror and rotation about that plane would effect 
coincidence. Such rotation would make a right glove 
become a left glove; or, roughly speaking, a right 
glove tossed up in the direction of the fourth dimen- 
sion and turning over there will fall back a left glove. 
The inability of man to locate the fourth dimension 
or to detect the existence of a four-dimensional space, 
even if it be close at hand, is comparable with the 
inability of a two-dimensional man, inhabiting a two- 
dimensional space, to locate the third dimension or 
to detect the existence of three-dimensional space, 
even though his own space might be part of it, as a 
plane is part of a solid. Suppose the two-dimensional 
space represented by this page to be inhabited by 
two-dimensional beings. They have length and 
breadth, can move in those two dimensions, and are 
supposedly conscious of them. They have no thick- 
ness, cannot rise from the paper or sink beneath it, 
and are unconscious of any dimension in such a direc- 
tion; they have no "upward" and no "downward." 
Let them have intelligence concerning all within 
their space to the extent that man is intelligent re- 
garding his universe; let them possess houses and 
bams, and in general let their life be as rich as may 
be. Their houses and bams will have no roofs and no 
floors, for the bounds of the space itself alone are 
there. Three lines are sufficient to inclose any ob- 
ject in their world, and the flat-man himself is ex- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 79 

posed only along his polygonal contour; the interior 
of his polygon — ^his own interior — is to be reached 
only through his contour, for there is no "above*^ 
and no "below" within his cognizance. To convince 
him that a third dimension of "upward" and "down- 
ward" exists, touching and leading from even the in- 
terior of his polygon — his own internal parts — would 
be a hopeless task. Even if he accepts the arguments 
from analogy as to the properties of such a dimen- 
sion, he would rebel at the idea of looking within 
himself to find it. Yet, even there, at right angles to 
the two dimensions which he knows, it is to be found 
— ^as well as everywhere else in his space. And, simi- 
larly, within himself, quite as much as anywhere else, 
must man look if he is to find the fourth dimension. 

Were one to explain to this flat-man that a three- 
dimensional being, approaching from the direction of 
that unknown third dimension, could reach within his 
most securely locked bam and remove its contents 
without opening a door or breaking a wall — or could 
touch the very heart of the flat-man himself with- 
out piercing his skin — ^the flat-man might still be 
none the nearer to an appreciation of the third dimen- 
sion. Equally impossible is it for man to understand 
from what direction a four-dimensional robber must 
come to steal the treasures from the soundest vault 
without opening or breaking it— or by what way of 
approach the four-dimensional physician would reach 
to touch the inmost spot of the human heart without 
piercing the skin of the body or the wall of the heart ; 
yet the route of such a robber and of such a physician 
lies along the fourth dimension. By that route must 
come the four-dimensional being who is to remove the 
contents of the egg without puncturing the shell or 



So THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

drink the liquor from the bottle without drawing the 
cork. Such four-dimensional creatures, inhabiting a 
space containing the three-dimensional space where 
man lives, would constitute the most perfect of ghosts 
for man's world; and the absence of such ghosts 
argues against the existence of a four-dimensional 
space so situated and so inhabited. 

Algebra demands that geometry picture all its prob- 
lems; and since an algebraic problem may contain 
four or five or more unknown quantities quite as well 
as any lesser number, algebra demands a four-dimen- 
sional, five-dimensional, or higher space for its use 
quite as imperatively as the spaces of lower dimen- 
sions. Perhaps certain phenomena of molecular phy- 
sics or the mechanical principles of the electric cur- 
rent may find a complete explanation only with the 
use of the fourth dimension. Perhaps the fourth 
dimension escapes man's discovery only because the 
measurements in its direction are always very minute 
in comparison with the measurements in the three 
other dimensions. Thus far, however, the space of 
four dimensions — and all spaces of more dimensions 
— ^may be only "the fictitious geometric representation 
of an algebraic identity." 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 8 1 



V. 

HOW THC FOURTH DIMENSION MAY BE 

STUDIED.* 

BY '^CHARLES HENRY SMITH^' (CARL A. RICHMOND, 

CHICAGO, ILL.). 

A colony of bees housed in a hive with glass walls 
so that their every movement can be observed affords 
a very instructive lesson in natural history. Such a 
glass hive may also serve as a helpful illustration in 
a consideration of the fourth dimension. Let us 
imagine a hive with its floor and roof of horizontal 
glass plates brought so close together that there is 
barely room for the bees to move about between them, 
and, for the purpose of our illustration, let us endow 
the bees with the intelligence of men. To these bees, 
so confined, forward and backward, right and left, 
would be familiar ideas and their world would be 
one of two dimensions only. Debarred from upward 
and downward movement by the closeness of the glass 
plates, the words "up" and "down" would be mean- 
ingless to them because there would be no experience 
upon which to base these ideas. Imperfect as is the 
illustration, it suggests the conception of a world of 
only two dimensions, length and breadth. 

Plane geometry is a science which deals with such 
figures as triangles, squares, and circles. It is inter- 
esting to know that it originated in Eg5rpt where it 
was developed to facilitate the measurement of land. 

* Third Honorably Mentioned Kssay. 



82 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

This origin of the science gave rise to the name 
geometry, which means earth measurement. Long 
subsequent to the era- of its Egyptian development the 
science was extended under the names of solid geom- 
etry to a study of such figures as spheres, cubes, and 
cones. 

The bees in the glass hive could move around a 
square, could make triangles and circles, and to them 
plane geometry would be a practical science; but with 
their ignorance of an up-and-down direction, a cube 
or sphere would be inconceivable, and a third dimen- 
sion would appear to them as absurd and unthinkable 
as a fourth dimension does to us. Suppose we lay 
two pencils on the table so as to cross one another 
at a right angle and then hold a third pencil so as 
to form right angles with the other two. While this 
is obviously a possible thing for us to do, it would 
be impossible for the bees with their ignorance of 
the dimension of height. They could, of course, have 
two slender pencils in their hive at a right angle to 
one another, but they could^not have a third pencil at 
right angles to both of the first two. We may look 
upon the two pencils as representing the two dimen- 
sions of the world of the bees, and the three pencils 
as representing the three dimensions of our world. 
Suppose, further, that some one tells us to hold a 
fourth pencil at right angles with the other three. 
In our field of experience we can find no place for it, 
just as the bees could find no place in their field of 
experience for the third pencil. This fourth pencil 
represents the so-called fourth dimension. Although 
it is impossible for us to place it, the illustration of 
the relation of the bees to the third pencil or dimen- 
sion teaches us that the limitations of experience 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 83 

ought not to be deemed conclusive as to how many 
dimensions space may have. 

It is a matter of pure speculation as to whether 
there is such a thing as a fourth dimension, whether 
there are beings of intelligence to whom phenomena 
are manifested in the form of four dimensions. It is 
by no means the attitude of mathematicians instantly 
to recoil from the suggestion, but they are pleased to 
go ahead and study as accurately as possible under 
the necessary limitations what may be the properties 
of a space of four dimensions, if there is any such 
thing. The fundamental guiding principle of their 
investigation is this: Whatever they find to be the 
relations of geometry of two dimensions to geometry 
of three dimensions, they assume that there are simi- 
lar or analogous relations between geometry of three 
dimensions and geometry of four dimensions. As the 
circle is to the sphere, so is the sphere to some un- 
known body, which may have its existence in space 
of four dimensions. As the square is to the cube so 
is the cube to a figure in space of f our^^ (Jimc^nsipus 
which we may call the "cuboid.'f 'ir:; :/|!- " • ' rlfM 

Of course the fourth dimension is intahg^ible. Mamie- 
maticians do not ask us to imagine a fourth dimen- 
sion, much less do they ask us to believe in it. It is 
not to be supposed that the most skilled student in 
this subject has a mental picture of four-dimensional 
space. Nevertheless, the properties and relations of 
figures existing in four-dimensional space may be 
investigated and stated. 

Algebra is the science of numbers. It is a very 
efficient aid in the study of geometry. Algebra deals 
largely with equations such as ^3;= 12, which means 
that X and y are two variable numbers that multi- 



84 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

plied together, give 12, as for example, 3 and 4 or 
5 and 2 2/5. All the simpler figures of geometry such 
as the straight line and the circle may be represented 
by equations; in other words, the equations are con- 
densed descriptions of the respective geometrical fig- 
ures, somewhat as a score-card is a condensed de- 
scription of a base-ball game. Mathematicians have 
learned that the properties of geometrical figures can 
be studied far more readily by means of their equa- 
tions than by means of the figures themselves. A 
mathematician who understands this mode of study 
can look at the equation of a curve and tell all sorts 
of interesting and useful properties of it without ever 
seeing the curve itself — ^indeed, without even having 
any mental picture of what the form of the curve 
may be. 

Without going into detail, it may be stated that one 
equation with two variable numbers represents a 
plane figure, thus jr* + 3'* = 1 5 represents a circle. 
One equation with three variable numbers represents 
a figure in space, thus x^ + y^ — ^ = represents a 
cone. What does one equation with four variable 
numbers represent, say, for example, ^^ + 3;^ + ^ + 
w^ = 20? By analogy, we should say a figure in space 
of four dimensions. Althought we cannot imagine such 
a thing, we can pursue our analogies and study this 
unreal figure by means of its equation, and thus we 
can deduce many of its properties. The difference is 
simply this: whereas, when we study the equation 
of a cone, we can always turn to the real cone and 
interpret our results thereon, when we study an equa- 
tion of a four-dimensional figure we have to be satis- 
fied without such an interpretation. In other words, 
although our geometry halts with three dimensions 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 85 

our algebra marches on to any number of dimensions 
and is a stimulus to imagine a geometry of more than 
three dimensions. 

We will now outline briefly a way in which algebra 
may help to give a person some faint notion of a 
figure having four dimensions. It is somewhat com- 
mon to study a figure having three dimensions by 
means of equally spaced parallel sections thereof. For 
example, if the microscopist wants to study the shape 
and structure of a germ cell, he slices oflf exceedingly 
thin sections and arranges them in succession on a 
glass slide. Then by looking at these sections in suc- 
cession he can form an idea of the solid structure of 
the germ cell. Mathematicians have rules by which 
such sections of a solid figure may be constructed by 
means of equations. They start with an equation 
which represents a solid body, for example, j^ + y^ + 
2^ = g representing a sphere, and they perform certain 
operations by which they get a series of resulting 
equations that represent the successive sections of the 
solid body. It remains, then, merely to draw pictures 
of the sections from the data afforded by the result- 
ing equations. By looking at all these pictures, a 
person may get a fair idea of the shape of the original 
solid. In the case of a sphere the sections are circles 
of varying size. As we have already stated, an equa- 
tion having four variable numbers, should by analogy 
represent a figure in space of four dimensions. Sup- 
pose we have such an equation, as Jtr^ + y^ + j^ + w^ 
= 20. We can apply the same rules and perform the 
same operations to get sections of the figure repre- 
sented by this equation. Curiously but consistently, 
these sections come out as solid figures. From the 
data afiforded by the resulting equations, the mathe- 



86 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

matician can model these solid figures in clay and 
lay them in a row on the table before him. Just as 
the microscopist looks at the series of sections on his 
slide to get an idea of the solid structure of the germ 
cell, so the mathematician can look at the series of 
clay models before him and possibly feel that he has 
some idea of the nature of the four-dimensional figure 
represented by the equation with which he started. 

Thus we see how the fourth dimension may be 
studied by means of the equations which algebra fur- 
nishes. There is another bolder way. We have seen 
that we can hold three pencils so that each one of 
them will make a right angle with each of the others. 
Instead of saying that it is absurd to suppose that a 
fourth pencil can be held in a position so as to form 
right angles with each of the first three pencils, let 
us assume that it can be done. Without any further 
assumptions a complete geometry of four dimensions 
can be built up by pure reasoning. Many of its con- 
clusions are no more obvious to the senses than is the 
fundamental assumption with which it starts. Still 
that is the only assumption; all else may be deduced 
from that one assumption and from the principles of 
our well-known plane and solid geometry. 

An illustration of a special method in the study of 
space of four dimensions may serve to show how 
mathematicians reason about such things without 
being able actually to imagine them. We proceed by 
ascertaining the relations between two dimensions and 
three dimensions, and then establishing these rela- 
tions by analogy between three dimensions and four 
dimensions. Suppose we have a glass cube resting 
on the table before us and we close one eye and look 
straight down upon it with the open eye. Its appear- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 87 

ance will be as shown in the accwnpanying drawing. 
This drawing is really a plane figure, of two dimen- 
sions, and it might have been produced in the follow- 
ing manner ; namely, by drawing one square inside of 
another and then drawing lines connecting the corre- 
sponding comers. All this could be done without any 




Top view of glass cube 
dimensiotikl figni 



thought of three dimensions. The bees in the glass 
hive could draw such a figure as the one here on the 
paper before us. Nevertheless, on this figure many of 
the prc^erties of the cube can be studied. By count- 
ing the four-sided %ures (ABCD, EFCH, AEFB, 
BFGC, CGHD, DHEA), which we find to be six, we 
leam how many faces the cube has. By counting the 
comer points, which are eight, we team how many 



on THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

corners the cube has. By counting the lines, which 
are twelve, we leam how many edges the cube has. 
Just as starting with the squares we are able to get a 
two-dimensional figure, which, for the purpose of 
investigation, may be taken as representing the cube, 
may it not be possible that starting with cubes we 




can get a three-dimensional, figure which shall repre- 
sent the four-dimensional figure which we call the 
cuboid? Just as we drew a smaller square inside of 
a larger one, so we should think of a smaller cube 
inside of a larger cube, and just as we drew lines 
joining the corresponding comers in the case of the 
squares, so we should make planes joining corre- 
sponding edges in the case of tiit cubes. The %ure 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 89 

SO formed is somewhat imperfectly pictured in the 
accompanying drawing, and for the sake of clearness, 
let us suppose we have such a solid glass figure before 
us. In the case of the squares, to find from them how 
many square faces the cube has, we counted the big 
outer square, the small inner square and the four sur- 
rounding figures and got six as the result. So in the 
case of the cubes, to find from them how many cube 
faces the cuboid has, we count the big outer cube, the 
small inner cube and the six surrounding solid bodies 
and thus get eight as the result; this indicates that 
the cuboid has eight cube faces. A further study of 
this representative figure discovers that the cuboid has 
24 plane square faces, 32 edges, and 16 comer points. 
This shows how we can get a representation of a four- 
dimensional body, and on this representation we can 
study its properties. There are many considerations 
which we have not space to present which confirm the 
accuracy of the deductions that have just been stated. 

What is the use of such generalities, abstractions 
and speculations ? About the same as to know whether 
the earth goes around the sun or the sun goes around 
the earth. Space is as properly an object of scientific 
study as are planets or geological strata. Moreover, 
the study of these fundamental things in geometry 
throws light on the nature of our own mental equip- 
ment. We learn better what is the nature of reason- 
ing processes and how knowledge is built up from 
simpler and more fundamental elements. Such specu- 
lations sometimes lead to very useful results. 

If you hold 5 marbles in your hand and are told to 
take away 8 of them, this suggestion seems as un- 
thinkable as the suggestion of a fourth dimension. 
But when men chose to represent by — 3 the result of 



90 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

subtracting 8 from 5, instead of simply saying it was 
impossible, then the foundation was laid for the enor- 
mously useful science of Algebra. 

The assumption of a fourth dimension has not as 
yet led to any noteworthy useful results, but it is by 
no means impossible that the science of four-dimen- 
sional geometry may come to have useful applications. 
It has been suggested by Prof. Karl Pearson that an 
atom may be a place where ether is flowing into our 
space from a space of four dimensions. It can be 
shown mathematically that this would explain many 
of the phenomena of matter. At the present stage, the 
suggestion is regarded, even by its author, as merely 
fanciful, though it is not as fanciful as the proposi- 
tion of the German spiritualists who regard the fourth 
dimension as the abode of their disembodied spirits. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 9I 



VI. 
SPACE AND HYPERSPACE. 

BY ^^TESSERACT^' ( CLAUDE BRAGDON, ROCHESTER^ N. Y.) . 

The baffling thing about speculation concerning the 
fourth dimension of space lies in the fact that we must 
reshape our very idea of space. We naturally think 
of space as the box which contains all the furniture 
of consciousness, and in altering our conception of it, 
as it is necessary to alter it in postulating an additional 
dimension, we are dealing, not with the contents, but 
with the box. 

Let us think, not of space, but of spaces, differen- 
tiated from one another by their dimensionality and 
designated in terms of it, so that the greater the num- 
ber of its dimensions the "higher" will be the space. 
Let us think of each higher space as generated from 
the one next below it, and as having the properties 
and dimensionalities of all spaces lower than itself 
patent, and higher than itself, latent. 

Our space has three dimensions, and within it are 
given the conceptions of point and line, line and plane, 
plane and solid. These involve the relation of our 
space to higher space, and of lower space to our own. 

One segment of a straight line is separated from 
another by a point, and the straight line itself can be 
generated by the motion of a point. One portion of 
a plane (2 space) is separated from another by a 
straight line, and the plane itself can be generated by 
the movement of the straight line in a direction not 
contained within itself. Again, two portions of a solid 



92 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

(3 space) are separated from one another by a plane^ 
and the plane, moving in a direction not contained 
within itself, can generate the solid. From this it 
is possible to formulate a definition of space irrespec- 
tive of its dimensionality: Space is that which sepa^ 
rates two portions of higher space from each other. 
Also: Our space will generate higher space (i. e., 3 
space will generate 4 space) by moving in a direction 
not contained within itself. 

In the generation of the plane by the line, and the 
solid by the plane, the "direction not contained within 
itself" is inevitably a direction at right angles to the 
line and to every line of the plane. Hence, a move- 
ment in the fourth dimension is a movement in an 
unknown direction at right angles to every known 
direction embraced within three-dimensional space. 

Proceeding now from general to particular, let us 
endeavor to form some idea of the simplest symmet- 
rical four-dimensional solid — a tesseract — corre- 
sponding with a square in 2 space and a cube in 3 
space. 

In 2 space a square surrounded by four other 
squares, one on each of its four lines, would be com- 
pletely bounded and inclosed; but if this same square, 
together with its surrounding squares, moved in a 
direction at right angles to its surface (i. e., out of 2 
space into 3 space) a distance equal to the length of 
one of its sides, it would trace out a cube bounded by 
four other cubes. To inclose it completely in 3 space it 
would be necessary to add two more bounding cubes, 
the first to that face which coincides with the square 
in its first position, and the second with the square in 
its final position, i. e., in the positive and negative 
ways of the third dimension. The cube would then 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 93 

be completely bounded and inclosed in 3 space. 
Imagine now that the cube, together with its six sur- 
rounding cubes, moved in a direction at right angles 
to its every dimension (i. e., out of 3 space into 4 
space) a distance equal to the length of one of its edges, 
then it would trace out a higher cube, or tesseract, and 
each of the six surrounding cubes, carried on in the 
same motion, would trace tesseracts also, grouped 
around the original center tesseract. But would they 
inclose it completely? No; because as in the former case 
there would be nothing between the cube and that from 
which its motion started. The movement in the new 
dimension would not be bounded by any of the six 
cubes, nor by what they formed when moved. It 
would therefore be necessary to add two more bound- 
ing tesseracts, in the positive and negative ways of the 
unknown, or fourth dimension, at the beginning and 
at the end of the motion. 

In this manner it is established that a tesseract is 
completely inclosed by eight similar tesseracts; and 
because the faces of a tesseract are cubes, a tesseract is 
bounded by eight equal cubes. 

Now just as the cube has squares, lines, and points 
as elements, so the tesseract has cubes, squares, lines, 
and points as elements. Let us examine these. 

In the movement of a cube, which consists of six 
squares, twelve lines, eight points, into 4 space, the six 
squares would give six squares in their initial, and six 
in their final position ; and each of the twelve lines of 
the cube would trace out a square. Hence, a tesseract 
is bounded by twenty- four equal squares (6 + 6 + 
12), and further analysis by means of models or 
diagrams reveals the fact that each is a meeting sur- 
face of two of the cubic sides. 



94 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

The twelve lines of the cube, in its movement into 4 
space, give twelve lines of the tesseract in their initial, 
and twelve in their final position, while each of the 
eight points traces out a line. Hence, a tesseract is 
bounded by thirty-two lines (12 + 12 + 8), and fur- 
ther analysis by means of models or diagrams reveals 
the fact that each is common to three cubes or to three 
square faces. 

The eight points of a cube, in its movement into 4 
space, give eight points in their initial, and eight in 
their final position. Hence, a tesseract has sixteen 
points (8 + 8), and further analysis shows that each 
is common to six square faces and to four cubes. 

Although by these means it is possible to form a 
conception of the elements and projections of a 
tesseract in our space, and even to depict them graphic- 
ally by a series of related diagrams, the intellect fails 
in its effort to co-ordinate these into one figure, that 
is, to picture the tesseract itself. The chief difficulty 
lies in the fact that it is next to impossible to think of 
a cube, a solid of our space, as a mere boundary — one 
of the sides of a higher solid. A study of the corre- 
sponding predicament as presented to 2 space con- 
sciousness will be of assistance here. 

In a hypothetical plane-world, to a h)rpotheticaI 
plane-being, endowed with a body and a mind like 
our own, but minus the power of movement in the 
third dimension and, therefore, minus the consciousness 
of it, a square would be a solid body, being completely 
enclosed by boundaries, in the form of lines, through 
which he can neither see nor pass. The essential insub- 
stantiality of such a body and its property, known to 
us, of being one of the boundaries of a solid in our 
space, would seem to him no less a paradox than the 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 95 

cube as a mere boundary of the tesseract seems a para- 
dox to us. The square rests in 2 space, and to the con- 
sciousness of that space it is a solid if we define a solid 
as a completely bounded figure the interior of which 
cannot be reached without the disturbance of its 
boundaries. According to the same argument, a cube 
in our space is a solid only to our perception, and with 
relation to our space. In 4 space, or to four-dimen- 
sional consciousness, it loses its "solidity" in becom- 
ing the boundary of a higher solid, for the solid of any 
space becomes the boundary of a corresponding solid 
in higher space. 

A rotation in 2 space takes place about a point; in 
3 space about a line; hence, by analogy, a rotation in 
four dimensions takes place about a plane. 

In 2 space, right-handed and left-handed similar 
right-angled triangles could never be made to coincide 
by any motion proper to that space, but their perfect 
coincidence could be effected easily by the rotation of 
one of them in the third dimension, about the line of 
one of its sides. So, in our space, corresponding right 
and left-handed solids of the same elements and equal 
volume, like the right and left hands, for instance, 
could be made to coincide by the rotation of one of 
them about a plane. The mirror image of a solid 
represents the solid after such a rotation. 

The number and the variety of deductions concern- 
ing 4 space which can be made from simple premises 
of the above order is almost infinite, but a sufficient 
number of examples have been given to explain the 
what and how of 4 space. Where is it ? 

Go back to our first definition : Space is that which 
separates two portions of higher space from each 
other. Conceive of 2 space therefore as a vertical 



96 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

plane, separating two portions of 3 space from each 
other. Now, in order that this separation should be 
effective, the plane must be something more than a 
mere geometrical abstraction, that is, if it is a "real" 
plane, it must have a very slight thickness. Its parti- 
cles will have a free movement and circulation in the 
two principal dimensions of the plane, but their power 
of movement in the third dimension, being limited by- 
its thickness, which we assume to be so slight as to be 
inappreciable, will be confined to the infinitely minute. 
This is the h3rpothetical space of the h3rpothetical two- 
dimensional "man," but if he were set down in it, 
without some world to tread, some solid ground to 
push off from, he would be in a condition analogous 
to that in which we should be if we were suspended 
free in space. Let us give him his world : this would 
naturally be a vertical disk, the cross-section of a 
sphere, made of the matter of his space, held together 
by an attractive force analogous to gravity, which not 
only makes and preserves the form of his disk world, 
but holds him to the rim which is its surface. The 
direction of this attractive force of his matter would 
give him a knowledge of up and down, determining 
for him one direction in his plane space ; also, since he 
can move along the surface of his earth, he will have 
the sense of a direction parallel to its surface, i. e., for- 
ward and backward, but he will have no sense of right 
and left, the direction extending out into our space, 
which is his higher space. This would be for him the 
unknown dimension. With the first step in the appre- 
hension of 3 space he would come to the conviction 
that if the third dimension exists, the objects of his 
world which he had conceived of as geometrical figures 
of two dimensions only, had a certain, though a very 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 97 

small, thickness in the third dimension, that the condi- 
tions of his existence demanded the supposition for an 
extended sheet of matter, from contact with which in 
their motion his objects never diverged. 

Exactly analogous suppositions must be formed by 
us with regard to 4 space, namely : that our space sepa- 
rates two portions of higher space from each other; 
that in the infinitely minute of our world there is 
extension and the power of motion in the fourth 
dimension; that there is a direction toward which we 
•can never point extending from every point of our 
space, and that we "slip along" this invisible wall of 
higher space which we must give up any attempt to 
picture in relation to ours just as a plane being would 
Tiave to give up any attempt to picture the plane at 
right angles to his plane. 

Kant imagined that space might contain more than 
three dimensions. He even infers their "very probable 
real existence." Gauss and the non-Euclidean geom- 
eters have established a distinction between laws of 
space and laws of matter which clears the way for a 
conception of space of any dimensionality. To such a 
^conception mathematics lends itself in a truly remark- 
able manner. It is reasonable to suppose that the 
fourth power of a number should have its spatial 
equivalent, just as a square is the spatial equivalent of 
its second power, and a cube of its third. Moreover, 
it is just as possible to deal with four dimensions 
arithmetically as with three and by analogous opera- 
tions, and the shapes, movements, and mechanics of 
simple four-dimensional solids can be made intelligible 
to the understanding — in other words, the mind finds 
itself still at home in regions where the senses do not 
operate. 



98 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

The fact that we can apprehend but three dimen- 
sions does not disprove the existence of a fourth, and 
for the following reason. All our strictly sense im-^ 
pressions are two-dimensional, for we can see and 
contact only surfaces. Touch teaches that an object 
retains the same form and extension through all the 
variations of distance and position imder which it is 
observed, notwithstanding that the form and extension 
of the image on the retina change constantly with the 
variation in position and distance of the object in 
respect to the eye. The reconciliation of the apparently 
contradictory facts of the invariableness of the object 
and the variableness of its appearance is only possible 
in a space of three dimensions, in which, owing to 
perspective distortions and changes, these variations of 
projection can be reconciled with the consistency of 
the form of a body. Consequently we come to the 
idea of the third dimension by an intellectual process 
in order to overcome the apparent inconsistency of 
facts of the existence of which our experience daily 
convinces us. This being so, the moment we observe 
in three-dimensional space contradictory facts, our 
reason would at once be forced to reconcile these con- 
tradictions, and in that attempt a conception of a 
fourth dimension of space — if it reconciled the contra- 
diction — ^would arise. Furthermore, if from our 
childhood phenomena had been of daily occurrence, 
requiring a space of four dimensions for their proper 
understanding, we would naturally grow up with the 
conception of a space of four dimensions. It follows 
that the real existence of 4 space can only be decided 
by an observation of facts. 

Are there any facts? Many phenomena classed as 
"occult," clairvoyance, apparition at a distance, the 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



99 



moving of ponderable objects by unseen means, etc., 
can be explained, on their mechanical side, on the 
theory of a fourth dimension ; but as the dispute as to 
the reality of these phenomena is still going on, the 
reality of the fourth dimension may be said to be an 
open question. 



• • • • t * .• •♦ 



lOO THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



VII. 

AN INTERPRETATION OF THE FOURTH i 

DIMENSION. 

BY "QUEFANON" (ARTHUR HAAS, NEW YORK CITY). 

A ship in a canal could be located at any given time 
by a knowledge of its distance from some town, since 
its motion from that town has been restricted to one 
direction. When space is of such a nature that a point 
in it may be located by one measurement from some 
fixed or standard point, that space is said to be linear 
or one-dimensional. 

The same boat on the ocean, however, could not be 
located unless two measurements were given — ^its lati- 
tude and longitude. The nature of such space is 
defined by the words "surface" or "two-dimensional 
area." 

If, now, our vessel were converted into an airship 
or a submarine, we should be obliged to add to our 
other data its distance above or below the sea level in 
order to place it accurately. With three basic elements 
(in our illustration; the equator, the prime meridian, 
and the sea level) and with three known distances 
from these elements, we can locate any point that 
comes within our consciousness, whether above, on, or 
below the surface of the earth. Any additional meas- 
urements would be either superfluous or misleading. 
Hence we say that our space is three-dimensional. 

In this discussion it will be necessary for us to use 
graphic representations of changes in one-dimensional, 
two-dimensional, and three-dimensional space, and for 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED lOI 

this purpose we shall adopt as illustrations respectively 
the movement of mercury in a common thermometer, 
the movement of the arms of a semaphore, and the 
physical changes which a jellyfish tmdergoes in the 
course of its development. 

The rising and falling of the mercury is a one- 
dimensional movement. If we wish to keep an auto- 
matic record of the temperature during a given period, 
it would be an easy matter to pass a strip of photo- 
graphic paper behind a thermometer, and allow the sun 
or some artificial light to darken the part above the 
mercury. If this paper were kept stationery, the only 
record we could obtain would be that of the minimum 
height of the mercury. Therefore, some movement of 
the strip is necessary. If this motion were to be in the 
length direction of the thermometer, every part of the 
paper would be exposed to the action of the light, and 
no record at all would be obtained. We could obviate 
this trouble, however, by covering the strip while it 
moved through a distance equal to the length of the 
thermometer, then exposing it for a short time, and 
then again moving it Thus, without involving a 
second diriension, we would get a permanent record 
of various successive heights of the mercury. These 
pictures would be intermittent, and we would miss 
the changes that took place while the picture film was 
moving. In order to get a complete and continuous 
chart of the changes, we must move the paper in a 
direction other than that of the length of the ther- 
mometer. In short, we are forced to introduce a 
second dimension. The strip may be moved by dock 
work, and then we would have a two-dimensional 
chart, from which we could determine the temperature 
at any required time, the horizontal measurement 



I02 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

showing the time of observation, and the vertical one 
the height of the mercury at tiiat time. The result of 
this experiment could be read by passing this chart 
behind a vertically slotted surface, thus obtaining the 
effect of a line whose length varies as the strip of paper 
slowly passes the open space. These variations will, of 
course, exactly reproduce the variations in the height 
of the mercury. 

It is not difficult to imagine a being whose percepts 
are confined to a linear representation of objects ; for 
instance, a man whose sense of touch is paralyzed and 
whose eye is covered by a cataract in which a vertical 
slit has been successfully cut Better yet, we may 
conceive of one whose retina itself is merely a line 
instead of a spherical surface. He could not imagine 
such a thing as an angle, and it would be as hard to 
explain parallel lines to him as to describe color to 
a man bom blind. He could see the changes in the 
height of the mercury just as well as we, but a triangle 
passed before his line of vision would present the same 
sort of picture, viz., a line increasing in length; and 
there would be no way of convincing him of the simul- 
taneous existence of all its parallel elements, which to 
us is a very simple concept. He could, however, pic- 
ture from his memory, and re-produce, two or more 
lines which represent the height of the mercury at 
different times, but they would all lie in his one-dimen- 
sional consciousness as separate pictures. 

His knowledge of a growing tree would be confined 
to a line with various colored parts which change, 
both as the tree grows and as he moves his line of 
vision, but the most complex of these changes could be 
reproduced by a picture on a plane surface, slowly 
passed before his eye. In brief, such a being could 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED IO3 

have a perfect conception of one-dimensional change 
merely through a two-dimensional representation. 

When we come to consider changes in two dimen- 
sions, such, for instance, as are caused by the motion 
of the arms of a semaphore, how are we to represent 
them. A series of photographs might be taken in rapid 
succession, and if these were placed behind each other, 
a solid would be formed of which we might say each 
picture was a cross section. A book made up of these 
pictures in their order is such a solid, and the little 
pocket mutoscope exactly satisfies this description. If 
its pages are rapidly turned, the successive sections 
are presented to our sight, and we apparently see the 
arms of the semaphore changing their position. The 
kinetoscope with its two-dimensional strip and its 
shutter does the same thing more steadily, and presents 
the illusion of motion in a two-dimensional area even 
better than the little hand mutoscope. The pictures 
taken by the mutograph are really always two-dimen- 
sional; it is only our experience in shadow and per- 
spective which gives us the illusion of motion in three 
dimensions when the ordinary "moving picture" is 
tiirown on the screen. If we left tiie camera film 
unmoved while the semaphore was moving, only a 
picture of the stationary parts would be taken, the 
rest would be a blur. Hence we must move our picture 
film. 

If we move it continuously, no record of any posi- 
tion of the semaphore will be taken. Here again we 
must obviate tiie difficulty by shutting out the light 
while the film moves over a distance equal to the size 
of the picture it is to take, then exposing it, and then 
covering it again. But no matter how quickly the 
camera shutter is snapped, the representations of the 



I04 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

mutograph can never be continuous. In order to 
represent continuous and gradual change from one 
position of the semaphore to another, a line must be 
used for every point in the semaphore arms, and this 
line cannot usually be represented in the same plane as 
that in which the motion takes place, without inter- 
fering with the path of some other point in the moving 
object. A new dimension must be introduced to make 
a record of a really continuous change. Thus, a more 
nearly correct, though much more difficult, method 
of physically representing the phases of the semaphore 
arms would be the following : Suppose a plastic mate- 
rial (like wax) to be forced against the semaphore 
while its arms are moving. A continuous opening 
would be left in this material as the semaphore is 
forced deeper and deeper into it. Suppose again that 
this opening were filled with plaster of Paris, and that 
the wax were melted away. We would then have left 
a solid body, every section of which would represent a 
phase of the semaphore, and which would contain in 
itself every position that the movable arms had as- 
sumed during the course of the experiment. This 
representation is in what we ordinarily call the solid 
form ; that is, three-dimensional. 

If an imaginary being with a two-dimensional sense, 
an "Inhabitant of Flat-Land," were to have this solid 
passed through his plane, he would see reproduced the 
continuous motion of the semaphore arms. Like our 
slit-eyed friend, the "Line-lander," and for analogous 
reasons, he could not conceive the simultaneous exist- 
ence of all these cross sections. But by using his 
memory, he could reproduce some of them as separate 
pictures in his two-dimensional world — ^such pictures, 
perhaps, as we have in our kinetoscope film. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED IO5 

If a small quantity of yeast were allowed to ferment 
between the slide and cover glass of a microscope, we 
should have under our observation the growth of an 
object in practically two dimensions. Now, its leases 
at very small intervals could be photographed, but the 
same conditions that met us in the case of the sema- 
phore, face us again. The only way to represent all 
the changes that take place would involve the tracing 
of each point from one position to another. This 
would produce a line; and since two dimensions are 
required to present all the points in their relative posi- 
tions at any given time, this line, in order not to be 
obscured, must extend beyond the two-dimensional 
space in which the growth takes place. We must, 
therefore, create a solid, whose successive sections 
would be recognized by the two-dimensional mind as 
the growth of the object which was passing through 
the plane of their consciousness. 

In our previous illustrations we were able by the 
use of two-dimensional space to fix permanently varia- 
tions of position and magnitude of a one-dimensional 
object, and in three-dimensional space we were able 
to fix permanently the changes of an object moving 
or growing in two dimensions. 

Coming now to the phenomena of our every-day 
world, we know that changes in position and growth 
take place continuously in our three-dimensional space, 
and that the time element is necessary to determine 
exactly the conditions of any variable or movable 
thing. Thus the description of a tree would give an 
entirely false impression, if only its dimensions were 
given without adding the particular time when these 
were taken ; and the position of a planet would be in- 
completely given, unless the time of observation were 



I06 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

reported together with the other three necessary meas- 
urements ; even as the position of a ship upon the earth's 
surface is not known by its latitude and longitude un- 
less we know also when these were calculated, and the 
idea of the temperature of a body would be incomplete 
unless the record of time accompanied the statement of 
the mercury's height above the zero mark. 

If we could only picture to ourselves that a three- 
dimensional object is merely the cross section of 
a permanent four dimensional thing, that what we 
are cognizant of is merely a phase of a thing which 
exists in its entirety, and of whose other phases we 
are ignorant, till they are brought to our own con- 
sciousness or till our consciousness reaches them, 
then we could conceive the physical nature of a 
four-dimensional object. Considering, for instance, 
our own material bodies, we are conscious of a 
gradual change of shape and position of all the parts, 
and yet, at the same time, we are conscious of a con- 
tinuing identity throughout all these changes. Our 
past experiences are as real as the experiences we are 
now undergoing. Those past experiences, or phases 
of our existence, are as much a part of us as the 
present ones, and yet owing to the limitations of our 
three-dimensional consciousness we can reproduce past 
conditions only in memory. Nevertheless our lives 
in their completeness are made up of the sum 
of all our experiences and if our whole lives are con- 
sidered as units, and each period of which we are con- 
scious requires a three-dimensional space, then each 
individual may be considered as a four-dimensional 
solid. 

Let us, however, take a more simple illustration. 
A biologist wishes to present to his class a concrete 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 10/ 

tneans of stud)ring the jellyfish. He orders his pattern- 
maker to model perhaps fifty copies of the animal in 
question, showing the changes from the egg to the 
perfect adult. These are molded in glass, and are 
brought into the classroom for study. 

Now, although every particle of the living jellyfish 
is constantly changing, either in size, or position, or 
in its relation to neighboring particles, we say it is the 
same jell3rfish; there is a something that persists 
through all the changes ; an individuality which differ- 
entiates this animal from all others, although to-day 
it is as different from what it was previously as any 
two models. 

These models may be considered copies of mere 
leases of the jellyfish, just as photographs may be said 
to represent phases of the fermenting yeast, and two 
separate lines may be said to represent corresponding 
phases of the merctiry length in the thermometer. 

But no matter how small the interval which elapses 
between the making of two successive models, if there 
be any change at all, that change must have involved 
many, nay an infinite number, of smaller changes, and 
these changes in the case of each atom of the living 
organism must have been continuous ; that is, they 
must be represented by a line, and not by a succession 
of separated points, if we would preserve the indi- 
viduality of the animal in question. 

Now this line cannot be represented in our three- 
dimensional space without interfering with other atoms 
which surround it in three directions. We are com- 
X)elled, therefore, as in the previous illustrations, to 
go outside the space in whici the change takes place, 
in order to represent completely the continuous change 
in anything which preserves its individuality while 



I08 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

changing. Hence, to represent graphically a gradual 
change or growth in a three-dimensic«ial object, a f our- 
dimensic«ial space is necessary ; and the representation 
in such space of a fixed and permanent object whidi 
combines all the phases of a three-dimensional solid 
would constitute a four-dimensional figure. 

Mind you, I do not say that a growing jellyfish is 
necessarily a fixed four-dimensional object, passing' 
through diree-dimensional space, but I do say it could 
be so represented; and tiiat then a four-dimensional 
mentality could see any or all of its three-dimensional 
phases simultaneously, just as we can in a two-dimen- 
sional chart perceive simultaneously all the lengths of 
a varying line. To get a vague conception of such a 
four-dimensional figure, it is necessary for us to group 
all our three-dimensional memories of some changing 
object between two definite times, and imagine them 
merged into a something of such a nature that no 
part of one memory picture overlaps a different part 
of another, and yet that each of these concepts is itself 
complete. This is, of course, impossible to most of us, 
but so are many other mathematical and physical con- 
cepts. 

More scientific but somewhat similar considerations 
than those quoted above, have forced all the great mathe- 
maticians and many great physicists to accept the fourth 
dimension as a solution of many difficulties. Its use 
is recognized, almost unconsciously, even by the ele- 
mentary student, when he computes the area of a 
triangle, for here he multiplies four dimensions and 
extracts their square root to obtain a two-dimensional 

result, namely, Vs(s-a)(s-b)(s-c). Furthermore,|fthis 
theory lends itself to the simplification of many phys- 
ical and metaphysical problems. Therefore, its ad- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED IO9 

herents find an ever-increasing army of convertgi 
At present our three-dimensional knowledge is itself 
very imperfect. We can move unrestrictedly in two 
dimensions, but when we attempt to travel in the third, 
we are limited more than the fishes or the birds. Our 
knowledge of the interior of solids is so dependent upon 
surface study, that in order to scientifically study a 
single cubic inch of tissue, we must examine thirty 
thousand square inch sections cut by a very fine slicing 
machine ( the microtome) • 

The transparency of the jellyfish was the exceptional 
feature which permitted its use to illustrate a three- 
dimensional object whose changes could be studied 
without dissecting it. 

Our tiiree-dimensional concepts generally are mere 
inferences from our two-dimensional knowledge, and 
we are easily deluded by our senses in forming them. 
When our knowledge of solids becomes as nearly per- 
fect as our present knowledge of surfaces, then the 
vague four-dimensional figure may assume a more 
concrete form. Will this ever happen ? Who can tell ? 
Many more revolutionary theories have fotmd concrete 
expression, and then obtained a firm foothold against 
stronger opposition and with less necessity for their 
•existence. 



no THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



VIII. 

LCNGTH, l^KEADTH, THICKNESS, AND 

THEN WHAT? 

BY "QUESNEL" (LEONARD C. GUNNELL, SMITHSONIAN 
INSTITUTION, WASHINGTON, D. C). 

It is difficult for a finite mind to picture^ or even to 
conceive of conditions unconnected with finite experi- 
ences, and unperceivable by finite senses. All finite 
experiences are connected in some way with material 
substances or with perceivable forces. All material 
substances have one or more of the properties of 
length, breadth, or thickness, and all physical forces 
may in some way be rendered perceivable. 

To the lay mind many scientific achievements seem 
almost miraculous, though by systematic effort any 
educated mind may comprehend any of the achieve- 
ments in any of the sciences, for the results have to do 
alone with matter and forces, and are expressed in 
terms which may be transposed into the equivalent 
terms commonly used to describe every-day actions 
and experiences. 

The science of astronomy, dealing as it does with 
infinite masses, infinite forces, and infinite distances, 
would seem to require the ultimate effort of a finite 
mind to comprehend, but ihe ultimate problems in 
astronomy deal only with masses, forces, and three- 
dimensional space, things of common knowledge, con- 
nected only in a lesser degree with common every-day 
actions and experiences. 



? 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED III 

The ultimate theories in physics and diemistry deal 
with atomic and molecular forces and masses and with 
their interactions ; no matter how vast or how minute 
are the masses or forces they remain masses and forces, 
and their dimensions and activities are described in 
terms equivalent to those used in describing all other 
qualities and actions. 

The qualities of three-dimensional matter we com- 
prehend, forces we comprehend, and vibrations we can 
comprehend as one of the manifestations of forces; 
consequently, when the chemists or physicists in deal- 
ing with ultimate theories claim, as they do, that mat- 
ter is simply the manifestation of forces, the idea may 
be grasped, though it may or may not be accepted. 

Advocates of the fourth dimension ask more of our 
reasoning powers in explaining their hypothesis. One 
must lay aside all usual comparison with concrete 
things in grasping this hypothetical idea, as we can 
only reason about the qualities possessed by such a 
transcendental figure, the exact nature and form of 
which cannot possibly be definitely pictured to a finite 
mind. The conception is mental purely and is not con- 
nected with, nor necessary to, the solving or imder- 
standing of any actual problem. Four-dimensional 
space is not and cannot be connected with finite prob- 
lems or experiences limited, as all such problems and 
experiences are, to space of three dimensions. We live 
and exist in space, all our problems and experiences are 
limited to actions in space. 

We know that a point has position alone, but posi- 
tion in space with no dimension ; when the point moves 
in a straight path a line is traced which has length alone, 
the first dimension, beginning at a point and ending at 
a point. Should die line move at an angle, say at a 



^\ 



112 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

right angle with itself, a plane is formed having two 
dimensions, length and breadth, with a line at the 
beginning and a line at the ending of its path, and in 
addition two new lines traced by the two points in their 
movements. If the motion of the line is at right angles 
with the path of the point and for a distance equal to 
the length of the line a square is formed in a plane. 
A square being a good representative two-dimensional 
plane figure, we will use it in our explanation. In 
other words, a plane square is a figure having length 
and breadth, is boimded by four lines of equal length 
which meet at four points. In a similar manner a 
cube is formed by moving the plane, at a right angle, 
a distance equal to tiie length of the line ; this cube will 
have thickness, the third Jimension, in addition to the 
length and breadth of the line and the square. As it 
begins with and ends with a square and each of the 
four lines bounding the first square will, by its move- 
ment, trace a new square, it will be bounded by six 
squares. It will also have four lines from the orig- 
inal square, four lines in the final square, and four 
lines traced by the movements of the four points of the 
original square, or twelve lines in all, meeting at eight 
points; four points from the original square and four 
points from the final square. 

Let us assemble the above facts for convenience in 
comparing them and add to the table the correspond- 
ing properties of an imaginary fourth dimensional 
figure, these being determined as follows: 

As the line, the first dimension, is formed from a 
moving point, so a square, a typical second dimension 
figure, is formed from a moving line, making a figure 
bounded by four lines, and as a cube having a third 
dimension is similarly formed by a plane moving into 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED ^ 1 1 J. 

Number Number Number Number Number 

of of of of of 

dimen- points lines planes cubes 

sionsin in bounding bounding bounding 

figure figure figure figure figure 

Point o I o o o 

I4ne I 2 o o o 

Square 2 4 4 o o 

Cube 3 8 12 6 o 

Corresponding 

figure of fonr 

dimensions..., 4 16 32 24 8 

the third dimension, making a figure bounded by six 
planes, does it not follow that a corresponding fourth 
dimensional figure is formed by the movement of a 
cube into the fourth direction and will be bounded by 
cubes ? 

If this is the case and the line derives from the point 
two points, and the square derives from the line four 
lines and four points ; and if the cube derives from the 
square eight points, twelve lines and six planes, does it 
not follow that the moving figure gives to the corre- 
sponding fourth dimensional figure the following quali- 
ties? 

The cube at rest has eight points in space, at the end 
of its movement it has eight new points in space, its 
movement into the fourth dimension has created the 
fourth dimensional figure ; therefore, the figure should 
have sixteen points. The cube has at rest twelve 
lines or edges and has at the end of its movement 
twelve additional lines, and each of its eight points 
has traced a new line, making thirty-two lines or 
edges m all for a corresponding fourth dimensional 
figure. Similarly, as the cube has six planes at 
the beginning and has six new planes at the ending 
of its movement, and as its twelve lines will in mov- 



114 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

ing trace twelve new planes, there will be twenty- 
four planes in the fourth dimensional figure. Now, as 
a cube is generated from a moving square, when the 
cube moves to generate a figure of the fourth dimen- 
sion, the new figure will have a cube at the beginning of 
the movement and another cube at the end, and in addi- 
tion each of the six squares bounding the original cube 
will by their movement trace a new cube, thus adding 
six new cubes to the two already mentioned, or eight 
cubes in all to boimd the new fourth-dimensional figure. 

From this line of reasoning we derive from a point 
in an ascending scale through the well known figures 
and attributes of the first-, second- and third-dimen- 
sional figures, the logical attributes of a hypothetical 
figure of four dimensions, which is that it is bounded 
by eight cubes and has twenty-four planes and thirty- 
two lines meeting at sixteen points. 

It is not sufficient to say that the incomprehensible 
fourth-dimension of geometry, corresponding to the 
figiu-e of tiie fourth power of arithmetic and algebra, 
does not exist because we cannot picture it or even 
conceive of it, or because it does not enter into any 
problem connected with known matter or force. It may 
properly be claimed that a three-dimensional figure of 
infinite length, infinite breadth, and infinite thidcness 
would embrace infinite space ; but is it possible to pic- 
ture or comprehend what infinite space is? Can a 
finite mind picture a space with no ending, space with 
no beginning and no ending; limitless space in which 
our vast solar system is a mere dot, in which the 
known stellar universe is probably also comparatively 
a mere dot, although it is actually so vast in extent that 
the light from some of its component stars which 
started toward us generations ago or centuries ago is 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED II 5 

only now reaching us. All this known space is, how- 
ever, so far as the human mind can picture it, three- 
dimensional, though its vastness is well nigh incompre- 
hensible. 

If space is limitless, the idea is incomprehensible, and 
if it is limited its limits are incomprehensible. Space 
is limited or it is limitless; in either case the idea 
is incomprehensible. Thus the mere statement that 
an idea is incomprehensible does not prove its 
non-existence. It is common to use as an an- 
alogy, in explaining the idea of the fourth dimen- 
sion, the possible experiences of hypothetical beings 
existing in space of more limited dimensions 
than the three dimensional space we understand, and 
thus by comparison picture our possible experiences 
with space of four dimensions. Picture a being whose 
existence is passed in a plane, say a finite two-dimen- 
sional figure, a square, for instance. This being would 
be shut in by the four lines bounding the square, there 
would be no upper side or under side imaginable to 
this being, for upper side or under side would imply 
thickness which would be a dimension higher than the 
plane. Now this being could move in any direction on 
its square until a boundary line was encotmtered, which 
would be to it a barrier ; it could picture the other side 
of this line, for the other would be simply a continua- 
tion of the plane ; but to reach the other side without 
passing through the line would be incomprdiensible, 
for it would necessitate movement in the third dimen- 
sion, a movement in a direction incomprehensible to the 
plane being. 

Now, however, a three-dimensional being, able to 
move and act in three-dimensional space, a human being, 
for instance, could remove the two-dimensional being 



Il6 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

from its square, pass it over a boundary line and back 
on its plane outside of the boundary lines of the square. 
Thus the two-dimensional being would find itself on 
the outside of its barriers without having passed 
through any of them, for its movement in the third 
dimension would have been unperceived and incom- 
prehensible. Now, imagine a being in a cubic three- 
dimensional figure, say a box having solid covers on all 
of its six sides. There is no conceivable way of getting 
out of such a box save by passing through one of the 
six sides, yet from the analogy derived from the expe- 
rience of the two-dimensional being a fourth-dimen- 
sional being could move the being confined in the box 
into the fourth dimension, and so out of the box with- 
out passing the being through the sides of the box. 
This act is no more incomprehensible to the human 
three-dimensional being than would be the act of pass- 
ing over the boundary line to the two-dimensional 
being. 

It is obvious that a one-dimensional figure on a line 
can, by motion in the second direction, pass off of the 
line without passing through the points which begin 
and end the line, and we have shown that a two-dimen- 
sional figure can, by motion in the third direction, pass 
out of a square without passing through the square's 
boundary lines; therefore, a three-dimensional figure 
could, by motion in the fourth direction, pass out of a 
cube without passing through the cube's boundary 
planes. 

It will be noted that the generation of each of the 
three figures of known space is accomplished by one 
of three distinct motions, each differing in direction 
from the motions preceding, and that by one or a com- 
bination of these three motions any point of any con- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED II7 

ceivable figure of known space can be reached. Now, 
therefore, this fourth movement, that is, the movement 
of the cubic figure, in generating the fourth dimensional 
figure, is a movement differing essentially in direction 
from the movement the plane makes in generating the 
cubic figure, just as the line movement in generating the 
plane differs essentially in direction from the movement 
the point makes in generating the line. 

The fourth movement, essential to the generation of 
a fourth dimension from a third-dimensional figure, is 
inconceivable to the human three-dimensional being, 
just as the third movement essential in generating a 
third dimension from a fwo-dimensional figure would 
be inconceivable to a two-dimensional being whose 
possible experiences were always limited to a plane. 

It is not logical to state that a fourth dimension 
cannot exist, for from the analogies derived from the 
other three movements, the first that of a moving point 
generating a line, the second that of a moving line 
generating a plane, and the third that of a moving plane 
generating a cubic figure, a clear strong argument is 
derived for the possibility of a fourth movement differ- 
ing essentially in direction from any of the three pre- 
ceding movements or any combination of them, just as 
they severally differ essentially from each other. This 
fourth movement is the movement necessary to generate 
a fourth dimension whose figure is inconceivable to the 
finite human mind, but whose boundaries, qualities, and 
other attributes can be as definitely described as if the 
hypothetical figure could be perceived by the human 
senses of vision and touch. 



Il8 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



IX. 

THE FOURTH DIMENSION ALGEDKAIC- 

AI.I.T CONSIDERED. 

BY "N." (burton HOWARD CAMP, 
MIDDLETOWN, CONN.) 

The ccwicq)t of the fourth dimension is exclusively a 
mathematical one, and, therefore, can hardly be made 
intelligible without the introduction of a few mathemat- 
ical ideas. The more important aspects of it, however, 
I shall endeavor to explain with the use only of the 
elements of that algebra and geometry which are 
usually taught in high schools. 

The reader will recognize the following as types of 
equations with which he has dealt, though he may not 
recollect clearly all their properties : 

X + y =4 (i) 

JC'+ /=i (2) 

2^ + 3/= I (3) 

Here the letters x and y are, in first courses in alge- 
bra, commonly called the "imknowns." I do not pro- 
pose to inquire what values these unknowns may have, 
and, of course, these equations are not supposed to be 
true simultaneously ; they are chosen almost at random 
as three entirely separate and independent examples to 
illustrate the fact that some equations contain two and 
only two unknowns. In other equations we may put 
three unknowns; in still others four, or five, or as 
many as we like. 

X + y + 2 =4, (4) 

and;r* + / + ^=i (5) 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED II9 

are examples of equations in which the number of 
unknowns is three, and they are x, y, and s. 

W +x +y +s =4 (6) 
and fF^ + ^ + / + ^' = I (7) 
are equations in which their number is four. 

Now, just as illustrations are valuable in making 
language vivid, so the mathematician finds that, when 
he can form some sort of a picture of his algebraic 
work, he realizes more clearly what it means; and it 
happens, fortunately, that there are a number of ways 
in which he can form pictures of such equations as 
these. I shall speak of but one, the simplest and com- 
mon method. According to this method, in order to 
form pictures of equations in two unknowns, like ( i ) , 
(2), and (3), it is necessary to use space of two dimen- 
sions — for example, a plane ; the essential thing is that 
anywhere in this space it must be possible to conceive 
of two lines intersecting at right angles. Some read- 
ers will recognize this as the method of rectangular 
Cartesian co-ordinates, but it is not important that the 
principle be explained in detail, for all we shall need to 
know is that it exists. It turns out that the picture we 
get for equation (i) is a straight line, drawn, of 
course, in some plane; that equation (2) is a circle, 
and that equation (3) is an ellipse; there are besides a 
host of other curves, corresponding to all conceivable 
algebraic equations in two unknowns — spirals, heart- 
shaped curves, "figure eights," etc., some of which 
have been given names, and some of which have not. 

In order to represent equations like (4) and (5), 
in which the number of unknowns is three, space of 
two dimensions will not suffice; now we shall need to 
let three straight lines intersect so that each makes a 
right angle with the other two, and that cannot happen 



I20 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

in space of two dimensions. Three adjacent edges of 
a cube, however, are known to be mutually perpen- 
dicular, and so the ordinary space of three dimensions 
to which we are accustomed will be suitable, and by its 
aid we will be able to picture these equations. It 
happens that the representations of equations (4) and 
(5) will then be surfaces; equation (4) will be a plane 
surface, and equation ( 5 ) the surface of a sphere ; and 
here again we may write any number of equations in 
three unknowns, and each will be representable by 
some surface — ^perhaps plane, perhaps gently curving, 
perhaps full of convolutions so that it folds in and out 
upon itself. 

When, therefore, an equation contains exactly two 
unknowns or exactly three unknowns, it can be repre- 
sented thus by some curve drawn in space of two 
dimensions, or by a surface in space of three dimen- 
sions. But when the number of unknowns is increased 
to four, as in equations (6) and (7), the method fails; 
for now it requires a kind of space in which may be 
drawn four straight lines, all meeting at one point, and 
each perpendicular to the other three. It is not possible 
to conceive of such a situation, and, therefore, the 
mathematician is obliged to do without the representa- 
tion he has thus naturally been led to desire. But, 
though he cannot have the picture, he can have the 
language. Equation (6) looks a good deal like equation 
(4), which is a plane, and indeed it has many of the 
same properties ; so he decides to call (6) also a plane, 
but to distinguish it from (4) he calls it a "plane in 
four dimensions,"* while (4) is a plane in three dimen- 

* These are not suitable terms, for an actual plane or a sphere may be spoken 
of as in space of four dimensions. ** Hyperplane " and " h3n;>erspace " are 
terms often used.— H. P. M. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 121 

sions. Likewise (7) is to be called a "spherical surface 
in four dimensions," while its analogy, (5), is a spher- 
ical surface in three dimensions. He does not mean to 
imply by such language that it may be possible to con- 
ceive of four mutually perpendicular straight lines ; he 
does not suggest an)rthing whatever about our ideas of 
space, or, to speak more precisely, about our ideas of 
motion. He is merely using analogous terms because he 
finds them convenient. They possess for him some valu- 
able qualities — ^they are brief and suggestive; and so, 
with full knowledge of their limitations, he uses them. 
They are brief, because it is generally shorter to give 
merely the name of a surface, than it is to describe min- 
utely the general class of equations which that surface 
represents. It would take us too far afield to show fully 
in what ways he finds them suggestive, but a single illus- 
tration may be helpful. Suppose he wishes to find out 
what relations exist between all equations which, like 
(6), he has decided to call planes in space of four 
dimensions, and all equations which, like (7), he has 
decided to call spherical surfaces in space of four di- 
mensions. These are equations in four imknowns ; he 
looks back at their analogues in three unknowns, that 
is, at equations like (4) and (5), for which he has 
really found a geometrical meaning. These are really 
representable by the plane and by the spherical surface ; 
and so, by thinking of the geometrical relations be- 
tween these two figures, he has a clue to what he is to 
look for in dealing with the corresponding equations in 
four unknowns. Of course, he may not find it, for it 
is not true that always the same relations hold for these 
different sets of equations, but at least he is on the road 
to discovery — if he does not find what he is looking 
for, he is liable to find something else. 



122 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

From this point of view, then, the fourth dimen- 
sion is a convenient phraseology, and only that. It is 
customary also to use in like manner the terms, "fifth 
dimension," and "sixth dimension," and so on, in 
speaking of equations in more than four unknowns; 
and when the mathematician thus uses such terms, 
when, for example, he speaks of a surface in four- 
dimensional space, he is speaking and thinking merely 
of some kind of equation in four unknowns. 

But there is another point of view from which the 
fourth dimension is sometimes considered. Hopeless 
as it is for us, who have lived only in three-dimensional 
space, to conceive of four straight lines meeting at a 
point so that each is perpendicular to the other three, 
yet it is quite possible for us to find out what sort of 
things would happen if indeed four such straight lines 
could exist. To assume, then, that four such straight 
lines may exist, and to deduce the logical results of that 
assumption is another of the mathematician's problems. 
It matters not to him that his assumption asserts an in- 
conceivable situation; he is not concerned at all with 
the question of its truth, only with its logical conse- 
quences. 

Of course, such a geometry does not at the 
present state of our knowledge have important prac- 
tical applications, but at least it is rich in ideas, and 
it is by no means certain that its relation to our sur- 
roundings is not closer than it appears. For, though 
in this sense four-dimensional space, that is, motion in 
four different mutually perpendicular directions, is to 
us unthinkable, we cannot surely say that it may not 
exist. If it does exist, we can know something of those 
four-dimensional bodies which may also exist, and a 
number of interesting results follow. Suppose, for 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 23 

example, we consider some closed two-dimensional 
figure, say a circle. We know it is impossible 
for a point which always remains in the plane of 
the circle to move from that part of the plane which 
is inside the circle to that part which is outside, without 
passing through the circumference. But, if the point 
may make use of motion in a third dimension, and so 
get out of the plane for an instant, it may jump over 
the circumference, and without touching it at all reach 
the outer part of the plane. Likewise, if we try to 
think of a point moving from the inside of a sphere to 
the outside, without passing through the surface, the 
thing is inconceivable to us, and so we say it is impos- 
sible; but, if we assume a fourth dimension, then the 
point could, so to speak, "jump over" the surface, and 
appear again in three-dimensional space outside the 
sphere. The same is true of any such closed surface 
in three dimensions. If a prisoner could make use of 
motion in a fourth dimension, we know he could escape 
from the inside of a closed cell without touching the 
sides at all. 

From these two aspects, then, the mathematician 
commonly regards this subject of four dimensions- 
one furnishes an abbreviated and suggestive method of 
denoting various types of equations in four imknowns, 
and the other is the suppositicwi that four mutually 
perpendicular straight lines can exist. Neither can 
properly be the basis of any physical theory, at least 
at present, for the one is only a phrase and the other 
is a supposition which is not surely supported by any- 
thing tihat we know of the physical universe. At the 
same time, it may be well to remember that there is 
nothing self -contradictory in the assertion that each of 
four straight lines can be perpendicular to all of the 



124 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

Other three. Whatever "proofs'* have been given that 
this is impossible are based (ultimately) upon the intui- 
tion that space is three-dimensional. In other words, 
the only reason we have for believing that only three 
straight lines can be mutually perpendicular is that such 
a condition is the only one we have ever experienced. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I25 



X. 



I>irriCULTIES IN IMAGINING THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

BY ''a dweller in THREE DIMENSIONS/' 
(MRS. ELIZABETH BROWN DAVIS, WASHINGTON, D. C.)- 

We live in space of three dimensions. We call these 
three dimensions length, breadth, and thickness. For 
example, a line has length, but no breadth or thickness. 
A square has length and breadth, but no thickness. A 
cube has all three — length, breadth, and thickness. All 
the objects which we touch and use have these threo 
dimensions, no more and no less. 

Even when we say that a line has length, but no 
breadth or thickness, in reality we have to exercise our 
imagination to picture a line absolutely devoid of 
breadth or thickness. In practice, if we attempted to 
make such an object of only one dimension, which we 
could pick up and handle, the nearest approach to it 
that we could make would be an extremely fine rod 
or wire, but the most finely attenuated wire that could 
possibly be manufactured would evidently have some 
breadth and some thickness, though they might be 
extremely minute. 

If we attempt to manufacture a surface having two 
dimensions, length and breadth, but no thickness, we 
will find it equally impossible. Some of the metals 
are capable of being rolled into extremely thin sheets, 
but it would not be true to say that they have no thick- 
ness at all. We may speak of the surface of a sheet 



126 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

of paper, but we cannot separate this surface from 
the paper without taking away some of the thickness 
with it. 

Hence we see that the objects with which we are 
surrounded on all sides and which we constantly use, 
all have three dimensions. Our own bodies have three 
dimensions, and we live in a world of three dimensions. 
The notion of three dimensions is one of our inherent 
ideas, bequeathed to us by our earliest ancestors. 
Hence it is difficult for us to conceive the possibility of 
a world in which there are either more or less than 
three dimensions. 

It is possible, however, to picture in the imagination 
a world of two, or even of only one dimension, because 
to do so, it is only necessary to take away, in imagina- 
tion, from known objects, a portion of themselves, that 
is, one or two of their known dimensions, and to 
picture their appearance as it would be under those 
conditions. 

On the other hand, to picture in the imagination a 
world of four dimensions, or even one object of four 
dimensions, requires that we add to three dimensions 
already known, other parts about which we know 
nothing whatever. It is obviously much easier to 
imagine a known object stripped of some of its known 
parts, but whose remaining parts are also known, than 
it is to imagine that same known object, with all of 
its known parts intact, and increased by other parts 
which are entirely unknown, and about which we have 
no information to guide us. 

Moreover, we have no good reason for supposing that 
a world of four dimensions does anywhere exist. But 
the question has often been asked, If there are three 
dimensions, why are there not four, or five, or even 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 12/ 

more? Why should the number of dimensions be 
limited to three? Why should it be limited at all? 
To this there is clearly no satisfactory answer. 

Because a condition, or a state of affairs, has never 
come within our own experience, does not by any 
means prove it impossible. There are many things in 
the world around us to-day, even in daily use, which 
not many years ago we would have declared impossible. 
We can readily call to mind several instances of this 
fact. 

Hence, if we are not prepared to admit that a fourth 
dimension is impossible, we must conclude that it may 
somewhere, under some circumstances, be a possibility. 
When we have reached this conclusion, the mind 
eagerly b^ns to wonder and question what appear- 
ance an object of four dimensions would present, and 
what would be the conditions of life in a world of 
four dimensions. Since we have no information to 
guide us, we must look to the imagination for our only 
answer, and the imagination is ready to respond, as it 
always is when called upon, though in this case it has 
extremely meager data. 

The best way to approach the solution of this inter- 
esting question, is to picture in the imagination beings 
of two dimensions, living in a world of two dimensions, 
and then to imagine the relation of our world of three 
dimensions to theirs. From this we can reason for- 
ward, from the known to the unknown, and by analogy, 
form some notion of the comparison between our three- 
dimensional space and a world of four dimensions. 

A world of two dimensions would lie in a single 
plane, having length and breadth, but no thickness. 
Let us suppose this plane to be horizontal, like the flat 
top of a table. All die objects in it would be absolutely 



128 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

flat, without any thickness whatever. If such a world 
of two dimensions were peopled by intelligent beings, 
their bodies also would have two dimensions, length 
and breadth, but no thickness. They might have 
straight sides, like squares or triangles, or they might 
be curved, but whatever their shape, they would be 
perfectly flat. 

They could glide about the plane in any direction 
they pleased, as long as they remained in the plane, 
but they could not move out of their plane. Hence 
they could not lift themselves up on edge, as we would 
stand a card on its edge on the table; nor turn them- 
selves over, as we would turn up the face of a card. 
They could not move one hair's breadth out of their 
plane, for if they did they would at once be in three 
dimensions, and we are supposing them to live wholly 
in two dimensions. 

They not only could not move out of their plane, 
but they could see only objects lying in their own 
plane. That is, their, eyes would be so constructed that 
they could see horizontally in every direction in their 
own plane, but they could see nothing above their 
plane, and nothing below it. 

Instead of imagining their plane a small one rest- 
ing on the top of a table, we may, if we wish, 
imagine it a huge plane out in space, reaching out to 
the most distant stars. They might then be able to 
see the stars which happened to lie in this extended 
plane, but no matter how bright the stars not lying in 
their plane might be, those stars would be invisible to 
them. 

Not only would these creatures be unable to move 
themselves out of their two-dimensional world into 
the third dimension, and unable to see any object not 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 29 

lying in their own plane, but their ideas would be 
equally as limited as their powers of locomotion and of 
vision. It would be impossible for them to imagine 
an object having more than two dimensions, and the 
expression "third dimension" would be as unmeaning 
to them as the expression "fourth dimension" is to us. 
For instance, they might understand perfectly all the 
properties of the square, triangle, and circle, but they 
would have no conception of a cube, a pyramid, or a 
sphere, and if any one attempted to describe such 
objects to them it would be impossible to convey the 
correct idea to their minds. 

Thus we can see how such creatures might live, 
throughout the entire history of their race, in a world 
of only two dimensions, seeing and understanding only 
two dimensions, and yet with three dimensions lying 
all about them, extending out to infinity above their 
plane, and to infinity below it. 

Now, if there is a fourth dimension, it must encom- 
pass the three dimensions with which we are familiar, 
in very much the same way that three-dimensional 
space surrounds the plane of two dimensions. 

If we should try to explain to the being who knows 
only two dimensions the meaning of the third dimen- 
sion, we would probably begin by talking to him about 
one dimension, which, of course, he could easily imder- 
stand. We would point out to him that if a straight 
line be drawn in one dimension, and then a second 
line drawn at right angles to the first, the two lines 
thus drawn would represent two dimensions. This 
he would understand perfectly. We would then pass 
to the next step, and explain to him that, starting from 
that same right angle, if we construct a third line per- 
pendicular to both of the original lines at their point 



130 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

of intersection, we should then be in space of three 
dimensions. He would probably be able to follow the 
reasoning readily, but when he tried to form a picture 
in his imagination, it would be impossible for him to 
see how three lines could be perpendicular to one 
another at one and the same time and at the same point. 
It would be beyond his utmost power to trace this 
third line in space. 

Practically, this same difficulty confronts us, when 
we try to pass from the notion of three dimensions to 
the notion of four dimensions. We know that two 
lines at right angles to each other lie in a plane of two 
dimensions. And we know that a third line can be 
constructed in such a manner that all three lines will 
be perpendicular to one another in the same point, 
and that the three directions in which these lines 
extend will represent the three dimensions of our space. 
All this is very familiar to us. Now, if we proceed 
one step further, and construct a line meeting these 
three lines in their point of intersection, and perpen- 
dicular at one and the same time to all three of than, 
this fourth line will extend in the direction of the 
fourth dimension. We can follow tlie leasoning to 
this point, but when we try to construct the last line, 
we are in the same position as the being in two dimen- 
sions, who could not imagine what direction the third 
perpendicular would take. When we have found out 
how to draw four lines, meeting in a point, each cf 
which shall be perpendicular to all the other three, we 
will have solved tJie problem of the fourth dimension ; 
or at least we will be very warm, as the children say. 

The square of any number, a, is written a*, and it 
may be represented graphically by a flat surface 
bounded by four equal straight lines, whose length is a. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I3I 

and by four right angles. This requires only two 
dimensions. 

The cube of the same number is written a®, and is 
represented graphically by a solid figure of three 
dimensions, bounded by six squares, each equal to a^. 
Its angles are formed by three edges meeting in a point, 
each edge being perpendicular to the pther two. 

Following tbe same analogy, the fourth power of the 
same number is written a*. This much we know ; but 
its graphic representation we can only imagine, since 
it could only be formed in four dimensions. 

It seems reasonable to suppose that it would be a 
figure bounded by cubes, since the cube was bounded 
by squares, and the square by lines ; and that its angles 
would be formed by the meeting of four edges, each 
perpendicular to the other three. 

Let us return for a moment to the consideration of 
the world of two dimensions, which we have supposed 
to be a plane resting on some flat surface, as a table, 
and peopled by flat creatures of two dimensions. It is 
obvious that in their eyes the edges of objects would 
constitute the exterior of the objects. We know that if 
we look down at a card lying on a table, we can see 
one entire side of the card. But a flat creature, in the 
same plane with the card, would be able to see only tlie 
edges of the card. Even their houses, like everything 
else, would be flat like the card, and the walls of these 
houses would be their edges. When their doors were 
closed, those on the outside would see only the edges or 
exterior of their card-like houses. And they could not 
comprehend how we, looking down from our three 
dimensions, could see the whole interior of these closed 
houses, just as they would fail to understand our 
ability to view the entire surface of the card. In some 



132 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

such manner, it might be possible for a creature in the 
fourth dimension to see the interior of our own houses 
even when all doors and windows are closed. 

If we should purloin an article from one of the two- 
dimensional closed houses, and remove it entirely from 
their plane, it would become suddenly invisible to them, 
and its disappearance would doubtless constitute a 
great mystery. In the same way, if there were a 
fourth dimension, it might be possible for some object 
belonging to us to disappear suddenly and mysteriously 
into the fourth dimension. 

Although the creatures of our h)rpothetical two- 
dimensional world would be perfectly flat, they would 
possess a right side and a left side, just as a person in a 
photograph has a right and a left side. If we should lift 
a two-dimensional being from his plane, and replace 
him in a position that would be from our point of view 
bottom side up, his right and left sides would be 
reversed. This may be verified by experimenting with 
a face card. Hence we may imagine the possibility of 
any object being lifted from three dimensions into the 
fourth dimension and replaced in its former position 
with its right and left sides reversed. 

We are told that there are light rays which are invisi- 
ble to us, solely because our eyes are so constructed 
as to be unable to perceive them. And we are also 
told that there are tones so low or so high that we can 
never hear them, because our ears are not attuned to 
them. Shakespeare expresses this idea in the Mer- 
chant of Venice, when he makes Lorenzo say : 

'There's not the smallest orb, which thou beholdest. 
But in his motion like an angel sings. 
Such harmony is in immortal souls; 
But, whilst this muddy vesture of decay 
Doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it." 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I33 

And hence, whether or not a fourth dimension does 
really exist, it might be that causes similar to those 
just mentioned, that is, the limitations of some of our 
senses, would operate to render us unable to perceive 
it. But just as we may enjoy in imagination the 
"music of the spheres," though we cannot hear it, so 
we may take pleasure in exercising our ingenuity in 
picturing the different properties of the fourth dimen- 
sionr 



134 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XL 

SOME FOURTH-DIMENSION CURIOSITIEIS. 

BY "CREPUSCULA SUBLUCENt" (g. M. ACKLOM, M.A., 

NEW YORK city). 

Before commencing any explanation of what is 
popularly — i. e., physically — meant by a "fourth 
dimension," it is necessary to preface that the expres- 
sion is often used in an entirely different — i. e., a math- 
ematical — sense, which bears no relation to the con- 
ception of an actual universe of four dimensions. 

Mathematically speaking, the fourth dimension is 
merely a device of demonstrable utility for the solution 
of problems in geometry and algebra concerned with 
more than three independent variables, and is simply 

a convenient expedient of the same character as ^ — i, 
a"**, or any other quantities impossible of actual con- 
ception, which yet, through the allotting to them of 
meanings which do not conflict with the laws of real 
numbers, we are able to use, and find of great service 
in the extension of mathematical operations. For in- 
stance, a given particle of gas would require an expres- 
sion of four algebraical dimensions if, in addition to its 
location in space, its density is to be considered. In 
geometry a line possessing one dimension (length) be- 
ing moved at right angles to its direction, traces out a 
surface, of two dimensions; a surface, moved at right 
angles to the directions of both its dimensions, traces 
out a solid, of three dimensions ; and could we but find 
a direction at right angles to all of the three directions 
of these dimensions, a solid moved in this new direc- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I3S 

tion would, we must suppose, trace out a figure of four 
dimensions. We are not able to visualize such a fig- 
ure, but it is a simple matter to predicate some of its 
characteristics. For instance, the projection of a cube 
may be made on to a plane, or even on to a line ; simi- 
larly, a "tesseract" (the name given to the fourth-di- 
mension figure traced by the motion of a cube) may be 
projected on three-dimension space, or even a plane. 

Draw the complete diagram of a cube, edge i inch ; 
at a distance less than i inch away in any direction 
repeat the diagram; then join all the corresponding 
points of the two figures, and the result is the plane 
projection of a tesseract. From it may be observed 
that, just as a cube is determined by 8 points and 12 
lines, and hounded by 6 squares, so the tesseract is 
determined by 16 points, 32 lines, 24 squares, and 
bounded by 8 cubes. 

Three-dimension webs, or projections of four-dimen- 
sion figures in space, can with a little more difficulty 
be made; in fact, have been made in Grermany by Dr. 
V. Schlegel. 

Now, in order to gradually attain to the conception 
of a physical universe of four dimensions, we may con- 
sider that an infinite number of lines — i. e., one-dimen- 
sion figures — ^laid side by side make up a plane, i. e., a 
two-dimension figure ; and an infinite number of planes 
laid one on top of the other form a solid, i. e., a three- 
dimension figure, and therefore, by analogy, an infinite 
number of three-dimension figures allocated in the 
requisite direction (if we only knew how to do it) 
would compose a four-dimension figure. 

Or, putting the idea in a slightly different form, a 
line may be considered as an infinitely thin slice of a 
surface, a surface as an infinitely thin slice of a solid, 



136 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

and so a solid merely as an infinitely thin slice of an 
extra-solid (four-dimension figure). Expanding this 
idea to the whole universe, we see that it follows, as a 
matter of course, that an infinite number of two-dimen- 
sion universes is capable of being contained in our 
space, and, similarly, a universe of four dimensions 
would of necessity contain an infinite number of uni- 
verses such as ours. 

If we figure to ourselves the conditions of exist- 
ence in a world of two dimensions, and note the rela- 
tion such a world would bear to the three-dimension 
world in which it might lie, we shall get some instruc- 
tive analogies to the relations which would obtain be- 
tween our universe and a universe of four dimensions 
which may be conceived to enfold it. 

For instance, the world of an oyster or that of a 
thin, flat non-burrowing worm would be approximately 
two dimensions; while, by a reductio ad ultimam of 
these approximate conditions, and by supposing the 
worm incapable of cognizance or motion up or down- 
ward, we may obtain a very fair representation of life 
in a mathematical plane. 

For the sake of economy in words, it will be well to 
call the two-dimension universe we are examining a 
plane, the three-dimension universe in which it lies 
space, and the supposititious enveloping four-dimen- 
sion universe extra-space; and also to designate their 
inhabiting organisms by the symbols P, S, and E re- 
spectively. 

Now, it can be easily seen that for P a line in his 
plane forms an insuperable barrier, since he is capable 
of no up or down motion, just as a wall of infinite 
height would be for S in space. 

In the accompanying diagram (Fig. i), if P wishes 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



137 



to move from the position a to the position b, it i^ obvi- 
ous that he will have to move round the end of the 
line xy, which, from the nature of the case, he can 
neither see over nor across; while the object A inside 
the closed quadrilateral rs is as invisible and as in- 
accessible to him as it would be to S if contained in a 
closed room in space. 




Fig. I. 



Now, it is also perfectly clear that to S, who may be 
imagined to be occupying a position in space immedi- 
ately above this plane, the line xy is no barrier, should 
he wish to move from the spot a to the spot b along the 
plane, which offers a perfectly free and uninterrupted 
field for his movement and vision; so that S can, by 
picking the object A up out of the plane an infinitely 
small distance into space, and putting it down in the 
plane again outside of rs, render it — as by a miracle — 
both visible and accessible to P (at a). Thus, the 
whole of P's world lies open and defenseless to the 
vision and active interference of S. Nothing can be 
so covered or walled up as to be hidden from him or 
out of his reach. 

In a precisely analogous manner we may imagine 
that E, from the mysterious recesses of his extra-space, 



138 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



would be able to act at will on S's world, and to see 
everything that S imagined to be hidden. A letter 
locked in a safe in a barricaded cellar is as easily seen 
and removed by E as the object A is by S. Anything 
whatever in space within E's reach may be made to 
disappear instantly by the simple process of E moving 
it one-billionth of an inch into extra-space, whence he 
could return it to space in some different spot — or not 
— at his pleasure; and that without any interference 
with the integrity of the box, room, or receptacle in 
which the object may have been originally contained, 
for E does not have to penetrate it, merely to step into 



e 



\/ 



Fig. 2. 



extra-Space from the outside of the room and back 
again into space on the inside of the room. Again, 
consider two figures, cd and ef, in the plane (Diagram 
2) which have their sides and angles equal in every 
respect. It is clear that P may convince hipiself of 
their identical equality of sides and angles by measure- 
ment, but by no possible amount of turning ef about 
can he make it congruent to cd; i. e., capable of being 
put in such a position that it can be made to coincide 
with cd by superposition. 

Yet S can do this (to P) impossible thing, by taking 
ef up into space, there turning it over, and replacing 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



139 



It in the plane (as e'f ) — a figfure bearing the same rela- 
tion to ef as its own reflection in a mirror. 

An exactly analogous process may be performed by 
E with a solid belonging to space. 

For instance, suppose g and h to be two pyramids, 
irregular but exactly symmetrical to each other afid 
on equal bases, as in Diagram 3. It is obvious that we 




Fig. 3. 

may by measurement and calculation establish their 
equality of cubic content; but by no conceivable turn- 
ing about of h can we make it fill the same actual space 
as g (supposing, of course, that g is removed at the 
time). 

But nothing would be easier for E than to take up 
h into extra-space, there turn it about, and return it to 
space. Now it will in every way be not only equal to 
g, but exactly congruent to it and able to fit into the 
exact portion of space occupied by g. A somewhat 
similar action is performed in space when we turn a 
right-hand glove inside out, and so make it exactly 
congruent to the left-hand one; whereas, previously, it 
was only perfectly symmetrical to it. 

From these considerations we deduce that any body 
in space which is symmetrical to another can, by be- 
ing turned about in the fourth dimension, be made 
identically equal to the other, and symmetrical to its 
own previous self. 



I40 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

Once more, imagine S to pass completely through 
P's plane, and consider how the process will affect P's 
consciousness. Of course, only a section of S can exist 
in the plane at a given moment (though it is quite possi- 
ble to conceive of every portion of S being in the plane 
at one moment or another during the passing) ; conse- 
quently, by no possible means can P become aware that 
S is anything but a plane. At the same time, there is 
little doubt that S's passage would present some inex- 
plicable features to the observation of P. 

To begin with, unless S happened to be in the 
form of a right prism or cylinder, and struck the plane 
with its base exactly parallel to the plane, the section 
presented to P's observation would vary continually in 
size and contour during the passage. 

Even such a regular solid as a sphere would appear 
as a circle of gradually increasing and then diminishing 
circumference, while if we consider an involved solid, 
such as a piece of rope with a few knots, coils, and 
hitches in it, we can see that P might well be hard put 
to it to comprehend that these alternately separated 
and conjoined, irregular, and perpetually varying areas 
in his plane were parts of a single whole; let alone the 
fact that this whole (could he only know it) is mean- 
while in reality not changing its shape at all, merely 
its position in space. 

The same difficulty will obviously be present to S in 
the passage of E or any other fourth dimension body 
through space. S can in no possible way become cog- 
nizant of more than a section of E at once, and that 
section must appear to him as a solid; possibly of 
varying size, shape, and character, and possibly also 
disappearing and reappearing (owing to extra-spatial 
convolutions) as several distinct bodies. In any case, 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I4I 

it will be excessively improbable that S will form any 
adequate conception of the shape or nature of E as a 
whole, or even be in a position to recognize E at any 
future apposition, for his doing so will presuppose 
that he has encountered exactly the same infinitesimal 
section of E as before, presented at precisely the same 
angle in space. 

It is not easy at first to conceive of any circumstances 
under which a section of a body must be a solid, but a 
glimmer of this possibility may be arrived at thus: 
Consider the gradual gfrowth of some fixed body — a 
melon, say — from its birth in the flower to its full 
development as a large fruit. Every day we have a 
slightly larger and slightly different shaped solid than 
we had the day before. Now, taking up a position 
alongside the melon, think of time as a fourth dimen- 
sion, and visualize in a row the successive shapes which 
the melon has assumed since its birth. Thus, looking 
back along the direction of time— as it were— we can 
mentally become aware of a figure similar to an en- 
larged elephant tusk, and made up of a vast number of 
slightly varying and gradually increasing melon-shapes 
imposed one on the other, and each growing into the 
one beside it. This figure, observe, does not exist in 
space, for there has never been more than one melon- 
shape, as far as our actual senses are concerned, but it 
may be conceived to have a very real existence in time 
— our supposititious fourth dimension ; and, moreover, 
it possesses the property of a fourth-dimension figure, 
for at any given second, i. e., when a section of the 
figure in time is made, the section appears to us as a 
solid — a melon. Were we capable of experiencing two 
widely separated moments in time and their connecting 
moments (all simultaneously), our melon — and indeed 



142 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

every other growing thing on earth — might appear to 
us in the manner here conceived of. 

Again, in thinking of P's world, we have imagined 
the plane to be — so far — a rigidly level superficies ; but 
it is quite apparent that, since P is incapable of cog- 
nizance of any motion or object outside his own world, 
this superficies might be curved, in space, without 
affecting him or his surroundings, or even interfering 
with the correctness of his scientific observations, since 
those observations take place exclusively in the super- 
ficies ; just as the curvature of a sheet of paper will not 
vitiate the accuracy of a demonstration in plane geom- 
etry previously drawn on it. P's worjd might even be 
rolled up on itself, so that two places or beings which 
are an enormous distance (measured in the plane) 
apart, may be infinitely close to each other when the 
measurement is made along what S will see as the 
shortest line, i. e., the distance separating them in space. 

Applying this conception to space, we can see that 
S's world, in a precisely analogous manner, might be 
curved, twisted, or even involved, in extra space, with- 
out S having any possible means of becoming aware of 
the fact. 

This, of course, opens up the possibility that two 
bodies — say the earth and sun — which are, measured in 
space, millions of miles apart, may, if the measurement 
were made along the axis of the fourth dimension, 
prove to be close together, or actually touching. Some 
such explanation as this has, as a matter of fact, been 
invoked occasionally to account for various phenomena, 
such as the action of various natural forces across 
vacua of infinite extent, telepathy, and the like.* 

* If our space were thus curved certain places might be actually much 
nearer in space of four dimensions than they are in our space, but the differ- 
ence would In most cases be very slight.— H. P. M. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 43 

But just as Euclidean plane geometry fails utterly 
on an irregularly curved surface where the three angles 
of a triangle are not equivalent to two right angles, so 
our solid geometry would prove to be fundamentally 
incorrect in any portion of space which had such a 
curvature in extra-space. 

Thus we may see that by extending our ideas of the 
possibilities of existence downward to a world of two 
dimensions, it is quite possible, if not to obtain actual 
information, at least to get glimpses of what relations 
the fourth-dimension world would bear to our universe, 
supposing it to exist; though it is only fair to say 
that just as a mathematically plane world would be 
utterly incapable of apprehension by our three-dimen- 
sion senses, so a world of four — or more — dimensions, 
while not impossible of conception, would be equally 
beyond the reach of our present faculties; so that 
worlds of two, four, five, or even n dimensions, may 
coexist with space in the universe we are familiar with, 
and we all the while be blissfully unconscious of the 
fact. 



144 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XII. 

CHARACTERISTICS OF THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

BY '^RICHMOND"' ( LOUIS W. WORRELL, 
WASHINGTON, D. C.) 

Consider the following figures : 



B 



^r—4/ 



B 



A 




The line AB, possessing but a single dimension, can 
be moved in a direction not contained within itself, as 
to the right, so as to generate a surface ; for example, 
square ABBxAi. Also the surface ABBiAi possessing 
but two dimensions, can be moved in a direction not 
contained within itself, as up from the plane of the 
paper, so as to generate a solid; for example, cube 
ABBxAx'AzBzBsAs. Can the cube be moved in a direc- 
tion not contained in its three dimensions so as to gen- 
erate a new figure whose relation to the cube is analog- 
ous to that existing between the cube and its generating 
square and also analogous to that existing between the 
square and its generating line? If so, the new figure, 
called the four-square, contains an additional dimen- 
sion. This is the fourth dimension. 

As the dimension of length is perpendicular to the 
dimension of width ; and as the dimension of height is 
at right angles to both length and width, the fourth 
dimension must be perpendicular to the other three. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I4S 

The above is a full and complete explanation of 
what scientists call the fourth dimension. 

That the possibilities of space are not exnausted 
with the three dimensions of length, breadth, and thick- 
ness has no doubt occurred independently to many 
minds. However, the present widespread interest in 
the fourth dimension may be traced directly to Dr. 
Zollner, a German astronomer. 

Zollner believed that man is by nature a two-dimen- 
sional being; and that he acquires a full comprehension 
of the third dimension by a purely intellectual process 
only. The limitations of this article preclude a state- 
ment of the process by which he thought that man gains 
his consciousness of the third dimension. His work 
shows it to be conceivable that there may be beings 
who are structurally or intellectually limited to a world 
of but two dimensions. If structurally so limited, 
either we cannot imagine them, though we may think 
about them, or their extent in the third dimension is 
so extremely small in comparison with their length and 
breadth that it may be disregarded. ^ 

A two-dimensional being living in a plane, as the 
plane of this paper, might be led to consider the cord, 



Fig. 4. 

ab, with the loop or "knot" c lying so close to the 
paper that he would be unable to see an)rthing unusual 
about it (Fig. 4).* If asked to untie the "knot" he 
would move the end b entirely around the center of c, 

* See foot-note, page 30. 



146 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

whereupon the cord could be pulled straight. If such 
a being by an intellectual process arrived at a full 
comprehension of the notion of a third dimension, and 
attempted to untie the "knot" c, he might ask two 
friends to hold the ends a and b respectively. Then, 
after having turned a part bd of the cord half way 
over through the third dimension into this position 

(Fig. 5) : 



a. 



d 



Fig. 5. 

he could draw the knotted portion of the cord straight. 
His companions, seeing him untie the knot thus without 
moving the end b, would be completely mystified by the 
incomprdiensible process. By analogy it seemed plain 
to Zollner that some human being, by a purely intel- 
lectual process, might arrive at a comprehension of the 
fourth dimension so complete as to enable him to untie 
knots in a cord such as this in Fig. 6 : 




zezaszaases 



Fig. 6. 

without moving its ends, simply by bending some essen- 
tial part of the knot through the fourth dimensicwi. 

This, Zollner thought, would give a rational expla- 
nation of the mystifying rope-untying feats being per- 
formed by Slade of England. 

Some of the probable characteristics of four-dimen- 
sional figures may be determined by analogy. Thus, 
the characteristics of the four-square are found as 
follows : 

The line has two limiting points, as A and B in the 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 147 

figures ; the square has four ; the cube, eight. For the 
Hmiting points, we thus have the series 2, 4, 8. As 
16 is evidently the next number in this series, 'it is 
probable that the four-square has 16 limiting points. 

The line has a single limiting line ; the square has 4 ; 
the cube, 12. Here the series is i, 4, 12. The fourth 
term is found by noting the process by which the square 
is produced from the line; and the cube, from the 
square. In producing the square, the line is to be 
counted twice: as AB in its original position, and as 
AiBi in its final position. Besides two more lines A At 
and BBi are to be added as being traced out by the 
points A and B of the line. Similarly, in producing the 
cube from the square, each of the four lines of the 
square is to be counted twice : as found in ABBiAi at 
the beginning, and then as found in the final position 
A^BiB^A^. Besides four more lines A A 2, BB2, BxBz 
and AxAfi must be added as being traced respectively 
by the four points found in the generating square. The 
rule, therefore, is: Multiply the number of lines in 
the generating figure by two and add a line for each 
point in it. The four-square should, therefore, have 
2 X 12 + 8 lines. 

The line has no planes ; the square has i ; the cube, 6. 
Here we have the series o, i, 6. By noting how the 
cube is generated from the square, it is seen that the 
square is to be counted in two planes : as ABBiAi at 
the beginning and again as A2B2BZAZ at the end of the 
generating motion. Besides, each of the lines of the 
square has also traced a plane in the generating process 
— the plane ABB2A2 being generated, for example, by 
the line AB. The rule founded on the above is : Mul- 
tiply the number of planes in the generating figure by 
2 and add a plane for each line in it. Applying this 



148 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

rule to the square as generated by the line, we find the 
number of planes to be 2X0+1. The rule thus 
holding true in the series as far as we can know with 
certainty, we confidently apply it to the four-square 
as generated by the cube and find the number of planes 
in it to be 2 X 6 + 12. 

Noting that a cube is generated by the motion of a 
plane, it is thought that the four-square generated by 
the cube is limited by 8 cubes — each of the 6 planes 
of the generating cube itself generating a cube and there 
being the two additional cubes formed by the initial 
and the final positions of the generating cube. 

To a being limited either by structure or conscious- 
ness to a single dimension, any object, such as the 
square or the cube, or the four-square, crossing the line 
on which he lived, would be a wonderful phenomenon. 
Where a moment before there had been nothing, sud- 
denly a point would appear ; and, continuing for a time, 
it would as suddenly disappear. 

Similarly, any object, such as the cube or the four- 
square, moving along the third dimension and passing 
through the surface on which a two-dimensional being 
lived would be to him a marvelous phenomenon. 
Where a moment before there had been absolutely 
nothing, suddenly a line would appear. Continuing for 
a time, it would suddenly and mysteriously disappear. 

By analogy, it is reasonable to suppose that when- 
ever a four-dimensional object or being comes within 
the range of our consciousness, it appears to us as 
an ordinary solid of three dimensions. Thus, we 
would perceive the four-square as a cube and nothing 
else. Likewise, a four-dimensional being moving 
steadily in the direction of the fourth dimension might 
suddenly appear at our side within a room destitute 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 49 

of openings. Continuing his motion, the final limiting 
solid of his body would pass beyond our three-dimen- 
sional space into the fourth dimension, and he would 
disappear as suddenly and as inexplicably as he had 
appeared. 

It has been suggested that possibly many of the 
small objects each of us loses disappear by rolling out 
of three-dimensional space into the fourth dimension. 

We cannot imagine how beings structurally limited 
to a single dimension or to two dimensions only, can 
exist. It is true, we can think about them; but only 
as being mere abstractions. So far as we know they 
have no existence. Analogy, based upon the above, 
says that to four-dimensional beings we are likewise 
mere abstractions and have no real existence. 

If two one-dimensional beings were to meet, they 
could never pass each other. A being of more dimen- 
sions than one might carry one of them through the 
second dimension around his companion, to the com- 
plete mystification of both. 

If a two-dimensional being were placed inside a 
square, he could never get out without breaking 
through one of the sides. A being of more dimensions 
than two could, however, lift him through a third 
dimension and set him down outside of his square 
without his comprehending in the least by what opera- 
tion this miraculous result was accomplished. 

Similarly, if some of us were locked in an air-tight 
room we could never get out until an opening were 
made in one of the six bounding surfaces. But, 
analogy says that a four-dimensional being might pass 
us through the fourth dimension and set us on the 
outside of the room without disturbing any of the 
bounding walls. 



ISO THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

In a line, nothing can be rotated. In a plane, rota- 
tion takes place around a point. In three dimensions, 
rotation takes place around a line. In four dimensions, 
therefore, rotation takes place around a plane. 

If a two-dimensional being were asked to turn m 
into coincidence with n in Fig. 7, 





Fig. 7. 

he would be unable to do so. A three-dimensional 
being, however, would simply turn m half-way over, 
through the third dimension, about the side I, after 
which he could easily slide it over n. 

Similarly, considering our hands, we cannot manipu- 
late them in any way so as to make them coincide. 
But a four-dimensional being, by rotating one hand 
half way around about a plane can effect the coinci- 
dence easily. 

Two one-dimensional beings living on the same line 
might know themselves to be miles apart, yet they 
might in the twinkling of an eye be placed face to 
face if the line were bent into a circle. 

Two two-dimensional beings might be miles apart 
on the surface common to their existence. Yet it is 
conceivable that a three-dimensional being might bend 
their surface so as to bring them suddenly together. 

Two friends may know themselves to be separated 
by half the world. Yet it is possible for a four-dimen- 
sional being to bend their space of three dimensions 
so as to bring them suddenly into each other's pres- 
ence.* 

* See foot-note, page 143. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I5I 

Relative to the evidences of a fourth dimension, it 
may be stated that, as yet, nothing is known which 
points with any great degree of certainty to its exist- 
ence. 

As stated above, it would be possible to rotate the 
right hand in the fourth dimension about a plane and 
thus reverse it and make it coincide with its com- 
panion left hand. And because right-and left-handed- 
ness is not found in the mass (that is, in mountains, 
clouds, continents, etc.), but only in the minute (such 
as is produced in plants and animals and by molecular 
action), some believe that evidence of this additional 
dimension must be sought in the region of molecular 
and cellular activity. 

There are two forms of tartaric acid which appear 
to be identical in every particular except that one turns 
the plane of polarized light to the right while the other 
turns it to the left. The right-handed changes into 
the left-handed without any apparent decomposition 
and without any apparent manifestation of force. If 
it can be shown that the change does take place thus, 
the phenomenon would be proof that the fourth dimen- 
sion does exist. 

In a surface there can be only three points which 
are equally distant from each other. In space, as we 
know it, four points and no more can be so arranged. 
In space of four dimensions five points can be thus 
placed. Now, in organic chemistry, it has been found 
that certain substances have the same formulas. For 
example, there are at least eight possible alcohols which 
have the formula C6H12O. The only way that chemists 
have of accounting for these different compounds is 
by supposing that there is a different grouping of the 
carbon, or C-atoms in each compound. If now it 



152 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

should become necessary to the explanation of a com- 
pound to suppose that five carbon atoms in it are 
equally distant from each other, this would be evidence 
of a fourth dimension. 

Balance, or symmetry in a line can be produced with 
reference to a single point only. And, if that point 
is selected at random, in the line, the symmetry, or 
balance, can be accomplished by carrying a portion of 
the longer part of the line through the second dimen- 
sion around the point and attaching it to the end of 
the shorter part. 

Balance, or symmetry, in a surface, can be produced 
with reference to a line only. And if that line is 
selected at random in a figure in the surface, the 
figure may be put into S3nmmetry only by carrying parts 
of the longer portions of the figure through the third 
dimension around the line and attaching them to the 
shorter portions on the other side. 

In a similar way we know that there is three-dimen- 
sional symmetry, or balance, with reference to a plane. 
We see it manifested in the formation of crystals, and 
in right- and left-handedness, or bi-S)mimetry of plants 
and animals. Does this not at least indicate the prob- 
able existence of a fourth dimension ? 

And, finally. Prof. Hinton in developing his me- 
chanics of the fourth dimension came to the conclusion 
that the mechanics of four-dimensional vortices explain 
the electric current — a phenomenon hitherto unex- 
plained. He has thus furnished the most direct evi- 
dence yet found that space does contain a fourth dimen- 
sion. 

In the seventh book of the "Republic," Plato im- 
agines a group of prisoners chained at the mouth of 
a cavern. All movement is impossible to them. Their 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 53 

eyes are constrained to look upon the opposite wall 
of the cavern forever. Thus, they never see axiyihing 
except their own shadows, together with the shadows 
of whatever objects may come in contact with them. 
In time, they come to refer all their experiences to their 
shadows. And, finally, they identify themselves with 
their shadows. 

By conceiving a possible state in which man is 
limited by his consciousness to less than what he really 
is, Plato cleared the way for the notion that the normal 
man is likewise limited by his consciousness to less than 
what he really is. This Greater, which Plato strove to 
find, is thought by some to involve the fourth dimen- 
sion. 



154 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XIIL 

THE FOURTH DIMENSION THE PLAY- 
GROUND or MATHEMATICS. 

BY ''GATH^^ (ARTHUR R. CRATHORNE, 
CHAMPAIGN, ILL.). 

The fourth dimension has been aptly termed the 
playgroimd of mathematics. It has certainly called 
forth much speculation and a great deal of discussion 
which should not be taken too seriously. To under- 
stand the term "fourth dimension," it is necessary to 
know something of its origin and of the train of 
thought which led up to it. 

If we mark some point on a straight line or on a 
curve, any other point on it is located by giving one 
number, its distance from the fixed point. Such a 
line or curve is called a one-dimensional body, and 
a given number will locate some point on it. A 
point may be located on the earth's surface by giving 
two numbers, the latitude and the longitude. . If the 
streets of a city are numbered, any house may be 
located by the two numbers which give the house and 
street. In general, any point on a plane may be 
located by giving the two distances from two inter- 
secting reference lines. A similar statement may be 
made for a curved surface. We call such a plane or 
surface a two-dimensional body, and two numbers will 
locate a point on it. 

The position of an anchored balloon or the bottom 
of a mine shaft is determined by three numbers: the 
latitude, longitude, and the vertical distance up or 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 55 

down. A point inside a cube may be located by giving 
the three distances from the three faces which meet 
at one corner. Any point in a solid, or more generally 
any point in space, may be located by three numbers, 
and conversely any three numbers will locate a point 
in space. We say then that space is three-dimensional. 

Here an inquiring student asked, "Why stop here? 
Are there points which require four numbers for their 
representation ?" Or the student may be led up to the 
question in another way. A one-dimensional body, a 
line or curve, may be the boundary of a two-dimen- 
sional body. The boundaries of a three-dimensional 
body are two-dimensional. "Do three-dimensional 
bodies bound zxiphing ?" Or again, he noticed that if 
b is the length of the side of a square, then b^ repre- 
sents its area, and b^ the volume of the cube with 
edge equal to b. "What does &* represent ? Are there 
four-dimensional bodies?" 

In trying to imagine a four-dimensional thing, the 
student turned back, and tried to see how three dimen- 
sions would appear to a person who knew only two 
dimensions. He imagined a race of beings endowed 
with all the faculties of any rational being except that 
they have but two dimensions and live in a two-dimen- 
sional region, say a plane. We might think of these 
people as the shadows of three-dimensional beings. 
In their language there are no such words as "up" or 
"down," "high" or "low." They can see nothing lying 
outside of the plane in which they live. They can move 
in any direction in the plane, but have no conception of 
any movement which will carry them out of the plane. 
Life in such a region would be under conditions quite 
different from life in three-dimensional space. A house 
for such beings may be simply a series of rectangles. A 



156 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

shadow being is just as safe from observation behind 
a line as a three-dimensional being behind a wall. A 
bank safe might consist of simply a circle. It would 
have to be very large, however, for there is no piling 
up of money in this country. If we imagine a piece 
of two-dimensional rope, we will see that it is impossi- 
ble for the shadow beings to tie the two ends together 
in a knot, even if they had the slightest notion of a 
knot. 

If a schoolboy in shadow land wished to prove that 
the corresponding angles of the two triangles in Fig. i 
are equal because the corresponding sides are equal, he 
would perhaps show that each triangle could be moved 




Fig. I. 

over until the vertices occupied the positions A'BrC. 
He could not place one triangle on the other, for he has 
no conception of such a thing. If the triangles were 
as shown in Fig. 2, the schoolboy could not use the 






Fig. 2. 

sliding method of proof, for no amount of sliding could 
make the points ABC coincide with A''B''C". He 
might, however, conceive of the sides AB and BC to 
be made of some flexible cord, and the point B pushed 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 157 

along the line BB' until the cord again became taut, 
and then the triangle AB'C could be pushed into the 
position A^B^C, 

In working with this problem, he might have imag- 
ined two one-dimensional objects in a one-dimensional 
region with the fixed points ABC, and A'B'C\ respec- 



B C O C* ii' A^ 



Fig. 3. 

tively. These objects may be moved in a straight line, ' 
but not out of it. In trying to make the points AB'C 
coincide with ABC, he would find it impossible to do 
so by sliding along the line, but a rotation about o in the 
second dimension would bring them together. By 
analogy he might think that if he could turn his triangle 
over in the third dimension about AC, he could solve 
his problem. But he has no conception of such a 
motion, though he might call his work with the triangle 
made of flexible cord a revolution in the third dimen- 
sion. 

By a miracle one of these shadow beings becomes 
endowed with a knowledge of three dimensions. He 
does marvelous things in the eyes of his neighbors. 
He can disappear and reappear at will. The strongest 
prison cannot hold him. If he moves out of the plane 
in which he has lived he can look down into the houses, 
€ven into the insides of his neighbors. If, before 
returning to shadow land, he should turn himself over, 
he would be a sort of reflection of his former self to 
his friends. His heart would be on the right side 
instead of the left. To his friends he would be left- 
handed instead of right-handed. 



158 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

After amusing himself with his two-dimensional 
people, the student returned to his inquiry as to four 
dimensions. By analogy he supposed our space of 
three dimensions to lie in the midst of a space of four 
dimensions, just as his shadow land lay in the midst 
of three-dimensional space. He might speak of all 
people and objects as three-dimensional shadows of 
four-dimensional things. If now by supernatural 
means a person becomes endowed with four-dimen- 
sional knowledge, he can perform the same kind of 
antics that his two-dimensional analogue did in shadow 
land. No prison could hold him. He could take money 
from a sealed box without making an opening. He 
could disappear and reappear at will. 

In three dimensions we have similar solids which 
cannot be made to occupy the same space; for example, 
the right and the left hand. By analogy with the 
schoolboy's triangle problem, the student conceived 
of one of such a pair of objects being carried into the 
fourth dimension turned over and brought back. The 
two objects can now be made to occupy the same place. 
Turning a right-hand glove inside out to make it fit 
the left hand would have the same effect as turning 
it over in the fourth dimension.* 

Since the inhabitants of shadow land have no sense 
of "up" or **down," they cannot perceive in any way 
the plane upon which they move but which is present 
at every point. The imaginative student might then 
say that the ether which physicists claim to permeate 
our whole space is but the three-dimensional analogue 
to the plane of shadow land. So he could go on indefi- 
nitely with his analogies, but we must not forget that it 
is all the product of his imagination, and that there 

* See Introduction, page 38. 






SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 59 

is no more probability of the existence of his four- 
dimensional beings than of his two-dimensional ones. 
While this student was amusing himself with his 
two- and four-dimensional beings, another student, an 
investigator in the realm of pure mathematics, had 
found that the ideas and the language of four dimen- 
sions were exceedingly useful. By drawing two per- 
pendicular lines as in Fig. 4, he was able to locate every 
point in their plane, by giving the distances from each 
of the two lines. Like the schoolboy who begins his 
problem, **Let x equal the 
number of men," the investi- 
gator lets X represent the 
distance of the point from 
the vertical line and y the — — — 
distance from the horizontal 
line. He then, for the time 
being, concentrates his at- 
tention on the letters x and Fig. 4. 
y, just as the schoolboy 

manipulates the x in his problem, without at all times 
keeping in mind that x means men. It is an easy 
extension by means of three infinite planes to represent 
any point in space by three numbers, x, y, and z. 
Again, the investigator, after letting these letters repre- 
sent the point he is considering, deals only with the 
letters, and at times pays little attention to what they 
represent. But there are other things besides points 
which may be represented by numbers. He may wish 
to discuss spheres in space. Four numbers are needed 
to locate a sphere in space, three to locate the center 
and one to represent the radius. Again, if he wishes to 
locate a line of given length, he will use three numbers 
to locate one end of the line; and since the other end 



l6o THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

can then move on a sphere, he will need two more 
numbers, or five in all, to represent the line. In any- 
problem he assigns a letter to represent each of his 
unknown numbers, whether the number helps to give 
position or not. These letters he uses impartially in 
his algebraic manipulations. He has called all the 
points in the plane a "two-dimensional aggregate," for 
any point is represented by two numbers. The points 
in space make up a three-dimensional aggregate. The 
totality of spheres and of straight lines of given length 
make up four- and five-dimensional aggr^^tes respec- 
tively. 

These two students are types of the two classes of 
investigators who have studied the subject of dimen- 
sions. The first delights in placing before us those 
creatures of his imagination, those two and four-dimen- 
sional people with their imaginary environment. Just 
as the dramatist delights in presenting to us a hero 
who acts, imder the conditions laid down in the story, 
in a manner consistent with his character as presented 
by the author, so this writer takes pleasure in bringing 
before our minds his creatures, whose sole character- 
istics are lack or oversupply of dimensions. 

The second investigator is the mathematician who 
found it a real help in his investigations to use the 
ideas and language of four or more dimensions. He 
did not say that a four- or five-dimensional material 
world existed. He did not believe that our universe 
was part of an actual four-dimensional space, nor did 
he ask others to believe it. It was but another example 
of the mathematician's delight in generalization. In 
this way he introduced the idea of negative numbers to 
enrich his language and to give him more power of 
expression. He never asked us to believe in the exist- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED l6l 

ence of a n^;ative number of objects. The chemist is 
permitted to base his investigations on the atomic 
theory without knowing or caring much whether such 
a thing as an atom exists or not. The physicist may 
talk of the flow of heat in a rod without believing that 
heat is a substance or that it flows. The mathematician 
asked to be allowed to extend his notion of space, and to 
include in it aggregates of more than three dimensions, 
even if this lead to physical absurdities. 

The ideas and phraseology, as exhibited in the writ- 
ings of investigators in the subject of dimensions, were 
immediately seized by the romance writers, the presti- 
digitators, and a certain class of spiritualists. To the 
first it gave a new method for the disappearance and 
reappearance of the hero or the villain. As a rule, he 
returns as a reflection of his former self, having become 
turned over in the fourth dimension. To the second 
class it gave a new set of catchwords and phrases for 
use in sleight-of-hand performances. To the third 
class, led by Professor ZoUner of Leipsic, the fourth 
dimension became the abode of the spirit world. For 
them it solved a great problem, and many are their 
arguments to prove their contentions. The Bible is 
brought in to testify, and an extra dimension is read 
into the meaning of such verses as, "May be able to 
comprehend with all saints, what is the breadth and 
length and depth and height." (Ephesians iii, i8.) 
They boldly stated that physical space lies in a four- 
dimensional space, just as a line lies in a plane, or a 
plane lies in three-dimensional space. Just why one 
should stop at four dimensions is not made clear. 

In a brief way we have then shown how the term 
"fourth dimension" arose. We have shown how the 
efforts of mankind to tear himself away from the 



1 62 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

numbers i, 2, and 3 and to generalize have given rise 
to two classes of literature, one purely imaginative 
fiction for the general reader, and one mathematical for 
the mathematician. From these writings words and 
phrases have been torn from their settings and used 
in a way never thought of by their authors, and from 
this perversion of terms has arisen a discussion which 
has connected the word "dimensions" with mysticism 
and the occult. 

This, then, is the explanation of the term "fourth 
dimension." But the jfe-sistent reader will perhaps 
repeat the question, "Is there a fourth dimension ?" If 
by this question he means, "Does a fourth-dimensional 
world exist physically?" all we can say is that it is 
highly improbable. Continued thought and discussion 
on this phase of the question will only result in the 
state of mind of the Persian poet when he said, 

"Myself when young did eagerly frequent 
Doctor and saint, and heard great argument 
About it and about; but ever more 
Came out by the same door where in 1 went" 

If a physical fourth dimension exists a three-dimen- 
sional being would never know it, nor would he have 
any way of finding out. The same statement may be 
made of two or of five dimensions. As a mental con- 
ception, the fourth dimension exists, but the world of 
our physical experience includes only the three-dimen- 
sional. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 163^ 



XIV. 

THE TKUC AND FALSE. IN THC THCORT 
OF FOUR DIMENSIONS. 

BY ''PERGE DECET^' ( PERCY WILCOX GUMAER^ 

URBANA, ILL.) 

Of tentimes^ a theory that is advanced in good faith 
by some distinguished authority falls into disrepute, 
because it is appropriated by less intelligent persons 
and is modified or extended to suit some non-related 
hypothesis of their own. To mutilations of this char- 
acter the theory of four dimensions has become a sad 
victim. 

The idea originated as a pure mathematical concept, 
capable of symbolic representation, but quite incapable 
of being visualized. This may be illustrated by a simi- 
lar concept f oimd in the use of negative numbers. The 
individual who subtracts 7 from 3 and gets negative 4 
has a mathematical conception of its meaning. He does 
not, however, infer the actual existence of a negative 
number of objects. It is easy to conceive that when 
four trees in a garden are cut down there are four of 
them missing, yet no person can picture to himself 
minus four trees, because the mind can visualize only 
such quantities as result from actual counting. This 
lack of material existence, however, does not deter 
anyone from using negative numbers as a short cut 
in his calculations. In a similar way, the idea of four 
dimensions may be used in mathematical calculations 
and without any implication as to the existence of such 
a space. 

Mathematical reasoning has taught us many of the 



1 64 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

peculiar properties of this much-discussed space. These 
properties were appropriated by Zolhier and others as 
explanations of the phenomena of spiritualism. These 
persons said that spirits live in a space of four dimen- 
sions, and that we human beings who are confined to 
three dimensions are not sensible of their existence ex- 
cept as they choose to enter our limited space. These 
statements they have attempted to prove by means of 
the geometric properties of a four-dimensicwial space. 

In this wise, the unwarranted extension of a mathe- 
matical concept has given the lay reader a mudi per- 
verted idea of the fourth dimension, and it is the 
purpose of this article briefly to distinguish between the 
theory as rightfully advanced by mathematicians and 
the popular conception of the theory after it has been 
altered to suit the hypothesis of the spiritualists. 

In all branches of study or enterprise the mind is 
greatly aided by concrete representation. Drawings 
or photographs are indispensable accessories in many 
branches of industry. No contractor would attempt to 
erect a building without first securing the drawings for 
it. So, too, in mathematics, the possibility of drawing 
a picture of an algebraic equation greatly simplifies its 
understanding. 

Prior to the time of Descartes, the sciences of algebra 
and of geometry were treated as unrelated subjects. 
Descartes, however, discovered that algebraic equations 
of two or of three unknown quantities may be con- 
veniently represented by geometric figures. The me- 
thod of so representing an algebraic equation can be 
best illustrated by a simple example. We know from 
elementary algebra that in an equation of two unknown 
quantities, such as y = ;r* — 2jr + 2, we may assign 
to X any value that we please. Furthermore, by solving 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



165 



the equation we can determine for each value that we 
assign to x^ a corresponding value of y ; for instance, 
if jr=i, we find that 3f= i; if ;r = 2, y^=2; ^ = 3, 
y = S; ^ = 4f y=io; ^ = 5, y—i7f etc. To in- 
terpret these results by a diagram, we draw two 
straight lines meeting at right angles. These lines 
we call the axes of reference. Along one axis we 
measure from the intersection distances equal to the 



•i 



^ 



^ ■! I 1 



ab ed s 




Fig. I. 



Fig. 2. 



various values assigned to x, as shown by the points 
abcde in Fig. i. From these points we measure 
in a direction parallel to the F-axis distances aa' bb' 
cc dd' ee , equal respectively to the values that were 
determined for y by the different numbers substituted 
for X. The points ab'c'd'e', etc, are said to be points 
on the curve of the equaticm. It is evident that by 
asstuning the successive values of x near enough to- 
gether we can find an indefinite number of points be- 
tween those already plotted Fig. 2 shows the curv.e 



»■»*■!« 



4 . <> 
» . 



l66 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

of the equation, y = jr* — 2;r + 2, as plotted for values 
of X from o to 5. 

This concrete representation of an equation may give 
to the reader but little further information concerning 
the equation, and the working drawing of any object 
may be to the layman nothing but a confused mass of 
lines, yet the drawing conveys to the draughtsman or 
to the mechanic a very exact conception of the object. 
So, too, the graph or curve of an equation conveys to 
the mathematician a concise idea of the properties of 
the equation. 

Sometimes the engineer or the mathematician desires 
to plot an algebraic equation containing three variables, 
sudi as ;r + y + ^=io. Proceeding as before, it is 
possible to obtain values of z for particular values of 
X and y. The values of z, however, cannot be repre- 
sented on the same plane with x and y, for it is necesr- 
sary to have a third, a jsr-axis, along which to measure 
the values of z, and this axis must be perpendicular to 
the other two at their intersection. Having assumed 
a ^-axis, we proceed to plot the equation of the three 
variables in the same manner that equations of two 
variables were plotted. Particular values for x and y 
are assumed and the equation is solved for z. The 
values thus obtained for each of the variables are then 
laid off in the direction of their respective axes. 

This concrete representation of equations of two 
and three variables aided the mind so well in the solu- 
tion of difficult problems that mathematicians sug- 
gested that this interpretation be extended to include 
equations of four variables such as are sometimes 
found in problems of electricity and of physics. An 
equation, such as, jt + y + ^ + w = 16, to be plotted, 
requires a fourth, a W^-axis, along which to measure 






SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 67 

the values of w. Such an axis must be constructed 
perpendicular to the X, the Y, and the Z axes at their 
intersection. Here the mathematicians, as the popular 
saying goes, foimd themselves up against it, for they 
could not draw four straight lines mutually perpen- 
dicular at a point. This limitation of our space pre- 
vented the geometric representation of equations of 
four variables, but it did not deter further study of the 
equations. 

Men are continually calculating what would happen 
if conditions were different from what they are. The 
student of history seeks to determine the effect on 
history, if Napoleon had won the battle of Waterloo ; 
the physicist calctdates the probable amount of heat 
that wotdd be generated if the earth were suddenly 
stopped in its orbit ; so, too, the mathematician, unable 
to construct four mutually perpendicular lines, spends 
valuable time in determining what would happen if 
it were possible to construct his perpendiculars. This 
leads him to the concept of four-dimensional space. 

Here the reader is apt to become confused. The 
layman, on being told that in a four-dimensional space 
four straight lines can be constructed mutually perpen- 
dicular, immediately seeks to visualize to himself these 
four perpendiculars. Of course, all such attempts to 
picture these lines seem futile, and the whole discussion 
is, forthwith, pronoimced a humbug. This, however, 
is not a fair verdict, because the layman does not us- 
ually get the true meaning of the mathematician. It 
is not meant that these four lines should be actually 
constructed. That, as far as we are able to know, is 
impossible. It is perfectly legitimate, however, to cal- 
culate what would happen if this were possible, and 
that is all the mathematician attempts to do. 



1 68 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

Physical possibility and mathematical possibility are 
not always identical. A valid mathematical statement 
may often be quite incapable of physical interpreta- 
tion, as will be shown by a reference to Euclid's 
eleventh axiom. A statement is possible mathemati- 
cally if it is self-consistent, and if it does not con- 
tradict other assumptions in the same discussion. 
Euclid, the father of geometry, states in his eleventh 
axiom that through a given point only one straight 
line can be drawn parallel to another straight line. 
Proceeding on the assumption that his axiom was 
true, he built up a system of geometry. In the early 
part of the 19th century, Lobachevsl^, who did not 
accept Euclid's axiom as true, because it could not be 
proved, said, let us assume that it is not true. Suppose 
that through a given point more than one straight line 
can be drawn parallel to another straight line. He then 
proceeded by purely mathematical reasoning to build 
up an entire geometry based on his new axiom. In 
itself, this geometry is perfectly self-consistent, and it 
is mathematically possible. Strange as it may seem, 
we are unable to prove absolutely which system is the 
true one. Euclidean geometry, however, is simpler, 
is more convenient, and has been found to hold true 
even in the most delicate measurements that are pos- 
sible. Men will continue to use it in their measurements 
and calculations, because so far as we are able to judge 
from empirical knowledge, Euclidean geometry is the 
true one. 

So far as our experience goes, all space is three- 
dimensional, but the statement cannot be proved abso- 
lutely. It must be accepted as an axiom. If some 
Lobachevsky should challenge us for a proof of this 
axiom, we could give him but little satisfaction. He 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 69 

might then go ahead, and assume that space had four 
dimensions. He could proceed by deductive reasoning 
to build an entire geometry based on the assumption 
that this new axiom were true. He might derive 
formulae for the area of triangles, for the volume of 
solids, or for the direction of a tangent to a curve. 
This space of four dimensions would be mathematic- 
ally possible, for all the propositions and deductions 
concerning it, would be self-consistent and not con- 
tradictory within themselves, yet no amount of such 
reasoning will prove the actual existence of such a 
space, any more than Lobachevsky proved that any 
person can really draw through one point two straight 
lines parallel to a third. 

It is possible in dealing with equations of two varia- 
bles to determine, without plotting them, many of the 
properties of the curves which they represent. By 
various manipulations of an algebraic equation, higher 
mathematics enables us to get the length of any portion 
of the curve, the direction of a tangent to the curve at 
any point, or the points of intersection of two curves. 
The method of studying the properties of a four-dimen- 
sional space is very similar to that just described for 
two and for three dimensions. We know that an 
equation of four variables represents some sort of a 
configuration in a space of four dimensions, so that 
by applying the principles of analytic geometry and 
calculus to the equation it is possible to determine the 
properties of the particular figure, solid, or body that 
the equation represents. It is not at all necessary to 
be able actually to construct these four-dimensional 
bodies in order to study their properties. As we de- 
termined the properties of curves and surfaces by study- 
ing their equations, so we may determine by the same 



170 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

process properties of configurations that are represented 
by equations of four variables. 

Some of the propositions of a four-dimensional 
geometry are extremely tmique and almost incon:q)re- 
hensible. For instance, a hollow flexible sphere in a 
space of four dimensions could be turned inside out 
without tearing or stretching.* If any object were 
capable of moving into a space of four dimensions, 
it could not be confined by the four walls of a 
room, and, as soon as it had moved the smallest part 
of a distance in the unknown direction, it would become 
invisible. In a space of four dimensions it is possible 
to revolve an object about a plane, though in three 
dimensions it is possible to revolve bodies only about 
straight lines or points. 

A study of the strange properties of this hypo- 
thetical space, though interesting, is quite beyond the 
scope of this paper. A geometric proof would require a 
knowledge of very advanced mathematics, and the 
wonderful feats that might be accomplished by anyone 
possessing the secret of a fourth dimension have been 
well portrayed in several popular articles on the subject. 

Is the existence of a four-dimensional space really 
impossible? is the question most frequently asked. If 
existence means that the intellectual idea of a thing 
can be formed, and that this idea shall not lead to 
contradictions with other well established ideas and 
with the results of our experience, then it may be said 
that four-dimensional space does exist. If, on the 
other hand, existence is taken to mean objective or 
actual reality, all that we can say about it is that we do 
not know. 

* For a mathematical proof of this statement see Jaumai 0/ MathemaHcs^ 
▼ol. i, p. I. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I7I 

All knowledge proceeds originally from experience, 
but the amount and the degree of perception possible 
for our senses is limited. There are many phenomena 
that are not evident to our senses, and which are known 
only in an indirect way. We know that there are light 
waves below the red and above the violet end of the 
spectrum, which are invisible to the eye. Usually, the 
non-observation of a phenomena is taken as strong 
evidence of its non-occurrence. For instance, there 
was a time when it would have been a reasonable induc- 
tion to say that all plants and vegetables are motion- 
less, and that aninmls alone are endowed ' with the 
power of locomotion. The perfection of the micro- 
scope has, however, shown us that minute plants are 
as active as minute animals. Hence we cannot always 
assert that because we do not observe a phenomenon 
that it does not exist. If we insisted that everything 
were just as it appeared to be from our observation, we 
should be in the position of a child who believes that 
all people have enough to eat, and that all children 
have nurse-maids. The child reasons from uncontra- 
dicted experience, and so do we, usually. 

Although we cannot dogmatically deny the existence 
of a four-dimensional space, even though such a space 
is inconceivable and impossible for us to imagine, yet 
we can say with confidence that our universe, as we 
know it, and every known agency in it, is confined by 
some unknown law to a space of three dimensions. 



172 THE FOUKTH DIMENSION 



XV. 

THE ASCCNDINC SERIEIS OF DIMENSIONS. 

BY 'V (W. S. DAVIDSON, PITTSBURG, PA.). 

In setting out to investigate the possibility of a 
dimension above our present cc«iceptions, we neces- 
sarily proceed akxig the lines of analogy. From com- 
parative investigations in existences of (me, two, and 
three dimensions we will deduce parallel results to 
enable us to establish formulas by which may be derived 
an abstract conception of some of the elementary prop- 
erties of a body in four-dimensional space. To be con- 
sistent, we must proceed with the same care with which 
an astronomer would try to people a remote planet. 
While considering conditions which make life possible 
in his own sphere, he would make specific modifications 
in order to bring it into complete harmony with the 
new environments. 

Although the practical representations of lines and 
points have appreciable size in all directions, we should 
not forget that in our discussion these are abstract 
terms, the latter having only position, and the former, 
merely a distance between any two positions. In like 
manner, a surface is imaginary, independent in space, 
or forming a terminating plane of a body. It is devoid 
of thickness to such an extent that were an infinite 
number to be placed one upon the other the aggregate 
would still have no thickness. 

We will consider, first, the limitations in the percep- 
tions of beings in a world of one dimension, that is. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 73 

existence in an infinite path through space, some por- 
tion of which may be represented by the line AB (Fig. 
i). We will suppose that at various points in this 
path, separated from each other, creatures a, b, and c 
are in progress, a representing a point, 6 a creature 
having length, and c a creature similar to 6 but longer. 
This variety of form is apparent to us because our 
experience is gained through observing these objects 
from without the plane of their existence. To the 
creature a, however, b is merely a. point like itself, and 
to b, c is also a point. This arises from the fact that, 




Fig. I. 

having knowledge only of distance and location in their 
own path, anything requiring a realization of a third 
quality would be lost to them. Creature a observing b 
in the figure would see him as a point, because he sees 
only the end of 6. Suppose the bodies, a, b, and c con- 
tinued in their relative positions to one another through- 
out their entire existence, each would then, through his 
restricted knowledge of the other, be forced to different 
conclusions regarding the form of life outside his 
own. Now a, conscious of his own existence as a 
point and observing & as a point, would erroneously, 
though logically, conclude that all life existed in point 
bodies. Creature &, upon seeing a and c as points, and 
being conscious of his own length, would at once 



174 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

conclude that he was especially favored by the Creator 
above his fellow-beings, apart from the ordinary course 
of nature. 

In Fig. I, we employed any line, or path in space, but 
to avoid complications in succeeding diagrams, we 
shall adopt the straight line. A terminated line may be 
considered as a path of a point in space, bounded by its 
initial and final positions. The terminated straight 
line is the particular case where the point moves from 
one position to another by the shortest route AB (Fig. 
2). If we move AB through the shortest path to the 



A* ' » ' ' * 9 




Fig. 2. Fig. 3. 

final location A'B\ we obtain a plane figure ; and if AB 
be moved in this manner, a total distance equal to its 
length (Fig. 3), the result will be the definite plane 
figure known as a square. Hence the square may be 
called the elementary figure in the two-dimensional 
world, just as we consider a terminated straight line 
the elementary figure in the one-dimensional world. 

In passing from the lineal to the areal existence, we 
find that we have greatly multiplied the number of 
possible varieties in shapes. Thus, our two-dimen- 
sional world may have not only creatures rqpresented 
by points and lines, but also by numerous hetero- 
geneous forms, including many familiar ones, such as 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



175 



the square, rectangle, triangle, and circle. Here, as in 
the former case (Fig. i), only by careful demonstra- 
tion, such as the superimposing of various bodies for 
purposes of comparison, could these creatures get even 
an intimation of the endless variety of forms about 
them, or establish to any definite degree their relation- 
ships. An idea of the limited variety of forms that 
present themselves to the casual observer in sudi a 
two-dimensional world, may be gained by us if we 
cut various-shaped objects from paper and look at 
them edgewise. A long, narrow strip will appear as 





Fig. 4. 

a point or a line, according as the spectator views it 
from the end or from the side ; while the square, circle, 
triangle, and rectangle will appear merely as lines of 
various lengths. It would be only fair, however, to 
endow at least a few of these creatures with minds 
sufficiently mathematical to establish a few simple 
relationships. Suppose them to be confronted with the 
problem of proving the entire equality, by the Euclidean 
method, of the triangles ABC and abc (Fig. 4), when 
it is granted that the side AB is equal to the side ab, 
AC is equal to ac, and the angle CAB is equal to the 
angle cab. The mechanical operation here is within 
their possibilities. 



176 



THE FOURTH DIMEKSiOir 



Let US now place the same 6gures in the positions 
shown in Fig. 5. Given the same hypothesis, it might 
appear at first glace that this case is sinlUar to Fig. 4, 
but a closer examination shows diat Fig. 5 involves the 




simple preliminary operation of reversing one of the 
triangles before it can be superimposed upon the other. 
It is evident that this "turning-over" process requires 
a knowledge of three dimensions, and, therefore, to 

creatures with a compre- 
hension of only length 
and breadth, the possibility 
of an Euclidean proof 
would be inconceivable. 
We will now suppose our 
two-dimensional world 
pierced by a line LN (Fig. 
6), and imagine it to con- 
sist of such material that 
the line may be moved 
about at will without necessitating its withdrawal from 
or tearing the plane. It is evident that the only portion 
of this line which could be detected by these creatures 
would be the point P — a form of creature with whidi 
we have supposed them familiar — freely moving about 




Fig. 6. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 77 

and apparently limited to the two-dimensional exist- 
ence, while in reality requiring three-dimensional space 
for its accommodation. 

We now come to the consideration of objects with 
which we are familiar, namely, those in three-dimen- 
sional space. All forms of matter manifest to our 
senses require space for their accommodation, having 
length, breadth, and height. The plane, line, and 
point exist in theory only to aid man in the present 
crude state of his mental development to build up im- 
perfect images in conformity with forms as he senses 
them in the material world. As universal laws are the 
media through which nature works, she builds accord- 
ing to conditions and environments and inscrutable 
laws of economy. In nature, the straight line and the 
plane surface are the exceptions, appearing most fre- 
quently among the lower forms of plant and animal 
life, but man, ignorant of the finer considerations which 
shape the course of nature, and continually prone to 
error, must accomplish his results by the simplest, most 
direct methods within his comprehension. In doing 
this he has adopted as the standard of length a straight 
line; the unit of area, a plane figure known as the 
square; and the unit of volume, a six-sided figure 
called the cube. We have already seen how the plane 
may be derived from the straight line, by the same 
method we shall construct the elementary figure of 
three-dimensional space. Referring to Fig. 3, let us 
imagine the square AA'B'B moved at right angles to 
its surface, a distance equal to one of its sides. In doing 
this we have generated a figure (Fig. 7) which is 
three-dimensional. 

Suppose that in selecting the straight line AB, from 
which our figures have been constructed, we had 



178 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



chosen one two inches long, then the elementary geo- 
metrical figures would have a corresponding mathe- 
matical representation, thus: the line = 2; the square 
= 2*; the cube = 2*, Now since we have also such 
expressions as 2*, 2*, eta, for which we have found no 
geometrical solution, the question naturally arises 




Fig. 7. 



whether there does not exist, beyond the limits of man's 
present knowledge, a higher order of beings for the 
comprehension of whom we, as three-dimensional be- 
ings, would require additional perceptive powers. 
With our present mental limitations, however, it would 
be impossible even to attempt to define an object which 
would require four-dimensional space for its accommo- 
dation, but by analogy we can deduce a few interesting 
facts regarding a figure which would apparently occupy 
the same position in the new world that the cube holds 
in our own. 

We have seen that ( i ) points form the terminations 
of a straight line, (2) straight lines terminate, or 
bound, the square, and (3) squares form the bounding 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 79 

surfaces of the cube. Thus we have established that 
the elementary figure of each existence is contained 
within figures having one dimension less than itself. 
We, therefore, conclude that our four-square figure 
would be terminated by cubes. In deriving the square 
from the line, we move along the shortest path from the 
initial to the final positions, these being separated from 
each other a distance equal to the line itself. Similarly, 
the cube was generated by moving the square through 
space until it occupied a final position at a distance 
equal to one of its sides from its initial position. In 
both cases the motion took place in a direction at right 
angles to each and all of the boundaries of the generat- 
ing figure. We, therefore, conclude that our four- 
square figure might be generated by the displacement 
of the cube, a distance equal to one of its sides, and in 
a direction at right angles to all of its containing sides. 
What this direction would be is as foreign to our under- 
standing as a conception of height would prove to 
creatures in a two-dimensional world. 

In the movement of the line to form the square the 
number of boundaries obtained for the new figure was 
twice the original, plus two lines generated by the 
terminating points of the line. In like manner the con- 
taining sides of the cube were formed by the first and 
last positions of the square plus four squares created 
by the four containing lines. From these considera- 
tions it would appear that the four-square would have 
as its boundaries the initial and final positions of the 
cube plus six cubes formed by the displacement of the 
surfaces of the original figure, or a total of eight cubes. 
Again referring to our square and cube, we see that 
the number of points or comers in the constructed 
figure is twice the number of points (or comers) in the 



l8o THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

generating figure. Thus, the line with two limiting 
points gives the square four comers; the cube has 
eig^t comers and the four-square, on this basis, would 
have sixteen. The number of lines or edges connecting 
the comer points is as follows : in the square, twice the 
original line plus two lines traced by its ends; in the 
cube, four lines for each position of the square plus 
four lines described by its fotu* comers. The number 
of edges of a figure then is seen to be twice the number 
of lines or edges in the generating figure plus an edge 
formed by each one of its comers. Therefore, our four- 
square would give edges as follows : 12 X 2 + 8 = 32. 
To sum up, our four-square would have eight containing 
cubes, sixteen comers and thirty-two edges ; and if our 
generating cube measured two inches on an edge the 
content of this new figure would be represented by 2*. 
Curious as the above geometrical deductions may 
appear, they are surpassed by the dramatic results that 
would accompany a conception of the fourth dimension. 
To a creature with a knowledge of mere length and 
breadth, our physical representation of lines on a plane 
surface would prove as impassable a barrier as a stone 
wall unlimited in height would to us. Now, it is 
evident that we, as three-dimensional beings, may touch 
all portions of a plane figure (Fig. 3) without disturb- 
ing any of the containing lines. If, then, a number of 
two-dimensional creatures were placed in such an enclo- 
sure, imagine their surprise at finding that there existed 
an order of beings capable of penetrating matter, as 
they know it, without in any way disturbing it! A 
parallel case may be imagined in our own existence, 
if we suppose a being A of the three-dimensional order 
shut in a hermetically sealed armor-plate vault and 
suddenly confronted by a being, B, having a knowledge 
of the fourth dimension. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED l8l 

It might seem possible from these considerations 
that, with such an advanced state of knowledge, we 
would be able to extract the pulp from fruit and the 
kernel from the nut without first removing the outer 
covering. Likewise, windows for the admission of 
light, or doors for communication with the outside 
world, would no longer be necessary, for the fourth 
dimension would destroy the present effectiveness of 
the barrier formed by the six sides of a room. 

It will be many centuries, if ever, before man can 
prove the probability of a dimension above the third ; 
but, as we have shown in connection with Fig. 6, we 
are scarcely justified in denying such an advanced state 
merely because all matter can apparently be shown to 
occupy three-dimensional space. 

The development of our perceptive senses proceeds^ 
very slowly and, according to the theory of evolution, 
depends upon the extent of the use of existing facul- 
ties. We may be justified, therefore, in presuming 
that we are infinitely nearer to a realization of the 
four-dimensional existence, if such exists, than we 
are to the first dawn of reason. 

We may consider this ideal state of mental develop- 
ment a possibility if we believe that, in the various 
stages of his progress, man carries over to each suc- 
ceeding state a balance of inherent possibilities, which, 
in the new existence, prove the active influences deter- 
mining the mental status of the next. 

In view of this it might seem possible that that 
quality of the mind, subconsciousness, is in reality but 
a subtle force at work evolving greater possibilities in 
the acquirement of knowledge by the multiplication of 
the perceptive senses. 



1 62 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XVI. 

THE MIND'S EYE AND THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

BY ""rAJARAM^^ (CHARLES JOHNSTON, 
NEW YORK, N. Y.) 

A Straight line has length, but neither breadth nor 
height. It is a figure of one dimension or direction. 

A flat or plane surface has length and breadth, but 
not height. It is a figure of two dimensions or direc- 
tions. 

A solid body, like a cube, has length, breadth and 
height. It is a figure of three dimensions or directions. 

Line, surface, solid, represent one, two, three dimen- 



B 




Fig. I. 

sions. If we could take an additional step, we should 
have a fourth' dimension. 

In what direction should we look for the fourth 
dimension ? Let us see : 

Draw a straight line (Fig. i). Mark oflF one indi. 
This gives a figure of one dimension (length). It is 
bounded by two points. 

On this line as base draw a square (Fig. 2). It has 
two dimensions (length and breadth). The new 
dimension is obtained by drawing a line at right angles 
to the first direction. The square is botmded by four 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



183 



Straight lines; the two-dimensional figure is bounded 
by four one-dimensional figures. It has four extreme 
points, comers. 

From another point of view, the square is formed 
by moving the line sideways (at right angles to itself) 
for a distance equal to its length. 

With the square as base, construct a cube (Fig. 3). 
It is a three-dimensional figure. The third direction 
is at right angles to the other two, or to any line in the 
plane. The cube is bounded by six squares ; the three- 
dimensional figure is bounded by six two-dimensional 
figures. It has twelve bounding lines and eight comers. 

The cube is formed by lifting the square upward 
from the surface to a height equal to its length or 
breadth. 

e 

.4 





Fig. 3. Fig. 4. 

If we could move the cube in a fourth direction, at 
right angles to all its sides, we should form a four- 
dimensional figure. By analogy, it would be bounded 
by eight three-dimensional figures (cubes), and would 
have twenty-four square sides, thirty-two bounding 
lines, and sixteen points. (C. H. Hinton calls it a 
"tesseract.") 

We can represent a three-dimensional figure, like a 
cube, on a two-dimensional surface, like paper. It is 
just as easy to represent the new four-dimensional 
figure on the two-dimensional surface of the paper. 

Beginning at the point A (Fig. 4), we draw, first, 



184 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

AB, a one-dimensional figure. Next, ABCD, a two- 
dimensional figure, AD being at right angles to AB. 
Third, the three-dimensional cube, AG ; its new direc- 
tion, AEy being at right angles to both AB and AD. 

Now, let AJ represent a new direction, at right 
angles to all three directions, AB, AD and AE. This 
will be the fourth direction or dimension. We can 
complete the figure as before. This is a true picture of 
a four-dimensional figure represented on a surface: 
that is, in space of two dimensions. It is bounded by 
eight cubes, twenty-four squares, thirty-two lines and 
sixteen points. 



4 0B'' A 



# 



Fig. 5. 

Just as the cube was formed by moving the square 
upward for a distance equal to its length or breadth, 
so this "four dimensional cube" is formed by moving 
the cube for an equal distance in a new direction at 
right angles to all its sides. 

In the flat picture (projection) of the cube, the 
square sides seem to overlap, to occupy the same space. 
In reality they do not overlap. So, in the flat picture 
of the four-dimensional figure, the cubes forming its 
boundaries seem to overlap. But in space of four di- 
mensions they would not overlap. 

Let us approach the question in another way. Draw 
a straight line (Fig. 5). Mark off on it two points, 
A and B. A one-dimensional person could push the 
line along till it reached the position A'B\ But -he 
could not rotate it round B till it reached the position 
B''A\ 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 185 

Now, let US take a two-dimensional figure, sudi as a 
right-angled triangle, ABC (Fig. 6). A two-dimen- 
sional man could push the triangle sideways, to the 
position A'B'C (Fig. 7). He could also rotate it 



A* 






^ c>--^ W 



B 



Fig. 6. Fig. 7. 

round the point B till it took the position A^B^C". But 
he could not conceive the triangle turned over, so as 
to take the position DBF (Fig, 8). He could not 
rotate it round a line (AB). But for us, three-dimen- 
sional folk, it is easy to turn the triangle over — to 
rotate it round a line — so that it appears reversed, as 
in a looking-glass. 
Now, let us take a three-dimensional figure, a cube 



O 




B E 

Fig. 8. 




(here represented in two dimensions, flat). We can 
easily think of the cube turned round so as to take 
the position in Fig lo. We cannot turn it round so as 
to take the position in Fig. ii, that is, with right and 
left reversed, as we see ourselves in a looking-glass. 
We cannot rotate the cube round a surface. A four- 
dimensional person could, just as we can turn a triangle 
over, so that right and left are reversed. 



185 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



We cannot do this. But we can easily represent it, 
either by holding our cube before a looking-glass or 
by such a diagram as Fig. 12. Here we can think of 
either the side ABCD or the side EFGH as being 
nearest to us, as being the front of the cube. It 
changes as we look at it. 

This right-and-left rotation is characteristically four- 
dimensional. Something very like it occurs in nature. 
A beam of polarized light (whose wave-vibrations are 
all in one plane) is rotated either to the right or the 




Fig. 9. 



Fig. 10. 




Fig. II. 



Fig. 12. 



left, on passing through certain substances (sugar, 
starches), just as we might hold a ribbon by the ends 
and give it a twist to right or left. Dextrose and levu- 
lose (forms of sugar found in honey) owe their names 
to the fact that one rotates a polarized beam to the 
right (dextra, "right hand"), the other to the left 
(laeva, "left hand**). In chemical constitution, they 
are exactly the same. Such substances are called 
"isomeric." It is suggested that their contrasted 
properties are due to right and left reversal of their 
atoms, a four-dimensional movement in the minute 
particles of which they are built up. 

Certain snails, exactly alike in all other characters, 
have a like difference; some are coiled to the right, 
others to the left. It is remarkable that their juices 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 1 87 

have a corresponding property of rotating a polarized 
beam to right or left. This suggests that their external 
form is an expression of an internal difference, a right 
or left twist of their atoms, by a four-dimensional force. 

The correspondence of the right and left hand, the 
right and left sides of the face or body, is similar. It 
could be produced by a four-dimensional twist, just 
as our Fig. lo becomes Fig. ii. It is suggested that 
such a four-dimensional twist runs through living 
forms ; that the life-force is in part f our-dimentional 

Similarly, it is suggested that electric and magnetic 
forces are four-dimensional. Let us illustrate: Take 
a piece of flexible India rubber, shaped like an uncut 
pencil. You can roll it between your finger and thumb, 
thus rotating it on its center line (or axis). Now 
fasten the ends together so as to make a ring. You 
can turn this ring inside out, rotating it on its axis, 
which is now a circle instead of a straight line. A 
smoke-ring has just this motion, turning rapidly inside 
out. The particles on the outside keep moving to the 
right, while those on the inside move to the left. 

Now, imagine another dimension added to the axis 
of our smoke-ring. Instead of a circle, it will be a 
cylinder or tube. The outside surface of the tube will 
have a continuous movement to the right; the inside, 
a continuous movement toward the left. It will be a 
four-dimensional "vortex ring." It is suggested that 
an electric ciurent going along a wire is such a "four- 
dimensional vortex-ring." The positive current has a 
continuous right-hand movement; the n^;ative, an 
equal and opposite left-hand movement. k. 

Is our mental sight four-dimensional ? 

Consider the cube in Fig. 12. As we look at it, 
cither face may be taken as the front. Without chang- 



1 88 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

ing our point of view, we can locJc at the bade and the 
front equally well ; or at the outside and inside of each 
of the sides. Our line of sight is, therefore, perpen- 
dicular to all the sides, as we saw that the fourth 
dimension must be. 

We can do this, because our cube in Fig. 12 is not 
really solid. A four-dimensional man could do it with 
a solid cube. And we can do in thought what he could 
do in fact. 

For imagine a solid cube before your mind's eye. 
You can locJc direct at the front of it. You can look 
equally straight at its back or at any side, without either 
moving your own imagined position or the cube's posi- 
tion. This is four-dimensional. 

In the same way you can imagine a locked box, and 
at the same time imagine the inside of it, without think- 
ing of it as open. You can imagine taking a diamond 
necklace out of it, while it remains locked. This is 
four-dimensional robbery, and would be easy to a four- 
dimensional bank-robber. Our safes would lie open to 
him for all their locks. 

Draw a square on paper. It'represents a two-dimen- 
sional room. A two-dimensional man could leave it 
only by going along the surface of the paper to one 
edge. Put your finger on the paper within the square. 
It represents the apparition of a three-dimensional 
being in a two-dimensional room. Raise your finger. 
The apparition has vanished without approaching the 
boundaries of the room. Similarly, a four-dimensional 
being could appear in the center of a three-dimensional 
room, and disappear as suddenly ; just as you can think 
of yourself in one room and then in another, without 
having to think of yourself as approaching and going 
through the doors. This is four-dimensional. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 189 

Here is a two-dimensional knot (Fig. 13).* A two- 
dimensional man could only tie it by rotating half the 
string in a circle, thus bringing the two ends together. 
We can tie it by simply folding part of the string over 
without bringing the ends together. We could also 
tie such a knot on an endless cord — 3, circle of string. 
Similarly, a four-dimensional man could tie one of our 
three-dimensional knots without bringing the ends of 
the string together ; or he could tie knots on an endless 
cord — say a ring of leather formed by cutting out the 




Pig. 13. 

center of a disk of leather. The fact that a four-dimen- 
sional being could tie such knots, take things from 
closed boxes, write inside closed box-slates, appear and 
vanish, suggested to ZoUner of Leipzig that four- 
dimensional beings do do these things — ^at seances. 

Again, imagine a two-dimensional space, like the 
surface of water. Take a cone, point downward, and 
immerse it in the water. First, only a point touches 
the water. It becomes a tiny circle, which gradually 
expands, till the whole cone is just immersed. Plunge 
it deeper, and the cone vanishes from our two-dimen- 
sional space — the surface of the water. A two-dimen- 

* See foot-note, paRC 30. 



190 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

sional man could only conceive a cone in this way : a 
point, succeeded in time by expanding circles, and 
finally vanishing. 

It is suggested that we in like manner could only 
perceive a four-dimensional form as a series of three- 
dimensional forms succeeding each other in time. 
Thus, the seven ages of man — infant, schoolboy, lover, 
soldier, to lean and slippered pantaloon — ^may be 
thought of as our three-dimensional perception of a 
four-dimensional form. Th^ may be simultaneous, 
not successive, like the circles forming the cone. Both 
vanish at the end — ^the cone into three-dimensional, 
the man, perhaps, into four-dimensional space. Thus 
time, which has only one dimension (length, but not 
breadth or height), may rq)resent a fourth dimension 
added to our three-dimensional space. 

If our mental vision be four-dimensional, then our 
mental or spiritual self may be four-dimensional. If 
seance-wonders are four-dimensional, they may repre- 
sent the powers of spiritual beings. If time is but the 
way in which we perceive the fourth dimension, then 
our spiritual selves, being four-dimensional, may be 
above time, outside of time — eternal. 

Plato may have had this in mind when he compared 
us to men diained in a cave, watching shadows on the 
wall. That is, three-dimensional beings limited to two- 
dimensional perceptions. Did he mean that we are 
four-dimensional (spiritual) beings limited to three- 
dimensional (material) perceptions? 

Had Paul the fourth dimension in mind when, speak- 
ing of spiritual life, he enumerated "the breadth and 
length and depth and height "(Eph. iii., 18) ; or when 
he wrote : *T knew a man, whether in the body, or out 
of the body, I cannot tell, how that he was caught up 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I9I 

into paradise, and heard unspeakable words" (II. Cor. 
xii., 2-3) ? Had John the same thought when he "was 
in the spirit" and saw "the city foursquare" ? Was the 
body of the resurrection, which appeared in the midst 
of a closed room, a four-dimensional body? Was 
the ascension a like disappearance? 

These are some of the questions connected with the 
fourth dimension. This much is certain, that the term 
comes to us from a firm believer in spiritual life. 
Henry More, the Platonist, used the phrase "quarta 
dimensio" — ^the "fourth dimension" — in his '^ Enchiri- 
dion Metaphysicum," ch. 24, 7, about the year 1671, 
while Milton was still alive. 

Again, solids move in lines, like a bullet; that is, 
in one dimension. Liquids tend to move in two dimen- 
sions, as water spreads over a surface. Gases tend to 
move in three dimensions, as air fills a bubble. Does 
ether tend to move in four dimensions ? Are its contra- 
dictory properties the expression of this ? 

Are dreams four-dimensional? Js this tJie reason 
of their "simultaneous succession" — ^years in a mo- 
ment? But bur (three-dimensional) space is limited. 



192 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XVII. 
OTHER DIMENSIONS THAN CUSS. ' 

BY "cube'' (w. T., HOLLAND). 

^ Suppose some men were obliged to creq> slang 
inside a long gaspipe, so narrow, that each man would 
just fit it, and that omsequently no two men could 
pass one another. Then each man would be able to 
move to and fro in the direction of the pipe, but in no 
other direction. 

In such a case each man would be able to see only 
the feet of the man in front of him, and if any con- 
versation should be held, it is very probable that it 
would be about the length they had moved, and not 
about breadth or height. 

If you should look at the pipe from a great distance, 
you would see it as a black line, and if you were able 
to see through the wall, you would see little things 
moving along it. 

Suppose a number of men were obliged to creep 
between two parallel horizontal planes, so near one 
to the other, that they just fitted between them. They 
would have more freedom of movement than the men 
in the pipe, for they would be able to move in different 
directions. From any given place they would be able 
to move to some other place by creeping first in one 
arbitrarily chosen direction and after that in a direction 
perpendicular to the former. 



i 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I93 

If you were to stand at a great distance above the 
planes, you would see only one plane, and if you were 
able to see through it, you would see little things, 
seemingly moving on that plane. 

In ordinary life our movements are not so restricted 
as in the above-mentioned states, for we are not only at 
liberty to move on the surface of the earth, but we can 
also move in a direction perpendicular to it. 

It might be possible to shut up the men within the 
pipe by means of a small hindrance at each of the two 
ends. The men between the planes might, in a similar 
way, be shut up by means of a wire, forming a closed 
figure, placed between the two planes, say at equal 
distances from each. Looking at the pipe, you would 
say that the movement in the pipe is restricted by two 
points, one at each end of the line, and that the move- 
ment on the plane is restricted by some closed figure on 
the plane. 

But in ordinary life, neither a point nor a closed 
figure (for example, a figure drawn on the surface 
of the earth) is sufficient to hinder us from moving. 
We are restricted in our movement only when we are 
inclosed in a room or some other hollow body. 

Now, the mathematician is accustomed to say that a 
line has one dimension (namely length), that a surface 
has two dimensions, and that a solid has three dimen- 
sions. This is done because a surface may always be 
compared with a rectangle, which has length and 
breadth, and a solid may be compared with a rectan- 
gular block, which has length, breadth, and height. 

For the better understanding of the following, we 
will suppose that the pipe is really what it seems to 
be at a distance, namely, a single line, in which crea- 
tures are moving, which are not human beings, but 



194 '^HE FOURTH DIMENSION 

which have the form of lines without any thickness. 

In the same manner, we will suppose that the crea- 
tures between the planes are not human beings, but 
that they are what ihey seem to be from a distance, 
namely, flat figures moving on a plane. The wire, 
which prevents them from moving at will, is then also 
a closed figure, drawn on the plane. 

In the line, movement is possible only in one direc- 
tion ; therefore, we will call that line one dimensional 
space, and the creatures therein one-dimensional beings. 
In the plane, movement is possible in one arbitrarily 
chosen direction, and also in one perpendicular to that 
direction ; therefore, we will call that plane two-dimen- 
sional space, and the creatures in it two-dimensional 
beings. We ourselves are three-dimensional beings, 
living in three-dimensional space. In that space we can 
move in any chosen direction, then in one perpendicular 
to it, and again in a third direction perpendicular to 
the first and second. For instance, you may walk 
along in a street, then move perpendicularly to the 
street when you enter a house, and after that move 
perpendicularly to the surface of the earth by rising 
in an elevator. 

Now, the question arises ; Is it possible that a fourth 
direction should exist, which is at the same time per- 
pendicular to the first, second and third direction ? That 
fourth direction we cannot see or draw; we are only 
able to think and to speak about it. A creature, able to 
move in the fourth direction, would be a four-dimen- 
sional being, and would have at his disposal a four- 
dimensional space. 

A one-dimensional being cannot move in two-dimen- 
sional space, but he can think about it; a two-dimen- 
sional being cannot move in three-dimensional space» 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I9S 

but he can think and speak about it. In the same way, 
we, three dimensional beings, cannot move in four-di- 
mensional space, but we can, by reasoning, find out 
what a four-dimensional being would be able to per- 
form, and what things might exist in four-dimensional 
space. We do that by making a comparison with space 
of fewer dimensions, as follows : 

The one-dimensional space can be supposed to lie in 
a two-dimensional space; the two-dimensional space to 
lie in a three-dimensional one. In the same way, three- 
dimensional space may lie in a four-dimensional one. 
That is to say, the two-dimensional space surrounds the 
one-dimensional ; the three-dimensional space surrounds 
the two-dimensional, and thus the four-dimensional 
space must surround the three-dimensional. A two- 
dimensional creature would be hindered in its move- 
ment by a one-dimensional space lying in its two-dimen- 
sional space, if this one-dimensional space were impene- 
trable ; it would be obliged to rest all its life on one side 
of the line, and it could never come in contact with two- 
dimensional beings on the other side of the line. 

Two two-dimensional creatures on different sides 
of the line could, perhaps, hear each other, but never 
see each other. 

A three-dimensional creature would be hindered in 
its movements by a two-dimensional space if this latter 
were impenetrable; it would be obliged to spend all 
its life on one side of the plane, and could never come 
in contact with beings on the other side of the plane. 

In the same way, three-dimensional space would, if 
it were impenetrable from the side of the fourth direc- 
tion, hinder two four-dimensional beings from coming 
in contact one with the other. 

But as long as our world oxists we have neyer heard 



19^ THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

of any hindrance to our movements by some plane. 
Therefore, we will suppose that one-dimensional space 
is penetrable for a two-dimensional being; that a two- 
dimensional space is penetrable for us; and that our 
three-dimensional space is penetrable for a four- 
dimensional being. Thus a two-dimensional crea- 
ture would be able to enter one-dimensional space 
at any given point, consciously or unconsciously. 
If for a moment we return to our first idea of human 
beings in a gaspipe, the two-dimensional creature 
might (by a groove in the wall) take off the hat 
of one of the men, and put it a few seconds later 
on the head of another. Neither the latter nor the 
owner would have the slightest notion where the hat 
had come from or had gone to. The former would 
have lost its hat out of sight immediately; the other 
would see it appear suddenly. In the same way, a 
three-dimensional man would be able to take off the 
hat of a two-dimensional creature, and take it outside 
the wire-fence, within which the latter is shut up, only 
by removing it out of the plane and passing it through 
three-dimensional space. The two-dimensional crea- 
ture would see his hat disappear, without having any 
notion of where it had gone to, and a short time after 
he might see it appear again at a place which he would 
never be able to reach without breaking the limiting 
fence. We conclude from this that a four-dimensional 
being would be able to remove our hat and take it 
outside the room in which we are, without breaking the 
walls, or opening a door or a window. We should 
see the hat disappear without understanding where 
it had gone to, and would see it reappear after a 
short time in the street, without seeing where it had 
come from. The four-dimensional being would have 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 197 

taken it out of our space, and passed it through its 
own space. 

A one-dimensional being is tmable to turn so as to 
make its head occupy the place of its other extremity ; 
but if that same being should be taken to two-dimen- 
sional space, it might be turned round there, and then be 
put in the desired position. In the same way a two- 
dimensional being would not be able to turn upside 
down, but a three-dimensional being may do this by 
taking the two-dimensional being out of its plane, turn- 
ing it rotmd, and replacing it. 

Suppose that same two-dimensional being to have 
the fomv of a rectangle with 
points ABCD (Fig. i), then its 
f dlow-beings would see a very re- 
markable change in its state. For 
if before this points A, B, C, and 
D succeeded each other the way 
of the Sim they would, after the 
return of that being, follow each 
other in a contrary direction. Its 
fellow-being would have seen it 
disappear suddenly without having 
a notion where it had gone to, pjg^ i 

and would have seen it reappear 
suddenly, but now inverted ; for what first was on the 
right will now be on the left. 

We gather from this that a four-dimensional being 
would be able to take a righf-hand glove out of our 
space to his, and to bring it back as a left-hand glove ; 
that a man taken to four-dimensional space might be 
(but not necessarily must be) transformed into his 
reflected image, with his heart on the right side of his 
body instead of on the left side, etc. 





198 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

In drawing a cme-dimensional space we have to 
draw only lines, each line having two limiting points. 
In two-dimensional space we can move that line at 
right angles to its direction, and we can obtain a square. 
The moving line is in its initial and final position a 
side of that fig^e; the two other sides are described 
by the limiting points of the line. By moving the 
square perpendicularly to its plane we can obtain a 
cube. The moving square is in its initial and final 
position, a limiting face of the cube; the sides of the 
square describe each another limiting face of the cube ; 
consequently, there are six such-like faces. Each point 
of the square describes an edge of the cube; the square 
gives both in its initial and final position four edges; 
consequently, the cube must have 4 + 4 + 4, i.-e., 12 
edges. 

If it were possible to move the cube in a fourth direc- 
tion, perpendicularly to the three above-mentioned ones, 
then we should obtain a four-dimensional solid — let us 
call it an over-cube — of which by comparison we may 
notice the following properties : The cube in its initial 
and final position would form a part of the boundary 
of the solid ; each limiting face of the cube would have 
described a new cube; consequently, the boundary 
would consist of 2 + 6, i. e., 8 cubes. 

Each of the 12 edges of the cube would describe a 
square; in both the initial and final position there are 
6 squares; so the over-cube would possess 12 + 6 + 6, 
i. e., 24 square faces. 

Each of the 8 points of the cube would describe an 
edge; in both the initial and final position there are 12 
edges; so there will be a total of 8 + 12 + 12, i. e., 
32 edges. 

The one-dimensional line has two final points, the 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED I99 

two-dimensional square has 2 X 2, i. e., 4 points ; the 
cube has 2 X 4, i. e., 8 points ; consequently, the over- 
cube must have 2X8, i. e., 16 points. 

If a circle in two-dimensional space is passed through 
a one-dimensional space (which lies in that two-dimen- 
sional space), just between two one-dimensional beings, 
then these beings would be separated. Their distance 
would gradually increase until the moment that the 
center of the circle should be in the one-dimensional 
space ; then that distance would be equal to the diameter 
of the circle. As the circle continues its movement, the 
beings would be able to approach each other again, 
and would reach each other at the very moment that 
the circle should disappear out of their sight. The 
one-dimensional beings would get the notion of a line, 
which grows to a certain maximum and then dimin- 
ishes to zero. 

If in the same way a sphere in three-dimensional 
space were to move through a two-dimensional space 
then there will be seen on the plane a circle, which 
gradually increases to a maximum and then diminishes 
to zero. 

We conclude from this that in the fourth dimension 
there may exist a figure which, by passing through our 
three-dimensional space, would give us the impression 
of a sphere, growing larger until it reached a maximum 
and then gradually diminishing to zero. 

For two-dimensional beings that, which we call their 
surface, is the inner part of them. They are not able 
to see each other's surface. For one-dimensional beings 
the line itself forms the inner part; they are not able 
to see that part of each other. But a two-dimensional 
being is able to touch the inner part of a one-dimen- 
sional being, and a three-dimensional being can touch 



200 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



the inside of a two-dimensional one. In none of these 
cases the touching creature is seen by the touched one ; 
there can be only a strange feeling. 

We conclude from this that a four-dimensional being 
may be aUe to touch our inner parts without being 
seen by us. 



• * 



I 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 20I 



XVIII. 

THE MCANING OF THE TCSM "FOURTH 

DIMENSION." 

BY ''GEORGE" (GEORGE GAILEY CHAMBERS^ PH.D.). 

The phrase "space of four-dimensions" has been 
used in three distinct connections : in pure mathematics, 
in various theories put forth to explain certain phe- 
nomena in the physical sciences, and, lastly, in attempts 
to provide a suitable abiding place for the spirits of 
the dead. It was introduced and developed in mathe- 
matics long before it was used in either of the other 
connections. Moreover, its use in those other connec- 
tions has been simply a succession of attempts to apply 
the mathematical concept. 

Hence, the aim of this paper is first and chiefly to 
explain the meaning of the phrase as it is used in 
mathematics. There it is simply a language device to 
put certain mathematical facts in a more convenient 
form or to secure greater generality of expression or 
for both of these purposes. There is no question raised 
as to whether such a space actually exists or not. A 
space of four dimensions arises primarily by generaliz- 
ing a few of the fundamental facts of ordinary plane 
and solid geometry. Consequently, an exact explana- 
tion cannot be given without first stating those facts 
on which the generalization is based. 

Before taking up that explanation, I will mention 
some examples of other words whose meaning has 
been extended in a similar manner. In law, the word 
person has been extended so as to include a legal cor- 
poration. By this device a single statement is sufficient 



202 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

to express any principle of law which applies both to 
natural persons and to corporations. In double-entry 
bookkeeping, the accountant charges and credits "bills 
payable" or "merchandise" just as he charges and 
credits John Doe. He does this simply as a device 
which enables him to get a better view of the status of 
the business. In elementary arithmetic, we use the 
word "times" in its primary meaning only when the 
multiplier is an integer, as 3 times 5J4. With its 
original meaning it could not be used to express the 
related problem of taking a fractional part, as ^ of 
5 J4 . The meaning of the word was extended, however, 
so that we now say 2^ times 5J4, or even V ^ times 
5J^. We thus secure a generality of expression. This 
use of the word does not imply at all that an)rthing can 
happen or be done 2}i times or V 2 times in reality. 

O — . ^ 



« II > I * I ■>■— Bi^i 



Fig. I. 

The word dimension primarily means measurement. 
If we think of a straight line (Fig. i), and of one 
fixed point on it, O, then the position of every other 
point on it, P, is fixed by one measurement, if its 
direction from the fixed point be given. Since one 
measurement is necessary and sufficient to fix a point, 
a straight line is called a space of one dimension. This, 
by the way, is a use of the word space, distinct from 
its ordinary use. For the same reason, any continuous 
line is called a space of one dimension. We will dis- 
tinguish a straight line by calling it a straight one- 
dimensional space. 

In a plane, two measurements are necessary and suffi- 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



203 



cient to fix a point, P (Fig. 2), with reference to two 
perpendicular straight lines OX and OY. Conse- 
quently, a plane is called a space of two dimensions. 



O 



I I _ ■<■■ ! ■» 



t 



Fig. 2 

For the same reason, any continuous surface is also 

called a space of two dimensions. We will distinguish 

a plane by calling it a straight two-dimensional space. 

In like manner, three measurements are necessary 




f? 



"^ 



Fig- 3. 

and sufficient to fix a point, P (Fig. 3), in ordinary 
space with reference to three mutually perpendicular 
planes, XOY, YOZ, and ZOX. Hence, ordinary space 



204 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

is called a space of three dimensions. It should be 
noticed that this last sentence contains both of the dis- 
tinct uses of the word space. 

We can now state the following definitions which 
evidently hold in ordinary plane and solid geometry : 

A one-dimensional space (a line) is a space such 
that one measurement is necessary and sufficient , to 
fix a point. 

A two-dimensional space (a surface) is a space such 
that two measurements are necessary and sufficient to 
fix a point. 

A three-dimensional space (such as ordinary space) 
is a space such that three measurements are necessary 
and sufficient to fix a point. 

We can immediately generalize by adding to this set 
of definitions the following : 

1. A four-dimensional space is a space such that 
four measurements are necessary and sufficient to fix 
a point. 

Let me here remind the reader that this statement is 
not intended to define anything that we can conceive 
mentally in the sense in which we conceive the spaces 
of fewer dimensions. 

In a plane (a straight two-dimensional space) there 
are an unlimited number of straight lines (straight one- 
dimensional spaces). In ordinary space (a three- 
dimensional space) there are an unlimited number of 
planes (straight two-dimensional spaces). By general- 
izing we will give to our four-dimensional space the 
following property : 

2. In a four-dimensional space there are an unlimited 
number of three-dimensional spaces. 

The ordinary definition of a plane is as follows: a 
plane (a straight two-dimensional space) is a surface 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 205 

(a two-dimensional space) such that if any two points 
in it be joined by a straight line (a straight one-dimen- 
sional space), every point in that straight line will lie 
in the surface. Similarly, we will define a straight 
three-dimensional space as follows : 

3. A straight three-dimensional space is a three- 
dimensional space such that if any three points in it 
be joined by a straight two-dimensional space (a plane) 
every point in that two-dimensional space will lie in the 
three-dimensional space. Ordinary space is evidently a 
straight three-dimensional space. 

In a plane (a straight two-dimensional space), any 
straight line (straight one-dimensional space) may be 
rotated about any point in that line, and even if the 
amotmt of rotation be ever so small, the line will 
occupy an entirely new position, excepting the point 
about which it was rotated. In ordinary space (a 
three-dimensional space), any plane (straight two- 
dimensional space) may be rotated about any straight 
line (straight one-dimensional space) which lies in that 
plane, and even if the amount of rotation be ever so 
small, the plane will occupy an entirely new position, 
excepting the line about which it was rotated ; i. e., 
any fixed point in ordinary space originally in the plane 
but not in the axis of rotation will no longer be in that 
plane. By generalizing we will give to our four-dimen- 
sional space the following additional property: 

4. In a four-dimensional space, any straight three- 
dimensional space (such as ordinary space) may be 
rotated about any two-dimensional space (plane) which 
lies in that three-dimensional space, and even if the 
amoxmt of rotation be ever so small, the three-dimen- 
sional space will occupy an entirely new position except- 
ing the two-dimensional space (plane) about which it 



206 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

was rotated ; i. e., any fixed point in the four-dimen- 
sional space which was originally in the three-dimen- 
sional space, but not in the plane of rotation, will no 
longer be in that three-dimensional space. 

From the foregoing definitions and assumptions, the 
following theorem can be proved : 

5. Any four points not all in the same plane deter- 
mine a straight three-dimensional space. 

Proof : Let A, B, C and D be any four points not all 
in the same plane. Pass a straight three-dimensional 
space through the points A, B, and C, and rotate it 
about the plane of A, B, and C. The principle of rota- 
tion, 4 above, shows that there will be one and only one 
position in which the rotating three-dimensional space 
will contain the point D. Hence the points A, B, C, 
and D determine a straight three-dimensional space. 

From this theorem we have the following corollary : 

6. Two straight three-dimensional spaces intersect 
in a plane. 

For if all the points of the intersection do not lie 
in one plane, let A, B, C, and D be four points of the 
intersection not all in one plane. Then, by the theorem, 
there will be just one straight three-dimensional space 
containing all of them ; but by hypothesis they are con- 
tained in two such spaces. 

Proceeding in this way a geometry of four dimen- 
sions can be built up and all the theorems of plane 
geometry will hold in any plane contained in the four- 
dimensional space, and likewise all the theorems of 
solid geometry will hold in any straight three-dimen- 
sional space contained in the four-dimensional space. 
Our ordinary space can always be considered a& being 
one of the three-dimensional spaces contained therein. 
While the whole structure just described is nothing 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 20/ 

more than a language device, yet it gives the geometer 
a means of proving many theorems of plane and solid 
geometry. In many cases these theorems can be proved 
much more easily by making use of the geometry of 
four dimensions than by using the ordinary methods. 
In fact a number of new theorems in plane and solid 
geometry have been discovered by means of the geome- 
try of four dimensions. Schubert, in his mathematical 
essays, gives a very interesting case of that kind. 

I wish to refer to one other interesting example 
before leaving this part of the discussion. It has been 
proved that in four-dimensional geometry there are six 
regular structures corresponding to the five regular 
solids of ordinary geometry. Now, just as a figure in 
solid geometry can be projected upon a plane, so these 
regular structures in four-dimensional geometry can 
be projected upon a three-dimensional space (ordinary 
space). A few years ago, Dr. Paul R. Heyl, then a 
graduate student at the University of Pennsylvania, 
constructed wire models of such projections. These 
models are now preserved in the mathiematical seminar 
room in the University of Pennsylvania. 

The most valuable use of the geometry of four 
dimensions is distinct from the use mentioned above. 
To understand it one must have a slight knowledge of 
anal)rtic geometry, or of the geometrical representation 
of algebraic equations. Corresponding to any pair of 
numbers, there is a point in a plane (two-dimensional 
space) ; e. g., to the pair of numbers (4, 3) there 
corresponds the point P (Fig. 2). Corresponding to 
any set of three numbers there is a point in ordinary 
space (three-dimensional space) ; e. g., to the set of 
numbers (3, 2, 4) there corresponds the point P (Fig. 
3) . Similarly, from the above definition of four-dimen- 



208 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

sional space it follows that to any set of four numbers, 
say (2, I, s, 4), there corresponds a point in four- 
dimensional space. 

'Also, to any relation in algebra between two variables 
there corresponds a line in a plane ; e. g., to the first- 
degree equation, 2x + y = 2f there corresponds a 
straight line in a plane. To any relation between three 
variables there corresponds a surface ; e. g., to the first- 
degree equation, ;r -f- 3y + 2j8r= i, there corresponds 
a plane. Then making use of the language of four- 
dimensional geometry we can say that corresponding to 
any relation between four variables there corresponds a 
three-dimensional space ; e. g., to the first-degree equa- 
tion, x + y — 2j8r-F3W = 4, there corresponds a 
straight three-dimensional space. This is really noth- 
ing but a translation of the algebra into the language 
of geometry. In a similar manner any algebraic rela- 
tion can be translated into the language of geometry. 

It frequently happens, when a long algebraic discus- 
sion is translated into geometric language, that it be- 
comes much more concise, and consequently the mathe- 
matician can get a much better view of his discussion 
as a whole ; just as the bookkeeper by using the method 
of double-entry bookkeeping gets a much better view 
of the status of affairs in his firm. Moreover, when 
the bookkeeper has his accounts arrayed by the double- 
entry method, he is frequently able to discover import- 
ant facts about his firm's business which would have 
eluded him if he had used the old single-entry system. 
Just in the same way, the mathematician has frequently 
discovered important facts in his algebra by viewing 
it after translation into the language of geometry. 
These newly discovered facts can then be translated 
back into algebraic language and become a valuable 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 209 

addition to his store of knowledge. This is the most 
important use of four-dimensional geometry. 

The value of this will appear to one disposed to 
look at the practical side, if we consider how these 
algebraic relations may arise. The problem of a falling 
body gives rise to a relation between two variables, 
namely, time and the distance through which the body 
falls. This gives us an algebraic relation, S=i6t^, 
from which, by algebraic manipulation, other relations 
may be derived. These derived relations can then be 
interpreted in the terms of the original problem of a 
falling body. In some problems in electricity four 
variables are related. Such a relation can sometimes be 
expressed in algebra, deductions made from it, and 
these deductions interpreted again into the terms of 
electrical theory. Now, if the mathematician, by mak- 
ing use of the language of geometry, can discover other 
facts, these facts also can be interpreted into the terms 
of electrical theory. 

Thus far we have treated of the meaning of the 
term fourth dimension as it is used in mathematics. 
The same term has been used in attempts to explain 
certain physical phenomena, such as the phenomena of 
light. The properties of the space thus assumed by the 
physicist are exactly the same as the properties assumed 
or developed by the mathematician. The physicist 
assumes the existence of a space of four dimensions, 
takes those properties, combines with them other phys- 
ical principles, and makes deductions therefrom. He 
adds nothing to the meaning of the concept of a fourth 
dimension. Therefore, his theories are outside the 
scope of this papei 

In the third case, stated in the beginning, that of pro- 
viding a place for the spirits of the dead, the procedure 



2IO THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

has been very much the same. Here also no new 
properties are added to the meaning of the term. The 
attempts of those interested in this use of it have been 
directed toward justif)ring the assumption of its exist- 
ence. Hence, their omsiderations also are b^ond the 
present scope. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 211 



XIX. 



A PUPIL IN GEOMETRY QUIZZIIS HIS 
TXACHCK ABOUT THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

Being a Report, with some Modifications, of an 
Actual Class-room Discussion. 

BY ^'aRCTURUS" (ELMER E. BURNS, JOSEPH MEDILL 

HIGH SCHOOL, CHICAGO). 

Pupil: The newspapers have been printing things 
lately about the fourth dimension. Will you tell us 
something about it ? 

Teacher : I will do my best, but I fear that you will 
not be able to understand me. 

Pupil: I don't tmderstand what the fourth dimen- 
sion is. 

Teacher : State your difficulty as clearly as you can 
and it may be that I can help you. 

Pupil: We have been studying about figures and 
objects that have length, breadth, and thickness. I 
don't see how an object can have another dimension. 

Teacher: Objects such as you and I can see and 
handle do not, so far as we know, have a fourth dimen- 
sion, but there may be other objects that have four 
dimensions. 

Pupil : I don't see how that can be. 

Teacher: Well, do you see how there can be an 
object of only two dimensions? Did you ever see or 
handle an object that had only length and breadth, but 
not thickness ? 

Pupil : No ; I never did. Even the thinnest sheet of 
paper has some thickness. 



212 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

Teacher : Yet you have no difficulty in dealing witfi 
figures, such as triangles and circles, that have no 
thidcness. You even talk about them as though they 
actually exist. 

Pupil : I thought there were such things as circles. 

Teacher : You just said that you had never seen or 
handled anything that had no thidcness. Did you ever 
see or handle a circle ? 

Pupil : No. Come to think of it, I never did. I see 
that a circle exists only in my own thought and not in 
reality. 

T^urher: So far as our experience goes, we must 
admit that is true, but may we not conceive of the 
possibility of things existing which we cannot see and 
handle, things beyond the reach of our senses, that have 
no thickness ; in other words, that have only two dimen- 
sions ? 

Pupil : If they are not real to me, I don't see how 
they can be real at all. 

Teacher: Imagine for a moment that your shadow 
on the wall comes to life. Now, a shadow, as a mere 
surface, is not real to us. The shadow on the wall is 
to us a symbol of unreality, of that which has no sub- 
stance. Can you not now imagine the surface of the 
wall extended indefinitely and a multitude of such 
figures as your shadow moving about upon that sur- 
face? These shadow figures cannot escape from the 
surface. They are living in space of two dimensions. 
If one of them points his finger, he points in some 
direction in the surface in which he lives; in other 
words, in the direction of a straight line lying within 
the plane. Perhaps the earth upon which such creatures 
live is a circle, and they move about upon the circum- 
ference of that circle. Other planets are circles, perhaps 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



213 



moving about a larger circle, as the planets of the solar 
system move about the sun. 

Pupil : Yes, I can imagine all that ; but that is a world 
of two dimensions. I can't imagine a world in which 
there are four dimensions. 

Teacher : Perhaps not, because you have no experi- 
ence like seeing your shadow to help you. But you may 
be able to think of the possibility of such a world, and 
indeed you have taken the first step in that direction. 




_ 




^g. I. — ^The shadowman sees his image in a mirror 

Suppose the shadow man sees his image in a mirror, 
as in Fig. i. Suppose, in his vanity, he wishes to 
appear as he does in the mirror, that is, to take the 
position of his image. Do you see that, if he goes 
to the other side of the mirror, remaining in his space 
of two dimensions; he is either standing on his 
head or has his back to the mirror ? He cannot possibly 
take the position of his image and remain all tihe time 
in the plane. Now, suppose some higher being, who 
lives in space of three dimensions like yourself, picks 
up the shadow man and, turning him over, places him 
in the position of his image — a movement you can 



204 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

is called a space of three dimensions. It should be 
noticed that this last sentence contains both of the dis- 
tinct uses of the word space. 

We can now state the following definitions which 
evidently hold in ordinary plane and solid geometry : 

A one-dimensional space (a line) is a space such 
that one measurement is necessary and sufficient , to 
fix a point. 

A two-dimensional space (a surface) is a space such 
that two measurements are necessary and sufficient to 
fix a point. 

A three-dimensional space (such as ordinary space) 
is a space such that three measurements are necessary 
and sufficient to fix a point. 

We can immediately generalize by adding to this set 
of definitions the following : 

1. A four-dimensional space is a space such that 
four measurements are necessary and sufficient to fix 
a point. 

Let me here remind the reader that this statement is 
not intended to define anything that we can conceive 
mentally in the sense in which we conceive the spaces 
of fewer dimensions. 

In a plane (a straight two-dimensional space) there 
are an unlimited number of straight lines (straight one- 
dimensional spaces). In ordinary space (a three- 
dimensional space) there are an unlimited number of 
planes (straight two-dimensional spaces). By general- 
izing we will give to our four-dimensional space the 
following property : 

2. In a four-dimensional space there are an unlimited 
number of three-dimensional spaces. 

The ordinary definition of a plane is as follows : a 
plane (a straight two-dimensional space) is a surface 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 20$ 

(a two-dimensional space) such that if any two points 
in it be joined by a straight line (a straight one-dimen- 
sional space), every point in that straight line will lie 
in the surface. Similarly, we will define a straight 
three-dimensional space as follows : 

3. A straight three-dimensional space is a three- 
dimensional space such that if any three points in it 
be joined by a straight two-dimensional space (a plane) 
every point in that two-dimensional space will lie in the 
three-dimensional space. Ordinary space is evidently a 
straight three-dimensional space. 

In a plane (a straight two-dimensional space), any 
straight line (straight one-dimensional space) may be 
rotated about any point in that line, and even if the 
amoimt of rotation be ever so small, the line will 
occupy an entirely new position, excepting the point 
about which it was rotated. In ordinary space (a 
three-dimensional space), any plane (straight two- 
dimensional space) may be rotated about any straight 
line (straight one-dimensional space) which lies in that 
plane, and even if the amount of rotation be ever so 
small, the plane will occupy an entirely new position, 
excepting the line about which it was rotated ; i. e., 
any fixed point in ordinary space originally in the plane 
but not in the axis of rotation will no longer be in that 
plane. By generalizing we will give to our four-dimen- 
sional space the following additional property: 

4. In a four-dimensional space, any straight three- 
dimensional space (such as ordinary space) may be 
rotated about any two-dimensional space (plane) which 
lies in that three-dimensional space, and even if the 
amount of rotation be ever so small, the three-dimen- 
sional space will occupy an entirely new position except- 
ing the two-dimensional space (plane) about which it 



2l6 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



and CB and he will not believe you, because he cannot 
know of any such direction from his own experience. 

In Fig. 3 we have a cube and its image in a mirror. 
To place the cube in the position of its image, it must 
first be moved in a direction perpendicular to all its 
edges. That direction is the fourth dimensicm. Now 
you are like the shadow man. When I tell you that 



N 


A 


^ 








s 


F 


N 



>\ 


" 


"^^^ 






£ 


\ 


'• 


\f 



Pig- 3- — A cube and its image in a minor. 



there may be a line at the point E perpendicular to the 
lines EF, EB, and EH, you do not bdieve me, because 
you cannot picture to your mind any such direction. 

Pupil: Can you draw that line? 

Teacher : That I cannot do. If I draw a line on the 
blackboard or making any angle with the board, it 
represents to your mind a line in space, the only space 
you know, and that is space of three dimensions. You 
see, the reality of the fourth dimension depends on there 
being a direction of movement of whidi we are not 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



217 



conscious. We must admit that, as we know a direction 
unknown to the shadow man, so some higher being may 
know a direction unknown to us. 

We may unconsciously move in that unknown direc- 
tion just as the whole world in which the shadow man 
lives might, unknown to him, be moved in a direction at 
right angles to the plane. 

There is another way in which we may think of the 
fourth dimension. Just as we can understand how a 
cube or a sphere appears to the shadow man, as it passes 




Fig. 4. — A cube passing through the shadow world, 
shadow man it appears as a square. 



To the 



through the surface in which he lives, so we can under- 
stand how certain bodies of four dimensions would 
appear if they were to pass through our space. 

Let us think of a cube passing through the shadow 
world, as in Fig. 4. The shadow man can see only that 
part of the cube which lies within the surface in which 
he lives. If the cube is passing through with four edges 
perpendicular to that surface, the shadow man sees a 
square. As the cube passes through, the substance 
of which that square is composed changes. We can see 
this if we suppose the surface of the cube to be shaded, 
say from yellow through orange to red. Now, the 



2l8 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

colors of the lines which the shadow man sees bounding 
the square will change as the cube moves through his 
space. If he is a highly intelligent shadow man he may 
think of the possibility of a third dimension and try 
to imagine it just as you are trying to imagine the 
fourth dimension. He has seen the changing square as 
the cube moved through his space, and, since he cannot 
picture to his mind the third dimension, he can only 
represent this strange fig'.:re by a series of squares. 
Elach square is a section of the cube. He would know 
that in order to change through the entire series of 
squares the strange figure must move in the third 
dimension, a distance equal to a side of the square. 

We may think of a figure of four dimensions which 
bears the same relation to the cube that the cube bears 
to the square. A cube is generated by a square moving 
in a direction perpendicular to its sides, that is, in the 
third dimension. So this new figure is generated by 
a cube moving in a direction perpendicular to all its 
edges, that is, ih the fourth dimension. As a cube 
moving through space of two dimensions appears as a 
continuously changing square, so this new figure in 
passing through our space would appear as a continu- 
ously changing cube. As the shadow man represents 
the cube to himself by a series of squares, each square 
being a section of the cube, so we may represent this 
new figure of four dimensions by a series of cubes, each 
cube being a section of the figure. To pass through 
our space, this curious figure of four dimensions must 
move a distance equal to one of the edges of the cube. 

We might reason about other figures in the same 
way. We might even think of a being whose form 
bears the same relation to the human form that the 
human form bears to its shadow. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 2ig 

Pupil : I begin to see how we can think of a fourth 
dimension, but how can you prove that it is real ? 

Teacher : I cannot prove to you that it is real, since 
I have never yet seen a body disappear from our space 
and return to it after turning about in space of four 
dimensions ; nor have I seen a four-dimensional being 
move through our space. If either of these things were 
to happen or could be proved to have happened, we 
should know to a certainty that there is a fourth dimen- 
sion. 

Pupil : Could anyone draw a picture of a body that 
has four dimensions? 

Teacher: If such a picture were drawn it would 
have three dimensions, just as you may draw a picture 
of a cube and your picture has two dimensions. If your 
picture is drawn according to the laws of perspective 
it represents to your mind a cube, as the cube appears 
to you. Now, if a picture, having three dimensions 
and representing a body of four dimensions, were 
drawn, and if this picture accorded with the laws of 
perspective in space of four dimensions, still it would 
not represent to your mind a figure of four dimensions. 
You Would probably mistake it for a model. You 
would see only the three-dimensional figure. It would 
require a being conscious of movement in the fourth 
dimension to interpret the picture. 



220 



TH£ FOURTH DIMENSION 



XX. 



possible: MOVUMEINTS AND FORMS IN A 
SYSTHM OF FOUR DIMUNSIONS. 

BY ''DER CHEMIKER^^ ( J. CLYDE HOSTETTER, 

LEWISBURG, PA.). 

Geometry tells us that a point has no dimension; 
that it possesses merely position in space. If, however, 
we move a point continuously in space it will generate 
a line (Fig. i), which is said to possess one dimension 




Fig. I.— Moving point, /*, 
tbrongh space generates 
a line which has on^ di- 
mension — ^length. 




Fig. 2. — Moving line, A B^ 
generates a surface having 
twuo dimensions — ^length and 
breadth. 



— length. Now, let us move the line thus made through 
space. It generates a surface (Fig. 2), and we notice 
that our surface possesses the one dimension of the 
line and also a second dimension — ^breadth. From 
a line possessing one dimension we have generated a 
surface with two dimensions. Now, if we move our 
surface through space it will generate a solid (Fig. 3). 
This possesses the length and breadth of the surface 
and, in addition to these, a third dimension — thickness. 
From a point, then, we have generated a line with one 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



221 



dimension; from a line we have generated a surface 
with two dimensions, and from a surface with two 
dimensions we have generated a solid with three dimen- 
sions. We have generated each of these in turn from 
a form possessing one less dimension by motion 
through a new dimension. Reasoning from this we 
conclude that if we could move our solid through a 
new dimension a figure would be generated which 
possessed not only the length, breadth, and thickness 
of the solid, but, in addition to these, still another 



1^^ 




'![ 



B 



Pig* 3* — Moving snxf ace, A B 
CDf generates a solid which 
h^B three dimensions— length, 
breadth, and thickness. 



I I I I 1 1 ;^.»4., ^k 



Fig. 4. — ^To determine point P 
on a line we measure from 
zero to the point, obtaining 
one nxaribex. 



dimension. Such a figure would possess four dimen- 
sions, and the existence of such a figure would require 
the existence af a fourth dimension. It is by reason- 
ing of this kind that the idea of a fourth dimension has 
been developed. 

Now, let us take a line and see why the term one- 
dimensional is applied to it. On a line, the position 
of a point and, therefore, the point itself, is determined 
when its distance from an arbitrarily chosen point on 
the line, the zero point, is known. We find this dis- 
tance by measuring, in terms of the unit of length, 
from zero to the point P (Fig. 4), in just the same 



222 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



manner as we measure temperatures on a thermometer 
scale, the zero point of which has been arbitrarily 
fixed. One number, then, determines the position 
of our point. Now, a line may be considered as con- 
sisting of an infinite number of points. So any point 
of this point-aggr^^te is determined by one number, 
and, in general, a one-dimensional system requires 
one number for its determination. How is the point 
determined in a two-dimensional system of points, 
such as the plane? In determining the point on a line 
we arbitrarily set a zero. Here we must also have a 
zero for our measurements. We make this zero the 



U 



f t ■ ■< » 




Fig. 5.»To locate Ponm plane 
we measure from Pto each 
of two axes at right angles, 
thns obtaining iwa num- 
bers. 



Fig. 6.— To locate point P in 
space, we measure from P 
to each of three axial planes 
at right angles, thus ob- 
taining tMrte numbers. 



point at which two lines intersect each other at right 
angles. Such lines may be considered the axes of 
length and breadth. Now we measure the distance 
from P (Fig. 5) to each axis, and having these two 
distances our point can be determined. This is the 
same system that is used in locating positions on the 
surface of the earth, when we refer distances to the 
parallels of latitude and meridians of longitude. A 
point in the two-dimensional plane requires, then, two 
numbers for its determination, and, in general, for a 
two-dimensional system tiyo numbers are necessary 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 223 

and sufficient for its determination. The idea of axes 
is also used in determining position in a solid. A 
reference to Fig. 6 will make this clear. Here the 
three distances from point P to each of three planes 
intersecting at right angles are necessary to determine 
the position of P. So we find necessary the relation 
of three distances to determine position in a three- 
dimensional system. And, to generalize, an "n"-dimen- 
sional system of points is such that "n" numbers are 
necessary and sufficient to determine an individual 
point amid all the points of the aggr^^te. Thus, in 
a fourth-dimensional system four numbers are neces- 
sary, and in a fifth-dimensional system five numbers, 
and so on. 

Let us now study the possibilities of motion in the 
different systems. In a one-dimensional system there 
is but one possible direction for movement. In a two- 
dimensional system there is the possibility of mover it 
in two directions. On a line, then, motion is possible 
in but one direction ; in a plane, motion is possible in 
two directions. In a two-dimensional system all move- 
ments are either parallel to the two axes, or are com- 
binations of movement in these two directions. Simi- 
larly, in a three-dimensional system, there is possible 
motion in three directions, and all movements in a 
three-dimensional system are either parallel to the 
three axes of length, breadth, and thickness, or are 
combinations of movement in these three directions. 
If, then, we extend the argument, we see that in a 
fourth-dimensional system, movement would be possi- 
ble in one or all of four directions. 

How many dimensions does the world in which we 
live possess? We have seen that a solid possesses 
three dimensions. Further, according to geometry, a 



224 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

solid is a* limited portion of space. If we expand our 
three-dimensional solid indefinitely, it would conse- 
quently fill the space. We are accustomed to consider 
space, therefore, as three-dimensional, and our world 
is likewise a world of three dimensions. So reasoning 
as above, every point in space can be reached by motion 
in three directions. 

However, there are some who argue as follows: 
Motion in one direction will not take us to every point 
in a two-dimensional system; likewise, motion in two 
directions will not take us to every point in a three- 
dimensional system. So, they assert that motion in 
three directions will not enable us to reach all points 
in space as it really is. We know that motion in three 
directions will take us to every point in a three-dimen- 
sional system. Then, if motion in three directions 
will not take us to all points in space, we must assume 
motion in a fourth dimension, and so a fourth-dimen- 
sional space. 

What, then, is this fourth dimension, and is there 
any evidence for its existence? Before we attempt to 
answer let us see clearly the difficulties encountered in 
dicussing the fourth dimension. To beings living in 
a one-dimensional world the idea of breadth has no 
significance. To beings living in a two-dimensional 
world the idea of thickness would have no significance. 
They can move in but two directions and their world 
is consequently limited to the dimensions of leng^ 
and breadth. Terms which are easily comprehended 
by us, who live in a world of three dimensions, would 
possess absolutely no significance to the two-dimen- 
sional beings. Similar to this, then, is the difficulty 
of describing the fourth dimension. If a fourth-di- 
mensional being were to describe this dimension his 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



225 



•description would contain terms having no meaning 
to us. And when we attempt to describe this dimen- 
ision we find our vocabulary, developed from our three- 
dimensional experience, too limited. The best we 
•can do is to discuss the possibilities of a world possess- 
ing four dimensions. We can determine some of these 
possibilities by analogpies from our three-dimensional 
experiences. 

The first analogy depends on the properties of con- 
figuration. In a two-dimensional system we can place 
three points at equal distances from one another. Talk- 
ing a plane as our two-dimensional system, and con- 






~J?ig. 7. — In a plane which has 
two dimensions three points 
can be equidistant, bnt not 
four points. 



Fig. 8. — In three-dimensional 
space four points can be 
equidistant, but no more. 



necting the three equidistant points, we have an equi- 
lateral triangle (Fig. 7). Try as we will, however, 
we cannot place four points in a plane equidistant from 
one another. If we add another dimension to our 
: system the placing of four points equidistant from one 
another can be accomplished. Taking three of the 
points arranged in the form of an equilateral triangle 
as a base, we place the fourth point in the third dimen- 
sion above the others. We can place this at the same 
distance from the points in the plane, as these are from 
weach other. Connecting our points by lines we have a 



220 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

tetrahedron, the vertices of which are equidistant 
(Fig. 8). The placing of five points equidistant from 
one another is impossible as long as we have but three 
dimensions, but it would be possible if we could use 
a fourth dimensicm. 

Let us illustrate this space arrangement In chemis- 
try, the molectdes of a compotmd are said to amsist 
of the atoms of the elements contained in the com- 
potmd. These atoms are supposed to be at certain dis- 
tances from one another, and to be held in their relative- 
positions by certain forces. Formerly, all the atoms 
in a molectde were conceived to lie in one and the same 
plane. Now, however, the atoms are given a definite 
space arrangement In order to accotmt for certain 
facts, it has been necessary to assume in sc»ne mole« 
cules that four atoms are equidistant from one another. 
We picture them, therefore, as being situated at the 
vertices of a regular tetrahedron. If it were necessary 
to assume the equidistance of five atoms in the mole- 
cule, this would be evidence for the existence of a 
fourth dimension, as only in a fourth-dimensional sys- 
tem would this be possible. 

Another analogy depends on the properties of rota- 
tion. In a plane, rotation takes place about a point;, 
as may be illustrated by the drawing of a circle by 
means of a compass, in which the end of one 1^ of 
the compass is the point about which rotation takes 
place. It is impossible to have rotation about a point 
in a one-dimensional system, as a line. In a three- 
dimensional system, rotation may take place about a 
line, as, for instance, the rotation of the earth about 
its axis. In a world possessing four dimensions, how- 
ever, we see by analogy that rotation would also be 
possible about a plane. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 



227 



Let US see if this conclusion is justified. The pro- 
cess of rotation is closely connected with that of super- 
position, so the latter must be discussed to some extent. 
The congruence, or, roughly speaking, the equality of 
two geometric forms is determined by superimposing 
one upon the other, and then seeing if the two forms 





B A 

^ig* 9* — Superposition of lines requires two dimensions. 

coincide in every part. In a one-dimensional system 
we cannot superimpose one line upon the other;* the 
best we can do is to place the lines so that they meet. 
The only way in which superposition of lines can be 
secured is by moving one of the lines through a second 
dimension and then placing it upon the other (Fig. 9). 




Fig. 10. — th/t equality of i and 2 can be shown by displacement. 
Keeping 2 and 3 in the plane they cannot be made to coincide 
by any movement. Rotation of 3 through a third dimension 
makes coincidence possible. 

It takes, then, a two-dimensional system to give us 
superposition of one dimension. Now, take the case of 
two equal triangles on a plane (Fig. 10). We can 
determine the congruence of i and 2 by displacement ; 
that is, we move one of the triangles and then see if 



* Fnmi what foUofws it a 
upon A and B' upon B.--H. 



rs tbat the author means superposition of A' 



228 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



the second can be made to occupy exactly the space 
formerly occupied by the first. But how about tri- 
angles 2 and 3 ? We see that here we cannot use the 
process of displacement. We can measure the angles 
and sides and determine their equality, but we cannot 
superimpose one upon the other as long as they remain 
in the plane. It required two dimensions for the super- 
position of lines having but one dimension. Our tri- 
angles have two dimensions, and we at once conclude 
that superposition requires a third dimension. So we 




Fig. II. — The equality of pyramids i and 2 can be shown by dis- 
placement. 2 and 3, symmetrical pyramids, cannot, in three- 
dimensional space, be made to coincide. By rotation of one 
of them through a fourth dimension, coincidence would be 
possible. 

rotate one of them about an edge through a third 
dimension imtil it again reaches the plane, and they^ 
can now be superimposed. Rotation about a line and 
superposition of two-dimensional figures require thus 
the aid of a third dimension. In this passage through 
the third dimension, however, the angles of the tri- 
angle were reversed, that is, the anterior and posterior 
angles are interchanged, and, in fact, it is due to this 
that the superposition is possible. 

Let us extend this idea to the superposition of one 
solid upon another. For pyramids i and 2 we can use 
the process of displacement (Fig. ii). How can we 
superimpose 3 upon 2? Such pyramids are symmet- 
rical. All lengths and angles of one have their exact 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 229 

duplicate in the other, yet the two cannot be made to 
coincide, that is, be fitted the one into the other so that 
they shall both stand as one pyramid. They corre- 
spond exactly to our left and right hands. Our hands 
cannot be made to coincide in our three-dimensional 
space. The reflected image of the right hand, however, 
could be made to coincide with the left hand; they 
are alike one another, but on opposite sides of a plane. 
Just so are pyramids 2 and 3. We cannot, in our 
three-dimensional space cause symmetrical pyramids 
to coincide. It requires rotation about a plane to g^ve 
us congruence. This is impossible now, but if it were 
possible to hold one of the surfaces of either pyramid 
and rotate the pyramid through a fourth dimension 
back into our three-dimensional world it could be 
accomplished. This is the fourth-dimensional analogue 
of the superposition of the two triangles above de- 
scribed. In this rotation the interior surfaces would 
be converted into exterior surfaces,* and it is due to this 
conversion that coincidence is now possible. This 
interchange of exterior and interior surfaces may be 
illustrated by turning a right glove inside out to form 
a left glove. 

Now, to take another illustration from chemistry, 
there are two varieties of tartaric acid which crystal- 
lize in forms bearing the relation of object to mirror- 
image. Such crystals are illustrated in Fig. 12. Ap- 
parently these two varieties change the one into the 
other without chemical resolution and reconstitution. 
If it could be shown that such does take place, then 
this would be proof of a fourth dimension, because 
only in a fourth-dimensional space can a right-handed 
shape become a left-handed shape by simple movement. 

* This is not true. See Introduction, page 28.— H. 7. M. 



230 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

These, then, are the most obvious of the possibilities 
of a fourth dimension. 

Is there a real fourth-dimensional world? It is 
highly improbable. If there were such a world would 
it be inhabited by beings who could act upon us three- 
dimensional beings, as the Spiritualists assert? We 
reasoned the possibilities of a fourth-dimensional 
world by analogy — we must reason this question in the 
same way. If there is a fourth-dimensional world 
containing beings that can act upon and influence 
us, who are but three-dimensional, then, by analogy. 



f^rj^r 



id^ 



2 

Fig. 12.— Crystals of a lartrete bearing the leUtlon of object uid 
image. If i changed into 3 witboot chemical resolution and 
reconsdtntion it ironld be proof of a fomrtk dimenrion. 

we would exp«S the existence of a world of two- 
dimensional beings upon whom we could consciously 
act. We do not know of such a world. Also, we 
would expect a fifth-dtmensional world with beings 
who could influence the beings of a fourth-dimensional 
world, and so on. Perhaps there is a two-dimensional 
world that we cannot influence. Then, the other 
worlds should be independent also, and if the fourth- 
dimensional beings can still influence us, then the 
fourth-dimensional world would be an exception in the 
great plan of creation. The existence of such a world 
with beings that can influence us is, therefore, highly 
improbable. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 23 1 

In conclusion, let us summarize what we have 
learned concerning the fourth dimension. 
In a system of four dimensions : 

1 . It would be possible to generate a body possessing 
four dimensions by moving a solid through the fourth 
dimension, just as a solid is generated in a three-dimen- 
sional system from a surface with two dimensions. 

2. It would be possible to move in four directions, 
whereas, now we can move in but three. 

3. It would be possible to place five points equidis- 
tant from one another, whereas, now four is the maxi- 
mum number. 

4. Rotation would be possible about a plane, where- 
as, now it is possible only about points and lines. 

5. Coincidence of sjrmmetrical solids would be pos- 
sible. 

6. If there is such, it is highly improbable that it is 
inhabited by beings that can act upon us who are three- 
dimensional. 

Grateful acknowledgment is here given by the writer 
to Hermann Schubert and C. H. Hinton, whose papers 
have been freely used in the preparation of this essav. 






232 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XXI. 

THE FAIKTLAND OF THE FOURTH 

DIMENSION. 

BY ''a. CLEMENTUS'' (a. C. SILVERMAN, 
SYRACUSE, N. Y.). 

Everybody has observed the difficulty that a little 
child has in realizing that it must step over a compara- 
tively high object on the floor. It has no notion of 
falling. It is delighted and astonished as, from its 
eminence on the table, it watches you bend down and 
disappear and then rise up again and cry "pedc-a-boo." 
This inability on the part of babies to comprehend 
a third dimension is well known. Now, very serious 
and bespectacled geometricians tell us that perhaps 
we, too, are but babies in a space of a fourth dimension, 
and that we, too, might be no less astonislied if beings 
from that world chose to play pedc-a-boo with us. 

order to get some notion of the fourth dimension, 
let us, first of all, get an idea of the meaning of dintto- 
sion. The dictionary gives it as extension in space, 
material body, such as a tree, a horse, a sheet of 
paper, is known as a (physical) solid, and the limited 
portion of space it occupies is known as a (geomet- 
rical) solid, because it extends •in three directions; and 
we speak of every object as having three dimensions — 
length, breadth, and thickness. Yet, although a very 
thin sheet of paper is a solid, we can think of its sur- 
face only ; and, although a tree is a solid, we can think 
of its height only, without any reference to its diameter. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 233 

This is true, for we do have the linear measure with its 
inch, foot, yard, and we have the square measure with 
its square inch, square foot, and square yard. Indeed, 
we may get an idea of the cube by drawing, first, a 
straight line ; then, another straight line perpendicular 
to the first at its extremity, forming a square; and 
then a third line perpendicular to the other two at the 
same extremity, forming a box or cube, the volume of 
which is expressed by the cubic measure, the cubic 
inch, cubic foot, and so forth. The same idea can be 
gotten from the following definitions in geometry: a 
point has position but no magnitude ; if a point moves 
it generates or traces a line and that has length only; 
if a line moves, not along itself, it generates a surface, 
whidi has length and width ; if a surface moves, not 
along itself, it generates a solid, which has thickness, 
besides the other two dimensions. 

But, having the solid, our experience does not per- 
mit us to go any further. However we move the solid, 
we still generate a solid and nothing else. Neverthe- 
less, let us be bold and imagine that we move the solid 
into a space that it did not previously occupy and 
that we make it take an added dimension that it did 
not previously have. We now get an object of four 
dimendons. 

may be difficult for us to form a conception of a 

orld of more than three dimensions. Yet it is no 

ore difficult than to imagine a world confined to only 
wo dimensions, or than, for beings of such a world, to 
form a conception of our space. 

For simplicity, let the two-dimensional world be a 
plane, though equally well it might be the surface of 
a sphere. We may picture to ourselves the mode of 
life of the inhabitants of this flat land. They could 




234 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

move in any direction along the plane, but they could 
not move perpendicularly to it, and would have no 
consciousness that such a motion was possible. They 
would not be able to turn their heads up or down. 
Things about them could be pulled or pushed in any 
direction, but they could not be lifted up. People 
and things could pass arotmd each other, but they 
could not step over anything. Their plane geometry, 
however, would be exactly like ours. 

In this supposed land, let us draw two straight lines 
perpendicular to one another, that is, two straight lines 
intersecting at right angles at A. The drawuig (Fig. 
l) would be as perfectly conceivable to om* plane 

beings as it is to us. But suppose 
. we asked them to draw a third line 

■ perpendicular to the other two lines 
at the same point of intersection A. 
Fig. I. That woidd seem absurd and impos- 

sible to them, just as it would be to 
us if we had to draw the required third line on the 
paper. But with this condition removed, we can 
leave the plane surface of the paper and draw the 
third line through the paper perpendicular to the sur- 
face at A, just as we might stick a pin at A vertical to 
this page. 

So, too, with us, when we have a cube after drawing 
three mutually perpendicular lines, and are required to 
draw a fourth line passing through the same point, per- 
pendicular to all of the three lines already there. 
In our space the problem is absurd and impossible. 
Our conceptions do not admit of more than three 
dimensions. But for a being that could conceive of 
a fourth dimension the problem would be easy. He 
would simply draw the line through that space. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 235 

Our conscious life is in three dimensions, and natur- 
ally the idea occurs whether there may not be a fourth 
dimension. No inhabitant of flatland could realize 
what life in a world of three dimensions would mean. 
Yet, if he were intellectual, he might be able to extend 
the anal)rtical geometry that applied to his world, so 
as to obtain results true for a world in three dimen- 
sions, a world that would be unknown and incon- 
ceivable to him. Similarly, we cannot realize what 
life in four dimensions is like, though we can use our 
analytical geometry to obtain results true of that world 
or even of worlds of higher dimensions. Moreover, 
the analogy of our position to the inhabitant of flat- 
land enables us to form some idea of how the inhabit- 
ants of space of four dimensions would regard us. 

If we placed a dweller of flatland inside a circle, 
or inside a rectangle drawn on his plane, he would be 
as truly imprisoned as we are in a closed prison cell. 
He would go all around, and, finding every inch of it 
closed, he would simply despair of getting out, unless 
he could break through it. On account of his limited 
conceptions, he could not possibly understand how we 
might step over the boundary. He could form no 
notion of the trick. But we should simply step over 
the line and reappear on the other side. So, if we, 
confined within the six surfaces of a dungeon, a being 
able to move in the fourth dimension, he would step 
outside of the cell without breaking any part of the 
walls, ceiling or floor. He would do it as easily as we 
could pass over the circle drawn on a plane without 
touching it — so wonderful to our friend in flatland. 
Our new being, the fourth-dimensional one, would 
simply disappear from our view like a spirit and then 
reappear again outside the prison. He would only 



236 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

have to pass through the fourth dimension. Of course^ 
no such a case has as yet been reported. 

Let us continue our analogy further. We know that 
the cross-section of a line is a point ; that of a surface, 
a line; and that of a cube, a surface. Hence, if a 
fourth-dimensional object were cut crosswise its sec- 
tion would be a cube; ihat is, a four-dimensional object 



I I 




B C Jl 

Fig. 2. Fig. 3. 

is bounded on all sides by solids. Again, on a line 
we can find two points equidistant from each other ; for 
example, the points B and C with the single distance 
BC (Fig. 2). In a plane, we can find three equidistant 
points, as the vertices of an equilateral triangle in 
which AB = BC = CA (Fig. 3). In our space, four 
equidistant points can be located, the vertices of a 





Fig. 4. 

tetrahedron, that is, a pyramid having four triangular 
faces. Hence, in four-dimensional space it should be 
possible to find five equidistant points. Further, rota- 
tion in a plane takes place about a point ; in our space, 
about an axis, as shown in Fig. 4. Hence, in four- 
dimensional space, rotation should take place about a 
plane. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 237 

This last point — rotation — Pleads to a curious geo- 
metrical application of the principle. We have in Fig. 
5 two triangles, of which the sides and angles of the 
one are equd to the corresponding sides and angles 
of the other. We can lift one triangle up and turn 
it over on the other so that the two triangles fit 
exactly together. But, mind, we could not do it other- 





wise than by lifting. Hence, these two triangles could 
never be fitted together by the mathematicians of flat- 
land, since to them lifting is inconceivable. Possibly, 
however, they might suspect this method by noticing 
that an inhabitant of one-dimensional space — say, for 
simplicity, one living on a straight line — ^might expe- 
rience a similar difficulty in comparing the equality of 



B C B A ' 

-4 i t 




Fig. 6. Fig. 7. 

two segments, AB and B*A (Fig. 6), each defined 
by a set of two points. We may suppose that the seg- 
ments are equal and so that the corresponding points 
in them could be superposed by rotation round C 
This movement, so simple to a flatlander, would be 
inconceivable to our one-dimensional being. In fact, 
even if he were moving along the lines from A \.o A' , 



238 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

he would not arrive at the corresponding points in the 
same relative order, and thus might hesitate to believe 
that the corresponding distances were equal. So, judg- 
ing from this being's difficulties, the dweller of the 
plane might infer, by analogy, that by turning one of 
the triangles over through three-dimensional space they 
could make them coincide. 

We have a somewhat similar difficulty in our gecwue- 
try. Let us suppose two pyramids (Fig. 7) similarly 
related. All the faces and angles of the one corre- 
spond exactly to the faces and angles of the other. 
Yet lift them about as we please, we could never fit 
them together. If we fit the bases together, the two 
will lie on opposite sides, one being below the other. 
Again, we may conceive of two solids, such as a 
right hand and a left hand, which are exactly similar 
and equal, but of which one cannot be made to occupy 
exactly the same position in space as the other does. 
These are difficulties similar to those experienced by 
the inhabitants of flatland in comparing the triangles. 
But it may be conjectured that in the same way as 
such difficulties in the geometry of an inhabitant in 
space of one dimension are explicable by moving the 
figure temporarily into space of two dimensions by 
means of rotation round a point, and as such difficul- 
ties in the geometry of flatland are explicable by 
moving the figure temporarily into space of three 
dimensions by means of rotation round a line, so such 
difficulties in our geometry : would disappear if we 
could temporarily move our figures into space of four 
dimensions by means of rotation round a plane — a 
movement quite inconceivable to us. That is, the 
dweller in four-dimensional space would take our 
troublesome pyramids and fit them together without 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 22f^ 

any trouble. By merely turning over one of them he 
would convert it into the other without any change 
whatever in the relative positions of its parts. What 
he could do with the pyramids he could also do with 
our hands or our right shoe and left shoe, or, in fact, 
with one of us human beings, if we allowed him to take 
hold of us and turn a somersault with us in the fourth 
dimension. We should then return to our own space 
and appear as changed as when our natural form is 
seen in a mirror. Everything on us would be changed 
from right to left, even the seams of our clothes, and 
every hair on the head. And through the whole pro- 
cess no change would occur in the relative positions of 
the parts of the body. 

To sum up, then, we may say that the fourth dimen^ 
sion is an extension in a space unknown to us and in a 
direction outside of those we can conceive. The idea 
is to us incomprehensible. We have no positive proof 
of its existence. But, inconclusive and insufficient as 
are the results, we can get a notion of the fourth dimen- 
sion by attending to the corresponding step that the 
plane being would have to take in forming an imagin- 
ary construction of our space. Also, we considered 
how this inhabitant of flatland might find arguments to 
support the view that space of three dimensions existed, 
and then we saw whether analogous arguments applied 
to our world. Right around us, but in a direction that 
we can no more conceive than the flatlander can con- 
ceive a direction perpendicular to his plane, there may 
exist, then, another universe, or any number of uni- 
verses. All that physical science can say against this 
supposition is, that even if a fourth dimension exists, 
it must forever remain unknown to us in our natural 
condition. 



240 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

In conclusion, it may be said that the growth of this 
"fairyland of geometry" has been greatly influenced 
by the theory of parallels, which theory is the result of 
an attempt to prove that through a point only one 
line can be drawn parallel to another line — ^this being 
taken for granted in our plane geometries. Ignoring, 
then, this accepted truth, Lobachevsky, a Russian 
geometer, and the Hungarian Bolyai constructed, about 
1830, a geometry in which more than one line can be 
drawn through a point parallel to another line. The 
term applied to it is "metageometry," and its study 
has stimulated the development of the geometry of 
hyperspace, of which the fourth dimensioa is but a 
special case. 

Furthermore, attempts have been made to find, in the 
space of four dimensions, explanations of certain 
difficulties or apparent inconsistencies in physical sci- 
ence. Thus, the bdiavior of the atoms in certain carbon 
compounds has been attributed to their motion in the 
fourth dimension. Attempts have also been made to 
explain the properties and constitution of matter by 
means of space of four dimensions. One writer has 
even argued thus: If a finite solid were passed 
slowly through flatland, the inhabitants would be con^ 
scious only of that part of it which was in their plane ; 
that is, they would see only a surface, or the section ^ 
of the solid by their space. They would see the shape 
of the object gradually change and finally vanish. In 
the same way, if a body of four dimensions were passed 
through our space, we should be conscious of it only 
as a solid, namely, the section of the body by our space ;» 
and as it moved along, we should see its form and 
appearance gradually change and finally vanish, per- 
haps. So he suggested that the birth, growth, life. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 24I 

and death of animals may be explained thus, as the 
passage of finite four-dimensional bodies through our 
three-dimensional space. Again, the idea of a fourth 
dimension has been made ridiculous by the suggestion 
that spirits probably dwell in that dimension and can 
appear to us and disappear at pleasure, thus offering 
an explanation for the so-called phenomena of spirit- 
ualism. But whatever else we may think of these 
theories, we can certainly admit the possibility of a 
fourth dimension, even if it be only for the sake of 
"mental gymnastics." 



242 



THE FOURTH DIMENSION 



XXIL 

THi: PROPERTIES OF FOUR-DIMENSIONAL 

SPACE. 

BY "SYLVESTER" (MAJOR WILMOT E. ELLIS, COAST 
ARTILLERY CORPS, U. S. A.). 

Dimension as applied to space signifies extension. 

These extensions are measured in directions mu- 
tually perpendicular to one another, and the number 
of dimensions is determined by the number of inde- 
pendent perpendicular directions that can exist in the 
given space. 

To illustrate: In Fig. i, 
assume that ZO is a line 
drawn from the center of a 
sphere to the surface. All 
points in the line, from an 
assumed origin, O, to infinity 
in either direction could be 
represented by giving differ- 
ent values to one variable, 
as z, and using the proper 
sign, plus or minus. 

Imagine that the line ZO is the only space in exist- 
ence, and that a mathematical intelligence is concen- 
trated in the point Qx. It would have one sense of 
direction only, an "up-down" sense, for it could form 
no conception of any motion perpendicular to its line. 
From these two premises (the one algebraical, and the 
other geometrical), it follows that a line is a one- 
dimensional space. 




F/a£ 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 243 

At the point O erect OX perpendicular to OZ, A 
plane passed through these two lines will cut a circle 
ZOR from the sphere. The mathematical intelligence 
in this case may be represented by the square Q2. We 
may imagine it confined in the plane to the immediate 
proximity of the circumference of the circle ZOR, 
just as our habitat is located in the immediate vicinity 
of the surface of the earth. Q2, however, has one more 
space perception than Qi, for the former, in traveling 
its circumference, adds a sense of "forward-backward.'* 
O2 can move in either direction, OZ or OX. These two 
directions may be assumed at pleasure in the plane, 
but having assumed arbitrarily any one direction, only 
one other perpendicular direction can exist in the plane. 
Every point in the plane of ZOX may be reached by 
giving proper values to two variables, x and 2. Hence, 
a plane is a space of two dimensions. 

If, at the point O, we draw a perpendicular OY to 
the plane of ZOX, we determine a new space of three 
dimensions. The mathematical intelligence, now rep- 
resented by the cube Qs, has the added perception of 
"right-left.'** This is "our" "solid" space. The essen- 
tial characteristic of this space is that, at each point, 
any number of three independent perpendicular direc- 
tions may be determined, but no more than three. All 
points in "our" space may be located by giving different 
algebraical values to three variables, as x, y, and 2, 

Let us assume that at the point O a fourth liiie, OW, 
could be drawn perpendicular to the three axes, OX, 

*In this discussion, the " up-down" sense, associated with the attraction 
of gravitation, has been assumed as our primary sense of direction, because 
most of our physical perceptions are either directly or indirectly referred to 
graTitative force. It should be remembered, nevertheless, that the order of 
development of the three senses is immaterial, as the gravitative direction 
has no significance in geometry. 



244 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

OY, and OZ, We should thus determine a four- 
dimensional space, and the mathematical intelligence, 
Q4, dwelling therein, would have a new perception of 
direction, which, for the lack of a better name, we may 
call the "w" sense. We cannot represent the "w" direc- 
tion in a figure, nor Q4 by any known geometrical form. 
Since every line whatsoever in "our" space may be 
regarded as belonging to some set of axes, it follows 
that the "w" direction must be perpendicular to all 
lines in three-dimensioned space, in effect perpendicular 
to the space itself. 

We are absolutely lacking in the "w" sense. The 
key to this direction is concealed from the mathematical 
genius as well as from the schoolboy. The question 
naturally arises : Is this limitation a human limitation 
only, or is there something inherent in what we might 
term "absolute reason" that precludes the idea of the 
fourth and higher dimensions? It is at least possible 
that the limitation exists in human reason alone. Gen- 
eral geometry, both pure and analytical, ascends from 
zero to any number of dimensions without any break 
to betray the passing of the third dimension. 

If we accept a "w" direction, definitely abandoning 
all hope of mentally representing it, we can investigate 
the properties of four-dimensioned space as satisfac- 
torily as we can those of three dimensions. Our only 
method of investigation must be analogy, but we shall 
find that it will not once fail us. Following this line 
of inquiry, we may develop the following properties of 
four-dimensioned space : 

I. A line includes an infinity of points, or zero- 
spaces; a surface, an infinity of lines, or i -spaces;* 

* For brevity, i-«pace, 2-space, etc., will be frequently used to signify one- 
dimensioned space, two-dimensioned space, etc. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 245 

and a solid, an infinity of surfaces, or 2-spaces. We 
are justified in concluding, therefore, that a 4-space 
includes an infinity of 3-spaces. A 3-space is but one of 
many in a 4-space, and a fourth-dimensional intelli- 
gence would view "our" 3-space as an insignificant part 
of his 4-space. 

2. In analytical geometry, it is shown that any point 
in I -space can be represented by an equation of the 
general form x = a\ z line in 2-space by the general 
equation ax -\'by=^c\ and a plane in 3-space by the 
general equation ax + by + C2 = d. So in 4-space, a 
3-space may be represented by the general equation 
ax + by + C2 + dw = e. 

3. In 2-space, three points can be so located as to 
have any arbitrary distance between pairs of points ; in 
3-space, four points can be so located ; and in 4-space, 
five points. As illustrations, for conditions of equal 
distances, we have the equilateral triangle in 2-space, 
and the regular tetrahedron (regular pyramid), in 3- 
space. 

4. As a line is generated by the motion of a point, 
a surface by the motion of a line, a solid by the motion 
of a surface, so a fourth-dimensional body may be 
generated by some motion of a solid.* 

5. A polygon is bounded by three or more lines ; a 
polyhedron, by four or more polygons, and a fourth- 
dimensional body by five or more polyhedrons. 

6. In 2-space, rotation can take place only about a 
point ; in 3-space, about a line ; and in 4-space, about a 
plane. 

* Mathematidans have demonstrated that in 4-8pace, there should be six 
regular structures corresponding to the five regular polyhedrons of 3-space. 
For example, the analogue of the cube is bound by 8 cubes, with 16 comers, 24 
squares, and 3a edges. These structures can only be vaguely conceived by 
the most imaginative mathematicians. 



246 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

7. Two geometrical magnitudes are said to be sym- 
metrical, when every point of the one has a correspond- 
ing point at the same distance on the opposite side of 
an assumed spatial reference. The symmetry here de- 
fined is what is known as two-fold. It is not necessary 
to consider other kinds of symmetry. In one dimen- 
sion, symmetry exists with respect to a point ; in two 
dimensions, with respect to a line ; in three dimensions, 
with respect to a plane. An object and its mirror reflec- 
tion are always symmetrical. Such figures are equal, 
but to prove their coincidence, it is necessary to turn 
one of them around, "upside down," or "inside out," 
as the case may be. This process is called circumver- 
sion. 

8. In order to circumvert a figure, it must be turned 
around or maneuvered in the next higher dimension. 
Thus, a line must be turned through a plane, a polygon 
through 3-space, and a solid through 4-space.* 

Let us assume, for purposes of illustration, that a 
two-dimensional world and a four-dimensional world 
has each a separate existence. We must further postu- 

* If an intelligence capable of visualizing 4-«pace exists in any realm, of 
the universe , it is more than probable that n dimensions exist for an nth 
order of intelligence. The eight properties herein postulated of the fourth 
dimension may be thus generalized, rectilinear figures only being considered: 

X. An n-space incudes an infinity of (n — i) spaces. 

2. In a space of n dimensions, an (n — x) space may be represented by an 
equation of the first degree containing n variables. 

3. In an n-space, «+ < points may be located so as to have any arbitrary 
distance between pairs of points. 

4. An nth dimensional figure or space may be generated by some motion 
of an (n — x)th dimensional figure or space. 

5. An nth dimensional figure is bounded by n -f x or more figures of n — i 
dimensions. 

6. In an n-space, rotation can take place only about a space of (n — a) 
dimensions. 

7. In an n-space, sjrmmetry exists with respect to an (n — i) th space. 

8. Circumversion in an n-space can be effected only by a movement 
through an (n -f X) space. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 24/ 

late that the 2-worId and our world have small, but 
real extensions in the third and fourth dimensions, re- 
spectively. Without these extensions, an imaginary- 
visitor from one world to the next lower could not per- 
form his mysterious feats. Let us also represent con- 
crete mathematical intelligences of the 2-world, 3- 
world, and 4-world by Q2, Qz, and Q^, respectively. 
Each of these imaginary beings is supposed to have an 
intelligence and dimensions corresponding to his own 
world. 

If Qs should visit a 2-world, he would be perceived 
by O2 as two-dimensional. For example, if the visitor 
were cubical in shape, every part would be invisible to 
Q2, except the square base of contact. Q2 could not 
understand how a coin, "head-up," could be turned 
"tail-up." Qs could easily perform the feat, either by 
taking the coin into his own space, turning it, and 
restoring it, or by turning it around a chord of the 
circular coin as an axis. The maximum element of 
the circle that could possibly remain visible to Q2 during 
the transformation would be a single diameter. Simi- 
larly, if Q4 should visit our world, he would appear as 
a three-dimensional being. He could turn a sphere 
"inside out," either by withdrawing it to his own space, 
or by revolving it through his space around a circle of 
the sphere remaining in our space.* The maximum 
element of the sphere that could be seen during any 
such operation would be a great circle. 

Again, if Q2 were inside the bounding line of any 
figure, as the circumference of a circle, he could not 
reach the outside without breaking through. Q^, by 
first moving normal to the plane, could pass out and 
in at will, without penetrating the boundary. So, in 

* This process does not torn tiie sphere inside out. See Introduction, page 38. 



248 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

our world, Q^, by moving in the "w" direction, could 
pass in and out of a solid sphere without breaking 
through the surface. 

O2 could make a simple loop in a string,* but so long 
as he kept the string intact and the ends fastened, he 
could not straighten it. Qs could do this, however, by 
lifting the loop into his space, untwisting it, and restor- 
ing the string. The corresponding maneuver with us 
would be the untying of an ordinary ("thumb") knot, 
without disturbing the fastened ends or cutting the 
string. Qs would have to evoke Q4 to solve this 
problem. 

It is interesting to note that Slade (who was eventu- 



A a 




Fig 2. 

ally exposed) performed the trick of passing a grain 
of corn through the solid surface of a glass sphere, and 
that of untying a knot, as described in the preceding 
paragraph. The celebrated mathematician, Zollner, 
witnessed these two performances, and appears to have 
believed that Slade was assisted by fourth-dimensional 
"spirits." 

Q2 regards the symmetrical triangles of Fig. 2 as 
different shapes, because he cannot possibly make them 
coincide. He perceives a disposition of the one with 
respect to the other exactly analogous to the one we 
perceive with respect to "right-handed" and "left- 
handed" shapes. Qz proves that the triangles are equal, 
■■ li ' ■ ' 

* See foot-note, page 30. 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED. 249 

by moving them until AB and ab coincide, and then 
rotating one about the line AB-ab, until it falls upon 
the other. During this rotation, the moving figure is 
turned "upside down." 

If Qi views ABC from above the plane of the paper, 
he obtains one aspect of the triangle. If he views ABC 
from a point the same distance below the plane of the 
paper, he obtains the other (the dbc) aspect. We see 
then that Qa's conception of symmetrical shapes, as but 
two aspects of one shape, results from his freedom of 
movement in a direction normal to 02's space. 

We sense a right glove and a left glove as different 
shapes, yet we have an intuitive feeling they ought to 
be the same figures. If one turns a right glove inside 
out, it becomes a left glove, and vice versa. Q4 can 
perform this transformation, when the gloves are closed 
surfaces. If he rotates a right glove a half-turn 
through his space, it becomes a left glove, the rotating 
glove being necessarily turned "inside out" during the 
movement.* 

Suppose that Q4 should view a glove from two 
points, the one "above," and the other a corresponding 
position "below" our space. From one point of view, 
the glove will appear to him as a right glove, and from 
the other point of view, as a left glove. He recognizes 
no difference whatsoever between "outside" and "in- 
side," except one of aspect. It is for this reason that 
the passage from what we call the "inside" of a sphere 
to the "outside" does not necessarily involve the pene- 
tration of the surface. This attribute of Q4S intelli- 
gence results from his ability to conceive and move in 
what we have calle d the "w" direction. If I were 

* See foot-note on page 247. It is not the ** outside *' and " inside *' that Q^ 
sees above and below our space, but two new sides.— H. P. M. 



250 THE FOURTH DIMENSION 

ever able to see a right glove as a left glove (except in 
a mirror), I should know that I possessed a fourth- 
dimensional intelligence, and could move with perfect 
freedom in the "w" direction. 

It should be noted that if two symmetrical figures be 
rotated a quarter-turn toward each other through the 
next higher space, they will coincide. From this point 
of view, symmetrical figures may be regarded as re- 
sulting from a splitting of one figure in a given space, 
and an unfolding into the next lower space. 

With the possible exception of symmetry existing in 
our world, we have no evidence of the real existence 
of a 4-world in the finite, and no evidence whatever in 
the direction of the infinite. 

We know that the ether, although it eludes all of our 
senses, envelopes and permeates our phenomenal world. 
We feel in some vag^e, intuitive way, that it is the 
medium connecting us with a higher order of existence 
and thought. In the ether, if anywhere, we should 
expect to find some fourth-dimensional characteristics. 
Gravitation, electricity, magnetism, and light are 
known to be due to stresses in, or motions of, the 
infinitesimal particles of the ether. The real nature of 
these phenomena has never been fully explained by 
three-dimensional mathematical analysis. Indeed, the 
unexplained residuum would seem to indicate that so 
far we have merely been considering the three- 
dimensional aspects of four-dimensional processes. 
As one illustration of many, it has been shown 
both mathematically and experimentally that no 
more than five corpuscles may have an independent 
grouping in an atom; a most significant fact, in view 
of our third "property" of 4-space. 

The fourth dimension has an ethical and philosophic 



SIMPLY EXPLAINED 2$ I 

cal as well as a mathematical and physical value. The 
idea reveals many fruitful fields of speculation. As 
examples may be cited the stupendous significance of 
the first "property" of 4-space, and a pondering of the 
question: Might not birth be an unfolding through 
the ether into the symmetrical life-cell, arid death the 
reverse process of a f olding-up into fourth-dimensional 
tmity? 



