Death in Venice (Thomas Mann, 1912)
==========================================================
The definitive novella of artistic obsession — Aschenbach's pursuit of Tadzio is the artist's tragedy. Public domain. Source note: Internet Archive scan (deathinvenice0000thom_k9i0).

The Nobel Prize-winner’s great novel of sensual awakening


‘Thomas Mann
Heath in Venic


Warner Bros. presents


LD e ae
tidy Ow cf
a film by
Luchino Visconti
ii starring Dirk Bogarde
4 and Silvana
Mangano
' and introducing
| Bjorn Andresen


in 2024


SOAS AD ge ee ee


THOMAS MANN, one of the few indisputably great writ-
ers of the twentieth century, was born in Lubeck in 1875.
His first success Buddenbrooks, a novel, was published
in 1901 when he was twenty-five. He left Germany in
1933 for Switzerland and then the United States.
In 1952, he returned to Europe. He died in 1955 at the


age of eighty. His principal works include The Magic


Mountain, Joseph and His Brothers, Doctor Faustus, Con-
fessions of Felix Krull, novels; Freud, Goethe, Wagner,
essays; and A Sketch of My Life, autobiography. He was
awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1929.


In a long and celebrated career as a director, Luchino Visconti
has offered notable productions of Tennessee Williams and
Shakespeare in the theater, and of Verdi, Puccini and Mozart in
the opera. His many films include Ossessione, Senso, Rocco and
His Brothers, The Stranger and The Damned.


DEATH
VENICE


Thomas Mann


Translated from the German by
KENNETH BURKE


fo)

or %
<1 z
° 3°
OD
Zz
4 Age 9


New yout
A NATIONAL GENERAL COMPANY


This low-priced Bantam Book
has been completely reset in a type face
designed for easy reading, and was printed
from new plates. It contains the complete
text of the original hard-cover edition.
NOT ONE WORD HAS BEEN OMITTED.


wt


DEATH IN VENICE


A Bantam Book / published by arrangement with
Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.


PRINTING HISTORY


Knopf editions of Death in Venice:
1925; First published in Death in Venice and Other Stories,
translated by Kenneth Burke
1930: Death in Venice, translated by H. T. Lowe-Porter, with an
Introduction by Ludwig Lewisohn
1936: in Stories of Three Decades, translated by H. T. Lowe-Porter
1965: Death in Venice, transiated by Kenneth Burke


Bantam edition published June 1971


All rights reserved.
Copyright 1924 by The Dial Publishing Co., Inc.
Copyright 1925 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.

This book may not be reproduced in whole or in part, by
mimeograph or any other means, without permission.
For information address: Alfred A. Knopf, Inc.,

201 East 50th Street, New York, N.Y. 10022.


Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada


Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, Inc., a National
General company. Its trade-mark, consisting of the words ““Bantam
Books” and the portrayal of a bantam, is registered in the United
States Patent Office and in other countries. Marca Registrada,.
Bantam Books, Inc., 666 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10019.


PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA


On a spring afternoon of the year 19—, when our
continent lay under such threatening weather for
whole months, Gustav Aschenbach, or von Aschen-
bach as his name read officially after his fiftieth
birthday, had left his apartment on the Prinzre-
gentenstrasse in Munich and had gone for a long
walk. Overwrought by the trying and precarious
work of the forenoon—which had demanded a
maximum wariness, prudence, penetration, and
rigor of the will—the writer had not been able even
after the noon meal to break the impetus of the
productive mechanism within him, that motus
animi continuus which constitutes, according to
Cicero, the foundation of eloquence; and he had
not attained the healing sleep which—what with
the increasing exhaustion of his strength—he
needed in the middle of each day. So he had gone
outdoors soon after tea, in the hopes that air and
movement would restore him and prepare him for
a profitable evening.

It was the beginning of May, and after cold,
damp weeks a false midsummer had set in. The
English Gardens, although the foliage was still fresh

1


_ Aschenbach had surveyed for a short time — e.


sinking, he had started home, outside the park,


a storm was threatening from the direction of Fohr an


Wirtsgarten with its lively crowds and its borde:
of cabs and carriages. From here, as the sun


across the open fields; and since he felt tired a


ing, he waited at the North Cemetery for the tram
which would take him directly back to the city.

It happened that he found no one in the stale e
or its vicinity. There was not a vehicle to be seen,
either on the paved Ungererstrasse, with its solitary a
glistening rails stretching out toward Schwabing, or _
on the Fohringer Chaussee. Behind the fences
the stonemasons’ establishments, where the crosses, ar
memorial tablets, and monuments standing for sale _
formed a second, uninhabited burial ground, there |
was no sign of life; and opposite him the Byzantine ~
structure of the Funeral Hall lay silent in the reflec-
tion of the departing day, its facade ornamented
in luminous colors with Greek crosses and hieratic
paintings, above which were displayed inscriptions
symmetrically arranged in gold letters, and texts
chosen to bear on the life beyond, such as “They
enter into the dwelling of the Lord” or “The light
of eternity shall shine upon them.” And for some

2


ee above the two 5 eee a animals cae 4
the steps, a man whose somewhat unusual ap-
arance gave his thoughts an entirely new direc-


e cough the bronze door, or had ee /
d mounted from the outside unobserved, re-
ined uncertain. Aschenbach, without applying
imself especially to the matter, was inclined to be-
ve the former. Of medium height, thin, smooth-
aes and noticeably pug-nosed, the man be-


is head gave his appearance the stamp of a for-
-eigner, of someone who had come from a long dis-
__ tance. To be sure, he was wearing the customary
__ knapsack strapped across his shoulders, and a
pelted suit of rough yellow wool; his left arm was
_ resting on his thigh, and his gray storm cape was
thrown across it. In his right hand he held a cane
_ with an iron ferrule, which he had stuck diagonally
into the ground, while, with his feet crossed, he was
leaning his hip against the crook. His head was
3


i.


THOMAS MANN


raised so that the Adam’s apple protruded hard and
bare on a scrawny neck emerging from a loose sport
shirt. And he was staring sharply off into the dis-
tance, with colorless, red-lidded eyes between
which stood two strong, vertical wrinkles peculiarly
suited to his short, turned-up nose. Thus—and per-
haps his elevated position helped to give the im-
pression—his bearing had something majestic and
commanding about it, something bold, or even say-
age. For whether he was grimacing because he was
blinded by the setting sun, or whether it was a case
of a permanent distortion of the physiognomy, his
lips seemed too short, they were so completely
pulled back from his teeth that these were exposed
even to the gums, and stood out white and long.

It is quite possible that Aschenbach, in his half-
distracted, half-inquisitive examination of the
stranger, had been somewhat inconsiderate, for he
suddenly became aware that his look was being an-
swered, and indeed so militantly, so straight in the
eye, so plainly with the intention of driving the
thing through to the very end and compelling him
to capitulate, that he turned away uncomfortably
and began walking along by the fences, deciding
casually that he would pay no further attention to
the man. The next minute he had forgotten him.
But perhaps the exotic element in the stranger’s ap-
pearance had worked on his imagination; or a new
physical or spiritual influence of some sort had come

4


hands behind his back and his eyes on the —
nto the nature and purport of this emotion.


though, to be sure, it had attacked him violently,
d was heightened to a passion, even to the point
- a hallucination. His yearnings crystallized; his
magination, still in ferment from his hours of work,
actually pictured all the marvels and terrors of a
manifold world which it was suddenly struggling
_ to conceive. He saw a landscape, a tropical swamp-
land under a heavy, murky sky, damp, luxuriant
d enormous, a kind of prehistoric wilderness of
slands, bogs, and arms of water, sluggish with
- mud; he saw, near him and in the distance, the
hairy shafts of palms rising out of a rank lecherous
thicket, out of places where the plant life was fat,
swollen, and blossoming exorbitantly; he saw
_ strangely misshapen trees lowering their roots into
the ground, into stagnant pools with greenish reflec-
tions; and here, between floating flowers which
were milk-white and large as dishes, birds of a
strange nature, high-shouldered, with crooked bills,
_ were standing in the muck, and looking motionless-

ly to one side; between dense, knotted stalks of


y 5


—


, OF SO long dormant aad ae that, oie a .


ground, he came to a sudden stop, and exaegey on


It was the desire for travel, nothing more;


. ve MANN J re i


: a od be felt his ee ae with fear
and with puzzling desires. Then the image disap-
peared; and with a shake of his head Aschenbach
resumed his walk along past the fences of the stone- -
- masons’ establishments. pS

Since the time, at least, when he could command ~
the means to enjoy the advantages of moving about _
_ the world as he pleased, he had considered travel
_ing simply as a hygienic precaution which must be _
; complied with now and then despite one’s feelings -
and one’s preferences. Too busy with the tasks a ar “
= ranged for him by his interest in his own ego and _
"Bs


Sy
ie


_ in the problems of Europe, too burdened with the —
onus of production, too little prone to diversion, —
and in no sense an amateur of the varied amuse ee
_ ments of the great world, he had been thorough ee
satisfied with such knowledge of the earth’s surface Sa
as anyone can get without moving far out of his
own circle; and he had never even been tempted ies
to leave Europe. Especially now that his life w:
slowly on the decline, and that the artist’s fear of
not having finished—this uneasiness lest the clock
run down before he had done his part and given
himself completely—could no longer be waved
~. aside as a mere whim, he had confined his outer
existence almost exclusively to the beautiful city
which had become his home and to the rough
6


and where he spent the rainy summers.
_ Further, this thing which had laid hold of him —
belatedly, but with such suddenness, was very |


. ince youth. He had intended carrying his life work
country. And the thought of knocking about the


this time, seemed much too lax and contrary to his
plans; it really could not be considered seriously.
Yet he knew only too well what the reasons were
or this unexpected temptation. It was the urge to
_ escape—he admitted to himself—this yearning for
_ the new and the remote, this appetite for freedom,
_ for unburdening, for forgetfulness; it was a pressure
away from his work, from the steady drudgery of
a coldly passionate service. To be sure, he loved
_ this work and almost loved the enervating battle
3 that was fought daily between a proud tenacious
_ will—so often tested—and this growing weariness
_ which no one was to suspect and which must not
betray itself in his productions by any sign of weak-
ness or negligence. But it seemed wise not to draw
the bow overtightly, and not to strangle by sheer
_ obstinacy so strongly persistent an appetite. He
thought of his work, thought of the place at which
yesterday and now again today he had been forced
‘ 7


e which he le built & in ihe mountains


a.
ie
tas


idily moderated and adjusted by the force of his 2 a


forward to a certain point before removing to the _


world for months and neglecting his work during . :


_ difficulty here; what balked him was the scruples —
of aversion, which took the form of a fastidious in- __
satiability. Even as a young man this insatiability _
had meant to him the very nature, the fullest es- —
sence, of talent; and for that reason he had re- |
strained and chilled his emotions, since he was —
aware that they incline to content themselves with :
a happy approximate, a state of semi-completion.
Were these enslaved emotions now taking their
vengeance on him, by leaving him in the lurch, by _
refusing to forward and lubricate his art; and were =:
they bearing off with them every enjoyment, every _
live interest in form and expression?
Not that he was producing anything bad; his
years gave him at least this advantage, that he felt
himself at all times in full and easy possession of his
craftsmanship. But while the nation honored him
for this, he himself was not content; and it seemed
to him that his work lacked the marks of that fiery
and fluctuating emotionalism which is an enormous
thing in one’s favor, and which, while it argues an
~ enjoyment on the part of the author, also consti-
tutes, more than any depth of content, the enjoy-
ment of the amateur. He feared the summer in the


8


e with the maid who ~
eae his mae and the servant who brought oS
to him. He feared the familiar view of the _


ae there was need of a break in some new
ection. If the summer was to be endurable and


element of freshness into the blood. To travel, —
n—that much was settled. Not far, not all the
ay to the tigers. But one night on the sleeper, and
rest of three or four weeks at some pleasant popu-
w resort in the South. .

He thought this out ‘walle the noise of the electric
m came nearer along the Ungererstrasse; and as
he boarded it, he decided to devote the evening to
_ the study of maps and timetables. On the platform
it occurred to him to look around for the man in
the straw hat, his companion during that most sig-
nificant time spent waiting at the station. But his
whereabouts remained uncertain, as he was not to
_ be seen either at the place where he was formerly
_ standing, or anywhere else in the vicinity of the
_ station, or on the car itself.


The author of that lucid and powerful prose epic
t around the life of Frederick of Prussia; the
acious artist who, after long application, wove
rich, varied strands of human destiny together
under one single predominating theme in the fic-
tional tapestry known as Maya; the creator of that
stark tale which is called The Wretch and which
jointed out for an entire oncoming generation the
ossibility of some moral certainty beyond pure
nowledge; finally, the writer (and this sums up
riefly the works of his mature period) of the im-
assioned treatise on “Art and the Spirit,” whose
_ capacity for mustering facts, and, further, whose
4 fluency in their presentation, led cautious judges to
E place this treatise alongside Schiller’s conclusions on
4 naive and sentimental poetry—Gustav Aschenbach,
then, was the son of a higher law official, and was
born in L——, a leading city in the province of
_ Silesia. His forebears had been officers, magistrates,
_ government functionaries, men who had led severe,
_ steady lives serving their king, their state. A deeper
strain of spirituality had been manifest in them
once, in the person of a preacher; the preceding
ll


blood into the family ae the author's ae 5
daughter of a Bohemian bandmaster. The traces of
foreignness in his features came from her. A mar-—


riage of sober painstaking conscientiousness with
impulses of a darker, more fiery nature had had an
artist as its result, and this particular artist.

Since his whole nature was centered on acquiring


a reputation, he showed himself, if not exactly pre-


cocious, at least (thanks to the firmness and pithi-


‘


ness of his personality, his accent) ripened and ad-


justed to the public at an early age. Almost as a
schoolboy he had made a name for himself. Within


ten years he had learned to face the world through ©


the medium of his writing table, to discharge the
obligations of his fame in a correspondence which
(since many claims are pressed on the successful,
the trustworthy ) had to be brief as well as pleasant
and to the point. At forty, wearied by the vicissi-
tudes and the exertion of his own work, he had to
manage a daily mail which bore the postmarks of
countries in all parts of the world.

Equally removed from the banal and the eccen-
tric, his talents were so constituted as to gain both
the confidence of the general public and the stable
admiration and sympathy of the critical. Thus even
as a young man continually devoted to the pursuit
of craftsmanship—and that of no ordinary kind—he
had never known the careless freedom of youth.

12


in Vics one Aces ja epee aid a hie


ethical about it all was that he was not of a strong


e to these steady efforts, he was not really born
them.
Considerations of ill health had kept him from
tending school as a boy, and had compelled him
receive instruction at home. He had grown up
me, without comrades—and he was forced to
realize soon enough that he belonged to a race
which often lacked, not talent, but that physical
substructure which talent relies on for its fullest
ition: a race accustomed to giving its best early,
; and seldom extending its faculties over the years.
_» But his favorite phrase was “carrying through”; in
his novel on Frederick he saw the pure apotheosis
_ of this command, which struck him as the essential
_ concept of the virtuous in action and passion. Also,
he wished earnestly to grow old, since he had al-
- ways maintained that the only artistry which can
_ be called truly great, comprehensive—yes, even
a truly admirable—is that which is permitted to bear
, 13


ampanty: “You see, Aschenbach has always lived _
ike this,” and the speaker contracted the fingers of
ee s left hand into a fist; “never like this,” and he
_ let his open hand droop comfortably from the arm 7
his chair. That hit the mark; and the heroic, the ©


nstitution, and though he was pledged by his na- _


fruits characteristic of each stage in ks.
ent on frail shoulders, and wanted to go a long w
asm, and are contentedly putting off to some later


_ date the execution of plans on a large scale, he =
would start the day early, dashing cold water ov


opment.
Since he must carry the responsibilities of his


the primary requirement was discipline—and for
nately discipline was his direct inheritance from
father’s side. By forty, fifty, or at an earlier age
when others are still slashing about with enthus:


his chest and back, and then, with a couple of tall
wax candles in silver candlesticks at the head ee
manuscript, he would pay out to his art, in two | <
three eager, scrupulous morning hours, the strength —
which he had accumulated in sleep. It was pardon- _
able, indeed it was a direct tribute to the effective-
ness of his moral scheme, that the uninitiated took
his Maya world, and the massive epic machinery —
upon which the life of the hero Frederick was un- —
rolled, as evidence of long breath and sustaining —
power. While actually they had been built up layer
by layer, in small daily allotments, through hun- —
dreds and hundreds of single inspirations. And if
they were so excellent in both composition and tex-
ture, it was solely because their creator had held
out for years under the strain of one single work,
with a steadiness of will and a tenacity comparable
to that which conquered his native province; and
14


7 se, finally, he had iat over his most ede


ee i order that a significant work of the mind may
_ exert immediately some broad and deep effect, a
secret relationship, or even conformity, must exist
__ between the personal destiny of the author and the


‘not know why they raise a work of art to fame.
BS _ Far from being connoisseurs, they believe that they
_ see in it hundreds of virtues which justify so much
interest; but the true reason for their applause is
an unconscious sympathy. Aschenbach had once
stated quite plainly in some remote place that
_ nearly everything great which comes into being
does so in spite of something—in spite of sorrow
_ or suffering, poverty, destitution, physical weakness,
_ depravity, passion, or a thousand other handicaps.
But that was not merely an observation; it was a
_ discovery, the formula of his life and reputation, the
_. key to his work. And what wonder, then, that it
was also the distinguishing moral trait, the domi-
nating gesture, of his most characteristic figures?
Years before, one shrewd analyst had written of
the new hero type to which this author gave prefer-
ence, and which kept turning up in variations of
one sort or another: he called it the conception of
_ “an intellectual and youthful masculinity” which
“stands motionless, haughty, ashamed, with jaw set,
15


CV aace Lhd ener ees


1 valuable hours to the problem of minute re-_


\


2


at


| =e while swords and spear potat beset the be
That was beautiful and ingenious; and it was e


although it may have seemed to suggest too n
passivity. For to be poised against fatality, to m
adverse conditions gracefully, is more than simy
endurance; it is an act of aggression, a positive
 mipaand the figure of Sebastian is the m
beautiful figure, if not of art as a whole, a at Tea:
of the art of literature. Looking into this fictior
_ world, one saw: a délicate self-mastery by whi
any inner deterioration, any biological decay
kept concealed from the eyes of the world; a crude,
vicious sensuality capable of fanning its rising pas
sions into pure flame, yes, even of mounting to
dominance in the realm of beauty; a pallid weak-
ness which draws from the glowing depths of the |
soul the strength to bow whole arrogant peoples be-
fore the foot of the cross, or before the feet of vee
ness itself; a charming manner maintained in his _
cold, strict service to form; a false, precarious q
mode of living, and the keenly enervating melan- _
choly and artifice of the born deceiver—to observe -
such trials as this was enough to make one question _
whether there really was any heroism other than
weakness. And, in any case, what heroism could be
more in keeping with the times? Gustav Aschen-
bach was the one poet among the many workers on
the verge of exhaustion: the over-burdened, the
used-up, the clingers-on, in short all those moralists-


16


the shrewd husbandry of their resources to se-


y are the heroes of the period. And they all
found themselves in his works; here they were in-
deed, upheld, intensified, applauded; they were
Ee grateful to him, they acclaimed him.

n his time he had been young and raw; and,
sled by his age, he had blundered in public. He
_had stumbled, had exposed himself; both in writing
and in talk he had offended against caution and
. Bact: But he had acquired the dignity which, as he
- insisted, is the innate goad and craving of every
‘great talent; in fact, it could be said that his entire
development had been a conscious undeviating pro-
_ gression away from the embarrassments of skepti-
_ cism and irony, and toward dignity.

_ The general masses are satisfied by vigor and
_ tangibility of treatment rather than by any close in-
_ + tellectual processes; but youth, with its passion for
_ the absolute, can be arrested only by the prob-
7 lematical. And Aschenbach had been absolute,
_ problematical, as only a youth could be. He had
_ been a slave to the intellect, had played havoc with
_ knowledge, had ground up his seed crops, had di-
_ yulged secrets, had discredited talent, had betrayed
_ art—yes, while his modelings were entertaining the
4 faithful votaries, filling them with enthusiasm, mak-
17


e the effect of greatness. There are many such:


- duction who, delicately built and destitute of | ia
s, can rely for a time at least on will power


e


ae : ing their lives more keen, this youthful a
taking the breath away from the generation t


nature of art, and of artistry itself.


in its twenties by his cynicisms on the questianas DI


But it seems that nothing blunts the edge of
noble, robust mind more quickly and more thor-
oughly than the sharp and bitter corrosion
knowledge; and certainly the moody radicalism of
the youth, no matter how conscientious, was
shallow in comparison with his firm determination —
as an older man and a master to deny knowledge,
to reject it, to pass it with raised head, insofar as
it is capable of crippling, discouraging, or degrad-
ing to the slightest degree, our will, acts, feelings, —
or even passions. How else could the famous story 4
The Wretch be understood than as an outburst of
repugnance against the disreputable psychologism _
of the times: embodied in the figure of that soft — :
and stupid ‘half-clown who pilfers a destiny for .
himself by guiding his wife (from powerlessness,
from lasciviousness, from ethical frailty) into the
arms of an adolescent, and believes that he may
through profundity commit vileness? The verbal
pressure with which he here cast out the out-
cast announced the return from every moral skep-
ticism, from all fellow-feeling with the engulfed: it
was the counter-move to the laxity of the sympa-
thetic principle that to understand all is to forgive
all—and the thing that was here well begun, even

18


a


2


mv -


ign 48 and sternness, that his cial for see
_ discriminating purity, simplicity, and evenness
of attack which henceforth gave his productions
such an obvious, even such a deliberate stamp of —
x nastery and classicism—showed an almost exces-
sive strengthening about this time? But ethical re-
a I ctecies in the exclusion of science, of emancipa-_
_ tory and restrictive knowledge—does this not in

_ turn signify a simplification, a reduction morally of
% the world to too limited terms, and thus also a
_ strengthened capacity for the forbidden, the evil,
_ the morally impossible? And does not form have
two aspects? Is it not moral and unmoral at once—
- moral in that it is the result and expression of dis-
 cipline, but unmoral, and even immoral, in that by
nature it contains an indifference to morality, is cal-
culated, in fact, to make morality bend beneath its
proud and unencumbered scepter?

Be that as it may. An evolution is a destiny; and
~ why should his evolution, which had been upheld
__ by the general confidence of a vast public, not run

through a different course from one accomplished
outside the luster and the entanglements of fame?

Only chronic vagabondage will find it tedious and
19


poses a formal etiquette upon a solitede which hel
been filled with unchastened and rigidly isolated
sufferings and struggles and had brought all this to _
a point of power and honor among men. Further, ©
how much sport, defiance, indulgence there is in the
self-formation of a talent! Gradually something
official, didactic, crept into Gustav Aschenbach’s—
productions, his style in later life fought shy of any
abruptness and boldness, any subtle and unex
pected contrasts; he inclined toward the fixed and te
standardized, the conventionally elegant, the con-
servative, the formal, the formulated, nearly. Ande
as is traditionally said of Louis XIV, with the a
vancing years he came to omit every common word
from his vocabulary. At about this time it happened |
that the educational authorities included selected
pages by him in their prescribed school readers.
This was deeply sympathetic to his nature, and he —
did not decline when a German prince who had
just mounted the throne raised the author of the.
“Frederick” to knighthood on the occasion of his
fiftieth birthday. After a few years of unrest, a few
tentative stopping places here and there, he soon
chose Munich as his permanent home, and lived
there in a state of middle-class respectability such
as fits in with the life of the mind in certain individ-
20


Ww married. He had never had ason.
Gustav von Aschenbach was “somewhat below
rage height, dark, and smooth-shaven. His head


ut the temples, and strongly marked with gray;
framed a high, ridged forehead. Gold spectacles
with rimless lenses cut into the bridge of his bold,
heavy nose. The mouth was big, sometimes droop-
ing, sometimes suddenly pinched and firm. His
cheeks were thin and wrinkled, his well-formed
chin had a slight cleft. This head, usually bent pa-
g ety to one side, seemed to have gone through
- momentous experiences, and yet it was his art
_ which had produced those effects in his face, effects
~ which are elsewhere the result of hard and agitated
_ living. Behind this brow the brilliant repartee of the
_ dialogue on war between Voltaire and the king had
_ been born; these eyes, peering steadily and wearily
_ from behind their glasses, had seen the bloody in-
_ ferno of the lazaret in the Seven Years’ War. Even
as it applies to the individual, art is a heightened
mode of existence. It gives deeper pleasures, it con-
_ sumes more quickly. It carves into its servants’ faces
21


ae of Ses pplitess. He was left with a daughter, bn ze


emed a bit too large in comparison with his al- —
ost dapper figure. His hair was brushed straight _
ck, thinning out toward the crown, but very full


: nM i * ;
NAS, § Mb rce *3
LA Thane TU, ack La aes Nee


THOMAS MANN


the marks of imaginary and spiritual adventures,
and though their external activities may be as quiet
as a cloister, it produces a lasting voluptuousness,
over-refinement, fatigue, and curiosity of the nerves
such as can barely result from a life filled with illicit
passions and enjoyments.


22


d one day between the middle and the end of
‘May he took the night train for Trieste, where he
made a stopover of only twenty-four hours, and em-
barked the following morning for Pola.

_ What he was hunting was something foreign and
unrelated to himself which would at the same time
be quickly within reach; and so he stopped at an
island in the Adriatic which had become well
known in recent years. It lay not far off the Istrian
coast, with beautifully rugged cliffs fronting the
- open sea, and natives who dressed in variegated tat-
_ ters and made strange sounds when they spoke. But
rain and a heavy atmosphere, a provincial and ex-
_ clusively Austrian patronage at the hotel, and the
_ Jack of that restfully intimate association with the
_ sea which can be gotten only by a soft, sandy
beach, irritated him, and prevented him from feel-
ing that he had found the place he was looking for.
Something within was disturbing him, and drawing
23


country house ready for occupancy within a month; _ E


aae


Pen he was not sure where. He studied ae
dates, he looked about him questioningly, and
a sudden, as a thing both astounding and self-evi-


dent, his goal was before him. If you wanted to


reach overnight the unique, the fabulously differ- _
ent, where did you go? But that was plain. What —
was he doing here? He had lost the trail. He had —
wanted to go there. He did not delay in giving no- —
tice of his mistake in stopping here. In the early
morning mist, a week and a half after his arrival
on the island, a fast motorboat was carrying him
and his luggage back over the water to the naval
port, and he landed there just long enough to cross
the gangplank to the damp deck of a ship which —
was lying under steam ready for the voyage to Ven- _

ce.


* It was an old hulk flying the Italian flag, decrepit,


sooty, and mournful. In a cavelike, artificially
lighted inside cabin where Aschenbach, immedi-
ately upon boarding the ship, was conducted by a
dirty hunchbacked sailor, who smirked politely,
there was sitting behind a table, his hat cocked over


Chis forehead and a cigarette stump in the corner


&


~


of his mouth, a man with a goatee, and with the

face of an old-style circus director, who was taking

down the particulars of the passengers with profes-

sional grimaces and distributing the tickets. “To

Venice!” He repeated Aschenbach’s request, as he

extended his arm and plunged his pen into the
24


Venice, first class! At your service, sir. = And ee
wrote a generous scrawl, sprinkled it with blue sand
out of a box, let the sand run off into a clay bowl,
folded the paper with sallow, bony fingers, and be-
an writing again. “A happily chosen destination!”
he chatted on. “Ah, Venice! A splendid city! A city
of irresistible attractiveness for the educated on ac-
count of its history as well as its present-day —


the empty words accompanying them had some-
_ thing anaesthetic and reassuring about them, much
_ as though he feared lest the traveler might still be
 vacillating in his decision to go to Venice. He han-
_ dled the cash briskly, and let the change fall on
the spotted table cover with the skill of a croupier.
“A pleasant journey, sir!” he said with a theatrical
bow. “Gentlemen, I have the honor of serving you!”
he called out immediately after, with his arm up-
raised, and he acted as if business were in full
j swing, although no one else was there to require
his attention. Aschenbach returned to the deck.

With one arm on the railing, he watched the pas-
sengers on board and the idlers who loitered around
the dock waiting for the ship to sail. The second-
class passengers, men and women, were huddled
together on the foredeck, using boxes and bundles
as seats. A group of young people made up the trav-
_ elers on the first deck, clerks from Pola, it seemed,
25


charms.” The smooth rapidity of his movements and __


fy
Se.


Ne Saat ray,
- who had gathered in the greatest excitement for an _
excursion to Italy. They made a considerable fuss _
about themselves and their enterprise, chattered, _
laughed, enjoyed their own antics self-contentedly, _
and, leaning over the hand rails, shouted flippantly —
and mockingly at their comrades who, with portfo-
lios under their arms, were going up and down the
waterfront on business and kept threatening the
picnickers with their canes. One, in a bright yellow
summer suit of ultra-fashionable cut, with a red
necktie, and a rakishly tilted Panama, surpassed all
the others in his crowning good humor. But as soon

as Aschenbach looked at him a bit more carefully, —
he discovered with a kind of horror that the youth _
was a cheat. He was old, that was unquestionable. |
There were wrinkles around his eyes and mouth.
The faint crimson of the cheeks was paint, the hair
under his brilliantly decorated straw hat was a wig;
his neck was hollow and stringy, his turned-up mus-
tache and the imperial on his chin were dyed; the
full set of yellow teeth which he displayed when
he laughed, a cheap artificial plate; and his hands,
with signet rings on both index fingers, were those
of an old man. Fascinated with loathing, Aschen-
bach watched him in his intercourse with his
friends. Did they not know, did they not observe
that he was old, that he was not entitled to wear
their bright, foppish clothing, that he was not en-
titled to play at being one of them? Unquestion-


26


e.


eG SL OREN ERS ns ‘isin


4


too little sleep. He felt as though everything were
not quite the same as usual, as though some


_ dreamlike estrangement, some peculiar distortion of
the world, were beginning to take possession of
him, and perhaps this could be stopped if he hid


his face for a time and then looked around him
again. Yet at this moment he felt as though he were


_ swimming; and, looking up with an unreasoned
_ fear, he discovered that the heavy, lugubrious body
E of the ship was separating slowly from the walled


_ bank. Inch by inch, with the driving and reversing
of the engine, the strip of dirty glistening water
widened between the dock and the side of the ship;
and, after cumbersome maneuvering, the steamer
_ finally turned its nose toward the open sea. Aschen-
bach crossed to the starboard side, where the
hunchback had set up a deck chair for him, and
a steward in a spotted dress coat asked after his
wants.

The sky was gray, the wind damp. Harbor and
islands had been left behind, and soon all land was
lost in the haze. Flakes of coal dust, bloated with
moisture, fell over the washed deck, which would

27


not iy; After the first hour an ae was ‘spread
since it had begun to rain. —

Bundled up in his coat, a book in his lap, the
traveler rested, and the hours passed unnoticed. It
stopped raining; the canvas awning was removed. —
The horizon was unbroken. The sea, empty, like an
enormous disk, lay stretched under the curve of the
sky. But in empty inarticulate space our senses lose
also the dimensions of time, and we slip into the
incommensurate. As he rested, strange shadowy fig-
ures, the old dandy, the goatee from the inside
cabin, passed through his mind, with vague ges-
tures, muddled dream words—and he was asleep.

About noon he was called to a meal down in the
corridorlike dining hall into which the doors opened
from the sleeping cabins; he ate near the head of
a long table, at the other end of which the clerks,
including the old man, had been drinking with the
boisterous captain since ten o’clock. The food was
poor, and he finished rapidly. He felt driven outside
to look at the sky, to see if it showed signs of being
brighter above Venice.

He had kept thinking that this had to occur, since
the city had always received him in full blaze. But
sky and sea remained dreary and leaden, at times
a misty rain fell, and here he was reaching by water
a different Venice than he had ever found when
approaching on land. He stood by the forestays,
looking in the distance, waiting for land. He

28


once risen out of these waters; he relived in silence _
_ some of that reverence, happiness, and sorrow
_ which had been turned then into cautious song; and


easily susceptible to sensations already molded, he


asked himself wearily and earnestly whether some


new enchantment and distraction, some belated ad-
venture of the emotions, might still be held in store


for this idle traveler.

Then the flat coast emerged on the right; the sea
was alive with fishing smacks; the bathers’ island
appeared; it dropped behind to the left, the steamer
slowly entered the narrow port which is named af-
ter it; and on the lagoon, facing gay ramshackle
houses, it stopped completely, since it had to wait
for the barque of the health department.

An hour passed before it appeared. He had ar-
rived, and yet he had not; no one was in any hurry,
no one was driven by impatience. The young men
from Pola, patriotically attracted by the military
bugle calls which rang over the water from the vi-
cinity of the public gardens, had come on deck and,
warmed by their Asti, they burst out with cheers
for the drilling bersaglieri. But it was repulsive to
see what a state the primped-up old man had been
brought to by his comradeship with youth. His old
head was not able to resist its wine like the young
and robust: he was painfully drunk. With glazed

29


erughi of the ener eithaslastic poet ee = x


@ whom the domes and bell towers of his dreams had


3
a
e
of
+ :


ners of his mouth with his tongue in the most abom-_
inably suggestive manner. Aschenbach observed


from giddiness, and balancing himself laboriously. a
Since he would have fallen at the first step, he did


cae


i.


not trust himself from the spot—yet he showed a


deplorable insolence, buttonholed everyone who


came near him, stammered, winked and tittered, —
lifted his wrinkled, ornamented index finger in a ©


stupid attempt at bantering, while he licked the cor- -


him darkly, and a feeling of numbness came over
him again, as though the world were displaying a
faint but irresistible tendency to distort itself into


_ the peculiar and the grotesque: a feeling which cir-


cumstances prevented him from surrendering him-
self to completely, for just then the pounding activ-
ity of the engines commenced again, and the ship,
resuming a voyage which had been interrupted so
near its completion, passed through the San Marco
canal.

So he saw it again, the most remarkable of land-
ing places, that blinding composition of fantastic
buildings which the Republic lays out before the
eyes of approaching seafarers: the soft splendor of
the palace, the Bridge of Sighs, on the bank the
columns with lion and saint, the advancing, showy
flank of the enchanted temple, the glimpse through
to the archway, and the giant clock. And as he

30


a cd'o on he thought that to reach Venice by land,
on the railroad, was like éntering a palace from the


rear, and that this most unreal of cities should not
be approached except as he was now doing, by


ship, over the high seas.


The engine stopped, gondolas pressed in, the
gangway was let down, customs officials climbed on


board and discharged their duties perfunctorily; the


disembarking could begin. Aschenbach made it


understood that he wanted a gondola to take him


and his luggage to the dock of those little steamers


which ply between the city and the Lido, since he


intended to locate near the sea. His plans were
complied with, his wants were shouted down to the
water, where the gondoliers were wrangling with
one another in dialect. He was still hindered from
descending; he was hindered by his trunk, which
was being pulled and dragged with difficulty down
the ladderlike steps—so that for some minutes he
was not able to avoid the importunities of the atro-
cious old man, whose drunkenness gave him a sinis-
ter desire to do the foreigner parting honors. “We
wish you a very agreeable visit,” he bleated as he
made an awkward bow. “We leave with pleasant
recollections! Au revoir, excusez, et bon jour, Your
Excellency!” His mouth watered, he pressed his
eyes shut, he licked the corners of his mouth, and
the dyed imperial turned up about his senile lips.
“Our compliments,” he mumbled, with two finger-
31


2 : aa the dearest prettiest sweetheart .. .” And


=


ps on his eas “our Pecnslees to our


-_denly his false upper teeth fell eae on his lowe


lip. Aschenbach was able to escape. “To our sweet-
heart, our handsome sweetheart,” he heard the coo- _
ing, hollow, stuttering voice behind him while, sup- =
porting himself against the hand rail, he went down =


the gangway.

Who would not have to suppress a fleeting tae
der, a vague timidity and uneasiness, if it were a
matter of boarding a Venetian gondola for the first


:


time or after several years? The strange craft, an


entirely unaltered survival from the times of ballad- —


ry, with that peculiar blackness which is found else-


_ where only in coffins—it suggests silent, criminal


adventures in the rippling night, it suggests even


more strongly death itself, the bier and the mourn- _


ful funeral, and the last silent journey. And has it
been observed that the seat of such a barque, this
armchair of coffin-black veneer and dull black up-
holstery, is the softest, most luxuriant, most lulling
seat in the world? Aschenbach noted this when he
had relaxed at the feet of the gondolier, opposite
his luggage, which lay neatly assembled on the
prow. The rowers were still wrangling, harshly, in-


comprehensibly, with threatening gestures. But the


strange silence of this canal city seemed to soften

their voices, to disembody them, and dissipate them

over the water. It was warm here in the harbor,
32.


_ leaning back against the limber portions of the
“cushions, the traveler closed his eyes in the enjoy-


ment of a lassitude which was as unusual with him
_ as it was sweet. The trip would be short, he |


thought; if only it went on forever! He felt himself


_ glide with a gentle motion away from the crowd _


and the confusion of voices.
It became quieter and quieter around him! There


was nothing to be heard but the splashing of the ~ |


oar, the hollow slapping of the waves against the
prow of the boat as it stood above the water black
and bold and armed with its halberdlike tip, and
a third sound, of speaking, of whispering—the
whispering of the gondolier, who was talking to
himself between his teeth, fitfully, in words that
were pressed out by the exertion of his arms.
Aschenbach looked up, and was slightly astonished
to discover that the lagoon was widening, and he
was headed for the open sea. This seemed to indi-
cate that he ought not to rest too much, but should
see to it that his wishes were carried out.


“To the steamer dock!” he repeated, turning -


around completely and looking into the face of the

gondolier who stood behind on a raised platform

and towered up between him and the dun-colored

sky. He was a man of unpleasant, even brutal ap-

pearance, dressed in sailor blue, with a yellow sash;

a formless straw hat, its weave partially unraveled,
33


ed faintly i the warm breeze of the ee


up nose, undoubtedly meant that he was not It


8E


ian. Although of somewhat frail build, so that ‘ta
would not have thought him especially well suited _
to his trade, he handled the oar with great energy, —


_ throwing his entire body into each stroke. Occasion- _
ally he drew back his lips from the exertion, and
disclosed his white teeth. Wrinkling his reddish —
_ brows, he gazed on past his passenger, as he an- —
swered deliberately, almost gruffly: “You are going


to the Lido.” Aschenbach replied: “Of course. But
I have just taken the gondola to get me across to
San Marco. I want to use the vaporetto.”

“You cannot use the vaporetto, sir.”

“And why not?”

“Because the vaporetto will not haul luggage.”

That was so; Aschenbach remembered. He was
silent. But the fellow’s harsh, presumptuous man-
ner, so unusual toward a foreigner here, seemed un-
bearable. He said: “That is my affair. Perhaps I
want to put my things in storage. You will turn
back.”

There was silence. The oar splashed, the water
thudded against the bow. And the talking and whis-
pering began again. The gondolier was talking to
himself between his teeth.

What was to be done? This man was strangely
insolent, and had an uncanny decisiveness; the

34


3 0 es in ie eed And Caridad how one |
he could rest, if only he did not become excited! —
Hadn't he wanted the trip to go on and on forever?
_ It was wisest to let things take their course, and
the main thing was that he was comfortable. The —
- poison of inertia seemed to be issuing from the seat,
_ from this low, black-upholstered armchair, so gently _
cradled by the oar strokes of the imperious gondo- __

_ lier behind him. The notion that he had fallen into
_ the hands of a criminal passed dreamily across
__ Aschenbach’s mind—without the ability to summon
_ his thoughts to an active defense. The possibility
that it was all simply a plan for cheating him
seemed more abhorrent. A feeling of duty or pride,
a kind of recollection that one should prevent such
things, gave him the strength to arouse himself once
: more. He asked: “What are you asking for the
p trip?”
4 Looking down upon him, the gondolier an-
’  swered: “You will pay.”
| It was plain how this should be answered.
_ Aschenbach said mechanically: “I shall pay noth-
ing, absolutely nothing, if you don’t take me where
I want to go.”

“You want to go to the Lido.”

“But not with you.”

“I am rowing you well.”

That is so, Aschenbach thought, and relaxed.

35


x Se Pluto with a blow of are oar from =e as ee
os will have rowed me well. :


a - and women, ae sang to guitar and mandolin, _ =<
riding persistently side by side with the gondola —
and filling the silence over the water with their
-_ eovetous foreign poetry. A hat was held out, and 4
_ Aschenbach threw in money. Then they stopped | :
& singing, and rowed away. And again the muttering ©
of the gondolier could be heard as he talked fitfully _
aemmaricl jerkily to himself. te
= So they arrived, tossed in the wake of a steamer 4
plying toward the city. Two municipal officers, their :
hands behind their backs, their faces turned in the
direction of the lagoon, were walking back and :
forth on the bank. Aschenbach left the gondola at R
the dock, supported by that old man who is sta- —
tioned with his grappling hook at each one of Ven- _
ice’s landing places. And since he had no small
money, he crossed over to the hotel by the steamer
wharf to get change and pay the rower what was
due him. He got what he wanted in the lobby, he
returned and found his traveling bags in a cart on
the dock, and gondola and gondolier had vanished.
“He got out in a hurry,” said the old man with
the grappling hook. “A bad man, a man without
36


men shrugged his shoulders.


coin. He gave instructions to have his luggage taken
__ to the beach hotel, and followed the cart through —
the avenue, the white-blossomed avenue which,
lined on both sides with taverns, shops, and board-
ing houses, runs across the island to the shore.

__ He entered the spacious hotel from the rear, by _
: the terraced garden, and passed through the vesti-


he had been announced, he was received with
_ obliging promptness. A manager, a small, frail, flat-
teringly polite man with a black mustache and a
_ French-style frock coat, accompanied him to the
third floor in the lift, and showed him his room,
an agreeable place furnished in cherry wood. It was
decorated with strong-smelling flowers, and its high
_ windows afforded a view out across the open sea.
He stepped up to one of them after the employee
had left; and while his luggage was being brought
_ up and placed in the room behind him, he looked
down on the beach (it was comparatively deserted
in the afternoon) and on the sunless ocean which
__was at flood tide and was sending long low waves
against the bank in a calm regular rhythm.
3 The experiences of a man who lives alone and
: 37


p
a Ui


“The gentleman rode for nothing,” the old man Re ae
said, and held out his hat. Aschenbach tossed ina _


+4
4


~ pule and the lobby until he reached the desk. Since


THOMAS MANN oa
ay in silence are both vaguer and more penetrating —
__ than those of people in society; his thoughts are
2 _ heavier, more odd, and touched always with melan-
_ choly. Images and observations which could easily
be disposed of by a glance, a smile, an exchange
of opinion, will occupy him unbearably, sink deep
into the silence, become full of meaning, become
life, adventure, emotion. Loneliness ripens the ec-
centric, the daringly and estrangingly beautiful, the
poetic. But loneliness also ripens the perverse, the
disproportionate, the absurd, and the illicit. So, the
things he had met with on the trip, the ugly old
fop with his twaddle about sweethearts, the law-
breaking gondolier who was cheated of his pay, still
left the traveler uneasy. Without really providing
any resistance to the mind, without offering any
solid stuff to think over, they were nevertheless pro-
foundly strange, as it seemed to him, and disturbing
precisely because of this contradiction. In the mean-
while, he greeted the sea with his eyes, and felt
pleasure at the knowledge that Venice was so con-
veniently near. Finally he turned away, bathed his
face, left orders to the chambermaid for a few
things he still needed done to make his comfort
complete, and let himself be taken to the ground
floor by the green-uniformed Swiss who operated
the lift.

He took his tea on the terrace facing the ocean,
then descended and followed the boardwalk for

38


|


quite a way in the erties of the Hotel Treckion .
Vhen he returned it seemed time to dress for din-
ner. He did this with his usual care and slowness,
_ since he was accustomed to working over his toilet.
i And yet he came down a little early to the lobby,


here he found a great many of the hotel guests


_ assembled, mixing distantly and with a show of mu-
__ tual indifference to one another, but all waiting for
4 mealtime. He took a paper from the table, dropped
into a leather chair, and observed the company;
_ they differed agreeably from the guests where he


__ had first stopped.


A wide and tolerantly inclusive horizon was


spread out before him. Sounds of all the principal
_ languages formed a subdued murmur. The ac-
cepted evening dress, a uniform of good manners,
j brought all human varieties into a fitting unity.


_ There were Americans with their long wry features,


_ large Russian families, English ladies, German chil-
a dren with French nurses. The Slavic element


:


_ seemed to predominate. Polish was being spoken


nearby.
It was a group of children gathered around a


little wicker table, under the protection of a teacher


or governess: three young girls, apparently fifteen

to seventeen, and a long-haired boy about fourteen

years old. With astonishment Aschenbach noted

_ that the boy was absolutely beautiful. His face, pale

and reserved, framed with honey-colored hair, the
39


straight sloping nose, the lovely mouth, ae: ee


sion of sweet and godlike seriousness, recalled
Greek sculpture of the noblest period; and the com-


plete purity of the forms was accompanied by such


a rare personal charm that, as he watched, he felt
that he had never met with anything equally felic-
itous in nature or the plastic arts. He was further
struck by the obviously intentional contrast with the


principles of upbringing which showed in the sis-
ters’ attire and bearing. The three girls, the eldest


of whom could be considered grown up, were
dressed with a chasteness and severity bordering on
disfigurement. Uniformly cloisterlike costumes, of
medium length, slate-colored, sober, and deliber-
ately unbecoming in cut, with white turned-down
collars as the only relief, suppressed every possible
appeal of shapeliness. Their hair, brushed down flat


se


_


and tight against the head, gave their faces a nun- —
like emptiness and lack of character. Surely this was _


a mother’s influence, and it had not even occurred
to her to apply the pedagogical strictness to the boy
which she seemed to find necessary for her girls.
It was clear that in his existence the first factors
were gentleness and tenderness. The shears had
been resolutely kept from his beautiful hair; like a
Prince Charming’s, it fell in curls over his forehead,
his ears, and still deeper, across his neck. The En-
glish sailor suit, with its braids, stitchings, and em-
broideries, its puffy sleeves narrowing at the ends
40


iting snugly about the fine wrists of his still
childish but slender hands, gave the delicate figure
_ something rich and luxurious. He was sitting, half- _
_ profile to the observer, one foot in its black patent- ee
_ leather shoe placed before the other, an elbow rest-
_ ing on the arm of his wicker chair, a cheek pressed _
a against his fist, in a position of negligent good man-
hers, entirely free of the almost subservient stifMess _
to which his sisters seemed accustomed. Did he —
have some illness? For his skin stood out as white
_ as ivory against the golden darkness of the sur-
_ rounding curls. Or was he simply a pampered fa-
 vorite child, made this way by a doting and moody
_ love? Aschenbach inclined to believe the latter. Al-
most every artist is born with a rich and treacherous
__ tendency to recognize injustices which have created

_ beauty, and to meet aristocratic distinction with
_ sympathy and reverence.

A waiter passed through and announced in En-
glish that the meal was ready. Gradually the guests
disappeared through the glass door into the dining
hall. Stragglers crossed, coming from the entrance,
or the lifts. Inside, they had already begun serving,
but the young Poles were still waiting around the
- jittle wicker table; and Aschenbach, comfortably

propped in his deep chair, and with this beauty be-

fore his eyes, stayed with them.
The governess, a small corpulent middle-class
woman with a red face, finally gave the sign to rise.
41


™


ES ER SP Pe Ge ene nee ee ens eae
= 7 ee y


With lifted brows, she eared back her chair Sie :
bowed, as a large women dressed in gray and richly —
jeweled with pearls entered the lobby. This woman —
was advancing with coolness and precision; her —
lightly powdered hair and the lines of her dress
were arranged with the simplicity which always sig-
nifies taste in those quarters where devoutness is
taken as one element of dignity. She might have
been the wife of some high German official. Except
that her jewelry added something fantastically lay-
ish to her appearance; indeed, it was almost price-
less, and consisted of ear pendants and a very long
triple chain of softly glowing pearls, as large as
cherries.

The children had risen promptly. They bent over
to kiss the hand of their mother, who, with a distant
smile on her well-preserved though somewhat tired
and peaked features, looked over their heads and
directed a few words to the governess in French.
Then she walked to the glass door. The children
followed her: the girls in the order of their age,
after them the governess, the boy last. For some
reason or other he turned around before crossing
the sill, and since no one else was in the lobby his
strange dusky eyes met those of Aschenbach, who,
his newspaper on his knees, lost in thought, was
gazing after the group.

What he saw had not been unusual in the slight-
est detail. They had not preceded the mother to the

42


m. But it aa taken place so See ae >
uch an accent of training, duty, and self-respect,
that Aschenbach felt peculiarly touched by it all. —
_ He delayed for a few moments, then he too crossed
_ into the dining room, and was assigned to his table, —
_ which as he noted with a brief touch of regret, ae rs
_ very far removed from that of the Polish family.
_ Weary, and yet intellectually active, he enter-
tained himself during the lengthy meal with ab-
_ stract, or even transcendental things; he thought
_ over the secret union which the lawful must enter
- upon with the individual for human beauty to re-
_ sult, from this he passed into general problems of
_ form and art, and at the end he found that his
_ thoughts and discoveries were like the seemingly
_ felicitous promptings of a dream which, when the
q mind is sobered, are seen to be completely empty
oa _ and unfit. After the meal, smoking, sitting, taking
a ‘an occasional turn in the park with its smell of
nightfall, he went to bed early and spent the night
_ ina sleep deep and unbroken, but often enlivened
_ with the apparitions of dreams.
The weather did not improve any the following
_ day. A land breeze was blowing. Under a cloudy
ashen sky, the sea lay in dull peacefulness; it
_ seemed shriveled up, with a close dreary horizon,
and it had retreated from the beach, baring the


43


opened his window, he thought that he could detect _
the foul smell of the lagoon. “

He felt depressed. He thought already of leaving.
Once, years ago, after several weeks of spring here,
this same weather had afflicted him, and impaired
his health so seriously that he had to abandon Ven-
ice like a fugitive. Was not this old feverish unrest
again setting in, the pressure in the temples, the
heaviness of the eyelids? It would be annoying to
change his residence still another time; but if the
wind did not turn, he could not stay here. To be
safe, he did not unpack completely. He breakfasted
at nine in the buffet room provided for this purpose
between the lobby and the dining room.

That formal silence reigned here which is the am-
bition of large hotels. The waiters who were serving
walked about on soft soles. Nothing was audible
but the tinkling of the tea things, a word half whis-
pered. In one corner, obliquely across from the
door, and two tables removed from his own,
Aschenbach observed the Polish girls with their
governess. Erect and red-eyed, their ash-blond hair
freshly smoothed down, dressed in stiff blue linen
with little white cuffs and turned-down collars—
they were sitting there, handing around a glass of
marmalade. They had almost finished their break-
fast. The boy was missing.

Aschenbach smiled. “Well, little Phaeacian!” he

44


; ORES ee Be ES oS.
ee ribs of several sandbanks. As ae BES ae ic


<
a
:


— quent change of dress; warm baths, and rest.”


Sy He breakfasted without haste. From the porter,


_ who entered the hall holding his braided cap inhis
__ hand, he received some forwarded mail; and while __


Fis of having ee paleept out.” And, ade ae :
_ exhilarated, he recited to himself the line: “A ree


he smoked a cigarette he opened a few letters. In — =


_ entrance of the late sleeper who was being waited


_ for over yonder.


He came through the glass door and crossed the


room in silence to his sisters’ table. His approach—


the way he held the upper part of his body, and


bent his knees, the movement of his white-shod


feet—had an extraordinary charm; he walked very
lightly, at once timid and proud, and this became
still more lovely through the childish embarrass-
ment with which, twice as he proceeded, he turned
his face toward the center of the room, raising and


- Jowering his eyes. Smiling, with something half


muttered in his soft vague tongue, he took his
place; and now, as he turned his full profile to the
observer, Aschenbach was again astonished, terri-
fied even, by the really godlike beauty of this hu-
man child. Today the boy was wearing a light
blouse of blue-and-white-striped cotton goods, with
a red silk tie in front, and closed at the neck by
a plain white high collar. This collar lacked the dis-
45


4 this way it happened that he was present at the


-ness—the head of an Eros, in blended yellows of
_ Parian marble, with fine serious brows, the temples _
- and ears covered softly by the abrupt encroach- —
ment of his curls. ee
“Good, good!” Aschenbach thought, with that de-_
_ liberate expert appraisal which artists sometimes
employ as a subterfuge when they have been car- |
= _ ried away with delight before a masterwork. And ~


he thought further: “Really, if the sea and the —
beach weren't waiting for me, I should stay here —
as long as you stayed!” But he went then, passed
_ through the lobby under the inspection of the ser-
-—_-vants, down the wide terrace, and straight across —
the boardwalk to the section of the beach reserved —
for the hotel guests. The barefoot old man in dun-
garees and straw hat who was functioning here as
bathing master assigned him to the bathing house
he had rented; a table and a seat were placed on
the sandy board platform, and he made himself
comfortable in the lounge chair which he had
drawn closer to the sea, out into the waxen yellow
sand.

More than ever before, he was entertained and
~~ amused by the sights on the beach, this spectacle
of carefree, civilized people getting sensuous enjoy-
ment at the very edge of the elements. The gray
flat sea was already alive with wading children,

46


+
p |
;
|
>


a ee ae |


ae ah Oe


4 Pisce without keels; they were continually upset-
. ting, amid laughter. Before the long stretches of __
_ bathing houses, where people were sitting on the © ts

_ platforms as though on small verandas, there was
_ a play of movement against the line of rest and in- _


Aes


ertness behind—visits and chatter, fastidious morn-


2
i
vs
F
:


qi ing elegance alongside the nakedness which, boldly :


_ at ease, was enjoying the freedom which the place
__ afforded. Farther in front, on the damp firm sand,


_ people were parading about in white bathing
_ cloaks, in ample, brilliantly colored wrappers. An
__ elaborate sand pile to the right, erected by children,
__ had flags in the colors of all nations planted around
_ it. Venders of shells, cakes, and fruit spread out


j


_ their wares, kneeling. To the left, before one of the


bathing houses which stood at right angles to the
_ others and to the sea, a Russian family was en-
"camped: men with beards and large teeth, slow del-
icate women, a Baltic girl sitting by an easel and


_ painting the sea amidst exclamations of despair,


a
~


.
.


two ugly good-natured children, an old maid ser-

vant who wore a kerchief on her head and had the

alert scraping manners of a slave. Delighted and

appreciative, they were living there, patiently call-

ing the names of the two rowdy disobedient chil-

dren, using their scanty Italian to joke with the hu-
47


Ye


Roe
ee


ae ‘morous ‘ald man fon ia ‘they were 4
oe candy, kissing one another on the cheek, and ‘not. ing
the least concerned with anyone who might be ob- —
serving their community. 4
“Yes, I shall stay,” Aschenbach thought. “Where _
would things be better?” And, his hands folded in ~
his lap, he let his eyes lose themselves in the ex-
panses of the sea, his gaze gliding, swimming, and ~
_ failing in the monotone mist of the wilderness of |
space. He loved the ocean for deep-seated reasons:
_ because of that yearning for rest, when the hard-
pressed artist hungers to shut out the exacting mul-
tiplicities of experience and hide himself on the —
breast of the simple, the vast; and because of a for- _
_ bidden hankering—seductive, by virtue of its being _
. directly opposed to his obligations—after the in- :
communicable, the incommensurate, the eternal, .
the nonexistent. To be at rest in the face of perfec- |
tion is the hunger of everyone who is aiming at ex- _
cellence; and what is the nonexistent but a form —
of perfection? But now, just as his dreams were so
far out in vacancy, suddenly the horizontal fringe
of the sea was broken by a human figure; and as
he brought his eyes back from the unbounded, and
focused them, it was the lovely boy who was there,
~~ coming from the left and passing him on the sand.
He was barefooted, ready for wading, his slender
legs exposed above the knees; he walked slowly, but
as lightly and proudly as though it were the custom-
48


= ay ete for him ¢ to move about Shot ee Ne

he was looking around him toward the line of bath-
ing houses opposite. But as soon as he had noticed
_ the Russian family, occupied with their own
harmony and contentment, a cloud of scorn and


~


detestation passed over his face. His brow dark-
ened, his mouth was compressed, he gave his lips


an embittered twist to one side, so that the cheek |


was distorted and the forehead became so heavily
furrowed that the eyes seemed sunken beneath its
pressure: malicious and glowering, they spoke the
language of hate. He looked down, looked back
once more threateningly, then with his shoulder
made an abrupt gesture of disdain and dismissal,
and left the enemy behind him.

A kind of pudency or confusion, something like
respect and shyness, caused Aschenbach to turn
away as though he had seen nothing. For the ear-
nest-minded who have been casual observers of
some passion, struggle against making use, even to
themselves, of what they have seen. But he was
both cheered and unstrung—which is to say, he


‘was happy. This childish fanaticism, directed


against the most good-natured possible aspect

of life—it brought the divinely arbitrary into

human relationships; it made a delightful natural

picture which had appealed only to the eye now

seem worthy of a deeper sympathy; and it gave the

figure of this half-grown boy, who had already been
49


THOMAS MANN


sragetlant enough by his sheer beauty, sonic
to offset him still further, and to make one


take him more seriously than his years justified.
Still looking away, Aschenbach could hear the boy's
voice, the shrill, somewhat weak voice with which,


in the distance now, he was trying to call hello to


his playfellows busied around the sand pile. They
answered him, shouting back his name, or some af-
fectionate nickname; and Aschenbach listened
with a certain curiosity, without being able to catch
anything more definite than two melodic syllables
like “Adgio,” or still more frequently “Adgiu,” with
a ringing u-sound prolonged at the end. He was
pleased with the resonance of this; he found it ad-
equate to the subject. He repeated it silently and,
satisfied, turned to his letters and manuscripts.

His small portable writing desk on his knees, he
began writing with his fountain pen an answer to
this or that bit of correspondence. But after the first
fifteen minutes he found it a pity to abandon the
situation—the most enjoyable he could think of—in
this manner and waste it in activities which did not
interest him. He tossed the writing materials to one
side, and he faced the ocean again; soon afterward,
diverted by the childish voices around the sand
heap, he revolved his head comfortably along the
back of the chair toward the right, to discover
where that excellent little Adgio might be and what
he was doing.


50


~


He was found at a glance; the red tie on his breast me:


q _ was not to be overlooked. Busied with the others
in laying an old plank across the damp moat of the _


sand castle, he was nodding, and shouting instruc-
tions for this work. There were about ten compan-—


ions with him, boys and girls of his age, and a few


younger ones who were chattering with one another
in Polish, French, and several Balkan tongues. But _
it was his name which rang out most often. He was


- openly in demand, sought after, admired. One boy


especially, like him a Pole, a stocky fellow who was
called something like “Jaschu,” with sleek black hair


and a belted linen coat, seemed to be his closest


vassal and friend. When the work on the sand struc-
ture was finished for the time being, they walked
arm in arm along the beach, and the boy who was
called “Jaschu” kissed the beauty.

Aschenbach was half minded to raise a warhing
finger. “I advise you, Critobulus,” he thought, smil-
ing, “to travel for a year! For you need that much
time at least to get over it.” And then he break-
fasted on large ripe strawberries which he got from
a peddler. It had become very warm, although the
sun could no longer penetrate the blanket of mist
in the sky. Laziness clogged his brain, even while
his senses delighted in the numbing, drugging dis-
tractions of the ocean’s stillness. To guess, to puzzle


out just what name it was that sounded something


like “Adgio,” seemed to the sober man an appropri-
51


| . Polish he decided that they must mean “Tadzio,”

the shortened form of “Tadeusz,” and sounding like _

-“Tadziu’ when it is called. f

a Tadzio was bathing. Aschenbach, who had lost 3
S, sight of him, spied his head and the arm with which
he was propelling himself, far out in the water; for
the sea must have been smooth for a long distance
| out. But already people seemed worried about him,
women’s voices were calling after him from the
bathing houses, uttering this name again and again.

It almost dominated the beach like a battle cry, and

- with its soft consonants, its long-drawn u-note at

the end, it had something at once sweet and wild —

about it: “Tadziu! Tadziu!” He turned back; beat-

ing the resistant water into a foam with his legs, _

he hurried, his head bent down over the waves. ©

And to see how this living figure, graceful and

: \ clean-cut in its advance, with dripping curls, and

"4 lovely as some frail god, came up out of the depths _

of sky and sea, rose and separated from the ele- —
»{.ments—this spectacle aroused a sense of myth, it
was like some poet’s recovery of time at its begin-
ning, of the origin of forms and the birth of gods.

Aschenbach listened with closed eyes to this song —
ringing within him, and he thought again that it
was pleasant here, and that he would like to

remain.


52


a


t sting from Hf bath; he
sand, wrapped in his white robe, which w
drawn under the right shoulder, his head ae oe
_ on his bare arm. And even when Aschenbach was —
_ not observing him, but was reading a few pages
in his book, he hardly ever forgot that this boy was"
lying there and that it would cost him only a slight
turn of his head to the right to behold the nee
watch over his repose—busied with his own con-—
cerns, and yet constantly aware of this noble picture __
at his right, not far in the distance. And he was
stirred by a paternal affection, the profound leaning
which those who have devoted their thoughts to the —
creation of beauty feel toward those who possess
beauty itself.
A little past noon he left the beach, returned to
the hotel, and was taken up to his room. He stayed
there for some time in front of the mirror, looking
at his gray hair, his tired sharp features. At this mo-
ment he thought of his reputation, and of the fact
that he was often recognized on the streets and ob-
served with respect, thanks to the sure aim and the
_ appealing finish of his words. He called up all the
exterior successes of his talent which he could think
of, remembering also his elevation to the knight-
hood. Then he went down to the dining hall for
lunch, and ate at his little table. As he was riding
up in the lift, after the meal was ended, a group
; 53


7 a a) a lea SRS ee ae eee ees


SFIS people just eS Pe s


into the swaying cage after him, and Tadzio en-


= - tered too. He stood quite near to Aschenbach, for 4
he first time so near that Aschenbach could see |


him, not with the aloofness of a picture, but in mi- —


was addressed by someone or other, and as he was —
- answering with an indescribably agreeable smile he _


stepped out again, on the second floor, walking back-
ward, and with his eyes lowered. “Beauty makes
modest,” Aschenbach thought, and he tried insis-


tently to explain why this was so. But he had no- ©


ticed that Tadzio’s teeth were not all they should
be; they were somewhat jagged and pale. The
enamel did not look healthy; it had a peculiar brit-


tleness and transparency, as is often the case with


anemics. “He is very frail, he is sickly,” Aschenbach
thought. “In all probability he will not grow old.”
And he refused to reckon with the feeling of gratifi-
cation or reassurance which accompanied this no-
tion.

He spent two hours in his room, and in the after-
noon he rode in the vaporetto across the foul-smell-
ing lagoon to Venice. He got off at San Marco, took
tea on the Piazza, and then, in accord with his
schedule for the day, he went for a walk through
the streets. Yet it was this walk which produced a
complete reversal in his attitudes and his plans.

An offensive sultriness lay over the streets. The

54


ro | iui


DEATH IN VENICE


_ air was so heavy that the smells pouring out of
_ homes, stores, and eating houses became mixed


with oil, vapors, clouds of perfumes, and still other
odors—and these would not blow away, but hung
in layers. Cigarette smoke remained suspended, dis-
appearing very slowly. The crush of people along
the narrow streets irritated rather than entertained
the walker. The farther he went, the more he was
depressed by the repulsive condition resulting from
the combination of sea air and sirocco, which was
at the same time both stimulating and enervating.
He broke into an uncomfortable sweat. His eyes
failed him, his chest became tight, he had a fever,
the blood was pounding in his head. He fled from


_ the crowded business streets across a bridge into


the walks of the poor. On a quiet square, one of
those forgotten and enchanting places which lie in
the interior of Venice, he rested at the brink of a
well, dried his forehead, and realized that he would


_. have to leave here.


For the second and last time it had been demon-
strated that this city in this kind of weather was
decidedly unhealthy for him. It seemed foolish to
attempt a stubborn resistance, while the prospects
for a change of wind were completely uncertain.
A quick decision was called for. It was not possible
to go home this soon. Neither summer nor winter
quarters were prepared to receive him. But this was
not the only place where there were sea and beach;

55


and elsewhere these Scat be found ae oh


lagoon and its malarial mists. He remembered a lit- _


tle watering place not far from Trieste which had
‘been praised to him. Why not there? And without —


delay, so that this new change of location would


still have time to do him some good. He pro-


nounced this as good as settled, and stood up. At
the next gondola station he took a boat back to San
Marco, and was led through the dreary labyrinth
of canals, under fancy marble balconies flanked
with lions, around the corners of smooth walls,
past the sorrowing fagade of palaces which mir-
rored large dilapidated business signs in the pulsing
water. He had trouble arriving there, for the gondo-
lier, who was in league with lace-makers and glass-
blowers, was always trying to land him for inspec-
tions and purchases; and just as the bizarre trip
through Venice would begin to cast its spell, the
greedy business sense of the sunken Queen did all
it could to destroy the illusion.

When he had returned to the hotel, he an-
nounced at the office before dinner that unforeseen
developments necessitated his departure the follow-
ing morning. He was assured of their regrets. He
settled his accounts. He dined, and spent the warm
evening reading the newspapers in a rocking chair
on the rear terrace. Before going to bed he got his
luggage all ready for departure.

He did not sleep so well as he might, since the

56


lett eaintin


result of a passing diffidence and indisposition? If
he had delayed a little, if, instead of surrendering


_ self to the air of Venice or to wait for an improve-
ment in the weather, he would not be so rushed
- and inconvenienced, but could anticipate another
: forenoon on the beach like yesterday’s. Too late.
4 Now he would have to go on wanting what he had
_- wanted yesterday. He dressed, and at about eight
4 o'clock rode down to the ground floor for breakfast.
_ As he entered, the buffet room was still empty
of guests. A few came in while he sat waiting for
his order. With his teacup to his lips, he saw the
Polish girls and their governess appear: rigid, with
° morning freshness, their eyes still red, they walked
across to their table in the corner by the window.
_ Immediately afterward, the porter approached him,
_ cap in hand, and warned him that it was time to
_ go. The automobile is ready to take him and the
_ other passengers to the Hotel Excelsior, and from
here the motorboat will bring the ladies and gentle-
men to the station through the company’s private
canal. Time is pressing. Aschenbach found that it
was doing nothing of the sort. It was still over an
57


g uke meade thi renee Whee h

pened. the window in the moming, the sky was _
as overcast as ever, but the air seemed fresher, and _
ie was already beginning to repent. Hadn't his de-
cision been somewhat hasty and uncalled for, the _


so easily, he had made some attempt to adjust him- _


. ‘THOMAS MANN ele ea as
hour before his train left. He was irritated by this 4
hotel custom of hustling departing guests out of the —


‘


house, and indicated to the porter that he wished —


to finish his breakfast in peace. The man retired —
hesitatingly, to appear again five minutes later. It _
is impossible for the car to wait any longer. Then ©


he would take a cab, and carry his trunk with him,


Aschenbach replied in anger. He would use the —


public steamboat at the proper time, and he re-


quested that it be left to him personally to worry |


about his departure. The employee bowed himself
away. Pleased with the way he had warded off
these importunate warnings, Aschenbach finished
his meal at leisure; in fact, he even had the waiter
bring him a newspaper. The time had become quite
short when he finally arose. It was fitting that at
the same moment Tadzio should come through the
glass door.

On the way to his table he walked in the opposite
direction to Aschenbach, lowering his eyes modestly
before the man with the gray hair and high fore-
head, only to raise them again, in his delicious man-
ner, soft and full upon him—and he had passed.
“Goodbye, Tadzio!” Aschenbach thought. “I did not
see much of you.” He did what was unusual with
him, really formed the words on his lips and spoke
them to himself; then he added: “God bless you!”
After this he left, distributed tips, was ushered out
by the small gentle manager in the French frock

58


= NICE » mee
. off file Ae hed cn on toe as he


accompanied by the house servant carrying his
and luggage. He arrived, took his place—and then


of regret.


on the circular bench at the bow, his arm supported
against the railing, shading his eyes with his hand.
_ The public gardens were left behind, the Piazzetta
Z _ opened up once more in princely splendor and was
_ gone, then came the great flock of palaces, and as
__ the channel made a tum the magnificently slung
~ marble arch of the Rialto came into view. The tray-
eler was watching; his emotions were in conflict.
_ The atmosphere of the city, this slightly foul smell
- of sea and swamp which he had been so anxious
! ~_ to avoid—he breathed it now in deep, exquisitely
painful draughts. Was it possible that he had not
known, had not considered, just how much he was
attached to all this? What had been a partial mis-
giving this morning, a faint doubt as to the advis-
ability of his move, now became a distress, a posi-
tive misery, a spiritual hunger, and so bitter that
__ it frequently brought tears to his eyes, while he told
himself that he could not possibly have foreseen it.
. Hardest of all to bear, at times completely insuffer-
59


me, - going along the white-blossoming ave-
1ue which crossed the island to the steamer bridge, __


followed a painful journey through all the depths _ ;


It was the familiar trip across the lagoon, past __
San Marco, up the Grand Canal. Aschenbach sat __


jable, was the thought that iis would never see Ve o-
ce again, that this was a leave-taking forever. Since _
it had been shown for the second time that the city _
affected his health, since he was compelled for the |
second time to get away in all haste, from now on
he would have to consider it a place impossible and —
forbidden to him, a place which he was not equal
to, and which it would be foolish for him to visit
again. Yes, he felt that if he left now, he would
be shamefaced and defiant enough never to see


again the beloved city which had twice caused him


a physical breakdown. And of a sudden this strug-
gle between his desires and his physical strength
seemed to the aging man so grave and important,
his physical defeat seemed so dishonorable, so
much a challenge to hold out at any cost, that he
could not understand the ready submissiveness of
the day before, when he had decided to give in
without attempting any serious resistance.
Meanwhile the steamboat was nearing the sta-
tion; pain and perplexity increased, he became dis-
tracted. In his affliction, he felt that it was impossi-
ble to leave, and just as impossible to turn back.
The conflict was intense as he entered the station.
It was very late; there was not a moment to lose
if he was to catch the train. He wanted to, and he
did not want to. But time was pressing; it drove
him on. He hurried to get his ticket, and looked
about in the tumult of the hall for the officer on
60


j “announced ‘that the vhs Sank had been trans-
_ ferred. Transferred already? Yes, thank you—to


Como. To Como? And in the midst of hasty running


back and forth, angry questions and confused an-


swers, it came to light that the trunk had already
been sent with other foreign baggage from the ex-


press office of the Hotel Excelsior in a completely


wrong direction.

Aschenbach had difficulty in preserving the ex-
pression which was required under these circum-
stances. He was almost convulsed with an adventur-
ous delight, an unbelievable hilarity. The employee
rushed off to see if it were still possible to stop the
trunk, and, as was to be expected, he returned with
nothing accomplished. Aschenbach declared that he
did not want to travel without his trunk, but had
decided to go back and wait at the beach hotel for
its return. Was the company’s motorboat still at the
station? The man assured him that it was lying at
the door. With Italian volubility he persuaded the
clerk at the ticket window to redeem the canceled
ticket, he swore that they would act speedily, that
no time or money would be spared in recovering
the trunk promptly, and—so the strange thing hap-
pened that, twenty minutes after his arrival at the
station, the traveler found himself again on the
Grand Canal, returning to the Lido.

Here was an adventure, wonderful, abashing,

61


OE Wt oe F


A tit en ce iene ay
Pie a 4 ;


Ne hl GAL a


4


/
)


and comically dreamlike ‘Sepoid belief: | “places :
_ which he had just bid farewell to forever in i
- most abject misery—yet he had been turned and ~
driven back by fate, and was seeing them again in —
the same hour! The spray from the prow, washing
between gondolas and steamers with an absurd
agility, shot the speedy little craft ahead to its goal,
while the lone passenger was hiding the nervous-
ness and ebullience of a truant boy under a mask
__ of resigned anger. From time to time he shook with
laughter at this mishap which, as he told himself,
could not have turned out better for a child of des-
tiny. There were explanations to be given, expres-
sions of astonishment to be faced—and then, he
told himself, everything would be all right; then a
misfortune would be avoided, a grave error recti-
fied. And all that he had thought he was leaving
behind him would be open to him again, there at
his disposal. . . . And, to cap it all, was the rapidity
of the ride deceiving him, or was the wind really
coming from the sea?

The waves beat against the walls of the narrow
canal which runs through the island to the Hotel
Excelsior. An automobile omnibus was awaiting his
return there, and took him above the rippling sea
straight to the beach hotel. The little manager with
mustache and long-tailed frock coat came down the
stairs to meet him.

He ingratiatingly regretted the episode, spoke of

62


E “but one ae of Aschenbach’s decision to a
wait here for the baggage. Of course his room had
___ been given up, but there was another one, just as _
_ good, which he could occupy immediately. “Pas de
chance, monsieur,” the Swiss elevator boy smiled as —


they were ascending. And so the fugitive was estab- _
lished again, in a room almost identical with the


other in its location and furnishings.
Tired out by the confusion of this strange fore-
noon, he distributed the contents of his hand bag


about the room and dropped into an armchair by
the open window. The sea had become a pale _


green, the air seemed thinner and purer; the beach,
with its cabins and boats, seemed to have color, al-
though the sky was still gray. Aschenbach looked
out, his hands folded in his lap; he was content to
be back, but shook his head disapprovingly at his
irresolution, his failure to know his own mind. He
sat here for the better part of an hour, resting and
dreaming vaguely. About noon he saw Tadzio in
a striped linen suit with a red tie, coming back from
the sea across the private beach and along the
boardwalk to the hotel. Aschenbach recognized him


_ from this altitude before he had actually set eyes


on him; he was about to think some such words

as “Well, Tadzio, there you are again!” but at the

same moment he felt this careless greeting go dumb

before the truth in his heart. He felt the exhilaration
63


He sat very still, entirely unobserved from this
height, and looked within himself. His features —
__ were alert, his eyebrows raised, and an attentive, a


keenly inquisitive smile distended his mouth. Then ~
he raised his head, lifted both hands, which had —
; hung relaxed over the arms of the chair, and in a
| slow twisting movement turned the palms upward
x z _—as though to suggest an opening and spreading —
_ outward of his arms. It was a spontaneous act of —
_ welcome, of calm acceptance.


/


"7 ae Se ea Te ee ee ee Te eee et Ne Ee,


; Day after day now the naked god with the hot
cheeks drove his fire-breathing quadriga across the


a ht


expanses of the sky, and his yellow locks fluttered
in the assault of the east wind. A white silk sheen


>


stretched over the slowly simmering Ponto. The —
sand glowed. Beneath the quaking silver blue of the _


ether, rust-colored canvases were spread in front of
the bathing houses, and the afternoons were spent
in the sharply demarcated spots of shade which


they cast. But it was also delightful in the evening, —


when the vegetation in the park had the smell of
balsam, and the stars were working through their
courses above, and the soft persistent murmur of
the sea came up enchantingly through the night.
Such evenings contained the cheering promise that
more sunny days of casual idleness would follow,
dotted with countless closely interspersed possibili-
ties of well-timed accidents.

The guest who was detained here by such an ac-


| commodating mishap did not consider the return


of his property as sufficient grounds for another de-

parture. He suffered some inconvenience for two

days, and had to appear for meals in the large din-
65


E ing room in his traveling clothes. When the strayed


luggage was finally deposited in his room again, he
unpacked completely and filled the closet and
drawers with his belongings; he had decided to re-


_ main here indefinitely, content now that he could


pass the hours on the beach in a silk suit and appear
for dinner at his little table again in appropriate
evening dress.

The comfortable rhythm of this life had already
cast its spell over him; he was soon enticed by the
ease, the mild splendor, of his program. Indeed,
what a place to be in, when the usual allurement
of living in watering places on southern shores was
coupled with the immediate nearness of the most
wonderful of all cities! Aschenbach was not a lover
of pleasure. Whenever there was some call for him
to take a holiday, to indulge himself, to have a good
time—and this was especially true at an earlier age
—trestlessness and repugnance soon drove him back
to his rigorous toil, the faithful sober efforts of his
daily routine. Except that this place was bewitching
him, relaxing his will, making him happy. In the
mornings, under the shelter of his bathing house,
letting his eyes roam dreamily in the blue of the
southern sea; or on a warm night as he leaned back
against the cushions of the gondola carrying him
under the broad starry sky home to the Lido from
the Piazza di San Marco after long hours of idle-
ness—and the brilliant lights, the melting notes of

66


ee ee ee


battles in the summer, where nee clouds Wee io


across his garden, and terrifying storms put out the


lamps at night, and the crows which he fed were
swinging in the tops of the pine trees. Then every- _


Be
bs
=
“hy
oe
-


thing seemed just right to him, as though he were —


lifted into the Elysian fields, on the borders of the
earth, where man enjoys the easiest life, where
there is no snow or winter, nor storms and pouring
rains, but where Oceanus continually sends forth
gentle cooling breezes, and the days pass in a
blessed inactivity, without work, without effort, de-
voted wholly to the sun and to the feast days of
the sun.

Aschenbach saw the boy Tadzio frequently, al-
most constantly. Owing to the limited range of ter-
ritory and the regularity of their lives, the beauty
was near him at short intervals throughout the day.
He saw him, met him, everywhere: in the lower
rooms of the hotel, on the cooling water trips to
the city and back, in the arcades of the square, and
at times when he was especially lucky ran across
him on the streets. But principally, and with the
most gratifying regularity, the forenoon on the
beach allowed him to admire and study this rare
spectacle at his leisure. Yes, it was this guaranty of
happiness, this daily recurrence of good fortune,
which made his stay here so precious, and gave him

67


~ such pleasure in the constant procession of sunny is


days.

_He was up as early as he used to be when under
_ the driving pressure of work, and was on the beach
before most people, when the sun was still mild and
the sea lay blinding white in the dreaminess of
morning. He spoke amiably to the guard of the pri-
vate beach, and also spoke familiarly to the bare-
foot, white-bearded old man who had prepared his
place for him, stretching the brown canopy and
bringing the furniture of the cabin out on the plat-
form. Then he took his seat. There would now be
three or four hours in which the sun mounted and


_ gained terrific strength, the sea a deeper and deeper


/


blue, and he might look at Tadzio.

He saw him approaching from the left, along the
edge of the sea; he saw him as he stepped out back-
ward from among the cabins; or he would suddenly
find, with a shock of pleasure, that he had missed
his coming, that he was already here in the blue-
and-white bathing suit which was his only garment
now while on the beach, that he had already com-
menced his usual activities in the sun and the sand
—a pleasantly trifling, idle, and unstable manner of
living, a mixture of rest and play. Tadzio would
saunter about, wade, dig, catch things, lie down,
go for a swim, all the while being kept under sur-
veillance by the women on the platform who made
his name ring out in their falsetto voices: “Tadziul

68


DEATH IN VENICE ee
ziu!” Then he would come running to them


what he had found or caught: mussels, sea horses,
_ jellyfish, and crabs that ran sideways. Aschenbach
_ did not understand a word he said, and though it


_ world, it was a vague harmony in his ear. So the
_ foreignness of the boy’s speech turned it into music,
a wanton sun poured its prodigal splendor down
: over him, and his figure was always set off against
__ the background of an intense sea blue.

This piquant body was so freely exhibited that
hhis eyes soon knew every line and posture. He was
_ continually rediscovering with new pleasure all this
familiar beauty, and his astonishment at its delicate
appeal to his senses was unending. The boy was
called to greet a guest who was paying his respects

to the ladies at the bathing house. He came run-
ning, running wet perhaps out of the water, tossed
back his curls, and as he held out his hand, resting
on one leg and raising his other foot on the toes, the
set of his body was delightful; it had a charming
expectancy about it, a well-meaning shyness, a win-
someness which showed his aristocratic training.
... He lay stretched full-length, his bath towel slung
across his shoulders, his delicately chiseled arm sup-
ported in the sand, his chin in his palm; the boy
called Jaschu was squatting near him and making

69


:
‘
3
:


| th a look of eagerness, to tell them what he had
seen, what he had experienced, or to show them


_ might have been the most ordinary thing in the


up to him—and nothing “could be more Sains |
than the smile of his eyes and lips when the leader


z=


glanced up at his inferior, his servant. . .. He stood _


= on the edge of the sea, alone, apart from his people,
- quite near to Aschenbach—erect, his hands locked
across the back of his neck, he swayed slowly on

: the balls of his feet, looked dreamily into the blue-
ness of sea and sky, while tiny waves rolled up and
= bathed his feet. His honey-colored hair clung in
rings about his neck and temples. The sun made
the down on his back glitter; the fine etching of
the ribs, the symmetry of the chest, were empha-
sized by the tightness of the suit across the but-
_tocks. His armpits were still as smooth as those of
a statue; the hollows of his knees glistened, and
their bluish veins made his body seem built of some
clearer stuff. What rigor, what precision of thought
were expressed in this erect, youthfully perfect
body! Yet the pure and strenuous will which, darkly
at work, could bring such godlike sculpture to the
light—was not he, the artist, familiar with this? Did
it not operate in him too when he, under the press
of frugal passions, would free from the marble mass
of speech some slender form which he had seen in
.___ \the mind and which he put before his fellows as

a statue and a mirror of intellectual beauty?

Statue and mirror! His eyes took in the noble
form there bordered with blue; and with a rush of
enthusiasm he felt that in this spectacle he was

70


——


ne


lf, form as the thought


ing the beautiful itse


been placed here quietly and simply as an object
of devotion. That was drunkenness; and eagerly,
without thinking, the aging artist welcomed it. His


f God, the one pure perfection which lives in the ee
mind, and which, in this symbol and likeness, had


S
oa


- mind was in travail; all that he had learned Se


Z : dropped back into flux; his understanding threw up _
age-old thoughts which he had inherited with youth —


_ though they had never before lived with their own


tion from intellectual to sensual things? Reason and
understanding, it is said, become so numbed and
- enchanted that the soul forgets everything out of
delight with its immediate circumstances, and in as-
tonishment becomes attached to the most beautiful
object shined on by the sun; indeed, only with the
aid of a body is it capable then of raising itself to
higher considerations. To be sure, Amor did as the
instructors of mathematics who show backward
children tangible representations of the pure forms
—similarly the god, in order to make the spiritual
visible for us, readily utilized the form and color
of man’s youth, and as a reminder he adorned these
with the reflected splendor of beauty which, when
we behold it, makes us flare up in pain and hope.
His enthusiasm suggested these things, put him
in the mood for them. And from the noise of the
sea and the luster of the sun he wove himself a


71


ee Sey > ae Cte ea
' ‘ F : ;


——~ ee Ce


- fire. Is it not written that the sun diverts our atten- _


RAM ies Vai decoy


a


charming picture. Here was the old plane tree, Gots 4


far from the walls of Athens—a holy, shadowy
place filled with the smell of agnus castus blossoms
and decorated with ornaments and images sacred
to Achelous and the Nymphs. Clear and pure, the
brook at the foot of the spreading tree fell across
the smooth pebbles; the cicadas were fiddling. But
on the grass, which was like a pillow gently sloping


_ to the head, two people were stretched out, in hid-


ing from the heat of the day: an older man and
a youth, one ugly and one beautiful, wisdom next
to loveliness. And amid gallantries and skillfully en-
_ gaging banter, Socrates was instructing Phaedrus in
matters of desire and virtue. He spoke to him of
the hot terror which the initiates suffer when their
eyes light on an image of the eternal beauty; spoke
of the greed of the impious and the wicked who
cannot think beauty when they see its likeness, and
who are incapable of reverence; spoke of the holy
distress which befalls the noble-minded when a
godlike countenance, a perfect body, appears be-
fore them; they tremble and grow distracted, and
hardly dare to raise their eyes, and they honor the
man who possesses this beauty, yes, if they were
not afraid of being thought downright madmen
they would sacrifice to the beloved as to the image
of a god. For beauty, my Phaedrus, beauty alone
is both lovely and visible at once; it is, mark me,
the only form of the spiritual which we can receive
72


the hth sn if reason and virtue and truth. chould -


: _ cess to the spirit—but only a road, a means simply,


4 the neatest remark of all; it was this, that the lover
_ is more divine than the beloved, since the god is
in the one, but not in the other—perhaps the most
a delicate, the most derisive thought which has ever
been framed, and the one from which spring all the
cunning and the profoundest pleasures of desire.

Writers are happiest with an idea which can be-
come all emotion, and an emotion all idea. Just such
_ a pulsating idea, such a precise emotion, belonged
_ to the lonely man at this moment, was at his call.
_ Nature, it ran, shivers with ecstasy when the spirit
- bows in homage before beauty. Suddenly he
_ wanted to write. Eros loves idleness, they say, and
he is suited only to idleness. But at this point in
the crisis the affliction became a stimulus toward
productivity. The incentive hardly mattered. A re-
quest, an agitation for an open statement on a cer-
tain large burning issue of culture and taste, was
going about the intellectual world, and had finally
caught up with the traveler here. He was familiar
with the subject, it had touched his own experience;
and suddenly he felt an irresistible desire to display
73


ee a hee he ee


. appear to us through the senses? Should we not per-
and be consumed with love, as Semele once was
_ with Zeus? Thus, beauty is the sensitive man’s ac-


little Phaedrus. . . . And then this crafty suitor made e =


so far as to an ee in vada piece q
taking the scope of the boy as a standard for his —
writing, making his style follow the lines of this
body which seemed godlike to him, and carrying _


his beauty over into the spiritual just as the eagle _


once carried the Trojan stag up into the ether. —
Never had his joy in words been more sweet. He |


had never been so aware that Eros is in the word


as during those perilously precious hours when, at — !
his crude table under the canopy, facing the idol
and listening to the music of his voice, he followed |
Tadzio’s beauty in the forming of his little tract,
a page and a half of choice prose which was soon
to excite the admiration of many through its clarity,
its poise, and the vigorous curve of its emotion. Cer-
tainly it is better for people to know only the beau-
tiful product as finished, and not in its conception,
its conditions of origin. For knowledge of the sourc-
es from which the artist derives his inspiration
would often confuse and alienate, and in this way
detract from the effects of his mastery. Strange
hours! Strangely enervating efforts! Rare creative
intercourse between the spirit and body! When
Aschenbach put away his work and started back
from the beach, he felt exhausted, or in dispersion
even; and it was as though his conscience were
complaining after some transgression.

The following morning, as he was about to leave

74


Soe =
“a DEL ae


he looked off from the steps and noticed
it Tadzio, who was alone and was already on his
way toward the sea, was just approaching the pri- _
vate beach. He was half tempted by the simple no-
__ tion of seizing this opportunity to strike up a casual
friendly acquaintanceship with the boy who had
_ been the unconscious source of so much agitation
and upheaval; he wanted to address him, and enjoy
__ the answering look in his eyes. The boy was saun-
_ tering along, he could be overtaken; and Aschen- __
_ bach quickened his pace. He reached him on the
_ boardwalk behind the bathing houses; was about __
_ to lay a hand on his head and shoulders; and some
word or other, an amiable phrase in French, was
on the tip of his tongue. But he felt that his heart,
_ perhaps also because of his rapid stride, was beat-
_ ing like a hammer; and he was so short of breath
that his voice would have been tight and trembling.
He hesitated, he tried to get himself under control.
Suddenly he became afraid that he had been walk-
ing too long so close behind the boy. He was afraid
of arousing his curiosity and causing him to look
back questioningly. He made one more spurt,
failed, surrendered, and passed with bowed head.
_ “Too late!” he thought immediately. “Too latel”
Yet was it too late? This step which he had just
been on the verge of taking would very possibly
have put things on a sound, free and easy basis,
and would have restored him to wholesome sober-
75


Vas


/


at —_~* Te ee ae Oe he afore Waar Pre SS 2) ee. ; wg mo Le on vw


ness. But the fact was that Aechenbacl oe nee


want soberness: his intoxication was too precious.


= Who can explain the stamp and the nature of the |


_ artist? Who can understand this deep instinctive _
welding of discipline and license? For to be unable


to want wholesome soberness is license. Aschenbach —

was no longer given to self-criticism. His tastes, the _
mental caliber of his years, his self-respect, ripeness, _
and a belated simplicity made him unwilling to dis-


member his motives and to debate whether his im- —


pulses were the result of conscientiousness or of dis-
solution and weakness. He was embarrassed, as he
feared that someone or other, if only the guard on
the beach, must have observed his pursuit and de-
feat. He was very much afraid of the ridiculous.
Further, he joked with himself about his comically


pious distress. “Downed,” he thought, “downed like


a rooster, with his wings hanging miserably in the
battle. It really is a god who can, at one sight of
his loveliness, break our courage this way and force
down our pride so thoroughly. . . .” He toyed and
skirmished with his. emotions, and was far too
haughty to be afraid of them.

He had already ceased thinking about the time
when the vacation period which he had fixed for
himself would expire; the thought of going home
never even suggested itself. He had sent for an am-
ple supply of money. His only concern was with
the possible departure of the Polish family; by a

76


ved to learn that these people had come here only


browned his face and hands, the invigorating salt —


ual eedectiouing ‘af the hotel barber he fia con- E
a. short time before his own arrival. The sun ~


_ breezes made him feel fresher. Once he had been —
in the habit of expending on his work every bit of


ye


ag
:


nourishment which food, sleep, or nature could pro- = |


vide him; and similarly now he was generous and


uneconomical, letting pass off as elation and emo-
tion all the daily strengthening derived from the
sun, idleness, and sea air.

His sleep was fitful; the preciously uniform days
were separated by short nights of happy unrest. He


did retire early, for at nine o'clock, when Tadzio


had disappeared from the scene, the day seemed
over. But at the first gray of dawn he was awakened
by a gently insistent shock; he suddenly remem-
bered his adventure, he could no longer remain in
bed; he arose and, clad lightly against the chill of
morning, he sat down by the open window to await
the rising of the sun. Toned by his sleep, he
watched this miraculous event with reverence. Sky,
earth, and sea still lay in glassy, ghost-like twilight;
a dying star still floated in the emptiness of space.
_But a breeze started up, a winged message from
habitations beyond reach, telling that Eos was ris-
ing from beside her husband. And that first sweet
reddening in the farthest stretches of sky and sea
took place by which the sentiency of creation is an-
WA.


lo


4


-ductress of youth who stole Cleitus and Cephalus,
and despite the envy of all the Olympians enjoyed
the love of handsome Orion. A strewing of roses


__ began there on the edge of the world, an unutter-


_ ably pure glowing and blooming. Childish clouds,

_ lighted and shined through, floated like busy little
- Cupids in the rosy, bluish mist. Purple fell upon
_ the sea, which seemed to be simmering, and wash-
ing the color toward him. Golden spears shot up
into the sky from behind. The splendor caught fire,
silently; with godlike power an intense flame of
licking tongues broke out—and with rattling hoofs
the brother’s sacred chargers mounted the horizon.
Lighted by the god’s brilliance, he sat there, keep-
ing watch alone. He closed his eyes, letting this
glory play against the lids. Past emotions, precious
early afflictions and yearnings which had been sti-
fled by his rigorous program of living, were now
returning in such strange new forms. With an em-
barrassed, astonished smile, he recognized them. He
was thinking, dreaming; slowly his lips formed a
_ name. And still smiling, with his face turned up-
ward, hands folded in his lap, he fell asleep again
— in his chair.

But the day which began with such fiery solem-
nity underwent a strange mythical transformation.
Where did the breeze originate which suddenly be-
gan playing so gently and insinuatingly, like some

78


- ‘nounced. ‘The goddess was approaching, the "se= 2


A stronger wind arose, and the steeds of Poseidon
came prancing up, and along with them the steers
which belonged to the blue-locked god, bellowing
and lowering their horns as they ran. Yet among


Ep mee eens on bis, ears and temples? _ af
Little white choppy clouds stood in the sky in scat- _


tered clumps, like the pasturing herds of the gods.


te


ex
a
=
7


=


the detritus of the more distant beach, waves were _


hopping forward like agile goats. He was caught


in the enchantment of a sacredly distorted world


full of Panic life—and he dreamed delicate legends. _


Often, when the sun was sinking behind Venice, he
would sit on a bench in the park observing Tadzio,
who was dressed in a white suit with a colored sash
and was playing ball on the smooth gravel—and


it was Hyacinth that he seemed to be watching, —


Hyacinth who was to die because two gods loved
him. Yes, he felt Zephyr’s aching jealousy of the ri-
val who forgot the oracle, the bow, and the lyre,


in order to play forever with this beauty. He saw ©


the discus, guided by a pitiless envy, strike the love-
ly head; he too, growing pale, caught the drooping
body—and the flower, sprung from this sweet
blood, bore the inscription of his unending grief.
Nothing is more unusual and strained than the
relationship between people who know each other
only with their eyes, who meet daily, even hourly,
and yet are compelled, by force of custom or their
own caprices, to say no word or make no move of
79


Gctetledeiient: Shienno the ares ance
of an aloof unconcern. There is a restlessness and a
a surcharged curiosity existing between them, the


hysteria of an unsatisfied, unnaturally repressed de-
_ sire for acquaintanceship and intercourse; and es-
_ pecially there is a kind of tense respect. For one
_ person loves and honors another so long as he can-


not judge him, and desire is an evidence of incom-


_ plete knowledge.


Some kind of familiarity had necessarily to form
itself between Aschenbach and young Tadzio; and
it gave the elderly man keen pleasure to see that
his sympathies and interests were not left com-
pletely unanswered. For example, when the boy ap-
peared on the beach in the morning and was going
toward his family’s bathing house, what had in-


-duced him never to use the boardwalk on the far


side of it any more, but to stroll along the front
path, through the sand, past Aschenbach’s habitual
place, and often unnecessarily close to him, almost _
touching his table, or his chair even? Did the attrac-
tion, the fascination of an overpowering emotion
have such an effect upon the frail unthinking object
of itP Aschenbach watched daily for Tadzio to ap-


~~ proach; and sometimes he acted as though he were


occupied when this event was taking place, and he

let the boy pass unobserved. But at other times he

would look up, and their glances met. They were

both in deep earnest when this occurred. Nothing
80


sion Bee cae any inner movement; but there wa


___ a searching look in Tadzio’s eyes, a thoughtful ques- A
_ tioning—he began to falter, looked down, then —


looked up again charmingly, and, when he had


4 passed, something in his bearing seemed to indicate _
that it was only his breeding which kept him from a


turning around.
Once, however, one evening, things turned out
differently. The Polish children and their governess


had been missing at dinner in the large hall; — |
Aschenbach had noted this uneasily. After the meal, _
disturbed by their absence, Aschenbach was walk-


ing in evening dress and straw hat in front of the
hotel at the foot of the terrace, when suddenly he
saw the nunlike sisters appear in the light of the
arc lamp, accompanied by their governess and with
Tadzio a few steps behind. Evidently they were
coming from the steamer pier after having dined
for some reason in the city. It must have been cool
on the water; Tadzio was wearing a dark blue sailor
overcoat with gold buttons, and on his head he had
a cap to match. The sun and sea air had not
browned him; his skin still had the same yellow
marble color as at first. It even seemed paler today
then usual, whether from the coolness or from the
blanching moonlight of the lamps. His regular eye-
brows showed up more sharply, the darkness of his
eyes was deeper. It is hard to say how beautiful


81


i ae La


only evaluate sensuous beauty, but not regive it.


as ae before, by the ce that sures: can 7


_ He had not been prepared for this rich spectacle; 1


it came unhoped for. He had no time to entrench


himself behind an expression of repose and dignity.


Pleasure, surprise, admiration must have shown on —


his face as his eyes met those of the boy—and at


this moment it happened that Tadzio smiled, smiled
to him, eloquently, familiarly, charmingly, without


concealment; and during the smile his lips slowly
opened. It was the smile of Narcissus bent over the
reflecting water, that deep, fascinated, magnetic
smile with which he stretches out his arms to the
image of his own beauty—a smile distorted ever so
little, distorted at the hopelessness of his efforts to
kiss the pure lips of the shadow. It was coquettish,
inquisitive, and slightly tortured. It was infatuated,
and infatuating.

He had received this smile, and he hurried away
as though he carried a fatal gift. He was so broken
up that he was compelled to escape the light of the
terrace and the front garden; he hastily hunted out
the darkness of the park in the rear. Strangely in-
dignant and tender admonitions wrung themselves
out of him: “You dare not smile like that! Listen,
no one dare smile like that to another!” He threw
himself down on a bench; in a frenzy he breathed
the night smell of the vegetation. And leaning back,

82


ng seats him, he whispered the
ae of ee in this case, eee


id


83


a!
< iy,


7


During his fourth week at the Lido, Gustav von :


_ Aschenbach made several sinister observations
touching on the world about him. First, it seemed
_ to him that as the season progressed the number
_ of guests at the hotel was diminishing rather than
_ increasing; and German especially seemed to be
_ dropping away, so that finally he heard nothing but
_ foreign sounds at table and on the beach. Then one
_ day in conversation with the barber, whom he
_ visited often, he caught a word which startled him.
_ The man had mentioned a German family that left
~ soon after their arrival; he added glibly and flatter-
q ingly: “But you are staying, sir. You have no fear
_ of the plague.” Aschenbach looked at him. “The
_ plague?” he repeated. The gossiper was silent, made
- out as though busy with other things, ignored the
. question. When it was put more insistently, he de-
elared that he knew nothing, and with embarrassing
volubility he tried to change the subject.
That was about noon. In the afternoon there was
; a calm, and Aschenbach rode to Venice under an
_ intense sun. For he was driven by a mania to follow
the Polish children, whom he had seen with their
85


4 be


. governess taking the road to the steamer pier. He |
_ did not find the idol at San Marco. But while sitting _
over his tea at his little round iron table on the |


shady side of the square, he suddenly detected a


peculiar odor in the air which, it seemed to him —


now, he had noticed for days without being con- —


sciously aware of it. The smell was sweetish and —


druglike, suggesting sickness, and wounds, and a ~


suspicious cleanliness. He tested and examined it
thoughtfully, finished his luncheon, and left the
square on the side opposite the church. The smell
was stronger where the street narrowed. On the cor-
ners printed posters were hung, giving municipal
warnings against certain diseases of the gastric sys-
tem liable to occur at this season, against the eating
of oysters and clams, and also against the water of
the canals. The euphemistic nature of the an-
nouncement was palpable. Groups of people had
collected in silence on the bridge and squares; and
the foreigner stood among them, scenting and in-
vestigating.

At a little shop he inquired about the fatal smell,
asking the proprietor, who was leaning against his
door surrounded by coral chains and imitation
amethyst jewelry. The man measured him with
heavy eyes, and brightened up hastily. “A matter
of precaution, sir!” he answered with a gesture. “A
regulation of the police which must be taken for
what it is worth. This weather is oppressive, the

86


yh


‘


DEATH IN VENICE


sirocco is not good for the health. In short, you un-
derstand—an exaggerated prudence perhaps.”
Aschenbach thanked him and went on. Also on the
steamer back to the Lido he caught the smell of
the disinfectant.

Returning to the hotel, he went immediately to
the periodical stand in the lobby and ran through
the papers. He found nothing in the foreign-
language press. The domestic press spoke of ru-
mors, produced hazy statistics, repeated official
denials and questioned their truthfulness. This ex-
plained the departure of the German and Austrian
guests. Obviously, the subjects of the other nations
knew nothing, suspected nothing, were not yet un-
easy. “To keep it quiet!” Aschenbach thought angri-
ly, as he threw the papers back on the table. “To
keep that quiet!” But at the same moment he was
- filled with satisfaction over the adventure that was
~ to befall the world about him. For passion, like

crime, is not suited to the secure daily rounds of

order and well-being; and every slackening in the
bourgeois structure, every disorder and affliction of
the world, must be held welcome, since they bring
with them a vague promise of advantage. So
Aschenbach felt a dark contentment with what was
taking place, under cover of the authorities, in the
dirty alleys of Venice. This wicked secret of the city
was welded with his own secret, and he too was
involved in keeping it hidden. For in his infatuation
87


z


he cared about nothing but the possibilty: of
Tadzio’s leaving, and he realized with something
like terror that he would not know how to go on ~
living if this occurred. |
Lately he had not been relying simply on good
luck and the daily routine for his chances to be near
the boy and look at him. He pursued him, stalked _


him. On Sundays, for instance, the Poles never ap-
peared on the beach. He guessed that they must


_ be attending mass at San Marco. He hurried there;
and, stepping from the heat of the square into the


golden twilight of the church, he found the boy he
was hunting, bowed over a prie-dieu, praying. Then
he stood in the background, on the cracked mosaic
floor, with people on all sides kneeling, murmuring,
and making the sign of the cross. And the compact
grandeur of this Oriental temple weighed heavily
on his senses. In front, the richly ornamented priest
was conducting the office, moving about and sing-
ing; incense poured forth, clouding the weak little
flame of the candle on the altar—and with the
sweet, stuffy sacrificial odor another seemed to com-
mingle faintly: the smell of the infested city. But
through the smoke and the sparkle Aschenbach saw
how the boy there in front turned his head, hunted
him out, and looked at him.

When the crowd was streaming out through the
opened portals into the brilliant square with its
swarms of pigeons, the lover hid in the vestibule;

88


_ tumed toward the Piazzetta on her way home. He
_ made sure that the boy, the nunlike sisters, and the


_ gateway of the clock tower and into the Merceria.
_ And after giving them a slight start, he followed,
_ followed them furtively on their walk through Ven-
ice. He had to stand still when they stopped, had
_ to take flight in shops and courts to let them pass
_ when they turned back. He lost them; hot and ex-
_ hausted, he hunted them over bridges and down
_ dirty blind alleys—and he underwent minutes of
_ deadly agony when suddenly he saw them coming


_ toward him in a narrow passage where escape was —


impossible. Yet it could not be said that he suffered.
_ He was drunk, and his steps followed the prompt-
_ ings of the demon who delights in treading human
reason and dignity underfoot.
In one place Tadzio and his companions took a
_ gondola; and shortly after they had pushed off from
_ the shore, Aschenbach, who had hidden behind
- some structure, a well, while they were climbing
in, now did the same. He spoke in a hurried under-
tone as he directed the rower, with the promise of
_ a generous tip, to follow unnoticed and at a dis-
tance that gondola which was just rounding the
corner. And he thrilled when the man, with the
89


es quit the ee saw how the children took Z i
_ ceremonious leave of their mother, and how she _


governess took the road to the right through the _


~ roguish willingness of an ieoomplee assured |
in the same tone that his wishes would be carried |


3. out, carried out faithfully. .
Leaning back against the soft black cushions, he —
rocked and glided toward the other black-beaked _
Es . .
craft where his passion was drawing him. At times
___ it escaped; then he felt worried and uneasy. But _
: his pilot, as though skilled in such commissions, was


always able through sly maneuvers, speedy diago-
nals and shortcuts, to bring the quest into view
again. The air was quiet and smelly, the sun burned
down strong through the slate-colored mist. Water
slapped against the wood and stone. The call of the

_ gondolier, half warning, half greeting, was an-
swered with a strange obedience far away in the
silence of the labyrinth. White and purple umbels _
with the scent of almonds hung down from little ©
elevated gardens over crumbling walls. Arabian
window casings were outlined through the murki-
ness. The marble steps of a church descended into
the water; a beggar squatted there, protesting his
misery, holding out his hat, and showing the whites
of his eyes as though he were blind. An antiquarian
in front of his den fawned on the passer-by and
invited him to stop in the hopes of swindling him. |
That was Venice, the flatteringly and suspiciously _
beautiful—this city, half legend, half snare for —
strangers; in its foul air art once flourished glutton-
ously, and had suggested to its musicians seductive

90


ie ae


vr


DEATH IN VENICE


notes which cradle and lull. The adventurer felt as
though his eyes were taking in this same luxury,
as though his ears were being won by just such mel-
odies. He recalled too that the city was diseased
and was concealing this through greed—and he
peered more eagerly after the retreating gondola.
Thus, in his infatuation, he wanted simply to pur-
sue uninterrupted the object that aroused him, to
dream of it when it was not there, and, after the
fashion of lovers, to speak softly to its mere outline.
Loneliness, strangeness, and the joy of a deep be-
lated intoxication encouraged him and prompted
him to accept even the remotest things without re-
serve or shame—with the result that as he returned
late in the evening from Venice, he stopped on the
second floor of the hotel before the door of the
boy’s room, laid his head in utter drunkenness
_ against the hinge of the door, and for a long time
could not drag himself away despite the danger of
a being caught and embarrassed in such a mad situa-
tion.

Yet there were still moments of relief when he
came partly to his senses. “Where to?” he would
think, alarmed. “Where to?” Like every man whose
natural abilities stimulate an aristocratic interest in
his ancestry, he was accustomed to think of his fore-
bears in connection with the accomplishments and
successes of his life, to assure himself of their ap-
proval, their satisfaction, their undeniable respect.

91


: i a1
He thought of them now, entangled as he was in |
such an illicit experience, caught in such exotic
_ transgressions. He thought of their characteristic —
rigidity of principle, their scrupulous masculinity—_
and he smiled dejectedly. What would they say?
But then, what would they have said to his whole —
life, which was almost degenerate in its departure —


THOMAS MANN _


from theirs, this life under the bane of art—a life
against which he himself had once issued such
youthful mockeries out of loyalty to his fathers, but


which at bottom had been so much like theirs! He ©


too had served, he too had been a soldier and a
warrior like many of them—for art was a war, a
destructive battle, and one was not equal to it for
long, these days. A life of self-conquest and of in-
spite-ofs, a rigid, sober, and unyielding life which
he had formed into the symbol of a delicate and
timely heroism. He might well call it masculine, or
brave; and it almost seemed as though the Eros
mastering him were somehow peculiarly adapted
and inclined to such a life. Had not this Eros stood
in high repute among the bravest of peoples; was
it not true that precisely through bravery he had
flourished in their cities? Numerous war heroes of
antiquity had willingly borne his yoke, for nothing
was deemed a disgrace which the god imposed; and
acts which would have been rebuked as the sign
of cowardice if they had been done for other pur-
poses—prostrations, oaths, entreaties, abjectness—
92


<<
2

ie
Ae


4
ih


SS ERA OORT


DEATH IN VENICE


such things did not bring shame upon the lover, but
rather he reaped praise for them.

In this way his infatuation determined the course
of his thoughts, in this way he tried to uphold him-
self, to preserve his respect. But at the same time,
selfish and calculating, he turned his attention to
the unclean transactions here in Venice, this adven-
ture of the outer world which conspired darkly with
his own and which fed his passion with vague law-
less hopes.

Bent on getting reliable news of the condition
and progress of the pestilence, he ransacked the
local papers in the city cafés, as they had been miss-
ing from the reading table of the hotel lobby for
several days now. Statements alternated with dis-
avowals. The number of the sick and dead was sup-
posed to reach twenty, forty, or even a hundred and
more—and immediately afterward every instance
of the plague would be either flatly denied or at-


‘ tributed to completely isolated cases which had


crept in from the outside. There were scattered ad-
monitions, protests against the dangerous conduct
of foreign authorities. Certainty was impossible.
Nevertheless, the lone man felt especially entitled
to participate in the secret; and although he was
excluded, he derived a grotesque satisfaction from
putting embarrassing questions to those who did
know, and, as they were pledged to silence, forcing
them into deliberate lies. One day at breakfast in
93


the large dining hall he entered into a conversation _


with the manager, that softly treading little man in


= _ the French frock coat who was moving amiably and :


-solicitously about among the diners and had —
stopped at Aschenbach’s table for a few passing —
words. Just why, the guest asked negligently and _
casually, had disinfectants become so prevalent in —
Venice recently? “It has to do,” was the evasive an-
swer, “with a police regulation, and is intended to —
prevent any inconveniences or disturbances to the —
public health which might result from the excep-—
tionally warm and threatening weather.” ... “The |
police are to be congratulated,” Aschenbach an- |
swered; and after the exchange of a few remarks ~
on the weather, the manager left.

Yet that same day, in the evening, after dinner,
it happened that a little band of strolling singers
from the city gave a performance in the front gar- —
den of the hotel. Two men and two women, they
stood by the iron post of an arc lamp and turned _
their whitened faces up toward the large terrace |
where the guests were enjoying this folk recital over
their coffee and cooling drinks. The hotel personnel,
bellboys, waiters, and clerks from the office, could
be seen listening by the doors of the vestibule. The
Russian family, eager and precise in their amuse-
ments, had had wicker chairs placed in the garden
in order to be nearer the performers; and they were
sitting there in an appreciative semicircle. Behind

94


ch f ace Fieold slave.


_ beggars. Instrumental numbers alternated with
_ songs, as when the younger of the women, with a
_ sharp trembling voice, joined with the sweetly fal-


7 -setto tenor in a languishing love duet. But the real
_ talent and leader of the group was undoubtedly the ~


_ other of the two men, the one with the guitar. He


was a kind of buffo baritone, with not much of a


q voice, although he did have a gift for pantomime,


and a remarkable comic energy. Often, with his


__ large instrument under his arm, he would leave the
rest of the group and, still acting, would intrude
on the platform, where his antics were rewarded
with encouraging laughter. The Russians in their
_ seats down front seemed to be especially enchanted
_ with so much southern mobility, and their applause
incited him to let himself out more and more boldly
and assertively.

Aschenbach sat on the balustrade, cooling his lips
now and then with a mixture of pomegranate juice
__ and soda which glowed ruby-red in his glass in front
_ of him. His nerves took in the miserable notes, the
vulgar crooning melodies; for passion lames the
sense of discrimination, and surrenders in all seri-
ousness to appeals which, in sober moments, are ei-
ther humorously allowed for or rejected with an-

95


Mandolin, guitar, harmonica, and a squeaky vio- =
lin were responding to the touch of the virtuoso —


“MANN


the stone hand rail.


- noyance. At the clown’s antics his features had
- twisted into a set painful smile. He sat there re-
 laxed, although inwardly he was intensely awake;
for six paces from him Tadzio was leaning against


In the white belted coat which he often wore at —


mealtime, he was standing in a position of sponta-


neous and inborn gracefulness, his left forearm on
the railing, feet crossed, the right hand on a sup-


porting hip; and he looked down at the street sing- _


ers with an expression which was hardly a smile,
but only an aloof curiosity, a polite amiability.
Often he would stand erect and, expanding his
chest, would draw the white smock down under his
leather belt with a beautiful gesture. And then, too,
the aging man observed with a tumult of fright and
triumph how he would often turn his head over the
left shoulder in the direction of his admirer, care-


fully and hesitatingly, or even with abruptness as


though to attack by surprise. He did not meet —


Aschenbach’s eyes, for a mean precaution com-
pelled the transgressor to keep from staring at him:
in the background of the terrace the women who
guarded Tadzio were sitting, and things had
reached a point where the lover had to fear he
might be noticed and suspected. Yes, he had often
observed with a kind of numbness how, when
Tadzio was near him, on the beach, in the hotel
lobby, in the Piazza San Marco, they called him
96


and this Sounded him ee causing his nae =
unknown tortures which his conscience would not =
_ permit him to evade. eae


_ Meanwhile the guitar player had begun a solo
to his own accompaniment, a street ballad popular 3
_ throughout Italy. It had several strophes, and the — 3
_ entire company joined each time in the refrain, all

_ singing and playing, while he managed to give a |

_ plastic and dramatic twist to the performance. Of
slight build, with thin and impoverished features,

__ he stood on the gravel, apart from his companions, __
in an attitude of insolent bravado, his shabby felt
hat on the back of his head so that a bunch of his
red hair jutted out from under the brim. And to

the thrumming of the strings he flung his jokes up

at the terrace in a penetrating recitative; while the

_ veins were swelling on his forehead from the exer-

_ tion of his performance. He did not seem of Vene-

tian stock, but rather of the race of Neapolitan

- comedians, half pimp, half entertainer, brutal and
audacious, dangerous and amusing. His song was
stupid enough so far as the words went; but in his
mouth, by his gestures, the movements of his body,

his way of blinking significantly and letting the
tongue play across his lips, it acquired something
ambiguous, something vaguely repulsive. In addi-

tion to the customary civilian dress, he was wearing

3 a sport shirt; and his skinny neck protruded above

97


Adams apple. He was ae and acid It ales


hard to fix an age to his beardless features, which


seemed furrowed with grimaces and depravity; and —


the two wrinkles standing arrogantly, harshly, al- —


most savagely between his reddish eyebrows were |
strangely suited to the smirk on his mobile lips. Yet 4
what really prompted the lonely man to pay him
keen attention was the observation that the ques- |
tionable figure seemed also to provide its own ques- —
tionable atmosphere. For each time they came to —
the refrain the singer, amid buffoonery and familiar —
handshakes, began a grotesque circular march
which brought him immediately beneath Aschen-
bach’s place; and each time this happened, there —
blew up to the terrace from his clothes and body —
a strong carbolic smell.
After the song was ended, he began collecting —


Ce ead


sae el


money. He started with the Russians, who were evi- _


dently willing to spend, and then came up the —
stairs. Up here he showed himself just as humble
as he had been bold during the performance. Cring- —
ing and bowing, he stole about among the tables,
and a smile of obsequious cunning exposed his
strong teeth, while the two wrinkles still stood omi-
nously between his red eyebrows. This singular
character collecting money to live on—they eyed
him with a curiosity and a kind of repugnance, they
tossed coins into his felt hat with the tips of their
98


~


DEATH IN VENICE


fingers, and were careful not to touch him. The
elimination of the physical distance between the
comedian and the audience, no matter how great
the enjoyment may have been, always causes a cer-
tain uneasiness. He felt it, and tried to excuse it
by groveling. He came up to Aschenbach, and
along with him the smell, which no one else seemed
concerned about.

“Listen!” the recluse said in an undertone, almost
mechanically. “They are disinfecting Venice. Why?”
The jester answered hoarsely: “On account of the
police. That is a precaution, sir, with such heat, and
the sirocco. The sirocco is oppressive. It is not good
for the health.” He spoke as though astonished that
anyone could ask such things, and demonstrated
with his open hand how oppressive the sirocco was.
“Then there is no plague in Venice?” Aschenbach
asked quietly, between his teeth. The clown’s mus-
cular features fell into a grimace of comical embar-
rassment. “A plague? What kind of plague? Perhaps
our police are a plague? You like to joke! A plague!
Of all things! A precautionary measure, you_under-
stand! A police regulation against the effects of the
oppressive weather.” He gesticulated. “Very well,”
Aschenbach said several times curtly and quietly;
and he quickly dropped an unduly large coin into
the hat. Then with his eyes he signaled the man
to leave. He obeyed, smirking and bowing. But he
had not reached the stairs before two hotel em-

99


= a threw ereelhae apod him, and with t |
_ faces close to his began a whispered cross-examina-
_ tion. He shrugged his shoulders; he gave assur- —
ances, he swore that he had kept quiet—that was _
evident. He was released, and he returned to the
garden; then, after a short conference with his com- —


panions, he stepped out once more for a final song —
of thanks and leave-taking. a
It was a rousing song which the recluse never re- _
called having heard before, a “big number” in in- |
comprehensible dialect, with a laugh refrain in ©
which the troupe joined regularly at the top of their —
voices. At this point both the words and the accom-
paniment of the instruments stopped, with nothing ~
left but a laugh which was somehow arranged —
rhythmically although very naturally done—and the ~
soloist especially showed great talent in giving it
a most deceptive vitality. At the renewal of his pro- —
fessional distance from the audience, he recovered ©
all his boldness again, and the artificial laugh that
he directed up toward the terrace was derisive. —
Even before the end of the articulate portion of the _
strophe, he seemed to struggle against an irresistible _
tickling. He gulped, his voice trembled, he pressed
his hand over his mouth, he contorted his shoulders;
and at the proper moment the ungovernable laugh
broke out of him, burst into such real cackles that
it was infectious and communicated itself to the
audience, so that on the terrace also an unfounded ~
100


ity, living off itself alone, started up. But this


ned to double the singer’s exuberance. He bent —
knees, he slapped his thighs, he nearly split him- a
he no longer laughed, he shrieked. He pointed -
up with his finger, as though nothing were more __
comic than the laughing guests there, and finally
everyone in the garden and on the veranda was
laughing, even to the waiters, bellboys, and house _ =
_ servants in the doorways. :
_ Aschenbach was no longer resting in his chair; s
_he sat upright, as if attempting to defend himself, 2
_ or to escape. But the laughter, the whiffs of the hos- -
_ pital smell, and the boy’s nearness combined to put
_ him into a trance that held his mind and his senses
hopelessly captive. In the general movement and
_ distraction he ventured to glance across at Tadzio,
and as he did so he dared observe that the boy,
_in reply to his glance, was equally serious, much
_ as though he had modeled his conduct and expres-
‘sion after those of one man, and the prevalent
mood had no effect on him since this one man was
‘not part of it. This portentous childish obedience
had something so disarming and overpowering
- about it that the gray-haired man could hardly re-
strain himself from burying his face in his hands.
It had also seemed to him that Tadzio’s occasional
_ stretching and quick breathing indicated a com-
_ plaint, a congestion, of the lungs. “He is sickly, he
will probably not grow old,” he thought repeatedly
101


i 4


iA ie


ie lief to desire and passion. nd ae with pure sO-
_ licitude he had a feeling of rakish gratification.


leaving. Applause accompanied them, and their |


Meanwhile the Venetians had ended and Ware


leader did not miss the opportunity to cover his re-
treat with further jests. His bows, the kisses he |
blew, were laughed at—and so he doubled them. |
When his companions were already gone, he acted
as though he had hurt himself by backing into a |
lamppost, and he crept through the gate seemingly |
crippled with pain. Then he suddenly threw off the
mask of comic hard luck, stood upright, hurried |
away jauntily, stuck out his tongue insolently at the |
guests on the terrace, and slipped into the darkness.
The company was breaking up; Tadzio had been
missing from the balustrade for some time. But, to
the displeasure of the waiters, the lonely man sat
for a long while over the remains of his pome-
granate drink. Night advanced. Time was crum-_
bling. In the house of his parents many years back, —
there had been an hourglass—of a sudden he saw
the fragile and expressive instrument again, as
though it were standing in front of him. Fine and
noiseless, the rust-red sand was running through the
glass neck; and since it was getting low in the upper
half, a speedy little vortex had been formed there.

As early as the following day, in the afternoon,
he had made new progress in his obstinate baiting


102


le success. He Walked from the Piazza San Marco be
the English travel bureau located there; and
after changing some money at the cash desk, he put __
on the expression of a distrustful foreigner and
launched his fatal question at the attendant clerk.
He was a Britisher; he wore a woollen suit, and
was still young, with close-set eyes, and had that
7 characteristic stolid reliability which is so peculiarly
and strikingly appealing in the tricky, nimble-
; _witted South. He began: “No reason for alarm, sir.
_ A regulation without any serious significance. Such
measures are often taken to eee the un-
_ healthy effects of the heat and the sirocco. . . .” But
_as he raised his blue eyes, he met the stare 2a the
foreigner, a tired and somewhat unhappy stare
focused on his lips with a touch of scorn. Then the
_ Englishman blushed. “At least,” he continued in an
_emotional undertone, “that is the official explana-
tion which people here are content to accept. I will
admit that there is something more behind it.” And
_ then in his frank and leisurely manner he told the
truth.
_ For several years now Asiatic cholera had shown
a heightened tendency to spread and migrate.
Hatched in the warm swamps of the Ganges delta,
_ rising with the noxious breath of that luxuriant, un-
fit primitive world and island wilderness which is
shunned by humans and where the tiger crouches


103


in the bamboo thickets, the ona had raged con- —
tinuously and with unusual strength in Hindustan,
had reached eastward to China, westward to |
Afghanistan and Persia, and, following the chief |
caravan routes, had carried its terrors to Astrakhan, _
and even to Moscow. But while Europe was trem- |
bling lest the specter continue its advance from |
there across the country, it had been transported —
over the sea by Syrian merchantmen, and had |
turned up almost simultaneously in several Mediter- |
ranean ports, had raised its head in Toulon and |
Malaga, had showed its mask several times in Pa- |
lermo and Naples, and seemed permanently en- |
trenched through Calabria and Apulia. The north
of the peninsula had been spared. Yet in the middle
of this May in Venice the frightful vibrions were
found on one and the same day in the blackish
wasted bodies of a cabin boy and a woman who
sold greengroceries. The cases were kept secret. But
within a week there were ten, twenty, thirty more,
and in various sections. A man from the Austrian
provinces who had made a pleasure trip to Venice
for a few days, returned to his home town and died
with unmistakable symptoms—and that is how the
first reports of the pestilence in the lagoon city got
into the German newspapers. The Venetian authori-
ties answered that the city’s health conditions had
never been better, and took the most necessary pre-
ventive measures. But probably the food supply
104


canals lukewarm. Yes, it seemed as though the


pemecity and fruitfulness of its stimuli had doubled.


4 tacks, eighty were fatal, and in the most horrible
manner. For the plague moved with utter savagery,
_ and often showed that most dangerous form which
is called “the drying.” Water from the blood vessels
_ collected in pockets, and the blood was unable to
_ carry this off. Within a few hours the victim was
3 parched, his blood became as thick as glue, and he
stifled amid cramps and hoarse groans. Lucky for
him if, as sometimes happened, the attack took the
_ form of a light discomfiture followed by a profound
~ coma from which he seldom or never awakened.
_ At the beginning of June the pesthouse of the Ospe-
_ dale Civico had quietly filled; there was not much
room left in the two orphan asylums, and a fright-
fully active commerce was kept up between the
wharf of the Fondamente Nuove and San Michele,
_ the burial island. But there was the fear of a general

drop in prosperity. The recently opened art exhibit
_ in the public gardens was to be considered, along
with the heavy losses which, in case of panic or un-
favorable rumors, would threaten business, the

105


tckting its way ie ‘the narrow ee ae -S 4
E lesrin.ten was especially favored by the pre-


.


Inature summer heat which made the water of the __


4 _ plague had got renewed strength, as though the e


_ Cases of recovery were rare. Out of a hundred at- i =


hotels, the entire elaborate system for exploiting for-
eigners—and as these considerations evidently car- _
ried more weight than love of truth or respect for —
international agreements, the city authorities up- —


held obstinately their policy of silence, and denial.
The chief health officer had resigned from his post


in indignation, and had been promptly replaced —
by a more tractable personality. The people knew —


this; and the corruption of their superiors, together
with the predominating insecurity, the exceptional
condition into which the prevalence of death had
plunged the city, induced a certain demoralization
of the lower classes, encouraging shady and antiso-
cial impulses which manifested themselves in li-
cense, profligacy, and a rising crime wave. Contrary
to custom, many drunkards were seen in the eve-
nings; it was said that at night nasty mobs made
the streets unsafe. Burglaries and even murders be-
came frequent, for it had already been proved on
two occasions that persons who had presumably
fallen victim to the plague had in reality been dis-
patched with poison by their own relatives. And
professional debauchery assumed abnormal ob-
trusive proportions such as had never been known
here before, and to an extent which is usu-
ally found only in the southern parts of the country
and in the Orient.

The Englishman pronounced the final verdict on
these facts. “You would do well,” he concluded, “to

1086


tine zone is declared.”

“Thank you,” Aschenbach said, and left the office
__ The square lay sunless and stifling. Unsuspecting
_ foreigners sat in front of the cafés or stood among


_ the pigeons in front of the church and watched the
_ swarms of birds flapping their wings, crowding one
_ another, and pecking at grains of corn offered them >
_ in open palms. The recluse was feverishly excited, __


_ triumphant in his possession of the truth. But it had
_ left him with a bad taste in his mouth, and a weird
. 4a horror in his heart. As he walked up and down the
_ flagstones of the gorgeous court, he was weighing
- an action which would meet the situation and
_ would absolve him. This evening after dinner he
- could approach the woman with the pearls and
_ make her a speech; he had figured it out word for
- word: “Permit a foreigner, madam, to give you


~ some useful advice, a warning, which is being with-
_ held from you through self-interest. Leave immedi-


ately with Tadzio and your daughters! Venice is full
__ of the plague.” Then he could lay a farewell hand
on the head of this tool of a mocking divinity, turn
away, and flee this morass. But he felt at the same
_ time that he was very far from seriously desiring
suck a move. He would retract it, would disengage
himself from it. . . . But when we are distracted
we loathe most the thought of retracing our steps.
107


23
fs
4
:


=


5 ‘He recalled a white laine oancnedl oie in


- itself{—and then that strange wanderer’s form which |
_ had awakened in the aging man the roving hanker- {


, with these expectations? What were art and virtue
worth to him over against the advantages of chaos?


scriptions which glistened in the evening and in
whose transparent mysticism his mind’s eye had lost |


ings of youth after the foreign and the remote. And
the thought of return, the thought of prudence and |
soberness, effort, mastery, disgusted him to such an |
extent that his face was distorted with an expression |
of physical nausea. “It must be kept quiet!” he whis- 4


_ pered heavily. And: “I will keep quiet!” The con-—


sciousness of his share in the facts and the guilt in- |
toxicated him, much as a little wine intoxicates a
tired brain. The picture of the diseased and ne-
glected city hovering desolately before him aroused
vague hopes beyond the bounds of reason, but with
an egregious sweetness. What was the scant happi- —
ness he had dreamed of a moment ago compared


aca Fa A


=


a e kept quiet, and remained in Venice.

| This same night he had a frightful dream, if one
can designate as a dream a bodily and mental expe-
rience which occurred to him in the deepest sleep, —
completely independent of him, and with a physical
realness, although he never saw himself present or
moving about among the incidents; but their stage
rather was his soul itself, and they broke in from
without, trampling down his resistance—a pro-


108


ware 2 =


a nihilated behind them.


_ It began with anguish, anguish and desire, and a
Ba frightened curiosity as to what was coming, It was a


night, and his senses were on the watch. From far _
_ off a grumble, an uproar, was approaching, a jum- —
_ ble of noises. Clanking, blaring, and dull thunder, |


_ with shrill shouts and a definite whine in a long-
drawn-out u-sound—all this was sweetly, ominously


interspersed with and dominated by the deep coo- _
ing of wickedly persistent flutes which charmed the _


bowels in a shamelessly penetrative manner. But he
knew one phrase; it was veiled, and yet would
name what was approaching: “The foreign god!”
Vaporous fire began to glow; then he recognized


- mountains like those about his summer house. And


in the scattered light, from high up in the woods,
+ among tree trunks and crumbling moss-grown rocks
_ —people, beasts, a throng, a raging mob plunged
twisting and whirling downward, and made the hill
~ swarm with bodies, flames, tumult, and a riotous
- round dance. Women, tripped by overlong fur
_ draperies which hung from their waists, were hold-

ing up tambourines and beating on them, their
groaning heads flung back. Others swung sparking
firebrands and bare daggers, or wore hissing snakes
about the middle of their bodies, or, shrieking, held

109


= their breasts in their two hands.
on their foreheads, shaggy-haired, girded with —
hides, bent back their necks and raised their arms —


Men with horns


and thighs, clashed brass cymbals and beat furious- —
ly at kettledrums, while smooth boys prodded he-
goats with wreathed sticks, climbing on their horns —
and falling off with shouts when they bounded. And
the bacchantes wailed the word with the soft con-
sonants and the drawn-out u-sound, at once sweet


and savage, like nothing ever heard before. In one


place it rang out as though piped into the air by
stags, and it was echoed in another by many voices,
in wild triumph—with it they incited one another
to dance and to fling out their arms and legs, and
it was never silent. But everything was pierced and —
dominated by the deep coaxing flute. He who was
fighting against this experience—did it not coax him _
too, with its shameless penetration, into the feast —
and the excesses of the extreme sacrifice? His re- —


pugnance, his fear, were keen—he was honorably —


set on defending himself to the very last against the —
barbarian, the foe to intellectual poise and dignity.
But the noise, the howling, multiplied by the reso- —
nant walls of the hills, grew, took the upper hand,
swelled to a fury of rapture. Odors oppressed the
senses, the pungent smell of the bucks, the scent
of moist bodies, and a waft of stagnant water, with
another smell, something familiar, the smell of
wounds and prevalent disease. At the beating of the
110


was ake in a ‘frenzy, in a blinding coateairea
_ lewdness—and he yearned to join the ranks of the —
_ god. The obscene symbol, huge, wooden, was un- —
covered and raised up; then they howled the magic
_ word with more abandon. Foaming at the mouth,
__ they raged, teased one another with ruttish gestures _
_ and caressing hands; laughing and groaning, they
_ stuck the goads into one another’s flesh and licked
_ the blood from their limbs. But the dreamer now _
was with them, in them, and he belonged to the
_ foreign god. Yes, they were he himself, as they
_ hurled themselves biting and tearing upon the ani-
mals, got entangled in steaming rags, and fell in
_ promiscuous unions on the torn moss, in sacrifice
_ to their god. And his soul tasted the unchastity and
fury of decay.
. When he awakened from the affliction of this
_ dream he was unnerved, shattered, and hopelessly
". under the power of the demon. He no longer
avoided the inquisitive glances of other people; he
_ did not care if he was exciting their suspicions. And
as a matter of fact they were fleeing, traveling else-
_ where. Numerous bathing houses stood empty, the
occupants of the dining hall became more and more
‘scattered, and in the city now one rarely saw a for-
eigner. The truth seemed to have leaked out; the
panic, despite the reticence of those whose interests
were involved, seemed no longer avoidable. But the


lll


La J
4


Cf,.c vee


caer ee |


Pe atari Ae Gk Mg eh:


~ woman with the pearls ronnie “with her family, |
either because the rumors had not yet reached her _
or because she was too proud and fearless to heed
‘them. Tadzio remained. And to Aschenbach, in his


_ infatuation, it seemed at times as though flight and _
death might remove all the disturbing elements of |


_ life around them and leave him here alone with the |


boy. Yes, by the sea in the forenoon when his eyes —
rested heavily, irresponsibly, unwaveringly on the |
thing he coveted, or when, as the day was ending, 7


he followed shamelessly after him through streets |


where the hideous death lurked in secret—at such
times the atrocious seemed to him rich in possibili-


ties, and laws of morality had dropped away.


Like any lover, he wanted to please; and he felt :
a bitter anguish lest it might not be possible. He ©
added bright youthful details to his dress, he put ©
on jewels, and used perfumes. During the day he |
often spent much time over his toilet, and came to —
the table strikingly dressed, excited, and in sus-
pense. In the light of the sweet youthfulness which ~


had done this to him, he detested his aging body.


The sight of his gray hair, his sharp features,
plunged him into shame and hopelessness. It in- —


duced him to attempt rejuvenating his body and
appearance. He often visited the hotel barber.
Beneath the barber's apron, leaning back in the
chair under the gossiper’s expert hands, he winced
to observe his reflection in the mirror.
112


A little,” thet: man answered. “Due entirely one
slight neglect, an indifference to outward things, — et
which is conceivable in people of importance, but cs
_ it is not exactly praiseworthy. And all the less so
since such persons are above prejudice in matters — .
of nature or art. If the moral objections of certain
_ people to the art of cosmetics were to be logically —
__ extended to the care of the teeth, they would give ae
no slight offense. And after all, we are just as old
as we feel, and under some circumstances gray hair —
would actually stand for more of an untruth than
the despised correction. In your case, sir, you are
entitled to the natural color of your hair. Will you
permit me simply to return what belongs to you?” =
“How is that?” Aschenbach asked. =?
Then the orator washed his client’s hair with two
__ kinds of water, one clear and one dark, and it was
as black as in youth. Following this, he curled it
with irons into soft waves, stepped back, and eyed
~ his work.
“All that is left now,” he said, “would be to
_ freshen up the skin a little.”
_ And like someone who cannot finish, cannot sat-
__ isfy himself, he passed with quickening energy from
one manipulation to another. Aschenbach rested
comfortably, incapable of resistance, or rather his
hopes were aroused by what was taking place. In
the glass he saw his brows arch more evenly and
113


: = ‘. "decisively His ¢ eyes Spode longer; their b:


oe


iy


rid


€


was heightened by a light touching up of the lid
A little lower, where the skin had been a leatherish ©


Be
rt palette wh 05 ds


Sn, he saw a delicate crimson tint grow beneath


a deft application of color. His lips, bloodless a little
while past, became full, and as red as raspberries.
_ The furrows in the cheeks and about the mouth,
_ the wrinkles of the eyes, disappeared beneath lo-
tions and cream. With a knocking heart he beheld


a blossoming youth. Finally the beauty specialist


AE TAL Burch Oe eae eee


1 eng Ont


_ declared himself content, after the manner of such
people, by obsequiously thanking the man he had
been serving. “A trifling assistance,” he said, as he
applied one parting touch. “Now the gentleman can
fall in love unhesitatingly.” He walked away, fas- —


myendsen eiws oe


Oh A aa rte A aM id AP (ei hehe ECO RRA ct BNI Rut


cinated; he was happy as in a dream, timid and |


bewildered. His necktie was red, his broad-
brimmed straw hat was trimmed with a variegated
band.

A tepid storm wind had risen. It was raining
sparsely and at intervals, but the air was damp,
thick, and filled with the smell of things rotting. All
around him he heard a fluttering, pattering, and
swishing; and under the fever of his cosmetics it
seemed to him as though evil wind-spirits were —
haunting the place, impure sea birds which rooted —
and gnawed at the food of the condemned and be-
fouled it with their droppings. For the sultriness de- _
stroyed his appetite, and the fancy suggested itself —

114


ae eee See aT ee are


Baie teed oes te Ce ee kl eS ak
: NY we a
i.


DEATH IN VENICE


that the foods were poisoned with contaminating
substances. Tracking the boy one afternoon,
Aschenbach had plunged deep into the tangled cen-
ter of the diseased city. He was becoming uncertain
of where he was, since the alleys, waterways,
bridges, and little squares of the labyrinth were all
so much alike, and he was no longer even sure of
directions. He was absorbed with the problem of
keeping the pursued figure in sight. And, driven to
disgraceful subterfuges, flattening himself against
walls, hiding behind the backs of other people, for
a long time he did not notice the weariness, the
exhaustion, with which emotion and the continual
suspense had taxed his mind and his body. Tadzio
walked behind his companions. He always allowed
the governess and the nunlike sisters to precede him
in the narrow places; and, loitering behind alone,
he would turn his head occasionally to look over
his shoulder and make sure bya glance of. his pecu-
liarly dark-gray eyes that his admirer was following.
He saw him, and did not betray him. Drunk with
the knowledge of this, lured forward by those eyes,
led meekly by his passion, the lover stole after his
unseemly hope—but finally he was cheated and lost
sight of him. The Poles had crossed a short arching
bridge; the height of the curve hid them from the
pursuer, and when he himself had arrived there he
no longer saw them. He hunted for them vainly in
three directions, straight ahead and to either side
115


E so tired and unnerved that he had to eRe we fis: ||
search.
 * His head was on fire, his body was covered with
a sticky sweat, his knees trembled. He could no
x longer endure the thirst that was torturing him, and
he looked around for some immediate relief. From
alittle vegetable store he bought some fruit—straw-
2 berries, soft and overly ripe—and he ate them as
he walked. A very charming, forsaken little square
opened up before him. He recognized it; here he
had made his frustrated plan for flight weeks ago.
He let himself sink down on the steps of the cistern
in the middle of the square, and laid his head
against the stone cylinder. It was quiet; grass was
growing up through the pavement; refuse was scat-
tered about. Among the weather-beaten, unusually
tall houses surrounding him there was one like a
palace, with little lion-covered balconies and Gothic
windows with blank emptiness behind them. On
the ground floor of another house was a drugstore.
~ Warm gusts of wind occasionally carried the smell.
of carbolic acid.
He sat there, he, the master, the artist of dignity,
the author of The Wretch, a work which had, in
—_ such accurate symbols, renounced vagabondage
and the depths of misery, had denied all sympathy
with the engulfed, and had cast out the outcast; the
man who had arrived and, victor over his own
116


ied


‘iced


peeientineniteteaae xen


La, ole A ede Ante


ge, grown Ait iro and ere 3
ed peels to _ the obligations of public cor


ged to pattern themselves—he sat there. His eye-
_ lids were shut; only now and then a mocking un-
_ easy side glance slipped out from beneath them.
_ And his loose lips, set off by the cosmetics, formed
_ isolated words of the strange dream logic created ae
_ by his half-slumbering brain. |
“For beauty, Phaedrus, mark me, beauty alone is
both divine and visible at once; and thus it is the
__ road of the sensuous; it is, little Phaedrus, the road
_ of the artist to the spiritual. But do you now be-
_ lieve, my dear, that they can ever attain wisdom
and true human dignity for whom the road to the
_ spiritual leads through the senses? Or do you be-
_ lieve rather (I leave the choice to you) that this
_ is a pleasant but perilous road, a really wrong and
_ sinful road, which necessarily leads astray? For you
- must know that we poets cannot take the road of
beauty without having Eros join us and set himself
_ up as our leader. Indeed, we may even be heroes
_ after our fashion, and hardened warriors, though
_ we be like women, for passion is our exaltation, and
our desire must remain love—that is our pleasure
and our disgrace. You now see, do you not, that
_ we poets cannot be wise and dignified? That we

necessarily go astray, necessarily remain lascivious,
117


style is all lies and foolishness, our renown and
honor are a farce, the confidence of the masses in —
us is highly ridiculous, and the training of the pub- ©
lic and of youth through art is a precarious under- _
taking which should be forbidden. For how, indeed,
could he be a fit instructor who is born with a natu-
ral leaning toward the precipice? We might well _
disavow it and reach after dignity, but wherever |
we turn it attracts us. Let us, say, renounce the
dissolvent of knowledge, since knowledge,
Phaedrus, has no dignity or strength. It is aware,
it understands and pardons, but without reserve
and form. It feels sympathy with the precipice, it
is the precipice. This, then, we abandon with firm-
ness, and from now on our efforts matter only by
their yield of beauty, or, in other words, simplicity,
greatness, and new rigor, form, and a second type
of openness. But form and openness, Phaedrus, lead —
to intoxication and to desire, lead the noble perhaps
into sinister revels of emotion which his own beauti-
ful rigor rejects as infamous, lead to the precipice
—yes, they too lead to the precipice. They lead us
poets there, I say, since we cannot force ourselves,
since we can merely let ourselves out. And now I
am going, Phaedrus. You stay here; and when you
no longer see me, then you go too.”

A few days later, as Gustav von Aschenbach was
not feeling well, he left the beach hotel at a later


118


z Fat ae and were Sue by a pee ae 2

E ounesd malaise, a feeling of bafflement and hope- oo
~ Iessness—while he was not certain whether this had-
~ to do with conditions outside him or with his own -
Bre, In the lobby he noticed a large pile of lug- — =
_ gage ready for shipment; he asked the doorkeeper
_ who it was that was leaving, and heard in answer
__ the Polish title which he had learned secretly. He —

accepted this without any alteration of his sunken __
_ features, with that curt elevation of the head by
_ which one acknowledges something he does not

_ need to know. Then he asked: “When?” The answer
__was: “After lunch.” He nodded, and went to the
beach. .

__ It was not very inviting. Rippling patches of rain
- retreated across the wide flat water separating the
a beach from the first long sandbank. An air of au-
_ tumn, of things past their prime, seemed to lie over
the pleasure spot which had once been so alive with
color and was now almost abandoned. The sand
was no longer kept clean. A camera, seemingly
- without an owner, stood on its tripod by the edge
of the sea; and a black cloth thrown over it was
- flapping noisily in the wind.

Tadzio, with the three or four companions still
left, was moving about to the right in front of his
family’s cabin. And midway between the sea and

119


have no rules, and it was degenerating. The stocky
boy with the sleek black hair who was called Jaschu
had been angered and blinded by sand flung in his
face. He forced Tadzio into a wrestling match
which quickly ended in the fall of the beauty, who
was weaker. But as though, in the hour of parting,
the servile feelings of the inferior had turned to


Go on >


= i row of bathing a ile Bae in ee chair —
with a robe over his knees, Aschenbach looked at —
_ him once more. The game, which was not being
_ supervised since the women were probably occu-
_ pied with preparations for the journey, seemed to


a ee]


merciless brutality and were trying to get ven- —


geance for a long period of slavery, the victor did


not let go of the boy underneath, but knelt on his ©
back and pressed his face so persistently into the —


sand that Tadzio, already breathless from the strug-
gle, was in danger of strangling. His attempts to
shake off the weight were fitful; for moments they
stopped entirely and were resumed again as mere
twitchings. Enraged, Aschenbach was about to
spring to the rescue, when the torturer finally re-
leased his victim, Tadzio, very pale, raised himself
halfway and sat motionless for several minutes, rest-
ing on one arm, with rumpled hair and glowering
eyes. Then he stood up completely, and moved
slowly away. They called him, cheerfully at first,
then anxiously and imploringly; he did not listen.
The swarthy boy, who seemed to regret his excesses
120


ee ee eee ee ee ee ea


EER ON Ce nay T RRR aes ee ne NER PRON MRO Wee TSS ee SSE Eee PRO een aN ae ae


DEATH IN VENICE


_ immediately afterward, caught up with him and
tried to placate him. A movement of the shoulder
put him at his distance. Tadzio went down oblique-


ly to the water. He was barefoot, and wore his
striped linen suit with the red bow.

He lingered on the edge of the water with his
head down, drawing figures in the wet sand with
one toe; then he went into the shallows, which did
not cover his knees in the deepest place, crossed
them leisurely, and arrived at the sandbank. He
stood there a moment, his face turned to the open
sea; soon after, he began stepping slowly to the left
along the narrow stretch of exposed ground. Sepa-
rated from the mainland by the expanse of water,
separated from his companions by a proud moodi-
ness, he moved along, a strongly isolated and unre-
lated figure with fluttering hair—placed out there
in the sea, the wind, against the vague mists. He
stopped once more to look around. And suddenly,


__as though at some recollection, some impulse, with


one hand on his hip he turned the upper part of
his body in a beautiful twist which began from the
base—and he looked over his shoulder toward the
shore. The watcher sat there, as he had sat once
before when for the first time these twilight-gray
eyes had turned at the doorway and met his own.
His head, against the back of the chair, had slowly
followed the movements of the boy walking yonder.
Now, simultaneously with this glance, it rose and
121


_ seemed to him as Soh the pale and levels ase
ai out there were smiling to him, nodding to him;
= though, removing his hand from his hip, he were
__ signaling to come out, were vaguely guiding toward —
i egregious promises. And, as often before, he stood |
_ upto follow him. 3 4
a ee Some minutes passed before anyone hurried to
=e “the aid of the man who had collapsed into one cor- _
= : ner of his chair. He was brought to his room. And
= on the same day a respectfully shocked world re-
ceived the news of his death.


122


ABOUT THE AUTHOR


_ THomMas MANN was born into a prominent Liibeck mer-
- chant family in 1875. Buddenbrooks was published in 1901
' when he was only twenty-five, DEATH IN VENICE in
- 1913, The Magic Mountain in 1924. In 1929, Mann was
_ awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature.
a An artist’s chance request for an introduction to a
' portfolio of drawings of the Biblical Joseph was the
_ genesis of Mann’s tetralogy Joseph and His Brothers, pub-
lished serially from 1933 to 1943. In 1933, too, Mann left
' Munich, where he had been making his home, to live in
_ Switzerland for a time.

After several visits to the United States, Mann settled in
Princeton, New Jersey, where he lectured at the university.
His Goethe novel, The Beloved Returns, appeared in 1939.
- Mann moved to Pacific Palisades, California, in 1941.
' There he wrote both Doctor Faustus and The Holy Sinner.
' In 1944, he became a citizen of the United States. In 1952,
he returned to Europe, settling in Kilchberg, Switzerland.
_ .There he completed Confessions of Felix Krull, the con-
Ey tinuation of a fragmentary story that he had begun in 1911
_ and first published in 1922. He died in 1955, not long after
" amemorable celebration of his eightieth birthday.


A Pe ee ee Cee eee


ae


Secs
~


QO


ie,
‘ol


f DEMIAN Q5544

( NARCISSUS AND GOLDMUND T5868

(1 STEPPENWOLF Q4789
BENEATH THE WHEEL Q5859
MAGISTER LUDI TS555


(] THE LOVE-GIRL AND THE INNOCENT NM6600
FIRST CIRCLE Q4604 $
ONE DAY IN THE LIFE OF IVAN :
DENISOVICH N4639
[ CANCER WARD Q4753 $
a \
By Jean Paul Sartre
1 AGE OF REASON QY5301 $
O REPRIEVE QY5791
{1 TROUBLED SLEEP QY5665 $
By Aldous Huxley
tO APE AND ESSENCE NY5468
[O CROME YELLOW NY4157
(] EYELESS IN GAZA QY5940 $
By D. H. Lawrence
(1 WOMEN IN LOVE Q4580 §$
TD LADY CHATTERLEY’S LOVER NY4089
O THE VIRGIN AND THE GYPSY $3840
O THE FOX $5275 -4|
By Nikos Kazantzakis
(1 THE LAST TEMPTATION OF CHRIST RY5716
[© REPORT TO GRECO DM5662
By Thomas Mann ‘|
(0 TONIO KROGER AND OTHER STORIES QY5441
O DEATH IN VENICE N6998


By Herman Hesse


By Alexander Solzhenitsyn


Ask for them at your local bookseller or use this handy coupon:


BANTAM BOOKS, Inc., Dept. CL2, Room 2450, 666 Fifth Ave.,
New York, N. Y. 10019


Please send me the Bantam Books which | have checked. | a
enclosing $________ (check or money order—no currence
please). Sorry, no C.O.D.’s. Note: Please include 10¢ per book fo
postage and handling on orders of less than 5 books. Please allo J


four weeks for delivery.
Name
Address


City.


BJORN ANDRESEN AS TADZIO. PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID BAILEY


4

a hi 3,9 |
In the early 1900’s, Gustav von Aschenbach, a distinguished \ if
writer, is profoundly weary of his solitary life dedicated to J
an impulse, he travels south to Venice. There, amid the g 7)
threat of the plague, von Aschenbach’s parched spirit is


m

1 ———

pectedly and disturbingly refreshed by the sight of a hanc iS =
Polish boy of fourteen. *« > > > kK Ok OK Ok ok kk Ok Ok * ©


Thomas Mann, the great German writer and Nobel Prize-wi =
wove into his brilliant novel Death in Venice—published in 19 ~~
the complex themes that would occupy him for a lifetime:

youth, art, decay, suffering, death. * > > > 2k 2k ok ok OK ok ok ok


liu,
