In a German Pension (Katherine Mansfield, 1911)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1926 Constable edition (https://archive.org/details/ingermanpension0000kath)
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

SS S SX 

\ 

WN SX 
AKG SS S& 
AEX 
SS 

Sanda pep a str 
teeta als 
as 

Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2025 

https://archive.org/details/ingermanpensionOOOOkath 

THE WORKS OF 
KATHERINE MANSFIELD 

BLISS 
THE DOVE’S NEST 
THE GARDEN PARTY 
TIE Lid TL Reet Rey 
POEMS 
JOURNAL OF KATHERINE MANSFIELD 
LETTERS OF KATHERINE MANSFIELD 
STORIES BY KATHERINE MANSFIELD 

NOVELS AND NOVELISTS 

These are Borzoi Books Published by 

ALFRED A. KNOPF 

IN A GERMAN 
PENSION 

IN A GERMAN 
PENSION 

BY KATHERINE 
MANSFIELD 

NEW YORK 
ALFRED: A: KNOPF 
MCMXXXV 

Copyright 1926 by Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be 
reproduced in any form without permission in 
writing from the publisher, except by a reviewer 
who may quote brief passages in a review to be 
printed in a magazine or newspaper 

Published January 23, 1926 
Second Printing, January 1935 

Manufactured in the United States 
of America 

CONTENTS 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE 
GERMANS AT MEAT 

THE BARON 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
FRAU FISCHER 

FRAU BRECHENMACHER ATTENDS A 
WEDDING 

THE MODERN SOUL 

AT LEHMANN’S 

THE LUFT BAD 

A BIRTHDAY 

THE CHILD-WHO-WAS-TIRED 
THE ADVANCED LADY 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
A BLAZE 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

6¢ W N a German Pension” was Katherine 

| Mansfield’s first book. It was pub- 

lished in 1911, when she was twenty- 

one. The sketches and _ stories which 

compose it first appeared in The New Age 
during the two previous years. 

“In a German Pension” met with a 
considerable success on its appearance. It 
ran quickly into three editions. ‘Then the 
publisher defaulted and was made bank- 
rupt. The stereotyped plates disappeared 
into the void, and with them all hope of 
royalties. 

Katherine Mansfield was not very dis- 
appointed. She quickly became indifferent 
to the book; then hostile. It represented 
for her a phase of youthful bitterness and 
crude cynicism which she desired to disown 
for ever. How alien to herself she con- 
sidered it may be judged from the fact that 
at the outbreak of the war with Germany, 

7 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

when one or two publishers made her at- 
tractive offers for the right of republishing 
it, she steadily refused, although she badly 
needed money. At that moment, in the 
general detestation of things German, there 
is no doubt that the book would have 
achieved a very great popular success; at 
that moment, and indeed at most other times 
in her life, £500 would have been untold 
wealth to Katherine Mansfield. But noth- 
ing would induce her to make £500 by re- 
publishing “In a German Pension,” partly 
because she thought the book itself un- 
worthy, but even more, as I remember, 
because she thought it unworthy of herself 
to take advantage of the odium into which 
Germany had fallen. 

There followed a long period during 
which Katherine Mansfield wrote much 
and published nothing. Not until the pub- 
lication of Prelude in 1918 was the silence 
broken. When Bliss appeared in 1920 and 
achieved immediate success, she was once 
more urged to allow In a German Pension 
to be re-issued. I passed the request on to 
her. This was her reply: 

8 

INTRODUCTORY NOTE 

. .. I cannot have The German Pen- 
ston reprinted under any circumstances. It 
is far too immature, and I don’t even ac- 
knowledge it to-day. I mean I don’t ‘hold’ 
by it. I can’t go foisting that kind of stuff 
on the public. J¢’s not good enough. But 
if you’ll send me the note that refers to it, 
I will reply and offer a new book by May 
ist. But I could not for a moment enter- 
tain republishing the Pension. It’s posi- 
tively juvenile, and besides that, it’s not 
what I mean; it’s a lie. Oh no, never!” 

To which I replied that an author, hav- 
ing once deliberately printed a book, could 
not disown it in that way; and that the rea- 
son why she felt so acutely about her first 
book was that she had waited too long be- 
fore publishing her second. In fact it was 
not merely a good work, but a truly re- 
markable one to have written at nineteen. 
Moreover, by refusing to republish it, she 
could not annihilate it. “In a German 
Pension” was, irrevocably, in existence. 
She replied: 

“Very well, Isabel, about the Pension. 
But I must write an introduction saying it is 

9 

“ 

IntTRopucToRY NOoTE 

early, early work, or just that it was written 
between certain years, because you know, 
Betsy, it’s nothing to be proud of. If you 
didn’t advise me I should drop it over- 
board. But of course I’ll do the other 
thing, and certainly it airsone’sname. But 
why isn’t it better? It makes me simply 
hang my head. I'll have to forge ahead 
and get another decent one written, that’s 
all eae 

But Katherine Mansfield never did write 
the introduction, and to this day, fourteen 
years since it was first published, Jn a Ger- 
man Pension has remained out of print. 

J.M.M. 

Io 

IN A GERMAN 
PENSION 

GERMANS AT MEAT 

READ soup was placed upon the 

table, “Ah,” said the Herr Rat, 

leaning upon the table as he peered 
into the tureen, “that is what I need. My 
‘magen’ has not been in order for several 
days. Bread soup, and just the right con- 
sistency. JI am a good cook myself”—he 
turned to me. 

“Flow interesting,” J said, attempting to 
infuse just the right amount of enthusiasm 
into my voice. 

“Oh yes—when one is not married it is 
necessary. As for me, I have had all I 
wanted from women without marriage.” 
He tucked his napkin into his collar and 
blew upon his soup as he spoke. ‘Now at 
nine o’clock I make myself an English 
breakfast, but not much. Four slices of 
bread, two eggs, two slices of cold ham, 
one plate of soup, two cups of tea—that is 
nothing to you.” 

13 

GERMANS AT MEAT 

He asserted the fact so vehemently that 
I had not the courage to refute it. 

All eyes were suddenly turned upon me. 
I felt I was bearing the burden of the na- 
tion’s preposterous breakfast—I who drank 
a cup of coffee while buttoning my blouse 
in the morning. 

“Nothing at all,” cried Herr Hoffmann 
from Berlin. ‘Ach, when I was in Eng- 
land in the morning I used to eat.” 

He turned up his eyes and his mous- 
tache, wiping the soup drippings from his 
coat and waistcoat. 

“Do they really eat so much?” asked 
Fraulein Stiegelauer. “Soup and baker’s 
bread and pig’s flesh, and tea and coffee 
and stewed fruit, and honey and eggs, and 
cold fish and kidneys, and hot fish and liver. 
All the ladies eat, too, especially the 
ladies?” 

“Certainly. I myself have noticed it, 
when I was living in a hotel in Leicester 
Square,” cried the Herr Rat. “It was a 
good hotel, but they could not make tea— 
now ) 

“Ah, that’s one thing I can do,” said I, 

14 

GERMANS AT MEAT 
laughing brightly. “TI can make very good 
tea. The great secret is to warm the tea- 
pot.” 

‘‘Warm the teapot,” interrupted the Herr 
Rat, pushing away his soup plate. ‘What 
do you warm the teapot for? Ha! ha! 
that’s very good! One does not eat the tea- 
pot, I suppose?” 

He fixed his cold blue eyes upon me with 
an expression which suggested a thousand 
premeditated invasions. 

“So that is the great secret of your Eng- 
lish tea? All you do is to warm the teapot.” 

I wanted to say that was only the pre- 
liminary canter, but could not translate it, 
and so was silent. 

The servant brought in veal, with sauer- 
kraut and potatoes. 

“T eat sauerkraut with great pleasure,” 
said the Traveller from North Germany, 
“but now I have eaten so much of it that I 
cannot retain it. I am immediately forced 
to Mi 

“A beautiful day,” I cried, turning to 
Fraulein Stiegelauer. “Did you get up 
early?” 

15 

GERMANS AT MEAT 

“At five o’clock I walked for ten minutes 
in the wet grass. Again in bed. At half- 
past five I fell asleep, and woke at seven, 
when I made an ‘overbody’ washing! 
Again in bed. At eight o’clock J had a 
cold-water poultice, and at half-past eight 
I drank “a cup of mint*tea: At (nine 
I drank some malt coffee, and began my 
‘cure.’ Pass me the sauerkraut, please. 
You do not eat it?” 

“No, thank you. I still find it a little 
strong.” 

“Ts it true,” asked the Widow, picking 
her teeth with a hairpin as she spoke, “that 
you are a vegetarian?” 

“Why, yes; I have not eaten meat for 
three years.” 

“Im—possible! Have you any family?” 

Nos 

“There now, you see, that’s what you’re 
coming to! Who ever heard of having 
children upon vegetables? It is not pos- 
sible. But you never have large families 
in England now; I suppose you are too busy 
with your suffragetting. Now I have had 
nine children, and they are all alive, thank 

16 

GERMANS AT MEAT 
God. Fine, healthy babies—though after 
the first one was born I had to a 

“How wonderful!” I cried. 

“Wonderful,” said the Widow contemp- 
tuously, replacing the hairpin in the knob 
which was balanced on the top of her head. 
“Not at all! A friend of mine had four at 
the same time. Her husband was so 
pleased he gave a supper-party and had 
them placed on the table. Of course she 
was very proud.” / 

“Germany,” boomed the Traveller, bit- 
ing round a potato which he had speared 
with his knife, “is the home of the Family.” 

Followed an appreciative silence. 

The dishes were changed for beef, red 
currants and spinach. They wiped their 
forks upon black bread and started again. 

“How long are you remaining herer”’ 
asked the Herr Rat. 

“T do not know exactly. I must be back 
in London in September.” 

“Of course you will visit Munchen?” 

“T am afraid I shall not have time. You 

see, it is important not to break into my 
yeh) 

‘cure. 
17 

GERMANS AT MEAT 

“But you must go to Minchen. You 
have not seen Germany if you have not been 
to Miinchen. All the Exhibitions, all the 
Art and Soul life of Germany are in Min- 
chen. There is the Wagner Festival in 
August, and Mozart and a Japanese collec- 
tion of pictures—and there is the beer! 
You do not know what good beer is until 
you have been to Mtinchen. Why, I see 
fine ladies every afternoon, but fine ladies, 
I tell you, drinking glasses so high.” He 
measured a good washstand pitcher in 
height, and I smiled. 

“Tf I drink a great deal of Mtinchen beer 
I sweat so,” said Herr Hoffmann. ‘When 
I am here, in the fields or before my baths, 
I sweat, but I enjoy it; but in the town it is 
not at all the same thing.” 

Prompted by the thought, he wiped his 
neck and face with his dinner napkin and 
carefully cleaned his ears. 

A glass dish of stewed apricots was placed 
upon the table. 

“Ah, fruit!” said Fraulein Stiegelauer, 
“that is so necessary to health. The doctor 

18 

GERMANS AT MEAT 
told me this morning that the more fruit I 
could eat the better.” 

She very obviously followed the advice. 

Said the Traveller: “I suppose you are 
frightened of an invasion, too, eh? Oh, 
that’s good. I’ve been reading all about 
your English play in a newspaper. Did 
you see itr” 

“Yes.” Isat upright. “I assure you we 
are not afraid.” 

“Well, then, you ought to be,” said the 
Herr Rat. “You have got no army at all— 
a few little boys with their veins full of 
nicotine poisoning.” 

“Don’t be afraid,” Herr Hoffmann said. 
“We don’t want England. If we did we 
would have had her long ago. We really 
do not want you.” 

He waved his spoon airily, looking across 
at me as though I were a little child whom 
he would keep or dismiss as he pleased. 

“We certainly do not want Germany,” I 
said. 

“This morning I took a half bath. Then 
this afternoon I must take a knee bath and 

19 

GERMANS AT MEAT 
an arm bath,” volunteered the Herr Rat; 
“then I do my exercises for an hour, and 
my work is over. A glass of wine and a 
couple of rolls with some sardines a 

They were handed cherry cake with 
whipped cream. 

‘What is your husband’s favourite meat?” 
asked the Widow. 

“T really do not know,” I answered. 

“You really do not knowe How long 
have you been married?” 

‘Three. years.” 

“Butcyou™ cannots bewin= cares amy on 
would not have kept house as his wife for 
a week without knowing that fact.” 

“T really never asked him; he is not at all 
particular about his food.” 

A pause. They all looked at me, shaking 
their heads, their mouths full of cherry 
stones. 

““No wonder there is a repetition in Eng- 
land of that dreadful state of things in 
Paris,” said the Widow, folding her dinner 
napkin. “How can a woman expect to 
keep her husband if she does not know 

20 

GERMANS AT MEAT 
his favourite food after three years?” 
“Mahlzeit!” 
“Mahlzeit!” 
I closed the door after me. 

21 

THE BARON 

ee HO is he?” I said. “And why 
does he sit always alone, with 
his back to us, too?” 

“Ah!” whispered the Frau Oberregier- 
ungsrat, “‘he is a Baron.” 

She looked at me very solemnly, and 
yet with the slightest possible contempt 
—a fancy-not-recognising-that-at-the-first- 
glance expression. 

“But, poor soul, he cannot help it,” I said. 
“Surely that unfortunate fact ought not to 
debar him from the pleasures of intellectual 
intercourse.” 

If it had not been for her fork I think 
she would have crossed herself. 

“Surely you cannot understand. He is 
one of the First Barons.” 

More than a little unnerved, she turned 
and spoke to the Frau Doktor on her 
left. 

22 

THE Baron 

“My omelette is empty—empfty,” she 
protested, “and this is the third I have 
tried!” 

I looked at the First of the Barons. He 
Was eating salad—taking a whole lettuce 
leaf on his fork and absorbing it slowly, 
rabbit-wise—a fascinating process to watch. 

Small and slight, with scanty black hair 
and beard and yellow-toned complexion, he 
invariably wore black serge clothes, a rough 
linen shirt, black sandals, and the largest 
black-rimmed spectacles that I had ever 
seen. 

The Herr Oberlehrer, who sat opposite 
me, smiled benignantly. 

“It must be very interesting for you, 
gnadige Frau, to be able to watch... . Of 
course this is a very fine house. ‘There was 
a lady from the Spanish Court here in the 
summer; she had a liver. We often spoke 
together.” 

I looked gratified and humble. 

“Now, in England, in your boarding 
’ouse, one does not find the First Class, as in 
Germany. 

“No, indeed,” I replied, still hypnotised 

23 

THE Baron 
by the Baron, who looked like a little yellow 
silk-worm. 

“The Baron comes every year,” went on 
the Herr Oberlehrer, “for his nerves. He 
has never spoken to any of the guests—yet.” 
A smile crossed his face. I seemed to see 
his visions of some splendid upheaval of 
that silence—a dazzling exchange of cour- 
tesies in a dim future, a splendid sacrifice 
of a newspaper to this Exalted One, a 
“danke schén” to be handed down to future 
generations. 

At that moment the postman, looking like 
a German army officer, came in with the 
mail. He threw my letters into my milk 
pudding, and then turned to a waitress and 
whispered. Sheretired hastily. ‘The man- 
ager of the pension came in with a little 
tray. A picture post card was deposited on 
it, and reverently bowing his head, the man- 
ager of the pension carried it to the Baron. 

Myself, I felt disappointed that there was 
not a salute of twenty-five guns. 

At the end of the meal we were served 
with coffee. I noticed the Baron took three 
lumps of sugar, putting two in his cup and 

24 

THE BARON 
wrapping up the third in a corner of his 
pocket-handkerchief. He was always the 
first to enter the dining-room and the last 
to leave; and in a vacant chair beside him 
he placed a little black leather bag. 

In the afternoon, leaning from my win- 
dow, I saw him pass down the street, walk- 
ing tremulously and carrying the bag. 
Each time he passed a lamp-post he shrank 
a little, as though expecting it to strike him, 
or maybe the sense of plebeian contamina- 
tiODmean er: 

I wondered where he was going, and why 
he carried the bag. Never had I seen him 
at the Casino or the Bath Establishment. 
He looked forlorn, his feet slipped in his 
sandals. J found myself pitying the Baron. 

That evening a party of us were gathered 
in the salon discussing the day’s ‘cure’ with 
feverish animation. The Frau Oberre- 
gierungsrat sat by me knitting a shawl for 
her youngest of nine daughters, who was in 
that very interesting, frail condition. ... 
“But it is bound to be quite satisfactory,” 
she said to me. “The dear married a 
banker—the desire of her life.” 

25 

THE BARON 

There must have been eight or ten of us 
gathered together, we who were married 
exchanging confidences as to the under- 
clothing and peculiar characteristics of our 
husbands, the unmarried discussing the 
over-clothing and peculiar fascinations of 
Possible Ones. 

“T knit them myself,” I heard the Frau 
Lehrer cry, “of thick grey wool. He wears 
one a month, with two soft collars.” 

“And then,” whispered Fraulein Lisa, 
“he said to me, ‘Indeed you please me. I 
shall, perhaps, write to your mother.’ ” 

Small wonder that we were a little vio- 
lently excited, a little expostulatory. 

Suddenly the door opened and admitted 
the Baron. 

Followed a complete and deathlike si- 
lence. 

He came in slowly, hesitated, took up a 
toothpick from a dish on the top of the 
piano, and went out again. 

When the door was closed we raised a 
triumphant cry! It was the first time he 
had ever been known to enter the salon. 
Who could tell what the Future held? 

26 

THE Baron 

Days lengthened into weeks. Still we 
were together, and still the solitary little 
figure, head bowed as though under the 
weight of the spectacles, haunted me. He 
entered with the black bag, he retired with 
the black bag—and that was all. 

At last the manager of the pension told us 
the Baron was leaving the next day. 

“Oh,” I thought, “surely he cannot drift 
into obscurity—be lost without one word! 
Surely he will honour the Frau Oberre- 
gierungsrat or the Frau Feldleutnants- 
witwe once before he goes.” 

In the evening of that day it rained 
heavily. I went to the post office, and as I 
stood on the steps, umbrellaless, hesitating 
before plunging into the slushy road, a little, 
hesitating voice seemed to come from under 
my elbow. 

I looked down. It was the First of the 
Barons with the black bag and an umbrella. 
WasI mad? WasIsane? He was asking 
me to share the latter. But I was exceed- 
ingly nice, a trifle diffident, appropriately 
reverential. Together we walked through 
the mud and slush. 

27 

THE BARON 

Now, there is something peculiarly in- 
timate in sharing an umrella. 

It is apt to put one on the same footing 
as brushing a man’s coat for him—a little 
daring, naive. 

I longed to know why he sat alone, why 
he carried the bag, what he did all day. 
But he himself volunteered some informa- 
tion. 

“T fear,” he said, “that my luggage will 
be damp. I invariably carry it with me in 
this bag—one requires so little—for serv- 
ants are untrustworthy.” 

“A wise idea,” I answered. And then: 
“Why have you denied us the pleasure P 

“T sit alone that I may eat more,” said 
the Baron, peering into the dusk; “my 
stomach requires a great deal of food. I 
order double portions, and eat them in 
peace.” 

Which sounded finely Baronial. 

‘‘And what do you do all dayr” 

“T imbibe nourishment in my room,” he 
replied, in a voice that closed the conversa- 
tion and almost repented of the umbrella. 

28 

THE Baron 

When we arrived at the pension there 
was very nearly an open riot. 

I ran half way up the stairs, and thanked 
the Baron audibly from the landing. 

He distinctly replied: ‘Not at all!” 

It was very friendly of the Herr Ober- 
lehrer to have sent me a bouquet that eve- 
ning, and the Frau Oberregierungsrat asked 
me for my pattern of a baby’s bonnet. 

Next day the Baron was gone. 
Sic transit gloria German mundi. 

29 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 

oe HERE are two new guests arriv- 
ing this afternoon,” said the man- 
ager of the pension, placing a 
chair for me at the breakfast table. “I have 
only received the letter acquainting me with 
the fact this morning. ‘The Baroness von 
Gall is sending her little daughter—the 
poor child is dumb—to make the ‘cure.’ 
She is to stay with us a month, and then the 
‘Baroness herself is coming.” 
“Baroness von Gall,” cried the Frau 
Doktor, coming into the room and positively 
scenting thename. ‘“Cominghere? ‘There 
was a picture of her only last week in 
Sport und Salon. She is a friend of the 
court: I have heard that the Kaiserin says 
‘du’ to her. But this is delightful! I shall 
take my doctor’s advice and spend an extra 
six weeks here. There is nothing like 
young society.” 
30 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 

“But the child is dumb,” ventured the 
manager apologetically. 

“Bah! What does that matter? Af- 
flicted children have such pretty ways.” 

Each guest who came into the breakfast- 
room was bombarded with the wonderful 
news. ‘The Baroness von Gall is sending 
her little daughter here; the Baroness her- 
self is coming in a month’s time.” Coffee 
and rolls took on the nature of an orgy. 
We positively scintillated. Anecdotes of 
the High Born were poured out, sweetened 
and sipped: we gorged on scandals of High 
Birth gefterously buttered. 

“They are to have the room next to 
yours,” said the manager, addressing me. 
“T was wondering if you would permit me 
to take down the portrait of the Kaiserin 
Elizabeth from above your bed to hang 
over their sofa.” 

“Yes, indeed, something homelike”—the 
Frau Oberregierungsrat patted my hand— 
“and of no possible significance to you.” 

I felt a little crushed. Not at the pros- 
pect of losing that vision of diamonds and 
blue velvet bust, but at the tone—placing 

31 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
me outside the pale—branding me as a 
foreigner. 

We dissipated the day in valid specula- 
tions. Decided it was too warm to walk in 
the afternoon, so we lay down on our beds, 
mustering in great force for afternoon 
coffee. And a carriage drew up at the 
door. A tall, young girl got out, leading a 
child by the hand. They entered the hall, 
were greeted and shown to their room. 
Ten minutes later she came down with the 
child to sign the visitors’ book. She wore 
a black, closely fitting dress, touched at 
throat and wrists with white frilling. Her 
brown hair, braided, was tied with a black 
bow—unusually pale, with a small mole on 
her left cheek. 

“J am the Baroness von Gall’s sister,” 
she said, trying the pen on a piece of 
blotting-paper, and smiling at us deprecat- 
ingly. Even for the most jaded of us life 
holds its thrilling moments. ‘Two Baron- 
esses in two months! The manager im- 
mediately left the room to find a new nib. 

To my plebeian eyes that afflicted child 
was singularly unattractive. She had the 

32 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
air of having been perpetually washed with 
a blue bag, and hair like grey wool— 
dressed, too, in a pinafore so stiffly starched 
that she could only peer at us over the frill 
of it—a social barrier of a pinafore—and 
perhaps it was too much to expect a noble 
aunt to attend to the menial consideration of 
her niece’s ears. But a dumb niece with 
unwashed ears struck me as a most depress- 
ing object. 

They were given places at the head of 
the table. For a moment we all looked at 
one another with an eena-deena-dina-do ex- 
pression. Then the Frau Oberregierungs- 
rat: 

“TJ hope you are not tired after your 
journey.” 

“No,” said the sister of the Baroness, 
smiling into her cup. 

“T hope the dear child is not tired,” said 
the Frau Doktor. 

SNotatall.” 

“T expect, I hope you will sleep aril to- 
night,” the Herr Oberlehrer said reverently. 

BeYCeh i 

The poet from Munich never took his 

Ss 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
eyes off the pair. He allowed his tie to 
absorb most of his coffee while he gazed at 
them exceedingly soulfully. 

Unyoking Pegasus, thought I. Death 
spasms of his Odes to Solitude! There 
were possibilities in that young woman for 
an inspiration, not to mention a dedication, 
and from that moment his suffering tem- 
perament took up its bed and walked. 

They retired after the meal, leaving us 
to discuss them at leisure. 

“There is a likeness,’ mused the Frau 
Doktor. “Quite. What a manner she has. 
Such reserve, such a tender way with the 
child.” 

“Pity she has the child to attend to,” 
exclaimed the student from Bonn. He had 
hitherto relied upon three scars and a ribbon 
to produce an effect, but the sister of a 
‘Baroness demanded more than these. 

Absorbing days followed. Had she been 
one whit less beautifully born we could not 
have endured the continual conversation 
about her, the songs in her praise, the de- 
tailed account of her movements. But she 

34 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
graciously suffered our worship and we 
were more than content. 

The poet she took into her confidence. 
He carried her books when we went walk- 
ing, he jumped the afflicted one on his knee 
—poetic licence, this—and one morning 
brought his notebook into the salon and read 
to us. 

“The sister of the Baroness has assured 
me she is going into a convent,” he said. 
(That made the student from Bonn sit up.) 
“T have written these few lines last night 
from my window in the sweet night air——” 

“Oh, your delicate chest,” commented 
the Frau Doktor. 

He fixed a stony eye on her, and she 
blushed. 

“T have written these lines: 

‘Ah, will you to a convent fly, 

So young, so fresh, so fair, 
Spring like a doe upon the fields 
And find your beauty there.’ ” 

Nine verses equally lovely commanded 
her to equally violent action. I am certain 
35 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
that had she followed his advice not even 
the remainder of her life in a convent would 
have given her time to recover her breath. 

“T have presented her with a copy,” he 
said. “And to-day we are going to look 
for wild flowers in the wood.” 

The student from Bonn got up and left 
the room. I begged the poet to repeat the 
verses once more. At the end of the sixth 
verse I saw from the window the sister of 
the Baroness and the scarred youth dis- 
appearing through the front gate, which 
enabled me to thank the poet so charmingly 
that he offered to write me out a copy. 

But we were living at too high pressure 
in those days. Swinging from our humble 
pension to the high walls of palaces, how 
could we help but fall? Late one afternoon 
the Frau Doktor came upon me in the 
writing-room and took me to her bosom. 

“She has been telling me all about her 
life,’ whispered the Frau Doktor. “She 
came to my bedroom and offered to massage 
my arm. You know, I am the greatest 
martyr to rheumatism. And, fancy now, 
she has already had six proposals of mar- 

36 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
riage. Such beautiful offers that I assure 
you I wept—and every one of noble birth. 
My dear, the most beautiful was in the 
wood. Not that I do not think a proposal 
should take place in a drawing-room—it 
is more fitting to have four walls—but this 
was a private wood. He said, the young 
officer, she was like a young tree whose 
branches had never been touched by the 
ruthless hand of man. Such delicacy!” 
She sighed and turned up her eyes. 

“Of course it is difficult for you English 
to understand when you are always exposing 
your legs on cricket-fields, and breeding 
dogs in your back gardens. The pity of it! 
Youth should be like a wild rose. For 
myself I do not understand how your women 
ever get married at all.” 

She shook her head so violently that I 
shook mine too, and a gloom settled round 
my heart. It seemed we were really in a 
very bad way. Did the spirit of romance 
spread her rose wings only over aristocratic 
Germany? 

I went to my room, bound a pink scarf 
about my hair, and took a volume of 

37 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 
Morike’s lyrics into the garden. A great 
bush of purple lilac grew behind the 
summer-house. There I sat down, finding 
a sad significance in the delicate suggestion 
of half mourning. I began to write a poem 
myself. 

“They sway and languish dreamily, 
And we, close pressed, are kissing there.” 

Itended! ‘Close pressed” did not sound 
at all fascinating. Savoured of wardrobes. 
Did my wild rose then already trail in the 
dust? JI chewed a leaf and hugged my 
knees. —Then—magic moment—I heard 
voices from the summer-house, the sister of 
the Baroness and the student from Bonn. 

Second-hand was better than nothing; I 
pricked up my ears. 

“What small hands you have,” said the 
student from Bonn. ‘They are like white 
lilies lying in the pool of your black dress.” 
This certainly sounded the real thing. Her 
high-born reply was what interested me. 
Sympathetic murmur only. 

“May I hold oner” 

38 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 

I heard two sighs—presumed he held— 
he had rifled those dark waters of a noble 
blossom. 

“Look at my great fingers beside yours.” 

“But they are beautifully kept,” said the 
sister of the Baroness shyly. 

The minx! Was love then a question of 
manicure? 

“How I should adore to kiss you,” mur- 
mured the student. ‘But you know I am 
suffering from severe nasal catarrh, and I 
dare not risk giving it to you. Sixteen 
times last night did I count myself sneez- 
ing. And three different handkerchiefs.” 

I threw Morike into the lilac bush, and 
went back to the house. A great automobile 
snorted at the front door. In the salon 
great commotion. The Baroness was pay- 
ing a surprise visit to her little daughter. 
Clad in a yellow macintosh she stood in 
the middle of the room questioning the 
manager. And every guest the pension con- 
tained was grouped about her, even the 
Frau Doktor, presumably examining a 
time-table, as near to the august skirts as 
possible. 

39 

THE SISTER OF THE BARONESS 

“But where is my maid?’” asked the 
Baroness. 

“There was no maid,” replied the mana- 
ger, “save for your gracious sister and 
daughter.” 

“Sister!” “she. cried “sharply. “Pooler: 
have no sister. My child travelled with 
the daughter of my dressmaker.” 

Tableau grandissimo! 

40 

FRAU FISCHER 

RAU FISCHER was the fortunate 
K possessor of a candle factory some- 

where on the banks of the Eger, 
and once a year she ceased from her labours 
to make a ‘cure’ in Dorschausen, arriving 
with a dress-basket neatly covered in a black 
tarpaulin and a hand-bag. ‘The latter con- 
tained amongst her handkerchiefs, eau de 
Cologne, toothpicks, and a certain woollen 
muffler very comforting to the ‘magen,’ 
samples of her skill in candle-making, to be 
offered up as tokens of thanksgiving when 
her holiday time was over. 

Four of the clock one July afternoon she 
appeared at the Pension Muller. I was 
sitting in the arbour and watched her bus- 
tling up the path followed by the red- 
bearded porter with her dress-basket in his 
arms and a sunflower between his teeth. 
The widow and her five innocent daughters 

41 

Frau FISCHER 
stood tastefully grouped upon the steps in 
appropriate attitudes of welcome; and the 
greetings were so long and loud that I felt 
a sympathetic glow. 

“What a journey!” cried the Frau 
Fischer. ‘And nothing to eat in the train— 
nothing solid. I assure you the sides of my 
stomach are flapping together. But J must 
not spoil my appetite for dinner—just a 
cup of coffee in my room. Bertha,” turn- 
ing to the youngest of the five, “how 
changed! Whata bust! Frau Hartmann, 
I congratulate you.” 

Once again the Widow seized Frau 
Fischer’s hands. 

“Kathi, too, a splendid woman; but 
a little pale. Perhaps the young man 
from Nurnberg is here again this year. 
How you keep them all I don’t know. 
Each year I come expecting to find you 
with an empty nest. It’s surprising.” 

Frau Hartmann, in an ashamed, apolo- 
getic voice: “We are such a happy family 
since my dear man died.” 

“But these marriages—one must have 
courage; and after all, give them time, they 

42 

Frau FIscHER 
all make the happy family bigger—thank 
God for that. . . . Are there many people 
here just now?” 

“Every room engaged.” 

Followed a detailed description in the 
hall, murmured on the stairs, continued in 
Six parts as they entered the large room 
(windows opening upon the garden) which 
Frau Fischer occupied each successive year. 
I was reading the “Miracles of Lourdes,” 
which a Catholic priest—fixing a gloomy 
eye upon my soul—had begged me to digest; 
but its wonders were completely routed by 
Frau Fischer’s arrival. Not even the white 
roses upon the feet of the Virgin could 
flourish in that atmosphere. 

“,. It was a simple shepherd-child 
who pastured her flocks upon the barren 
Telas wr. < 

Voices from the room above: “The 
washstand has, of course, been scrubbed 
over with soda.” 

“, . Poverty-stricken, her limbs with 
tattered rags half covered . . .” 

“Every stick of the furniture has been 
sunning in the garden for three days. And 

43 

Frau FISCHER 
the carpet we made ourselves out of old 
clothes. There is a piece of that beautiful 
flannel petticoat you left us last summer.” 

“. . Deaf and dumb was the child; in 
fact, the population considered her half 
1diOteeescm 

“Yes that is a new picture of the Kaiser. 
We have moved the thorn-crowned one of 
Jesus Christ out into the passage. It was 
not cheerful to sleep with. Dear Frau 
Fischer, won’t you take your coffee out in 
the gardene” 

“That is a very nice idea. But first I 
must remove my corsets and my boots. Ah, 
what a relief to wear sandals again. IJ am 
needing the ‘cure’ very badly this year. 
My nerves! ITamamassof them. During 
the entire journey I sat with my handker- 
chief over my head, even while the guard 
collected the tickets. Exhausted!” 

She came into the arbour wearing a black 
and white spotted dressing-gown, and a 
calico cap peaked with patent leather, fol- 
lowed by Kathi, carrying the little blue 
jugs of malt coffee. We were formally 
introduced. Frau Fischer sat down, pro- 

44. 

Frau FIscHER 
duced a perfectly clean pocket handkerchief 
and polished her cup and saucer, then lifted 
the lid of the coffee-pot and peered in at the 
contents mournfully. 

“Malt coffee,” she said. “Ah, for the 
first few days I wonder how I can put up 
with it. Naturally, absent from home one 
must expect much discomfort and strange 
food. But as I used to say to my dear 
husband: with a clean sheet and a good cup 
of coffee J can find my happiness anywhere. 
‘But now, with nerves like mine, no sacrifice 
is too terrible for me to make. What com- 
plaint are you suffering from? You look 
exceedingly healthy!” 

I smiled and shrugged my shoulders. 

“‘Ah, that is so strange about you English. 
You do not seem to enjoy discussing the 
functions of the body. As well speak of a 
railway train and refuse to mention the 
engine. How can we hope to understand 
anybody, knowing nothing of their stom- 
achs? In my husband’s most severe illness 
—the poultices 2, 

She dipped a piece of sugar in her coffee 
and watched it dissolve. 

45 

Frau FISCHER 

“Yet a young friend of mine who trav- 
elled to England for the funeral of his 
brother told me that women wore bodices 
in public restaurants no waiter could help 
looking into as he handed the soup.” 

“But only German waiters,’ I said. 
“English ones look over the top of your 
head.” 

“There,” she cried, “now you see your 
dependence on Germany. Not even an 
efficient waiter can you have by yourselves.” 

“But I prefer them to look over your 
head.” 

“And that proves that you must be 
ashamed of your bodice.” 

I looked out over the garden full of wall- 
flowers and standard rose-trees growing 
stiffly like German bouquets, feeling I did 
not care one way or the other. I rather 
wanted to ask her if the young friend had 
gone to England in the capacity of waiter 
to attend the funeral baked meats, but de- 
cided it was not worth it. The weather 
was too hot to be malicious, and who could 
be uncharitable, victimised by the flapping 
sensations which Frau Fischer was endur- 

46 

Frau FIscHER 
ing until six-thirty? As a gift from heaven 
for my forbearance, down the path towards 
us came the Herr Rat, angelically clad in a 
white silk suit. He and Frau Fischer were 
old friends. She drew the folds of her 
dressing-gown together, and made room for 
him on the little green bench. 

‘How cool you are looking,” she said; 
“and if I may make the remark—what a 
beautiful suit!” 

“Surely I wore it last summer when you 
were here? I brought the silk from China 
—smugegled it through the Russian customs 
by swathing it round my body. And such 
a quantity: two dress lengths for my sister- 
in-law, three suits for myself, a cloak for 
the housekeeper of my flat in Munich. 
How I perspired! Every inch of it had to 
be washed afterwards.” 

“Surely you have had more adventures 
than any man in Germany. When I think 
of the time that you spent in Turkey with a 
drunken guide who was bitten by a mad 
dog and fell over a precipice into a field of 
attar of roses, I lament that you have not 
written a book.” 

47 

Frau FISCHER 

‘“‘Time—time. I am getting a few notes 
together. And now that you are here we 
shall renew our quiet little talks after sup- 
per. Yes? Itis necessary and pleasant for 
a man to find relaxation in the company of 
women occasionally.” 

“Indeed I realise that. Even here your 
life is too strenuous—you are so sought af- 
ter—so admired. It was just the same with 
my dear husband. He wasa tall, beautiful 
man, and sometimes in the evening he 
would come down into the kitchen and say: 
‘Wife, I would like to be stupid for two 
minutes.’ Nothing rested him so much 
then as for me to stroke his head.” 

The Herr Rat’s bald pate glistening in 
the sunlight seemed symbolical of the sad 
absence of a wife. 

I began to wonder as to the nature of 
these quiet little after-supper talks. How 
could one play Delilah to so shorn a Sam- 
son? 

“Herr Hoffmann from Berlin arrived 
yesterday,” said the Herr Rat. 

“That young man I refuse to converse 
with. He told me last year that he had 

48 

FRAU FISCHER 

stayed in France in an hotel where they did 
not have serviettes; what a place it must 
have been! In Austria even the cabmen 
have serviettes. Also I have heard that he 
discussed ‘free love’ with Bertha as she was 
sweeping his room. I am not accustomed 
to such company. I had suspected him for 
a long time.” 

“Young blood,” answered the Herr Rat 
genially. “I have had several disputes 
with him—you have heard them—is it not 
so?” turning to me. 

“A great many,” I said, smiling. 

“Doubtless you too consider me behind 
the times. I make no secret of my age; I 
am sixty-nine; but you must have surely 
observed how impossible it was for him to 
speak at all when I raised my voice.” 

I replied with the utmost conviction, and, 
catching Frau Fischer’s eye, suddenly real- 
ised I had better go back to the house and 
write some letters. 

It was dark and cool in my room. A 
chestnut tree pushed green boughs against 
the window. I looked down at the horse- 
hair sofa so openly flouting the idea of curl- 

49 

Frau FISCHER 
ing up as immoral, pulled the red pillow 
on to the floor and lay down. And barely 
had I got comfortable when the door 
opened and Frau Fischer entered. 

“The Herr Rat had a bathing appoint- 
ment,” she said, shutting the door after her. 
“May I come ine Pray—do not move: 
You look like a little Persian kitten. Now, 
tell me something really interesting about 
your life. When I meet new people I 
squeeze them dry like a sponge. ‘To begin 
with—you are married.” 

I admitted the fact. 

“Then, dear child, where is your hus- 
band?” 

I said he was a sea-captain on a long and 
perilous voyage. 

“What a position to leave you in—so 
young and so unprotected.” 

She sat down on the sofa and shook her 
finger at me playfully. 

“Admit, now, that you keep your journeys 
secret from him. For what man would 
think of allowing a woman with such a 
wealth of hair to go wandering in foreign 
countries? Now, supposing that you lost 

50 

Frau FIsCHER 
your purse at midnight in a snowbound 
train in North Russia?” 

“But I haven’t the slightest intention 
——” J began. 

“I don’t say that you have. But when 
you said good-bye to your dear man I am 
positive that you had no intention of coming 
here. My dear, I am a woman of experi- 
ence, and I know the world. While he is 
away you have a fever in your blood. Your 
sad heart flies for comfort to these foreign 
lands. At home you cannot bear the sight 
of that empty bed—it is like widowhood. 
Since the death of my dear husband I have 
never known an hout’s peace.” 

“T like empty beds,” I protested sleepily, 
thumping the pillow. 

“That cannot be true because it is not 
natural. Every wife ought to feel that her 
place is by her husband’s side—sleeping or 
waking. It is plain to see that the strongest 
tie of all does not yet bind you. Wait until 
a little pair of hands stretches across the 
water—wait until he comes into harbour 
and sees you with the child at your breast.” 

I sat up stiffly. 

ot 

Frau FIscHER 

“But I consider child-bearing the most 
ignominious of all professions,” I said. 

For a moment there was silence, then 
Frau Fischer reached down and caught my 
hand. 

“So young and yet to suffer so cruelly,” 
she murmured. ‘There is nothing that 
sours a woman so terribly as to be left alone 
without a man, especially if she is married, 
for then it is impossible for her to accept the 
attention of others—unless she is unfortu- 
nately a widow. Of course, I know that 
sea-captains are subject to terrible tempta- 
tions, and they are as inflammable as tenor 
singers—that is why you must present a 
bright and energetic appearance, and try 
and make him proud of you when his ship 
reaches port.” 

This husband that I had created for the 
benefit of Frau Fischer became in her hands 
so substantial a figure that I could no longer 
see myself sitting on a rock with seaweed in 
my hair, awaiting that phantom ship for 
which all women love to suppose they hun- 
ger. Rather I saw myself pushing a per- 
ambulator up the gangway, and counting 

52 

Frau FISCHER 
up the missing buttons on my husband’s 
uniform jacket. 

“Handfuls of babies, that is what you are 
really in need of,’ mused Frau Fischer. 
‘Then, as the father of a family he cannot 
leave you. Think of his delight and ex- 
citement when he saw you!” 

The plan seemed to me something of a 
risk. To appear suddenly with handfuls 
of strange babies is not generally calculated 
to raise enthusiasm in the heart of the aver- 
age British husband. I decided to wreck 
my virgin conception and send him down 
somewhere off Cape Horn. 

Then the dinner-gong sounded. 

“Come up to my room afterwards,” said 
Frau Fischer. “There is still much that I 
must ask you.” 

She squeezed my hand, but I did not 
squeeze back. 

53 

FRAU BRECHENMACHER 
ATTENDS A WEDDING 

ETTING ready was a terrible busi- 
C- ness. After supper Frau Brechen- 

macher packed four of the five 
babies to bed, allowing Rosa to stay with 
her and help to polish the buttons of Herr 
Brechenmacher’s uniform. ‘Then she ran 
over his best shirt with a hot iron, polished 
his boots, and put a stitch or two into his 
black satin necktie. 

“Rosa,” she said, “fetch my dress and 
hang it in front of the stove to get the 
creases out. Now, mind, you must look af- 
ter the children and not sit up later than 
half-past eight, and not touch the lamp— 
you know what will happen if you do.” 

“Yes, mamma,” said Rosa, who was nine 
and felt old enough to manage a thousand 
lamps. “But let me stay up—the ‘Bub’ 
may wake and want some milk.” 

54 

A WEDDING 

“Half-past eight!” said the Frau. “I'll 
make the father tell you, too.” 

Rosa drew down both corners of her 
mouth. 

ebUter. Duty i? 

‘‘Here comes the father. You go into the 
bedroom and fetch my blue silk handker- 
chief. You can wear my black shawl while 
I’m out—there now!” 

Rosa dragged it off her mother’s shoul- 
ders and wound it carefully round her own, 
tying the two ends in a knot at the back. 
After all, she reflected, if she had to go to 
bed at half-past eight she would keep the 
shawl on. Which resolution comforted 
her absolutely. 

“Now, then, where are my clothes?” 
cried Herr Brechenmacher, hanging his 
empty letter-bag behind the door and 
stamping the snow out of his boots. “Noth- 
ing ready, of course, and everybody at the 
wedding by this time. I heard the music 
as I passed. Whatare youdoingr You're 
not dressed. You can’t go like that.” 

“Tere they are—all ready for you on the 
table, and some warm water in the tin basin. 

oD 

A WEDDING 

Dip your head in, Rosa, give your father the 
towel. Everything ready except the trou- 
sers. I haven’t had time to shorten them. 
You must tuck the ends into your boots un- 
til we get there.” 

“Nu,” said the Herr, “there isn’t room to 
turn. I want the light. You go and dress 
in the passage.” 

Dressing in the dark was nothing to Frau 
Brechenmacher. She hooked her skirt and 
bodice, fastened her handkerchief round 
her neck with a beautiful brooch that had 
four medals to the Virgin dangling from it, 
and then drew on her cloak and hood. 

“Ffere, come and fasten this buckle,” 
called Herr Brechenmacher. He stood in 
the kitchen puffing himself out, the buttons 
on his blue uniform shining with an en- 
thusiasm which nothing but official buttons 
could possibly possess. “How do I look?” 

“Wonderful,” replied the little Frau, 
straining at the waist buckle and giving him 
a little pull here, a little tug there. “Rosa, 
come and look at your father.” 

Herr Brechenmacher strode up and down 
the kitchen, was helped on with his coat, 

56 

A. WEDDING 
then waited while the Frau lighted the lan- 
tern. 

“Now, then—finished at last! Come 
along.” 

“The lamp, Rosa,” warned the Frau, 
slamming the front door behind them. 

Snow had not fallen all day; the frozen 
ground was slippery as an icepond. She 
had not been out of the house for weeks 
past, and the day had so flurried her that 
she felt muddled and stupid—felt that Rosa 
had pushed her out of the house and her 
man was running away from her. 

“Wait, wait!” she cried. 

“No. Ill get my feet damp—you 
hurry.” 

It was easier when they came into the 
village. ‘There were fences to cling to, and 
leading from the railway station to the 
Gasthaus a little path of cinders had been 
strewn for the benefit of the wedding guests. 

The Gasthaus was very festive. Lights 
shone out from every window, wreaths of 
fir twigs hung from the ledges. Branches 
decorated the front doors, which swung 
open, and in the hall the landlord voiced his 

57 

A WEDDING 

superiority by bullying the waitresses, who 
ran about continually with glasses of beer, 
trays of cups and saucers, and bottles of 
wine. 

“Up the stairs—up the stairs!” boomed 
the landlord. “Leave your coats on the 
landing.” 

Herr Brechenmacher, completely over- 
awed by this grand manner, so far forgot 
his rights as a husband as to beg his wife’s 
pardon for jostling her against the banisters 
in his efforts to get ahead of everybody 
else. 

Herr Brechenmacher’s colleagues greeted 
him with acclamation as he entered the door 
of the Festsaal, and the Frau straightened 
her brooch and folded her hands, assuming 
the air of dignity becoming to the wife of a 
postman and the mother of five children. 

Beautiful indeed was the Festsaal. Three 
long tables were grouped at one end, the 
remainder of the floor space cleared for 
dancing. Oil lamps, hanging from the 
ceiling, shed a warm, bright light on the 
walls decorated with paper flowers and gar- 
lands; shed a warmer, brighter light on the 

58 

A. WEDDING 
red faces of the guests in their best clothes. 

At the head of the centre table sat the 
bride and bridegroom, she in a white dress 
trimmed with stripes and bows of coloured 
ribbon, giving her the appearance of an 
iced cake all ready to be cut and served in 
neat little pieces to the bridegroom beside 
her, who wore a suit of white clothes much 
too large for him and a white silk tie that 
rose half way up his collar. Grouped 
about them, with a fine regard for dignity 
and precedence, sat their parents and rela- 
tions; and perched on a stool at the bride’s 
right hand a little girl in a crumpled muslin 
dress with a wreath of forget-me-nots hang- 
ing over one ear. Everybody was laughing 
and talking, shaking hands, clinking glasses, 
stamping on the floor—a stench of beer and 
perspiration filled the air. 

Frau Brechenmacher, following her man 
down the room after greeting the bridal 
party, knew that she was going to enjoy her- 
self. She seemed to fill out and become 
rosy and warm as she sniffed that familiar 
festive smell. Somebody pulled at her 
skirt, and, looking down, she saw Frau 

59 

A WEDDING 

Rupp, the butcher’s wife, who pulled out 
an empty chair and begged her to sit beside 
her. 

“Fritz will get you some beer,” she said. 
“My dear, your skirt is open at the back. 
We could not help laughing as you walked 
up the room with the white tape of your 
petticoat showing!” 

“But how frightful!” said Frau Brechen- 
macher, collapsing into her chair and biting 
her lip. 

“Na, it’s over now,” said Frau Rupp, 
stretching her fat hands over the table and 
regarding her three mourning rings with 
intense enjoyment; “but one must be care- 
ful, especially at a wedding.” 

‘And such a wedding as this,” cried Frau 
Ledermann, who sat on the other side of 
Frau  Brechenmacher. “Fancy ‘Theresa 
bringing that child with her. It’s her own 
child, you know, my dear, and it’s going to 
live with them. That’s what I call a sin 
against the Church for a free-born child to 
attend its own mother’s wedding.” 

The three women sat and stared at the 
bride, who remained very still, with a little 

60 

A WEDDING 
vacant smile on her lips, only her eyes shift- 
ing uneasily from side to side. 

“Beer they’ve given it, too,” whispered 
Frau Rupp, “and white wine and an ice. 
It never did have a stomach; she ought to 
have left it at home.” 

Frau Brechenmacher turned round and 
looked towards the bride’s mother. She 
never took her eyes off her daughter, but 
wrinkled her brown forehead like an old 
monkey, and nodded now and again very 
solemnly. Her hands shook as she raised 
her beer mug, and when she had drunk she 
spat on the floor and savagely wiped her 
mouth with her sleeve. Then the music 
started and she followed Theresa with her 
eyes, looking suspiciously at each man who 
danced with her. 

“Cheer up, old woman,” shouted her hus- 
band, digging her in the ribs; “this isn’t 
Theresa’s funeral.” He winked at the 
guests, who broke into loud laughter. 

“Tam cheerful,” mumbled the old 
woman, and beat upon the table with her 
fist, keeping time to the music, proving she 
was not out of the festivities. 

61 

IN A GERMAN PENSION 

“She can’t forget how wild Theresa has 
been,” said Frau Ledermann. ‘Who could 
—with the child therer I heard that last 
Sunday evening Theresa had hysterics and 
said that she would not marry this man. 
They had to get the priest to her.” 

“Where is the other oner” asked Frau 
Brechenmacher. “Why didn’t he marry 
herr. 

The woman shrugged her shoulders. 

“Gone—disappeared. He was a trav- 
eller, and only stayed at their house two 
nights. He was selling shirt buttons—I 
bought some myself, and they were beauti- 
ful shirt buttons—but what a pig of a fel- 
low! I can’t think what he saw in such a 
plain girl—but you never know. Her 
mother says she’s been like fire ever since 
she was sixteen!” 

Frau Brechenmacher looked down at her 
beer and blew a little hole in the froth. 

“That's not how a wedding should be,” 
she said; ‘‘it’s not religion to love two men.” 

‘Nice time she'll have with this one,” 
Frau Rupp exclaimed. “He was lodging 
with me last summer and I had to get rid 

62 

A WEDDING 

of him. He never changed his clothes once 
in two months, and when I spoke to him of 
the smell in his room he told me he was sure 
it floated up from the shop. Ah, every wife 
has her cross. Isn’t that true, my dear?” 

Frau Brechenmacher saw her husband 
among his colleagues at the next table. He 
was drinking far too much, she knew— 
gesticulating wildly, the saliva spluttering 
out of his mouth as he talked. 

“Yes,” she assented, “that’s true. Girls 
have a lot to learn.” 

Wedged in between these two fat old 
women, the Frau had no hope of being 
asked to dance. She watched the couples 
going round and round; she forgot her five 
babies and her man and felt almost like a 
girl again. The music sounded sad and 
sweet. Her roughened hands clasped and 
unclasped themselves in the folds of her 
skirt. While the music went on she was 
afraid to look anybody in the face, and she 
smiled with a little nervous tremor round 
the mouth. 

“But, my God,” Frau Rupp cried, 
“they’ve given that child of Theresa’s a 

63 

A WEDDING 

piece of sausage. It’s to keep her quiet. 
There’s going to be a presentation now— 
your man has to speak. 

Frau Brechenmacher sat up stiffly. The 
music ceased, and the dancers took their 
places again at the tables. 

Herr Brechenmacher alone remained 
standing—he held in his hands a big sil- 
ver coffee-pot. Everybody laughed at his 
speech, except the Frau; everybody roared 
at his grimaces, and at the way he carried 
the coffee-pot to the bridal pair, as if it 
were a baby he was holding. 

She lifted the lid, peeped in, then shut it 
down with a little scream and sat biting her 
lips. The bridegroom wrenched the pot 
away from her and drew forth a baby’s bot- 
tle and two little cradles holding china 
dolls. As he dandled these treasures before 
Theresa the hot room seemed to heave and 
sway with laughter. 

Frau Brechenmacher did not think it 
funny. She stared round at the laughing 
faces, and suddenly they all seemed strange 
to her. She wanted to go home and never 
come out again. She imagined that all 

64 

A WEDDING 

these people were laughing at her, more 
people than there were in the room even— 
all laughing at her because they were so 
much stronger than she was. 

They walked home in silence. Herr 
‘Brechenmacher strode ahead, she stumbled 
after him. White and forsaken lay the 
road from the railway station to their house 
—a cold rush of wind blew her hood from 
her face, and suddenly she remembered 
how they had come home together the first 
night. Now they had five babies and twice 
as much money; but 

“Na, what is it all for?” she muttered, 
and not until she had reached home, and 
prepared a little supper of meat and bread 
for her man did she stop asking herself that 
silly question. 

Herr Brechenmacher broke the bread 
into his plate, smeared it round with his 
fork and chewed greedily. 

“Good?” she asked, leaning her arms on 
the table and pillowing her breast against 
them. 

“But fine!” 

65 

A. WEDDING 

He took a piece of the crumb, wiped it 
round his plate edge, and held it up to her 
mouth. She shook her head. 

“Not hungry,” she said. 

“But it is one of the best pieces, and full 
of the fat.” 

He cleared the plate; then pulled off his 
boots and flung them into a corner. 

“Not much of a wedding,” he said, 
stretching out his feet and wriggling his 
toes in the worsted socks. 

““N—no,” she replied, taking up the dis- 
carded boots and placing them on the oven 
to dry. 

Herr Brechenmacher yawned and 
stretched himself, and then looked up at 
her, grinning. 

“Remember the night that we came 
homer You were an innocent one, you 
were.” 

“Get along! Such a time ago I forget.” 
Well she remembered. 

“Such a clout on the ear as you gave me. 
. .. But I soon taught you.” 

“Oh, don’t start talking. You’ve too 
much beer. Come to bed.” 

66 

A WEDDING 

He tilted back in his chair, chuckling 
with laughter. 

“That’s not what you said to me that 
night. God, the trouble you gave me!” 

But the little Frau seized the candle and 
went into the next room. The children 
were all soundly sleeping. She stripped 
the mattress off the baby’s bed to see if he 
was still dry then began unfastening her 
blouse and skirt. 

“Always the same,” she said—all over 
the world the same; but, God in heaven— 
how stupid.” 

Then even the memory of the wedding 
faded quite. She lay down on the bed and 
put her arm across her face like a child who 
expected to be hurt as Herr Brechenmacher 
lurched in. 

) 

67 

THE MODERN SOUL 

oe OOD-EVENING,’’ said the 

G Herr Professor, squeezing my 

hand; “wonderful weather! I 

returned from a party in the wood. I have 
been making music for them on my trom- 
bone. You know, these pine-trees provide 
most suitable accompaniment for a trom- 
bone! They are sighing delicacy against 
sustained strength, as I remarked once in 
a lecture on wind instruments in Frankfort. 
May I be permitted to sit beside you on 
this bench, gnadige Frau?” 

He sat down, tugging at a white-paper 
package in the tail pocket of his coat. 

“Cherries,” he said, nodding and smiling. 
“There is nothing like cherries for produc- 
ing free saliva after trombone playing, 
especially after Greig’s ‘Ich Liebe Dich.’ 
Those sustained blasts on ‘liebe’? make my 
throat as dry as a railway tunnel. Have 
some?” He shook the bag at me. 

68 

THE MopERN Sout 

“T prefer watching you eat them.” 

“Ah, ha!” He crossed his legs, sticking 
the cherry bag between his knees, to leave 
both hands free. ‘Psychologically I under- 
stood your refusal. It is your innate fem- 
inine delicacy in preferring etherealised 
sensations. . . . Or perhaps you do not care 
to eat the worms. All cherries contain 
worms. Once I made a very interesting ex- 
periment with a colleague of mine at the 
university. We bit into four pounds of the 
best cherries and did not find one specimen 
without a worm. But what would you? 
As I remarked to him afterwards—dear 
friend, it amounts to this: if one wishes to 
satisfy the desires of nature one must be 
strong enough to ignore the facts of nature. 
.. . The conversation is not out of your 
depth? I have so seldom the time or op- 
portunity to open my heart to a woman that 
I am apt to forget.” 

I looked at him brightly. 

“See what a fat one!” cried the Herr 
Professor. ‘That is almost a mouthful in 
itself; it is beautiful enough to hang from a 
watch-chain.” He chewed it up and spat 

69 

THE MopERrN SOUL 

the stone an incredible distance—over the 
garden path into the flower bed. He was 
proud of the feat. I sawit. “The quan- 
tity of fruit I have eaten on this bench,” he 
sighed; “apricots, peaches, and cherries. 
One day that garden bed will become an 
orchard grove, and J shall allow you to pick 
as much as you please, without paying me 
anything.” 

I was grateful, without showing undue 
excitement. 

“Which reminds me’”—he hit the side of 
his nose with one finger—“the manager of 
the pension handed me my weekly bill after 
dinner thisevening. Itis almost impossible 
to credit. I do not expect you to believe 
me—he has charged me extra for a miser- 
able little glass of milk I drink in bed at 
night to prevent insomnia. Naturally, I 
did not pay. But the tragedy of the story 
is this: I cannot expect the milk to pro- 
duce somnolence any longer; my peaceful 
attitude of mind towards it is completely 
destroyed. I know I shall throw myself in- 
to a fever in attempting to plumb this want 

70 

THE Mopern Sout 
of generosity in so wealthy a man as the 
manager of a pension. Think of me to- 
night”—he ground the empty bag under his 
heel—“think that the worst is happening to 
me as your head drops asleep on your pil- 
low.” 

‘Two ladies come on the front steps of the 
pension and stood, arm in arm, looking over 
the garden. The one, old and scraggy, 
dressed almost entirely in black bead trim- 
ming and a satin reticule; the other, young 
and thin, in a white gown, her yellow hair 
tastefully garnished with mauve sweet peas. 

The Professor drew in his feet and sat up 
sharply, pulling down his waistcoat. 

“The Godowskas,” he murmured. “Do 
you know them? A mother and daughter 
from Vienna. ‘The mother has an internal 
complaint and the daughter is an actress. 
Fraulein Sonia is a very modern soul. I 
think you would find her most sympathetic. 
She is forced to be in attendance on her 
mother just now. But what a tempera- 
ment! I have once described her in her 
autograph album as tigress with a flower in 

71 

THE MopERNn SOUL 
the hair. Will you excuse me? Perhaps 
I can persuade them to be introduced to 
you.” 

I said, “I am going up to my room.” 
But the Professor rose and shook a playful 
finger, at) me. oy Na,’ hes saidae wemate 
friends, and, therefore, I shall speak quite 
frankly to you. I think they would con- 
sider it a little ‘marked’ if you immediately 
retired to the house at their approach, after 
sitting here alone with me in the twilight. 
You know this world. Yes, you know it 
as I do.” 

I shrugged my shoulders, remarking with 
one eye that while the Professor had been 
talking the Godowskas had trailed across 
the lawn towards us. They confronted the 
Herr Professor as he stood up. 

““Good-evening,” quavered Frau Godow- 
ska. ‘Wonderful weather! It has given 
me quite a touch of hay fever!” Fraulein 
Godowska said nothing. She swooped 
over a rose growing in the embryo orchard, 
then stretched out her hand with a magnifi- 
cent gesture to the Herr Professor. He 
presented me. 

72 

THE Mopern Sout 

“This is my little English friend of whom 
I have spoken. She is the stranger in our 
midst. We have been eating cherries to- 
gether.” 

“How delightful,” sighed Frau Godow- 
ska. ‘My daughter and I have often ob- 
served you through the bedroom window. 
Haven’t we, Soniar” 

Sonia absorbed my outward and visible 
form with an inward and spiritual glance, 
then repeated the magnificent gesture for 
my benefit. The four of us sat on the 
bench, with that faint air of excitement of 
passengers established in a railway carriage 
on the qui vive for the train whistle. Frau 
Godowska sneezed. “I wonder if it is hay 
fever,’ she remarked, worrying the satin 
reticule for her handkerchief, ‘or would 
it be the dew? Sonia, dear, is the dew 
falling?” 

Fraulien Sonia raised her face to the sky, 
and half closed her eyes. “No, mamma, 
my face is quite warm. Oh, look, Herr 
Professor, there are swallows in flight; they 
are like a little flock of Japanese thoughts 
—nicht wahre” 

73 

THE MopERN SOUL 

“Where?” cried the Herr Professor. 
“Oh yes, I see, by the kitchen chimney. 
But why do you say ‘Japanese’? Could 
you not compare them with equal veracity 
to a little flock of German thoughts in 
flight?” He rounded on me. “Have you 
swallows in England?” 

“T believe there are some at certain 
seasons. But doubtless they have not the 
same symbolical value for the English. In 
Germany 2 

“T have never been to England,” inter- 
rupted Fraulein Sonia, “but I have many 
English acquaintances. ‘They are so cold!” 
She shivered. 

“Fish-blooded,” snapped Frau Godowska. 
“Without soul, without heart, without grace. 
But you cannot equal their dress materials, 
I spent a week in Brighton twenty years 
ago, and the travelling cape I bought there 
is not yet worn out—the one you wrap the 
hot-water bottle in, Sonia. My lamented 
husband, your father, Sonia, knew a great 
deal about England. But the more he knew 
about it the oftener he remarked to me, 
‘England is merely an island of beef flesh 

74 

THE Movern Sout 
swimming in a warm gulf stream of gravy.’ 
Such a brilliant way of putting things. Do 
you remember, Sonia?” 

“I forget nothing, mamma,” answered 
Sonia. 

Said the Herr Professor: ‘That is the 
proof of your calling, gnadiges Fraulein. 
Now I wonder—and this is a very interest- 
ing speculation—is memory a blessing or— 
excuse the word—a curse?” 

Frau Godowska looked into the distance, 
then the corners of her mouth dropped and 
her skin puckered. She began to shed tears. 

“Ach Gott! Gracious lady, what have I 
said?” exclaimed the Herr Professor. 

Sonia took her mother’s hand. “Do you 
know,” she said, “to-night it is stewed car- 
rots and nut tart for supper. Suppose we 
go in and take our places,” her sidelong, 
tragic stare accusing the Professor and me 
the while. 

I followed them across the lawn and up 
the steps. Frau Godowska was murmur- 
ing, “Such a wonderful, beloved man”; 
with her dis-engaged hand Fraulein Sonia 
was arranging the sweet-pea garniture. 

75 

THE Mopern SOUL 
“A concert for the benefit of afflicted 
Catholic infants will take place in the salon at 
eight-thirty P.M. Artists: Fratilein Sonia God- 
owska, from Vienna; Herr Professor Wind- 
berg and his trombone; Frau Oberlehrer 
Weidel, and others.” 

This notice was tied round the neck of 
the melancholy stag’s head in the dining- 
room. It graced him like a red and white 
dinner bib for days before the event, caus- 
ing the Herr Professor to bow before it and 
say “good appetite” until we sickened of his 
pleasantry and left the smiling to be done 
by the waiter, who was paid to be pleasing 
to the guests. 

On the appointed day the married ladies 
sailed about the pension dressed like up- 
holstered chairs, and the unmarried ladies 
like draped muslin dressing-table covers. 
Frau Godowska pinned a rose in the centre 
of her reticule; another blossom was tucked 
in the mazy folds of a white antimacassar 
thrown across her breast. The gentlemen 
wore black coats, white silk ties and ferny 
buttonholes tickling the chin. 

76 

THE MopErRN Sout 

The floor of the salon was freshly pol- 
ished, chairs and benches arranged, and a 
row of little flags strung across the ceiling 
—they flew and jigged in the draught with 
all the enthusiasm of family washing. It 
was arranged that I should sit beside Frau 
Godowska, and that the Herr Professor and 
Sonia should join us when their share of 
the concert was over. 

“That will make you feel quite one of the 
performers,” said the Herr Professor ge- 
nially. “It is a great pity that the English 
nation isso unmusical. Nevermind! To- 
night you shall hear something—we have 
discovered a nest of talent during the re- 
hearsals.” 

“What do you intend to recite, Fraulein 
Soniae” 

She shook back her hair. “I never know 
until the last moment. When I come on 
the stage I wait for one moment and then I 
have the sensation as though something 
struck me here,”—she placed her hand up- 
on her collar brooch—‘and ... words 
come!” 

1H 

THE Mopern SOUL 

“Bend down a moment,” whispered her 
mother. “Sonia, love, your skirt safety-pin 
is showing at the back. Shall I come out- 
side and fasten it properly for you, or will 
you do it yourself?” 

“Oh, mamma, please don’t say such 
things,” Sonia flushed and grew very angry. 
“You know how sensitive I am to the 
slightest unsympathetic impression at a time 
like this....I would rather my skirt 
dropped off my body au 

“Sonia—my heart!” 

A bell tinkled. 

The waiter came in and opened the piano. 
In the heated excitement of the moment he 
entirely forgot what was fitting, and flicked 
the keys with the grimy table napkin he 
carried over his arm. The Frau Ober- 
lehrer tripped on the platform followed by a 
very young gentleman, who blew his nose 
twice before he hurled his handkerchief into 
the bosom of the piano. 

“Yes, I know you have no love for me, 
And no forget-me-not. 
No love, no heart, and no forget-me-not.”’ 

78 

THE Mopern Sout 
sang the Frau Oberlehrer, in a voice that 
seemed to issue from her forgotten ‘thimble 
and have nothing to do with her. 

‘Ach, how sweet, how delicate,” we cried, 
clapping her soothingly. She bowed as 
though to say, “Yes, isn’t it?” and retired, 
the very young gentleman dodging her train 
and scowling. 

The piano was closed, an arm-chair was 
placed in the centre of the platform. Frau- 
lein Sonia drifted towards it. A breathless 
pause. Then, presumably, the winged 
shaft struck her collar brooch. She im- 
plored us not to go into the woods in trained 
dresses, but rather as lightly draped as pos- 
sible, and bed with her among the pine 
needles. Her loud, slightly harsh voice 
filled the salon. She dropped her arms 
over the back of the chair, moving her lean 
hands from the wrists. We were thrilled 
and silent. The Herr Professor, beside me, 
abnormally serious, his eyes bulging, pulled 
at his moustache ends. Frau Godowska 
adopted that peculiarly detached attitude of 
the proud parent. The only soul who re- 
mained untouched by her appeal was the 

79 

THE Mopern SOUL 
waiter, who leaned idly against the wall of 
the salon and cleaned his nails with the edge 
of a programme. He was off duty and in- 
tended to show it. 

“What did I say?” shouted the Herr 
Professor under cover of tumultuous ap- 
plause, “tem-per-ament! ‘There you have 
it. She is a flame in the heart of a lily. I 
know I am going to play well. It is my 
turn now. I am _ inspired. Fraulein 
Sonia”—as that lady returned to us, pale 
and draped in a large shawl—“you are my 
inspiration. ‘To-night you shall be the soul 
of my trombone. Wait only.” 

To right and left of us people bent over 
and whispered admiration down Fraulein 
Sonia’s neck. She bowed in the grand 
style. 

“T am always successful,” she said to me. 
“You see, when I act I am. In Vienna, 
in the plays of Ibsen we had so many bou- 
quets that the cook had three in the kitchen. 
But it is difficult here. There is so little 
magic. Do you not feelit? ‘There is none 
of that mysterious perfume which floats 
almost as a visible thing from the souls of 

80 

THE Movern Sout 

the Viennese audiences. My spirit starves 
for want of that.” She leaned forward, 
chin on hand. “Starves,” she repeated. 

The Professor appeared with his trom- 
bone, blew into it, held it up to one eye, 
tucked back his shirt cuffs and wallowed in 
the soul of Sonia Godowska. Such a sen- 
sation did he create that he was recalled to 
play a Bavarian dance, which he acknowl- 
edged was to be taken as a breathing exer- 
cise rather than an artistic achievement. 
Frau Godowska kept time to it with a fan. 

Followed the very young gentleman who 
piped in a tenor voice that he loved some- 
body, ‘“‘with blood in his heart and a thou- 
sand pains.” Fraulein Sonia acted a 
poison scene with the assistance of her 
mother’s pill vial and the arm-chair re- 
placed by a chaise longue; a young girl 
scratched a lullaby on a young fiddle; and 
the Herr Professor performed the last 
sacrificial rites on the altar of the afflicted 
children by playing the National Anthem. 

“Now I must put mamma to bed,” whis- 
pered Fraulein Sonia. “But afterwards I 
must take a walk. It is imperative that I 

81 

THE MopERN SOUL 
free my spirit in the open air for a moment. 
Would you come with me, as far as the rail- 
way station and back?” 

“Very well, then, knock on my door when 
you’re ready.” 

Thus the modern soul and I found our- 
selves together under the stars. 

“What a night!” she said. “Do you 
know that poem of Sappho about her hands 
in the stars... . I am furiously sapphic. 
And this is so remarkable—not only am I 
sapphic, I find in all the works of all the 
greatest writers, especially in their unedited 
letters, some touch, some sign of myself— 
some resemblance, some part of myself, like 
a thousand. reflections of my own hands in 
a dark mirror.” 

“But what a bother,” said I. 

“T do not know what you mean by 
‘bother’; is it rather the curse of my 
genius... .” She paused suddenly, star- 
ing at me. “Do you know my tragedy?” 
she asked. 

I shook my head. 

‘“My tragedy ismy mother. Living with 
her I live with the coffin of my unborn 

82 

THE MopErN Sout 
aspirations. You heard that about the 
safety-pin to-night. It may seem to you 
a little thing, but it ruined my three first 
gestures. They were 2 

“Impaled on a safety-pin,” I suggested. 

“Yes, exactly that. And when we are in 
Vienna I am the victim of moods, you know. 
I long to do wild, passionate things. And 
mamma says, ‘Please pour out my mixture 
first.” Once I remember I flew into a rage 
and threw a washstand jug out of the win- 
dow. Do you know what she said? ‘Sonia, 
it is not so much throwing things out of 
windows, if only you would ee 

“Choose something smaller?” said I. 

“No ... ‘tell me about it beforehand.’ 
Humiliating! And I do not see any pos- 
sible light out of this darkness.” 

“Why don’t you join a touring company 
and leave your mother in Vienna?” 

“What! Leave my poor, little, sick, 
widowed mother in Vienna! Sooner than 
that I would drown myself. I love my 
mother as I love nobody else in the world— 
nobody and nothing! Do you think it is 
impossible to love one’s tragedy? ‘Out of 

83 

THE Mopern SOUL 
my great sorrows I make my little songs,’ 
that is Heine or myself.” 

“Oh, well, that’s all right,” I said cheer- 
fully. 

“But it is not all right!” 

I suggested we should turn back. We 
turned. 

“Sometimes I think the solution lies in 
marriage,” said Fraulein Sonia. “If I find 
a simple, peaceful man who adores me and 
will look after mamma—a man who would 
be for me a pillow—for genius cannot hope 
to mate—I shall marry him.... You 
know the Herr Professor has paid me very 
marked attentions.” 

“Oh, Fraulein Sonia,” I said, very pleased 
with myself, “why not marry him to your 
mother?” We were passing the _hair- 
dresser’s shop at the moment. Fraulein 
Sonia clutched my arm. 

“You, “you; esshenistammerédaes Phe 
cruelty. I am going to faint Mamma to 
marry again before I marry—the indignity. 
I am going to faint here and now.” 

I was frightened. 

84 

THE Moprern Sout 

“You can’t,” I said, shaking her. “Come 
back to the pension and faint as much as you 
please. But you can’t faint here. All the 
shops are closed. There is nobody about. 
Please don’t be so foolish.” 

“Here and here only!” She indicated 
the exact spot and dropped quite beautifully, 
lying motionless. 

“Very well,” I said, “faint away; but 
please hurry over it.” 

She did not move. I began to walk 
home, but each time I looked behind me I 
saw the dark form of the modern soul prone 
before the hairdresser’s window. Finally 
I ran, and rooted out the Herr Professor 
from his room. “Fraulein Sonia _ has 
fainted,” I said crossly. 

“Du lieber Gott! Where? How?” 

“Outside the hairdresser’s shop in the 
Station Road.” 

“Jesus and Maria! Has she no water 
with her?”—he seized his carafe—‘‘nobody 
beside her?” 

“Nothing.” 

“Where is my coat? No matter, I shall 

85 

THE Mopern SOUL 

catch a cold on the chest. Willingly, I shall 
catch one. . . . You are ready to come with 
me?” 

“No,” I said; “you can take the waiter.” 

“But she must have a woman. I cannot 
be so indelicate as to attempt to loosen her 
stays.” 

“Modern souls oughtn’t to wear them,” 
said I. He pushed past me and clattered 
down the stairs. 

When I came down to breakfast next 
morning there were two places vacant at 
table. Fraulein Sonia and the Herr Pro- 
fessor had gone off for a day’s excursion in 
the woods. 

I wondered. 

86 

AT LEHMANN’S 

ERTAINLY Sabina did not find 
life slow. She was on the trot from 
early morning until late at night. 

At five o’clock she tumbled out of bed, but- 
toned on her clothes, wearing a long-sleeved 
alpaca pinafore over her black frock, and 
groped her way downstairs into the kitchen. 

Anna, the cook, had grown so fat during 
the summer that she adored her bed because 
she did not have to wear her corsets there, 
but could spread as much as she liked, roll 
about under the great mattress, calling upon 
Jesus and Holy Mary and Blessed Anthony 
himself that her life was not fit for a pig in 
a cellar. 

Sabina was new to her work. Pink 
colour still flew in her cheeks; there was a 
little dimple on the left side of her mouth 
that even when she was most serious, most 
absorbed, popped out and gave her away. 

87 

AT LEHMANN’S 

And Anna blessed that dimple. It meant 
an extra half-hour in bed for her; it made 
Sabina light the fire, turn out the kitchen 
and wash endless cups and saucers that had 
been left over from the evening before. 
Hans, the scullery boy, did not come until 
seven. He was the son of the butcher—a | 
mean, undersized child very much like one 
of his father’s sausages, Sabina thought. 
His red face was covered with pimples, and 
his nails indescribably filthy. When Herr 
Lehmann himself told Hans to get a hair- 
pin and clean them he said they were stained 
from birth because his mother had always 
got so inky doing the accounts—and Sabina 
believed him and pitied him. 

Winter had come very early to Mindel- 
bau. By the end of October the streets 
were banked waist-high with snow, and the 
greater number of the ‘cure-guests,’ sick 
unto death of cold water and herbs, had de- 
parted in nothing approaching peace. So 
the large salon was shut at Lehmann’s and 
the breakfast-room was all the accommoda- 
tion the café afforded. Here the floor had 
to be washed over, the tables rubbed, coffee- 

88 

At LEHMANN’S 
cups set out, each with its little china plat- 
ter of sugar, and newspapers and magazines 
hung on their hooks along the walls before 
Herr Lehmann appeared at seven-thirty 
and opened business. 

As a rule his wife served in the shop lead- 
ing into the café, but she had chosen the 
quiet season to have a baby, and, a big 
woman at the best of times, she had grown so 
enormous in the process that her husband 
told her she looked unappetising, and had 
better remain upstairs and sew. 

Sabina took on the extra work without 
any thought of extra pay. She loved to 
stand behind the counter, cutting up slices 
of Anna’s marvellous chocolate-spotted con- 
fections, or doing up packets of sugar al- 
monds in pink and blue striped bags. 

“You'll get varicose veins, like me,” said 
Anna. ‘“That’s what the Frau’s got, too. 
No wonder the baby doesn’t come! All her 
swelling’s got into her legs.” And Hans 
was immensely interested. 

During the morning business was com- 
paratively slack. Sabina answered the 
shop bell, attended to a few customers who 

89 

At LEHMANN’S 
drank a liqueur to warm their stomachs be- 
fore the midday meal, and ran upstairs now 
and again to ask the Frau if she wanted any- 
thing. But in the afternoon six or seven 
choice spirits played cards, and everybody 
who was anybody drank tea or coffee. 

“Sabinatorasnoabinaseete 

She flew from one table to the other, 
counting out handfuls of small change, giv- 
ing orders to Anna through the slide, help- 
ing the men with their heavy coats, always 
with that magical child air about her, that 
delightful sense of perpetually attending a 
party. 

“How is the Frau Lehmann?” the women 
would whisper. 

“She feels rather low, but as well as can 
be expected,” Sabina would answer, nod- 
ding confidentially. 

Frau Lehmann’s bad time was approach- 
ing. Anna and her friends referred to it 
as her “journey to Rome,” and Sabina 
longed to ask questions, yet, being ashamed 
of her ignorance, was silent, trying to puzzle 
it out for herself. She knew practically 
nothing except that the Frau had a baby 

90 

AT LEHMANN’S 

inside her, which had to come out—very 
painful indeed. One could not have one 
without a husband—that she also realised. 
But what had the man got to do with it? 
So she wondered as she sat mending tea 
towels in the evening, head bent over her 
work, light shining on her brown curls. 
Birth—what was it? wondered Sabina. 
Death—such a simple thing. She had a 
little picture of her dead grandmother 
dressed in a black silk frock, tired hands 
clasping the crucifix that dragged between 
her flattened breasts, mouth curiously tight, 
yet almost secretly smiling. But the grand- 
mother had been born once—that was the 
important fact. 

As she sat there one evening, thinking, the 
Young Man entered the café, and called 
for a glass of port wine. Sabina rose 
slowly. The long day and the hot room 
made her feel a little languid, but as she 
poured out the wine, she felt the Young 
Man’s eyes fixed on her, looked down at 
him and dimpled. 

“Tt’s cold out,” she said, corking the bot- 
tle. 

91 

AT LEHMANN’S 

The Young Man ran his hands through 
his snow-powdered hair and laughed. 

“T wouldn’t call it exactly tropical,” he 
said. ‘But you’re very snug in here—look 
as though you’ve been asleep.” 

Very languid felt Sabina in the hot room, 
and the Young Man’s voice was strong and 
deep. She thought she had never seen any- 
body who look so strong—as though he 
could take up the table in one hand—and 
his restless gaze wandering over her face 
and figure gave her a curious thrill deep 
in her body, half pleasure, half pain. . 
She wanted to stand there, close beside 
him, while he drank his wine. A little 
silence followed. ‘Then he took a book out 
of his pocket, and Sabina went back to her 
sewing. Sitting there in the corner, she 
listened to the sound of the leaves being 
turned and the loud ticking of the clock 
that hung over the gilt mirror. She wanted 
to look at him again—there was a some- 
thing about him, in his deep voice, even in 
the way his clothes fitted. From the room 
above she heard the heavy dragging sound 
of Frau Lehmann’s footsteps, and again the 

g2 

AT LEHMANN’S 
old thoughts worried Sabina. If she her- 
self should one day look like that—feel like 
that! Yet it would be very sweet to have a 
little baby to dress and jump up and down. 

“Fraulein—what’s your name—what are 
you smiling at?” called the Young Man. 

She blushed and looked up, hands quiet in 
her lap, looked across the empty tables and 
shook her head. 

“Come here, and I’ll show you a picture,” 
he commanded. 

She went and stood beside him. He 
opened the book, and Sabina saw a coloured 
sketch of a naked girl sitting on the edge 
of a great, crumpled bed, a man’s opera 
hat on the back of her head. 

He put his hand over the body, leaving 
only the face exposed, then scrutinised 
Sabina closely. 

“Welle” 

‘What do you mean?” she asked, know- 
ing perfectly well. 

“Why, it might be your own photograph 
—the face, I mean—that’s as far as I can 
judge.” 

“But the hair’s done differently,” said 

93 

AT LEHMANN’S 
Sabina, laughing. She threw back her 
head, Ath the laughter bubbled in her 
eugte white throat. 

Slits sratheriea =thice Beene don’t you 
thinkP” he asked. But she was looking at 
a curious ring he wore on the hand that 
covered the girl’s body, and only nodded. 

“Ever seen anything like it before” 

“Oh, there’s plenty of those funny ones in 
the illustrated papers.” 

“How would you like to have your pic- 
ture taken that way?” 

“Mer Id never let anybody seeit. Be- 
sides, I haven’t got a hat like that!” 

‘“‘That’s easily remedied.” 

Again a little silence, broken by Anna 
throwing up the slide. 

Sabina ran into the kitchen. 

“Here, take this milk and egg up to the 
Frau,” said Anna. “Who’ve you got in 
there °”’ 

“Got such a funny man! I think he’s a 
little gone here,” tapping her forehead. 

Upstairs in the ugly room the Frau sat 
sewing, a black shawl round her shoulders, 

94 

AT LEHMANN’S 
her feet encased in red woollen slippers. 
The girl put the milk on a table by her, then 
stood, polishing a spoon on her apron. 

“Nothing else?” 

“Na,” said the Frau, heaving up in her 
chair. ‘“Where’s my man?” 

“He’s playing cards over at Snipold’s. 
Do you want him?” 

“Dear heaven, leave him alone. I’m 
nothing. I don’t matter.... And the 
whole day waiting here.” 

Her hand shook as she wiped the rim of 
the glass with her fat finger. 

“Shall I help you to bed?” 

“You go downstairs, leave me alone. 
Tell Anna not to let Hans grub the sugar— 
give him one on the ear.” 

“Ugly—ugly—ugly,” muttered Sabina, 
returning to the café where the Young Man 
stood coat-buttoned, ready for departure. 

“T’ll come again to-morrow,” said he. 
“Don’t twist your hair back so tightly; it 
will lose all its curl.” 

_ “Well, you are a funny one,” she said. 
“Good-night.” 
95 

At LEHMANN’S 

By the time Sabina was ready for bed 
Anna was snoring. She brushed out her 
long hair and gathered it in her hands... . 
Perhaps it would be a pity if it lost all its 
curl. Then she looked down at her straight 
chemise, and drawing it off, sat down on the 
side of the bed. 

“T wish,” she whispered, smiling sleepily, 
“there was a great big looking-glass in this 
room.” 

Lying down in the darkness, she hugged 
her little body. 

“T wouldn’t be the Frau for one hundred 
marks—not for a thousand marks. ‘To look 
like that.” 

And half-dreaming, she imagined herself 
heaving up in her chair with the port wine 
bottle in her hand as the Young Man 
entered the café. 

Cold and dark the next morning. Sabina 
woke, tired, feeling as though something 
heavy had been pressing under her heart all 
night. There was a sound of footsteps 
shuffling along the passage. Herr Leh- 
mann! She must have overslept herself. 
Yes, he was rattling the door-handle. 

96 

AT LEHMANN’S 

“One moment, one moment,” she called, 
dragging on her stockings. 

“Bina, tell Anna to go to the Frau—but 
quickly. JI must ride for the nurse.” 

“Yes, yes!” she cried. ‘Has it come?” 

But he had gone, and she ran over to 
Anna and shook her by the shoulder. 

“The Frau—the baby—Herr Lehmann 
for the nurse,” she stuttered. 

“Name of God!” said Anna, flinging her- 
self out of bed. 

No complaints to-day. Importance— 
enthusiasm in Anna’s whole bearing. 

“You run downstairs and light the oven. 
Put on a pan of water”’—speaking to an 
imaginary sufferer as she fastened her 
blouse—‘Yes, yes, I know—we must be 
worse before we are better—I’m coming— 
patience.” 

It was dark all that day. Lights were 
turned on immediately the café opened, and 
business was very brisk. Anna, turned out 
of the Frau’s room by the nurse, refused to 
work, and sat in a corner nursing herself, 
listening to sounds overhead. Hans was 
more sympathetic than Sabina. He also 

97 

At LEHMANN’S 
forsook work, and stood by the window, 
picking his nose. 

“But why must I do everything?” said 
Sabina, washing glasses. “I can’t help the 
Frau; she oughtn’t to take such a time about 
tow 

“Listen,” said Anna, “they've moved her 
into the back bedroom, above here, so as not 
to disturb the people. That was a groan 
—that one!” 

“Two small beers,” shouted Herr Leh- 
mann through the slide. 

“One moment, one moment.” 

At eight o’clock the café was deserted. 
Sabina sat down in the corner without her 
sewing. Nothing seemed to have happened 
to the Frau. A doctor had come—that was 
all. 

“Ach,” said Sabina. “I think no more 
of it. Ilistenno more. Ach, I would like 
go away—I hate this talk. I will not hear 
it. No, it is too much.” She leaned both 
elbows on the table—cupped her face in her 
hands and pouted. 

But the outer door suddenly opening, she 
sprang to her feet and laughed. It was the 

98 

AT LEHMANN’S 
Young Man again. He ordered more port, 
and brought no book this time. 

“Don’t go and sit miles away,” he grum- 
bled. ‘I want to be amused. And here, 
take my coat. Can’t you dry it somewhere? 
—snowing again.” 

“‘There’s a warm place—the ladies’ cloak- 
room,” she said. “I'll take it in there—just 
by the kitchen.” 

She felt better, and quite happy again. 

“T’ll come with you,” he said. “I'll see 
where you put it.” 

And that did not seem at all extraordi- 
nary. She laughed and beckoned to him. 

“Tn here,” she cried. ‘Feel how warm. 
I'll put more wood on that oven. It doesn’t 
matter, they’re all busy upstairs.” 

She knelt down on the floor, and thrust 
the wood into the oven, laughing at her own 
wicked extravagance. 

The Frau was forgotten, the stupid day 
was forgotten. Here was someone beside 
’ her laughing, too. They were together in 
the little warm room stealing Herr Leh- 
mann’s wood. It seemed the most exciting 
adventure in the world. She wanted to go 

99 

AT LEHMANN’S 
on laughing—or burst out crying—or—or 
—catch hold of the Young Man.” 

“What a fire,” she shrieked, stretching 
out her hands. 

“FHere’s a hand; pull up,” said the Young 
Man. “There, now, you'll catch it to- 
morrow.” 

They stood opposite to each other, hands 
still clinging. And again that strange tre- 
mor thrilled Sabina. 

“Took here,” he said roughly, “are you a 
child, or are you playing at being onee”’ 

A Pee) foe) 

Laughter ceased. She looked up at him 
once, then down at the floor, and began 
breathing like a frightened little animal. 

He pulled her closer still and kissed her 
mouth. 

“Na, what are you doing?” she whis- 
pered. 

He let go her hands, he placed his on her 
breasts, and the room seemed to swim round 
Sabina. Suddenly, from the room above, a 
frightful, tearing shriek. 

She wrenched herself away, tightened 
herself, drew herself up. 

100 

AT LEHMANN’S 
“Who did that—who made that noise?” 

In the silence the thin wailing of a baby. 

‘“‘Achk!” shrieked Sabina, rushing from 
the room. 

IOI 

THE LUFT BAD 

THINK it must be the umbrellas 
which make us look ridiculous. 
When I was admitted into the en- 
closure for the first time, I saw my fellow- 
bathers walking about very nearly in their 
nakeds, it struck me that the umbrellas gave 
a distinctly Little Black Sambo touch. 

Ridiculous dignity in holding over your- 
self a green cotton thing with a red parro- 
quet handle when you are dressed in noth- 
ing larger than a handkerchief. 

There are no treessinithe 1suitebad. nt 
boasts a collection of plain, wooden cells, a 
bath shelter, two swings and two odd clubs 
—one presumably the lost property of Her- 
cules or the German army, and the other to 
be used with safety in the cradle. 

And there in all weathers we take the 
air—walking, or sitting in little companies 
talking over each other’s ailments and 

102 

THE Lurt Bap 
measurements and ills that flesh is heir to. 

A high wooden wall compasses us all 
about; above it the pine-trees look down a 
little superciliously, nudging each other in 
a way that is peculiarly trying to a débu- 
tante. Over the wall, on the right side, is 
the men’s section. We hear them chopping 
down trees and sawing through planks, 
dashing heavy weights to the ground, and 
singing part songs. Yes, they take it far 
more seriously. 

On the first day I was conscious of my 
legs, and went back into my cell three times 
to look at my watch, but when a woman with 
whom I had played chess for three weeks 
cut me dead, I took heart and joirred a cir- 
cle. 

We lay curled on the ground while a 
Hungarian lady of immense proportions 
told us what a beautiful tomb she had 
bought for her second husband. 

‘“‘A vault it is,” she said, ‘“‘with nice black 
railings. And so large that I can go down 
there and walk about. Both their photo- 
graphs are there, with two very handsome 
wreaths sent me by my first husband’s 

103 

Tue Lurt Bap 
brother. There is an enlargement of a 
family group photograph, too, and an illu- 
minated address presented to my first hus- 
band on his marriage. I am often there; it 
makes such a pleasant excursion for a fine 
Saturday afternoon.” 

She suddenly lay down flat on her back, 
took in six long breaths, and sat up again. 

“The death agony was dreadful,” she said 
brightly; “of the second, Imean. The first 
was run into by a furniture waggon, and had 
fifty marks stolen out of a new waistcoat 
pocket, but the second was dying for sixty- 
seven hours. I never ceased crying once 
—not even to put the children to bed.” 

A young Russian, with a “bang” curl on 
her forehead, turned to me. 

“Can you do the ‘Salome’ dance?” she 
asked==a decane? 

“How delightful,” I said. 

“Shall I do it now? Would you like to 
see mer” 

She sprang to her feet, executed a series of 
amazing contortions for the next ten min- 
utes, and then paused, panting, twisting her 
long hair. 

104 

Tue Lurrt Bap 

“TIsn’t that nice?” she said. “And now 
I am perspiring so splendidly. I shall go 
and take a bath.” 

Opposite to me was the brownest woman 
I have ever seen, lying on her back, her 
arms clasped over her head. 

“How long have you been here to-day?” 
she was asked. 

“Oh, I spend the day here now,” she an- 
swered. “I am making my own ‘cure,’ and 
living entirely on raw vegetables and nuts, 
and each day [I feel my spirit is stronger 
and purer. After all, what can you expect? 
The majority of us are walking about with 
pig corpuscles and oxen fragments in our 
brain. The wonder is the world is as good 
as it is. Now I live on the simple, pro- 
vided food”—she pointed to a little bag be- 
side her—“a lettuce, a carrot, a potato, and 
some nuts are ample, rational nourishment. 
I wash them under the tap and eat them 
raw, just as they come from the harmless 
earth—fresh and uncontaminated.” 

“Do you take nothing else all dayr” I 
cried. 

“Water. And perhaps a banana if I 

105 

THE Lurt Bap 
wake in the night.” She turned round and 
leaned on one elbow. “You over-eat your- 
self dreadfully,” she said; “shamelessly! 
How can you expect the Flame of the Spirit 
to burn brightly under layers of superfluous 
flesh?” 

I wished she would not stare at me, and 
thought of going to look at my watch again 
when a little girl wearing a string of coral 
beads joined us. 

“The poor Frau Hauptmann cannot join 
us to-day,” she said; “she has come out in 
spots all over on account of her nerves. 
She was very excited yesterday after having 
written two post-cards.” 

“A delicate woman,’ volunteered the 
Hungarian, “but pleasant. Fancy, she has 
a separate plate for each of her front teeth! 
But she has no right to let her daughters 
wear such short sailor suits. They sit about 
on benches, crossing their legs in a most 
shameless manner. What are you going to 
do this afternoon, Fraulein Annae” 

“Oh,” said the Coral Necklace, “the Herr 
Oberleutnant has asked me to go with him 

106 

THE Lurt Bap 
to Landsdorf. He must buy some eggs 
there to take home to his mother. He saves 
a penny on eight eggs by knowing the right 
peasants to bargain with.” 

“Are you an American?” said the Veg- 
etable Lady, turning to me. 

“NO. 

“Then you are an Englishwoman?” 

“Well, hardl 2 

“You must be one of the two; you can- 
not help it. I have seen you walking alone 
several times. You wear your . 

I got up and climbed on to the swing. 
The air was sweet and cool, rushing past 
my body. Above, white clouds trailed 
delicately through the blue sky. From the 
pine forest streamed a wild perfume, the 
branches swayed together, rhythmically, 
sonorously. I felt so light and free and 
happy—so childish! I wanted to poke my 
tongue out at the circle on the grass, who, 
drawing close together, were whispering 
meaningly. 

“Perhaps you do not know,” cried a voice 
from one of the cells, ‘‘to swing is very up- 

107 

THE Lurt Bap 
setting for the stomach? A friend of mine 
could keep nothing down for three weeks 
after exciting herself so.” 

I went to the bath shelter and was hosed. 

As I dressed, someone tapped on the wall. 

“Do you know,” said a voice, “there is a 
man who /ives in the Luft Bad next door? 
He buries himself up to the armpits in mud 
and refuses to believe in the Trinity.” 

The umbrellas are the saving grace of the 
Luft Bad. Now, when I go, I take my 
husband’s storm gamp and sit in a corner, 
hiding behind it. 

Not that I am in the least ashamed of my 
legs. 

108 

A BIRTHDAY 

NDREAS BINZER woke slowly. 
A He turned over on the narrow bed 
and stretched himself—yawned— 
opening his mouth as widely as possible and 
bringing his teeth together afterwards with 
a sharp “click.” The sound of that click 
fascinated him; he repeated it quickly 
several times, with a snapping movement 
of the jaws. What teeth! he thought. 
Sound as a bell, every man jack of them. 
Never had one out, never had one stopped. 
That comes of no tomfoolery in eating, and 
a good regular brushing night and morning. 
He raised himself on his left elbow and 
waved his right arm over the side of the 
bed to feel for the chair where he put his 
watch and chain overnight. No chair was 
there—of course, he’d forgotten, there 
wasn’t a chair in this wretched spare room. 
Had to put the confounded thing under his 
109 

A BIRTHDAY 
pillow, ‘“Half-past eight, Sunday, break- 
fast at nine—time for the bath”—his brain 
ticked to the watch. He sprang out of bed 
and went over to the window. ‘The vene- 
tian blind was broken, hung fan-shaped 
over the upper pane... . “That blind 
must be mended. Ill get the office boy to 
drop in and fix it on his way home to- 
morrow—he’s a good hand at blinds. 
Give him twopence and he’ll do it as well as 
a carpenter... + -eAnla could dont iiersels 
if she was all right. So would I, for the 
matter of that, but I don’t like to trust my- 
self on rickety step-ladders.” He looked 
up at the sky: it shone, strangely white, un- 
flecked with cloud; he looked down at the 
row of garden strips and backyards. The 
fence of these gardens was built along the 
edge of a gully, spanned by an iron suspen- 
sion bridge, and the people had a wretched 
habit of throwing their empty tins over the 
fence into the gully. Just like them, of 
course! Andreas started counting the tins, 
and decided, viciously, to write a letter to 
the papers about it and sign it—sign it in 
full. 
110 

A BirTHDAY 

The servant girl came out of their back 
door into the yard, carrying his boots. She 
threw one down on the ground, thrust her 
hand into the other, and stared at it, suck- 
ing in her cheeks. Suddenly she bent for- 
ward, spat on the toecap, and started pol- 
ishing with a brush rooted out of her apron 
pocket... olut ot a ‘girl!~ Heaven 
knows what infectious disease may be breed- 
ing now in that boot. Anna must get rid 
of that girl—even if she has to do without 
one for a bit—as soon as she’s up and about 
again. The way she chucked one boot 
down and then spat upon the other! She 
didn’t care whose boots she’d got hold of. 
She had no false notions of the respect due 
to the master of the house.” He turned 
away from the window and switched his 
bath towel from the washstand rail, sick at 
heart. “I’m too sensitive for a man—that’s 
what’s the matter with me. Have been 
from the beginning, and will be to the end.” 

There was a gentle knock at the door and 
his mother came in. She closed the door 
after her and leant against it. Andreas 
noticed that her cap was crooked, and a 

III 

A BIRTHDAY 
long tail of hair hung over her shoulder. 
He went forward and kissed her. 

“Good-morning, mother; how’s Anna?” 

The old woman spoke quickly, clasping 
and unclasping her hands. 

“Andreas, please go to Doctor Erb as 
soon as you are dressed.” 

“Why,” he said,“‘is she bad?” 

Frau Binzer nodded, and Andreas, 
watching her, saw her face suddenly 
change; a fine network of wrinkles seemed 
to pull over it from under the skin surface. 

‘Sit down on the bed a moment,” he said. 
“Been up all night?” 

“Yes. No, I won’t sit down, I must go 
back to her. Anna has been in pain all 
night. She wouldn’t have you disturbed 
before because she said you looked so run 
down yesterday. You told her you had 
caught a cold and been very worried.” 

Straightway Andreas felt that he was be- 
ing accused. 

“Well, she made me tell her, worried it 
out of me; you know the way she does.” 

Again Frau Binzer nodded. 

“Oh yes, I know. She says, is your cold 

I1i2 

A. BIRTHDAY 
better, and there’s a warm undervest for 
you in the left-hand corner of the big 
drawer.” 

Quite automatically Andreas cleared his 
throat twice. 

“Yes,” he answered. “Tell her my 
throat certainly feels looser. I suppose I’d 
better not disturb her?” 

“No, and besides, time, Andreas.” 

“Tl be ready in five minutes.” 

They went into the passage. As Frau 
Binzer opened the door of the front bed- 
room, a long wail came from the room. 

That shocked and terrified Andreas. He 
dashed into the bathroom, turned on both 
taps as far as they would go, cleaned his 
teeth and pared his nails while the water 
was running. 

“Frightful business, frightful business,” 
he heard himself whispering. “And I 
can’t understand it. It isn’t as though it 
were her first—it’s her third. Old Schafer 
told me, yesterday, his wife simply 
‘dropped’ her fourth. Anna ought to have 
had a qualified nurse. Mother gives way 
to her. Mother spoils her. I wonder 

LA 

A BIRTHDAY 
what she meant by saying I’d worried Anna 
yesterday. Nice remark to make to a hus- 
band at a time like this. Unstrung, I sup- 
pose—and my sensitiveness again.” 

When he went into the kitchen for his 
boots, the servant girl was bent over the 
stove, cooking breakfast. ‘Breathing into 
that, now, I suppose,” thought Andreas, and 
was very short with the servant girl. She 
did not notice. She was full of terrified 
joy and importance in the goings on up- 
stairs. She felt she was learning the secrets 
of life with every breath she drew. Had 
laid the table that morning saying, “Boy,” 
as she put down the first dish, “Girl,” as she 
placed the second—it had worked out with 
the saltspoon to “Boy.” ‘For two pins I’d 
tell the master that, to comfort him, like,” 
she decided. But the master gave her no 
opening. 

“Put an extra cup and saucer on the 
table,” he said; “the doctor may want some 
coffee.” 

“The doctor, sir?’ The servant girl 
whipped a spoon out of a pan, and spilt two 
drops of grease on the stove. “Shall I fry 

114 

A BIRTHDAY 

something extra?’ But the master had 
gone, slamming the door after him. He 
walked down the street—there was nobody 
about at all—dead and alive this place on 
a Sunday morning. As he crossed the sus- 
pension bridge a strong stench of fennel and 
decayed refuse streamed from the gully, and 
again Andreas began concocting a letter. 
He turned into the main road. The shut- 
ters were still up before the shops. Scraps 
of newspaper, hay, and fruit skins strewed 
the pavement; the gutters were choked with 
the leavings of Saturday night. Two dogs 
sprawled in the middle of the road, scuffling 
and biting. Only the public-house at the 
corner was open; a young barman slopped 
water over the doorstep. 

Fastidiously, his lips curling, Andreas 
picked his way through the water. ‘“Ex- 
traordinary how I am noticing things this 
morning. It’s partly the effect of Sunday. 
I loathe a Sunday when Anna’s tied by the 
leg and the children are away. On Sun- 
day a man has the right to expect his family. 
Everything here’s filthy, the whole place 
might be-down with the plague, and will 

11s 

| A. BIRTHDAY 
be, too, if this street’s not swept away. Id 
like to have a hand on the government 
ropes.” He braced his shoulders. ‘Now 
for this doctor.” 

“Doctor Erb is at breakfast,” the maid 
informed him. She showed him into the 
waiting-room, a dark and musty place, with 
some ferns under a glass-case by the win- 
dow. ‘He says he won’t be a minute, 
please, sir, and there is a paper on the table.” 

“Unhealthy hole,” thought Binzer, walk- 
ing over to the window and drumming his 
fingers on the glass fern-shade. “At break- 
fast, is he? ‘That’s the mistake I made: 
turning out early on an empty stomach.” 

A milk cart rattled down the street, the 
driver standing at the back, cracking a 
whip; he wore an immense geranium flower 
stuck in the lapel of his coat. Firm as a 
rock he stood, bending back a little in the 
swaying cart. Andreas craned his neck to 
watch him all the way down the road, even 
after he had gone, listening for the sharp 
sound of those rattling cans. 

“H’m, not much wrong with him,” he 
reflected. ‘“Wouldn’t mind a taste of that 

116 

A BIRTHDAY 
life myself. Up early, work all over by 
eleven o’clock, nothing to do but loaf about 
all day until milking time.” Which he 
knew was an exaggeration, but he wanted 
to pity himself. 

The maid opened the door, and stood 
aside for Doctor Erb. Andreas wheeled 
round; the two men shook hands. 

“Well, Binzer,” said the doctor jovially, 
brushing some crumbs from a_ pearl- 
coloured waistcoat, “son and heir becoming 
importunate?” 

Up went Binzer’s spirits with a bound. 
Son and heir, by Jove! He was glad to 
have to deal with a man again. Anda sane 
fellow this, who came across this sort of 
thing every day of the week. 

“That’s about the measure of it, Doctor,” 
he answered, smiling and picking up his hat. 
“Mother dragged me out of bed this morn- 
ing with imperative orders to bring you 
along.” 

“Gig will be round in a minute. Drive 
back with me, won’t you? Extraordinary, 
sultry day; you’re as red as a beetroot al- 
ready.” 

117 

A BIRTHDAY 

Andreas affected to laugh. The doctor 
had one annoying habit—imagined he had 
the right to poke fun at everybody simply 
because he was a doctor. ‘The man’s rid- 
dled with conceit, like all these profes- 
sionals,” Andreas decided. 

‘What sort of night did Frau Binzer 
haver” asked the doctor. “Ah, here’s the 
gig. Tell me on the way up. Sit as near 
the middle as you can, will you, Binzer? 
Your weight tilts it over a bit one side— 
that’s the worst of you successful business 
men.” 

“Two stone heavier than J, if he’s a 
pound,” thought Andreas. “The man may 
be all right in his profession—but heaven 
preserve me.” 

“Off you go, my beauty.” Doctor Erb 
flicked the little brown mare. “Did your 
wife get any sleep last night?” 

“No; I don’t think she did,” answered 
Andreas shortly. “To tell you the truth, 
I’m not satisfied that she hasn’t a nurse.” 

“Oh, your mother’s worth a dozen 
nurses,” cried the doctor, with immense 
gusto. ‘To tell you the truth, I’m not keen 

118 

A BIRTHDAY 
on nurses—too raw—raw as rump-steak. 
They wrestle for a baby as though they were 
wrestling with Death for the body of Patro- 
clus. ... Ever seen that picture by an 
English artist. Leighton? Wonderful 
thing—full of sinew!” 

“There he goes again,” thought Andreas, 
“airing off his knowledge to make a fool of 
me: 

“Now your mother—she’s firm—she’s 
capable. Does what she’s told with a fund 
of sympathy. Look at these shops we’re 
passing—they’re festering sores. How on 
earth this government can tolerate Ys 

“They’re not so bad—sound enough— 
only want a coat of paint.” 

The doctor whistled a little tune and 
flicked the mare again. 

“Well, I hope the young shaver won’t 
give his mother too much trouble,” he said. 
“Flere we are,” 

A skinny little boy, who had been sliding 
up and down the back seat of the gig, sprang 
out and held the horse’s head. Andreas 
went straight into the dining-room and left 
the servant girl to take the doctor upstairs. 

119 

A BIRTHDAY 

He sat down, poured out some coffee, and 
bit through half a roll before helping him- 
self to fish. ‘Then he noticed there was no 
hot plate for the fish—the whole house was 
at sixes and sevens. He rang the bell, but 
the servant girl came in with a tray holding 
a bow] of soup and a hot plate. 

“T’ve been keeping them on the stove,” 
she simpered. 

“Ah, thanks, that’s very kind of you.” 
As he swallowed the soup his heart warmed 
to this fool of a girl. 

“Oh, it’s a good thing Doctor Erb has 
come,” volunteered the servant girl, who 
was bursting for want of sympathy. 

“F’m, h’m,” said Andreas. 

She waited a moment, expectantly, roll- 
ing her eyes, then in full loathing of men- 
kind went back to the kitchen and vowed 
herself to sterility. 

Andreas cleared the soup bowl, and 
cleared. the fish; As=he ate, the sroont 
slowly darkened. A faint wind sprang up 
and beat the tree branches against the win- 
dow. The dining-room looked over the 
breakwater of the harbour, and the sea 

120 

A BIRTHDAY 

swung heavily in rolling waves. Wind 
crept round the house, moaning drearily. 

“We're in for a storm. That means I’m 
boxed up here all day. Well, there’s one 
blessing; itll clear the air.” He heard the 
servant girl rushing importantly round the 
house, slamming windows. Then he 
caught a glimpse of her in the garden, un- 
pegging tea towels from the line across the 
lawn. She was a worker, there was no 
doubt about that. He took up a book, and 
wheeled his arm-chair over to the window. 
But it was useless. ‘Too dark to read; he 
didn’t believe in straining his eyes, and gas 
at ten o’clock in the morning seemed ab- 
surd. So he slipped down in the chair, 
leaned his elbows on the padded arms and 
gave himself up, for once, to idle dreaming. 
“A boy? Yes, it was bound to be a boy 
(hismetimne... +. °° Whats syour family, 
Binzer?” “Oh, I’ve two girls and a boy!” 
A very nice little number. Of course he 
was the last man to have a favourite child, 
but a man needed a son. “I’m working up 
the business for my son! Binzer & Son! 
It would mean living very tight for the next 

121 

A. BIRTHDAY 
ten years, cutting expenses as fine as pos- 
sible; and then——” 

A tremendous gust of wind sprang upon 
the house, seized it, shook it, dropped, only 
to grip the more tightly. The waves 
swelled up along the breakwater and were 
whipped with broken foam. Over the 
white sky flew tattered streamers of grey 
cloud. 

Andreas felt quite relieved to hear Doctor 
Erb coming down the stairs; he got up and 
lit the gas. 

“Mind if I smoke in here?” asked Doc- 
tor Erb, lighting a cigarette before Andreas 
had time to answer. “You don’t smoke, 
do your No time to indulge in pernicious 
little habits!” 

“How is she now?” asked Andreas, loath- 
ing the man. 

“Oh, well as can be expected, poor little 
soul. She begged me to come down and 
have a look at you. Said she knew you 
were worrying.’ With laughing eyes the 
doctor looked at the breakfast-table. Man- 
aged to peck a bit, I see, eh?” 

122 

A BIRTHDAY 

“Hoo-wih!” shouted the wind, shaking 
the window-sashes. 

“Pity this weather,” said Doctor Erb. 

“Yes, it gets on Anna’s nerves, and it’s 
just nerve she wants.” 

“Eh, what’s that?” retorted the doctor. 
“Nerve! Man alive! She’s got twice the 
nerve of you and me rolled into one. 
Nerve! she’s nothing but nerve. A woman 
who works as she does about the house and 
has three children in four years thrown in 
with the dusting, so to speak!” 

He pitched his half-smoked cigarette 
into the fireplace and frowned at the win- 
dow. 

“Now he’s accusing me,” thought An- 
dreas. ‘“That’s the second time this morn- 
ing—first mother and now this man taking 
advantage of my sensitiveness.” He could 
not trust himself to speak, and rang the bell 
for the servant girl. 

“Clear away the breakfast things,” he 
ordered. “I can’t have them messing 
about on the table till dinner!” 

“Don’t be hard on the girl,”’ coaxed Doc- 

123 

A BirTHDAY 
tor Erb. ‘“She’s got twice the work to do 
to-day.” 

At that Binzer’s anger blazed out. 

“T’ll trouble you, Doctor, not to interfere 
between me and my servants!’ And he 
felt a fool at the same moment for not say- 
ing “servant.” 

Doctor Erb was not perturbed. He 
shook his head, thrust his hands into his 
pockets, and began balancing himself on 
toe and heel. 

“You’re jagged by the weather,” he said 
wryly, “nothing else. A great pity—this 
storm. You know climate has an immense 
effect upon birth. A fine day perks a 
woman—gives her heart for her business. 
Good weather is as necessary to a confine- 
ment as it is to a washing day. Not bad— 
that last remark of mine—for a professional 
fossil, eh?” 

Andreas made no reply. 

“Well, Dll be getting back to my patient. 
Why don’t you take a walk, and clear your 
head? That’s the idea for you.” 

“No,” he answered, “I won’t do that; it’s 
too rough.” 

124 

A. BirTHDAY 

He went back to his chair by the window. 
While the servant girl cleared away he pre- 
tended to read ... then his dreams! It 
seemed years since he had had the time to 
himself to dream like that—he never had a 
breathing space. Saddled with work all 
day, and couldn’t shake it off in the evening 
like other men. Besides, Anna was in- 
terested—they talked of practically nothing 
else together. Excellent mother she’d make 
for a boy; she had a grip of things. 

Church bells started ringing through the 
windy air, now sounding as though from 
very far away, then again as though all the 
churches in the town had been suddenly 
transplanted into their street. ‘They stirred 
something in him, those bells, something 
vague and tender. Just about that time 
Anna would call him from the hall. “An- 
dreas, come and have your coat brushed. 
I’m ready.” ‘Then off they would go, she 
hanging on his arm, and looking up at him. 
She certainly was a little thing. He re- 
membered once saying when they were en- 
gaged, “Just as high as my heart,” and she 
had jumped on a stool and pulled his head 

125 

A BIRTHDAY 

down, laughing. A kid in those days, 
younger than her children in nature, 
brighter, more “go” and “spirit” in her. 
The way she’d run down the road to meet 
him after business! And the way she 
laughed when they were looking for a house. 
By Jove! that laugh of hers! At the mem- 
ory he grinned, then grew suddenly grave. 
Marriage certainly changed a woman far 
more than it did a man. ‘Talk about sober- 
ing down. She had lost all her go in two 
months! Well, once this boy business was 
over she'd get stronger. He began to plan 
a little trip for them. He’d take her away 
and they’d loaf about together somewhere. 
After all, dash it, they were young still. 
She’d got into a groove; he’d have to force 
her out of it, that’s all. 

He got up and went into the drawing- 
room, carefully shut the door and took 
Anna’s photograph from the top of the 
piano. She wore a white dress with a big 
bow of some soft stuff under the chin, and 
stood, a little stiffly, holding a sheaf of 
artificial poppies and corn in her hands. 
Delicate she looked even then; her masses 

126 

A. BIRTHDAY 
of hair gave her that look. She seemed to 
droop under the heavy braids of it, and yet 
she was smiling. Andreas caught his 
breath sharply. She was his wife—that 
girl. Bosh! it had only been taken four 
years ago. He held it close to him, bent 
forward and kissed it. Then rubbed the 
glass with the back of his hand. At that 
moment, fainter than he had heard in the 
passage, more terrifying, Andreas heard 
again that wailing cry. The wind caught 
it up in mocking echo, blew it over the 
house-tops, down the street, far away from 
him. He flung out his arms. “I’m so 
damnably helpless,” he said, and then, to 
the picture, ‘Perhaps it’s not as bad as it 
sounds; perhaps it is just my sensitiveness.” 
In the half light of the drawing-room the 
smile seemed to deepen in Anna’s portrait, 
and to become secret, even cruel. ‘No,’ 
he reflected, “that smile is not at all her 
happiest expression—it was a mistake to let 
her have it taken smiling like that. She 
doesn’t look like my wife—like the mother 
of my son.” Yes, that was it, she did not 
look like the mother of a son who was going 
124 

A BIRTHDAY 

to be a partner in the firm. The picture 
got on his nerves; he held it in different 
lights, looked at it from a distance, side- 
ways, spent, it seemed to Andreas after- 
wards, a whole lifetime trying to fit it in. 
The more he played with it the deeper 
grew his dislike of it. Thrice he carried 
it over to the fireplace and decided to 
chuck it behind the Japanese umbrella in 
the grate; then he thought it absurd to waste 
an expensive frame. ‘There was no good in 
beating about the bush. Anna looked like 
a stranger—abnormal, a freak—it might be 
a picture taken just before or after death. 

Suddenly he realised that the wind had 
dropped, that the whole house was still, 
terribly still. Cold and pale, with a dis- 
gusting feeling that spiders were creeping 
up his spine and across his face, he stood 
in the centre of the drawing-room, hearing 
Doctor Erb’s footsteps descending the 
stairs. 

He saw Doctor Erb come into the room; 
the room seemed to change into a great glass 
bowl that spun round, and Doctor Erb 
seemed to swim through this glass bowl to- 

128 

A. BIRTHDAY 
wards him, like a goldfish in a pearl- 
coloured waistcoat. 

“My beloved wife has passed away!” 
He wanted to shout it out before the doc- 
tor spoke. 

“Well, she’s hooked a boy this time!” 
said Doctor Erb. Andreas staggered for- 
ward. 

“Look out. Keep on your pins,” said 
Doctor Erb, catching Binzer’s arm, and 
murmuring, as he felt it, “Flabby as butter.” 

A glow spread all over Andreas. He was 
exultant. 

“Well, by God! Nobody can accuse me 
of not knowing what suffering is,” he said. 

129 

THE CHILD-WHO-WAS-TIRED 

HE was just beginning to walk along 
a little white road with tall black 

trees on either side, a little road that 
led to nowhere, and where nobody walked 
at all, when a hand gripped her shoulder, 
shook her, slapped her ear. 

“Oh, oh, don’t stop me,” cried the Child- 
Who-Was-Tired. “Let me go.” 

“Get up, you good-for-nothing brat,” 
said a voice; “get up and light the oven or 
I'll shake every bone out of your body.” 

With an immense effort she opened her 
eyes, and saw the Frau standing by, the baby 
bundled under one arm. The three other 
children who shared the same bed with 
the Child-Who-Was-Tired, accustomed to 
brawls, slept on peacefully. In a corner 
of the room the Man was fastening his 
braces. 

‘‘What do you mean by sleeping like this 

130 

THE CHILD-WHO-Was-TIRED 
the whole night through—like a sack of 
potatoes? You've let the baby wet his bed 
twice.” | 

She did not answer, but tied her petticoat 
string, and buttoned on her plaid frock with 
cold, shaking fingers. 

“There, that’s enough. Take the baby 
into the kitchen with you, and heat that cold 
coffee on the spirit lamp for the master, and 
give him the loaf of black bread out of the 
table drawer. Don’t guzzle it yourself or 
Pll know.” 

The Frau staggered across the room, 
flung herself on to her bed, drawing the 
pink bolster round her shoulders. 

It was almost dark in the kitchen. She 
laid the baby on the wooden settle, covering 
him with a shawl, then poured the coffee 
from the earthenware jug into the saucepan, 
and set it on the spirit lamp to boil. 

“T’m sleepy,” nodded the Child-Who- 
Was-Tired, kneeling on the floor and split- 
ting the damp pine logs into little chips. 
“That’s why I’m not awake.” 

The oven took a long time to light. Per- 
haps it was cold, like herself, and sleepy. .. . 

131 

THe CuHitp-WHo-Was-TirRED 
Perhaps it had been dreaming of a little 
white road with black trees on either side, 
a little road that led to nowhere. 

Then the door was pulled violently open 
and the Man strode in. 

“Here, what are you doing, sitting on the 
floor?” he shouted. “Give me my coffee. 
I’ve got to be off. Ugh! You haven’t even 
washed over the table.” 

She sprang to her feet, poured his coffee 
into an enamel cup, and gave him bread and 
a knife, then, taking a wash rag from the 
sink, smeared over the black linoleumed 
table. 

“Swine of a day—swine’s life,” mumbled 
the Man, sitting by the table and staring out 
of the window at the bruised sky, which 
seemed to bulge heavily over the dull land. 
He stuffed his mouth with bread and then 
swilled it down with the coffee. 

The Child drew a pail of water, turned 
up her sleeves, frowning the while at her 
arms, as if to scold them for being so thin, 
so much like little stunted twigs, and began 
to mop over the floor. 

“Stop sousing about the water while I’m 

132 

THE CHILD-WHO-WaS-TIRED 
here,” grumbled the man. “Stop the baby 
snivelling; it’s been going on like that all 
night.” 

The Child gathered the baby into her lap 
and sat rocking him. 

“Ts—ts—ts,” she said. “He’s cutting his 
eye teeth, that’s what makes him cry so. 
And dribble—I never seen a baby dribble 
like this one.” She wiped his mouth and 
nose with a corner of her skirt. ‘Some ba- 
bies get their teeth without you knowing it,” 
she went on, “and some take on this way all 
the time. I once heard of a baby that died, 
and they found all its teeth in its stomach.” 

The Man got up, unhooked his cloak 
from the back of the door, and flung it 
round him. 

“There’s another coming,” said he. 

“What—a tooth!” exclaimed the Child, 
startled for the first time that morning out 
of her dreadful heaviness, and thrusting her 
finger into the baby’s mouth. 

“No,” he said grimly, “another baby. 
Now, get on with your work; it’s time the 
others got up for school.”’ She stood a mo- 
ment quite silently, hearing his heavy steps 

133 

THe CurLtp-WHo-Was-TIRED 
on the stone passage, then the gravel walk, 
and finally the slam of the front gate. 

“Another baby! Hasn’t she finished 
having them yet?” thought the Child. 
“Two babies getting eye teeth—two babies 
to get up for in the night—two babies to 
carry about and wash their little piggy 
clothes!” She looked with horror at the 
one in her arms, who, seeming to under- 
stand the contemptuous loathing of her 
tired glance, doubled his fists, stiffened his 
body, and began violently screaming. 

“’Ts—ts—ts.” She laid him on the settle 
and went back to her floor-washing. He 
never ceased crying for a moment, but she 
got quite used to it and kept time with her 
broom. Oh, how tired she was! Oh, the 
heavy broom handle and the burning spot 
just at the back of her neck that ached so, 
and a funny little fluttering feeling just at 
the back of her waistband, as though some- 
thing were going to break. 

The clock struck six. She set the pan of 
milk in the oven, and went into the next 
room to wake and dress the three children. 
Anton and Hans lay together in attitudes 

134 

THE CHILD-WHo-Was-TIRED 
of mutual amity which certainly never 
existed out of their sleeping hours. Lena 
was curled up, her knees under her chin, 
only a straight, standing-up pigtail of hair 
showing above the bolster. 

“Get up,” cried the Child, speaking in a 
voice of immense authority, pulling off the 
bedclothes and giving the boys sundry pokes 
and digs. ‘I’ve been calling you this last 
half-hour. It’s late, and I’ll tell on you if 
you don’t get dressed this minute.” 

Anton awoke sufficiently to turn over and 
kick Hans on a tender part, whereupon 
Hans pulled Lena’s pigtail until she 
shrieked for her mother. 

“Oh, do be quiet,” whispered the Child. 
“Oh, do get up and dress. You know what 
will happen. There—I’ll help you.” 

But the warning came too late. The 
Frau got out of bed, walked in a deter- 
mined fashion into the kitchen, returning 
with a bundle of twigs in her hand fastened 
together with a strong cord. One by one 
she laid the children across her knee and 
severely beat them, expending a final burst 
of energy on the Child-Who-Was-Tired, 

135 

THE CHILD-WHo-Was-TIRED 
then returned to bed, with a comfortable 
sense of her maternal duties in good work- 
ing order for the day. Very subdued, the 
three allowed themselves to be dressed and 
washed by the Child, who even laced the 
boys’ boots, having found through ex- 
perience that if left to themselves they 
hopped about for at least five minutes to 
find a comfortable ledge for their foot, and 
then spat on their hands and broke the 
bootlaces. 

While she gave them their breakfast they 
became uproarious, and the baby would not 
cease crying. When she filled the tin 
kettle with milk, tied on the rubber teat, 
and, first moistening it herself, tried with 
little coaxing words to make him drink, he 
threw the bottle on to the floor and trem- 
bled all over. 

“Eye teeth!” shouted Hans, hitting An- 
ton over the head with his empty cup; 
“he’s getting the evil-eye teeth, I should 
Say.” 

“Smarty!” retorted Lena, poking out her 
tongue at him, and then, when he promptly 
did the same, crying at the top of her voice, 

136 

THE CHILD-WHO-Was-TIRED 
“Mother, Hans is making faces at me!” 

“That’s right,” said Hans; “go on howl- 
ing, and when you're in bed to-night I’ll 
wait till you’re asleep, and then I’ll creep 
over and take a little tiny piece of your 
arm and twist and twist it until mimelic 
leant over the table making the most hor- 
rible faces at Lena, not noticing that Anton 
was standing behind his chair until the 
little boy bent over and spat on his brother’s 
shaven head. 

“Oh, weh! oh, weh!” 

The Child-Who-Was-Tired pushed and 
pulled them apart, muffled them into their 
coats, and drove them out of the house. 

“Hurry, hurry! the second bell’s rung,” 
she urged, knowing perfectly well she was 
telling a story, and rather exulting in the 
fact. She washed up the breakfast things, 
then went down to the cellar to look out 
the potatoes and beetroot. 

Such a funny, cold place the coal cellar! 
With potatoes banked on one corner, beet- 
root in an old candle box, two tubs of 
sauerkraut, and a twisted mass of dahlia 
roots—that looked as real as though they 

137 

THE CuHILtp-WHo-Was- TiRED 
were fighting one another, thought the 
Child. 

She gathered the potatoes into her skirt, 
choosing big ones with few eyes because 
they were easier to peel, and bending over 
the dull heap in the silent cellar, she began 
to nod. 

“Here, you, what are you doing down 
therer” cried the Frau, from the top of 
the stairs. ‘The baby’s fallen off the settle, 
and got a bump as big as an egg over his 
eye. Come up here, and I’ll teach you!” 

“Tt wasn’t me—it wasn’t me!” screamed 
the Child, beaten from one side of the hall 
to the other, so that the potatoes and beet- 
root rolled out of her skirt. 

The Frau seemed to be as big as a giant, 
and there was a certain heaviness in all her 
movements that was terrifying to anyone 
so small. 

“Sit in the corner, and peel and wash the 
vegetables, and keep the baby quiet while 
I do the washing.” 

Whimpering she obeyed, but as to keep- 
ing the baby quiet, that was impossible. 

138 

THE CHILD-WHOo-Was-TiRED 
His face was hot, little beads of sweat 
stood all over his head, and he stiffened his 
body and cried. She held him on her 
knees, with a pan of cold water beside her 
for the cleaned vegetables and the ducks’ 
bucket for the peelings. 

“Ts—ts—ts!” she crooned, scraping and 
boring; “there’s going to be another soon, 
and you can’t both keep on crying. Why 
don’t you go to sleep, baby? I would, if 
I were you. I'll tell you a dream. Once 
upon a time there was a little white 
road a 

She shook back her head, a great lump 
ached in her throat and then the tears ran 
down her face on to the vegetables. 

“That’s no good,” said the Child, shak- 
ing them away. “Just stop crying until I’ve 
finished this, baby, and I'll] walk you up 
and down.” 

But by that time she had to peg out the 
washing for the Frau. A wind had sprung 
up. Standing on tiptoe in the yard, she 
almost felt she would be blown away. 
There was a bad smell coming from the 

139 

THe CuHILp-WHo-WaAs- TIRED 

ducks’ coop, which was half full of manure 
water, but away in the meadow she saw the 
grass blowing like little green hairs. And 
she remembered having heard of a child 
who had once played for a whole day in 
just such a meadow with real sausages and 
beer for her dinner—and not a little bit of 
tiredness. Who had told her that story? 
She could not remember, and yet it was so 
plain. 

The wet clothes flapped in her face as 
she pegged them; danced and jigged on the 
line, bulged out and twisted. She walked 
back to the house with lagging steps, look- 
ing longingly at the grass in the meadow. 

‘What must I do now, pleaser” she said. 

“Make the beds and hang the baby’s mat- 
tress out of the window, then get the wag- 
gon and take him for a little walk along 
the road. In front of the house, mind— 
where I can see you. Don’t stand there, 
gaping! Then come in when [I call you 
and help me cut up the salad.” 

When she had made the beds the Child 
stood and looked at them. Gently she 
stroked the pillow with her hand, and then, 

140 

THE CHILD-WHO-Was-TIRED 
just for one moment, let her head rest 
there. Again the smarting lump in her 
throat, the stupid tears that fell and kept 
on falling as she dressed the baby and 
dragged the little waggon up and down 
the road. 

A man passed, driving a bullock waggon. 
He wore a long, queer feather in his hat, 
and whistled as he passed. Two girls with 
bundles on their shoulders came walking 
out of the village—one wore a red handker- 
chief about her head and one a blue. 
They were laughing and holding each other 
by the hand. Then the sun pushed by a 
heavy fold of grey cloud and spread a warm 
yellow light over everything. 

“Perhaps,” thought the Child-Who-Was- 
Tired, “if I walked far enough up this road 
I might come to a little white one, with 
tall black trees on either side—a little 
road 

“Salad, salad!” cried the Frau’s voice 
from the house. 

Soon the children came home from 
school, dinner was eaten, the Man took the 
Frau’s share of pudding as well as his own, 

141 

THE CuHiILD-WHo-Was-TIRED 
and the three children seemed to smear 
themselves all over with whatever they ate. 
Then more dish-washing and more clean- 
ing and baby-minding. So the afternoon 
dragged coldly through. 

Old Frau Gerathwohl came in with a 
fresh piece of pig’s flesh for the Frau, and 
the Child listened to them gossiping to- 
gether. 

“Frau Manda went on her ‘journey to 
Rome’ last night, and brought back a 
daughter. How are you feeling?” 

“T was sick twice this morning,” said 
the Frau. ‘My insides are all twisted up 
with having children too quickly.” 

“I see you’ve got a new help,” com- 
mented old Mother Gerathwohl. 

“Oh, dear Lord’”’—the Frau lowered her 
voice—“‘don’t you know her? She’s the 
free-born one—daughter of the waitress at 
the railway station. They found her 
mother trying to squeeze her head in the 
wash-hand jug, and the child’s half silly.” 

“Ts—ts—ts!’ whispered the free-born 
one to the baby. 

As the day drew in the Child-Who-Was- 

142 

THE CHILD-WHO-Was-TIRED 
Tired did not know how to fight her sleepi- 
ness any longer. She was afraid to sit 
down or stand still. As she sat at supper 
the Man and the Frau seemed to swell to 
an immense size as she watched them, and 
then become smaller than dolls, with little 
voices that seemed to come from outside 
the window. Looking at the baby, it sud- 
denly had two heads, and then no head. 
Even his crying made her feel worse. 
When she thought of the nearness of bed- 
time she shook all over with excited joy. 
But as eight o’clock approached there was 
the sound of wheels on the road, and 
presently in came a party of friends to 
spend the evening. 

Then it was: 

Put on: the-cofice.” 

‘“‘Bring me the sugar tin.” 

“Carry the chairs out of the bed-room.” 

Spetatne table.’ 

And, finally, the Frau sent her into the 
next room to keep the baby quiet. 

There was a little piece of candle burn- 
ing in the enamel bracket. As she walked 
up and down she saw her great big shadow 

143 

THE Cuitp-WHo-Was-TiRrED 
on the wall like a grown-up person with a 
grown-up baby. Whatever would it look 
like when she carried two babies so! 

“Ts—ts—ts! Once upon a time she was 
walking along a little white road, with oh! 
such great big black trees on either side.” 

“Here, you!” called the Frau’s voice, 
“bring me my new jacket from behind the 
door.” And as she took it into the warm 
room one of the women said, ‘She looks 
like an owl. Such children are seldom 
right in their heads.” 

“Why don’t you keep that baby quiet?” 
said the Man, who had just drunk enough 
beer to make him feel very brave and mas- 
ter of his house. 

“If you don’t keep that baby quiet you'll 
know why later on.” 

They burst out laughing as she stumbled 
back into the bedroom. 

“T don’t believe Holy Mary could keep 
him quiet,” she murmured. “Did Jesus 
cry like this when He was littler If I was 
not so tired perhaps I could do it; but the 
baby just knows that I want to go to sleep. 

144 

THE CHILD-WHO-Was-TIRED 
And there is going to be another one.” 

She flung the baby on the bed, and stood 
looking at him with terror. 

From the next room there came the jingle 
of glasses and the warm sound of laughter. 

And she suddenly had a beautiful mar- 
vellous idea. 

She laughed for the first time that day, 
and clapped her hands. 

“Ts—ts—ts!” she said, “lie there, silly 
one; you will] go to sleep. You'll not cry 
any more or wake up in the night. Funny, 
little ugly baby.” 

He opened his eyes, and shrieked loudly 
at the sight of the Child-Who-Was-Tired. 
From the next room she heard the Frau call 
out to her. 

“One moment—he is almost asleep,” she 
cried. 

And then gently, smiling, on tiptoe, she 
brought the pink bolster from the Frau’s 
bed and covered the baby’s face with it, 
pressed with all her might as he struggled, 
‘Vike a duck with its head off, wriggling,” 
she thought. 

145 

THE CHILD-WHO-WaAs-TIRED 
She heaved a long sigh, then fell back on 
to the floor, and was walking along a little 
white road with tall black trees on either 
side, a little road that led to nowhere, and 
where nobody walked at all—nobody at all. 

146 

THE ADVANCED LADY 

se O you think we might ask her to 
come with us,” said Fraulein 

Elsa, retying her pink sash rib- 
bon before my mirror. “You know, al- 
though she is so intellectual, I cannot help 
feeling convinced that she has some secret 
sorrow. And Lisa told me this morning, 
as she was turning out my room, that she 
remains hours and hours by herself, writ- 
ing; in fact Lisa says she is writing a book! 
I suppose that is why she never cares to 
mingle with us, and has so little time for 
her husband and the child.” 

“Well, you ask her,’ said I. “I have 
never spoken to the lady.” 

Elsa blushed faintly. “I have only 
spoken to her once,” she confessed. “I 
took her a bunch of wild flowers, to her 
room, and she came to the door in a white 
gown, with her hair loose. Never shall I 
forget that moment. She just took the 

147 

THE ADVANCED LADY 
flowers, and I heard her—because the door 
was not quite properly shut—lI heard her, 
as I walked down the passage, saying, 
‘Purity, fragrance, the fragrance of purity 
and the purity of fragrance!’ It was won- 
derful!” 

At the moment Frau Kellermann 
knocked at the door. 

“Are you ready?” she said, coming into 
the room and nodding to us very genially. 
“The gentlemen are waiting on the steps, 
and I have asked the Advanced Lady to 
come with us.” 

“Na, how extraordinary!” cried Elsa 
“But this moment the gnadige Frau and I 
were debating whether 

“Yes, I met her coming out of her room 
and she said she was charmed with the idea. 
Like all of us, she has never been to Schlin- 
gen. She is downstairs now, talking to 
Herr Erchardt. J think we shall have a 
delightful afternoon.” 

“Ts Fritzi waiting too?” asked Elsa. 

“Of course he is, dear child—as impa- 
tient as a hungry man listening for the din- 
ner bell. Run along!” 

148 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 

Elsa ran, and Frau Kellermann smiled at 
me significantly. In the past she and I 
had seldom spoken to each other, owing to 
the fact that her “one remaining joy’— 
her charming little Karl—had never suc- 
ceeded in kindling into flame those sparks 
of maternity which are supposed to glow 
in great numbers upon the altar of every 
respectable female heart; but, in view of 
a premeditated journey together, we be- 
came delightfully cordial. 

“For us,” she said, “there will be a double 
joy. We shall be able to watch the happi- 
ness of these two dear children, Elsa and 
Fritz. They only received the letters of 
blessing from their parents yesterday morn- 
ing. It is a very strange thing, but 
whenever I am in the company of newly- 
engaged couples I blossom. Newly- 
engaged couples, mothers with first babies, 
and normal deathbeds, have precisely the 
same effect on me. Shall we join the 
others?” 

I was longing to ask her why normal 
deathbeds should cause anyone to burst 
into flower, and said, “Yes, do let us.” 

149 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 

We were greeted by the little party of 
‘cure guests’ on the pension steps, with those 
cries of joy and excitement which herald 
so pleasantly the mildest German excursion. 
Herr Erchardt and J had not met before 
that day, so, in accordance with strict pen- 
sion custom, we asked each other how long 
we had slept during the night, had we 
dreamed agreeably, what time had we got 
up, was the coffee fresh when we had ap- 
peared at breakfast, and how had we 
passed the morning. Having toiled up 
these stairs of almost national politeness we 
landed, triumphant and smiling, and paused 
to recover breath. 

“And now,” said Herr Erchardt, “I 
have a pleasure in store for you. The 
Professor is going to be one of us for the 
afternoon. “Yes,” nodding graciously to 
the Advanced Lady. “Allow me to intro- 
duce you to each other.” 

We bowed very formally, and looked 
each other over with that eye which is 
known as “eagle” but is far more the 
property of the female than that most un- 
offending of birds. “I think you are Eng- 

150 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
lishe” she said. I acknowledged the fact. 
“I am reading a great many English books 
just now—rather, I am studying them.” 

“Nu,” cried Herr Erchardt. ‘Fancy 
that! Whatabond already! I have made 
up my mind to know Shakespeare in his 
mother tongue before I die, but that you, 
Frau Professor, should be already im- 
mersed in those wells of English thought!” 

“From what I have read,” she said, “I 
do not think they are very deep wells.” 

He nodded sympathetically. 

“No,” he answered, “so I have heard. 
ee but do not let us embitter our ex- 
cursion for our little English friend. We 
will speak of this another time.” 

“Nu, are we ready?” cried Fritz, who 
stood, supporting Elsa’s elbow in his hand, 
at the foot of the steps. It was immediately 
discovered that Karl was lost. 

“Ka-rl, Karl-chen!” we cried. No re- 
sponse. 

“But he was here one moment ago,” said 
Herr Langen, a tired, pale youth, who was 
recovering from a nervous breakdown due 
to much philosophy and little nourishment. 

I51 

THE ApDVANCED LaDy 
“He was sitting here, picking out the works 
of his watch with a hairpin!” 

Frau Kellermann rounded on him. “Do 
you mean to say, my dear Herr Langen, 
you did not stop the child?” 

“No,” said Herr Langen; “I’ve tried 
stopping him before now.” 

“Da, that child has such energy; never 
is his brain at peace. If he is not doing 
one thing, he is doing another!” 

“Perhaps he has started on the dining- 
room clock now,” suggested Herr Langen, 
abominably hopeful. 

The Advanced Lady suggested that we 
should go without him. “I never take my 
little daughter for walks,” she said. “TI 
have accustomed her to sitting quietly in my 
bedroom from the time I go out until I 
return!” 

“There he is—there he is,” piped Elsa, 
and Karl was observed slithering down a 
chestnut-tree, very much the worse for 
twigs. 

“T’ve been listening to what you said 
about me, mumma,” he confessed while 

152 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
Frau Kellermann brushed him down. “It 
was not true about the watch. I was only 
looking at it, and the little girl never stays 
in the bedroom. She told me herself she 
always goes down to the kitchen, and 2 

“Da, that’s enough!” said Frau Keller- 
mann. 

We marched en masse along the station 
road. It was a very warm afternoon, and 
continuous parties of ‘cure guests,’ who 
were giving their digestions a quiet airing 
in pension gardens, called after us, asked 
if we were going for a walk, and cried, 
“Herr Gott—happy journey” with im- 
mense ill-concealed relish when we men- 
tioned Schlingen. 

“But that is eight kilometres,” shouted 
one old man with a white beard, who leaned 
against a fence, fanning himself with a yel- 
low handkerchief. 

“Seven and a half,” answered Herr Er- 
chardt shortly. 

“Fight,” bellowed the sage. 

“Seven and a half!” 

“Bight!” 

153 

THE ADVANCED LADY 

“The man is mad,” said Herr Erchardt. 

‘Well, please let him be mad in peace,” 
said I, putting my hands over my ears. | 

“Such ignorance must not be allowed to 
go uncontradicted,” said he, and turning his 
back on us, too exhausted to cry out any 
longer, he held up seven and a half fingers. 

“Eight!” thundered the greybeard, with 
pristine freshness. 

We felt very sobered, and did not re- 
cover until we reached a white signpost 
which entreated us to leave the road and 
walk through the field path—without 
trampling down more of the grass than was 
necessary. Being interpreted, it meant 
“single file,” which was distressing for Elsa 
and Fritz. Karl, like a happy child, gam- 
bolled ahead, and cut down as many 
flowers as possible with the stick of his 
mother’s parasol—followed the three others 
—then myself—and the lovers in the rear. 
And above the conversation of the advance 
party I had the privilege of hearing these 
delicious whispers: 

Fritz: “Do syout@love  nrer si isae 
“Nu—yes.” Fritz passionately: “But 

154 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
how muchr” To which Elsa never replied 
—except with “How much do you love 
me?” 

Fritz escaped that truly Christian trap 
by saying, “I asked you first.” 

It grew so confusing that I slipped in 
front of Frau Kellermann—and walked in 
the peaceful knowledge that she was blos- 
soming and I was under no obligation to 
inform even my nearest and dearest as to 
the precise capacity of my affections. 
“What right have they to ask each other 
such questions the day after letters of bless- 
ineeetiavespeen receivedr 1° (reflected. 
“What right have they even to question 
each other? Love which becomes engaged 
and married is a purely affirmative affair 
—they are usurping the privileges of their 
betters and wisers!”’ 

The edges of the field frilled over into 
an immense pine forest—very pleasant and 
cool it looked. Another signpost begged 
us to keep to the broad path for Schlingen 
and deposit waste paper and fruit peelings 
in wire receptacles attached to the benches 
for the purpose. We sat down on the first 

155 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 
bench, and Karl with great curiosity ex- 
plored the wire receptacle. 

“T love woods,” said the Advanced Lady, 
smiling pitifully into the air. “In a wood 
my hair already seems to stir and remember 
something of its savage origin.” 

“But speaking literally,” said Frau Kel- 
lermann, after an appreciative pause, “there 
is really nothing better than the air of pine- 
trees for the scalp.” 

“Oh, Frau Kellermann, please don’t 
break the spell,” said Elsa. 

The Advanced Lady looked at her very 
sympathetically. “Have you, too, found 
the magic heart of Nature?” she said. 

That was Herr Langen’s cue. “Nature 
has no heart,” said he, very bitterly and 
readily, as people do who are over-philos- 
ophised and underfed. ‘She creates that 
she may destroy. She eats that she may 
spew up and she spews up that she may eat. 
That is why we, who are forced to eke out 
an existence at her trampling feet, consider 
the world mad, and realise the deadly vul- 
garity of production.” 

“Young man,” interrupted Herr Er- 

156 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
chardt, “you have never lived and you have 
never suffered!” 

“Oh, excuse me—how can you know?” 

“I know because you have told me, and 
there’s an end of it. Come back to this 
bench in ten years’ time and repeat those 
words to me,” said Frau Kellermann with 
an eye upon Fritz, who was engaged in 
counting Elsa’s fingers with passionate fer- 
vour—‘‘and bring with you your young 
wife, Herr Langen, and watch, perhaps, 
your little child playing with MO Re 
turned towards Karl, who had rooted an 
old illustrated paper out of the receptacle 
and was spelling over an advertisement for 
the enlargement of Beautiful Breasts. 

The sentence remained unfinished. We 
decided to move on. As we plunged more 
deeply into the wood our spirits rose— 
reaching a point where they burst into 
song—on the part of the three men—‘‘O 
Welt, wie bist du wunderbar!”—the lower 
part of which was piercingly sustained by 
Herr Langen, who attempted quite unsuc- 
cessfully to infuse satire into it in ac- 
cordance with his “world outlook.” They 

157 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 
strode ahead and left us to trail after them 
—hot and happy. 

“Now is the opportunity,” said Frau Kel- 
lermann. ‘Dear Frau Professor, do tell 
us a little about your book.” 

‘Ach, how did you know I was writing 
one?” she cried playfully. 

“Elsa, here, had@it= frome lisawen oe 
never before have I personally known a 
woman who was writing a book. How do 
you manage to find enough to write down?” 

“That is never the trouble,” said the Ad- 
vanced Lady—she took Elsa’s arm and 
leaned on it gently. ‘The trouble is to 
stop. My brain has been a hive for years, 
and about three months ago the pent-up 
waters burst over my soul, and since then 
I am writing all day until late into the 
night, still ever finding fresh inspirations 
and thoughts which beat impatient wings 
about my heart.” 

“Ts it a novel?” asked Elsa shyly. 

“Of course it is a novel,” said I. 

“How can you be so positiver” said Frau 
Kellermann, eying me severely. 

158 

THE ApvANCED Lapy 

“Because nothing but a novel could pro- 
duce an effect like that.” 

‘Ach, don’t quarrel,” said the Advanced 
Lady sweetly. “Yes, it is a novel—upon 
the Modern Woman. For this seems to 
me the woman’s hour. It is mysterious 
and almost prophetic, it is the symbol of 
the true advanced woman: not one of those 
violent creatures who deny their sex and 
smother their frail wings under... 
under z 

“The English tailor-made?” from Frau 
Kellermann. 

“IT was not going to put it like that. 
Rather, under the lying garb of false 
masculinity!” 

“Such a subtle distinction!” J murmured. 

“Whom then,’ asked Fraulein Elsa, 
looking adoringly at the Advanced Lady 
—‘whom then do you consider the true 
woman?” 

“She is the incarnation of comprehend- 
ing Love!” 

“But my dear Frau Professor,” protested 
Frau Kellermann, “you must remember 

159 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 

that one has so few opportunities for ex- 
hibiting Love within the family circle 
nowadays. One’s husband is at business all 
day, and naturally desires to sleep when he 
returns home—one’s children are out of the 
lap and in at the university before one can 
lavish anything at all upon them!” 

“But Love is not a question of lavishing,” 
said the Advanced Lady. “It is the lamp 
carried in the bosom touching with serene 
rays all the heights and depths of u 

“Darkest Africa,’ I murmured flip- 
pently. 

She did not hear. 

“The mistake we have made in the past— 
as a sex,” said she, “is in not realising that 
our gifts of giving are for the whole world 
—we are the glad sacrifice of ourselves!” 

“Oh!” cried Elsa rapturously, and almost 
bursting into gifts as she breathed—“how I 
know that! You know ever since Fritz and 
I have been engaged, I share the desire to 
give to everybody, to share everything!” 

“How extremely dangerous,” said I. 

“Tt is only the beauty of danger, or the 
danger of beauty,” said the Advanced Lady 

160 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
—‘fand there you have the ideal of my 
book—that woman is nothing but a gift.” 

I smiled at her very sweetly. ‘Do you 
know,” I said, “I too would like to write a 
book, on the advisability of caring for 
daughters, and taking them for airings and 
keeping them out of kitchens!” 

I think the masculine element must have 
felt these angry vibrations: they ceased 
from singing, and together we climbed out 
of the wood, to see Schlingen below us, 
tucked in a circle of hills, the white houses 
shining in the sunlight, “for all the world 
like eggs in a bird’s nest,” as Herr Er- 
chardt declared. We descended upon 
Schlingen and demanded sour milk with 
fresh cream and bread at the Inn of the 
Golden Stag, a most friendly place, with 
tables in a rose-garden where hens and 
chickens ran riot—even flopping upon the 
disused tables and pecking at the red checks 
on the cloths. We broke the bread into 
the bowls, added the cream, and stirred it 
round with flat wooden spoons, the land- 
lord and his wife standing by. 

“Splendid weather!” said Herr Er- 

161 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 
chardt, waving his spoon at the landlord, 
who shrugged his shoulders. 

“What! you don’t call it splendid!” 

“As you please,” said the landlord, ob- 
viously scorning us. 

“Such a beautiful walk,” said Fraulein 
Elsa, making a free gift of her most charm- 
ing style to the landlady. 

“l “never walk, s said) the--landlaay 
“when I go to Mindelbau my man drives 
me—l’ve more important things to do with 
my legs than walk them through the 
dust!” 

“T like these people,” confessed Herr 
Langen to me. “I like them very, very 
much. I think IJ shall take a room here for 
the whole summer.” 

“Why?” 

“Oh, because they live close to the earth, 
and therefore despise it.” 

He pushed away his bowl of sour milk 
and lit a cigarette. We ate, solidly and 
seriously, until those seven and a half kilo- 
metres to Mindelbau stretched before us 
like an eternity. Even Karl’s activity be- 
came so full fed that he lay on the ground 

162 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
and removed his leather waistbelt. Elsa 
suddenly leaned over to Fritz and whis- 
pered, who on hearing her to the end and 
asking her if she loved him, got up and 
made a little speech. 

‘“We—we wish to celebrate our betrothal 
by—by—asking you all to drive back with 
us in the landlord’s cart—if—if it will 
hold us!” 

“Oh, what a beautiful, noble idea!” said 
Frau Kellermann, heaving a sigh of relief 
that audibly burst two hooks. 

“It-is my little gift,” said Elsa to the 
Advanced Lady, who by virtue of three 
portions almost wept tears of gratitude. 

Squeezed into the peasant cart and 
driven by the landlord, who showed his 
contempt for mother earth by spitting 
savagely every now and again, we jolted 
home again, and the nearer we came to 
Mindelbau the more we loved it and one 
another. 

“We must have many excursions like 
this,” said Herr Erchardt to me, “for one 
surely gets to know a person in the simple 
surroundings of the open air—one shares 

163 

THE ADVANCED LaDy 
the same joys—one feels friendship. What 
is it your Shakespeare says? One moment, 
I have it. ‘The friends thou hast, and 
their adoption tried—grapple them to thy 
soul with hoops of steel!” 

“But,” said I, feeling very friendly to- 
wards him, “‘the bother about my soul is 
that it refuses to grapple anybody at all— 
and I am sure that the dead weight ofa 
friend whose adoption it had tried would 
kill it immediately. Never yet has it 
shown the slightest sign of a hoop!” 

He bumped against my knees and ex- 
cused himself and the cart. 

“My dear little lady, you must not take 
the quotation literally. Naturally, one is 
not physically conscious of the hoops; but 
hoops there are in the soul of him or her 
who loves his fellow-men. . . . Take this 
afternoon, for instance. How did we 
start out? As strangers you might almost 
say, and yet—all of us—how have we come 
home?” 

“Tn a cart,” said the only remaining joy, 
who sat upon his mother’s lap and felt sick. 

We skirted the field that we had passed 

164 

THE ADVANCED Lapy 
through, going round by the cemetery. 
Herr Langen leaned over the edge of the 
seat and greeted the graves. He was sit- 
ting next to the Advanced Lady— inside the 
shelter of her shoulder. I heard her mur- 
mur: “You look like a little boy with 
your hair blowing about in the wind.” 
Herr Langen, slightly less bitter—watched 
the last graves disappear. And I heard 
her murmur: “Why are you so sad? I 
too am very sad sometimes—but—you look 
young enough for me to dare to say this 
—I—too—know of much joy!” 

“What do you know?” said he. 

I leaned over and touched the Advanced 
Lady’s hand. ‘“Hasn’t it been a nice after- 
nooner” J said questioningly. “But you 
know, that theory of yours about women 
and Love—it’s as old as the hills—oh, 
older!” 

From the road a sudden shout of tri- 
umph. Yes, there he was again—white 
beard, silk handkerchief and undaunted en- 
thusiasm. 

“What did I say? Hight kilometres—it 

is!” 
165 

THE ADVANCED LADY 

“Seven and a half!” shrieked Herr Er- 
chardt. 

“Why, then, do you return in carts? 
Eight kilometres it must be.” 

Herr Erchardt made a cup of his hands 
and stood up in the jolting cart while Frau 
Kellermann clung to his knees. “Seven 
and a half!” 

“Tgnorance must not go uncontradicted!” 
I said to the Advanced Lady. 

166 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

HE landlady knocked at the door. 
“Come in,” said Viola. 

“There is a letter for you,” said 
the landlady, ‘a special letter’”—she held 
the green envelope in a corner of her dingy 
apron. 

“Thanks.” Viola, kneeling on the floor, 
poking at the little dusty stove, stretched 
out her hand. “Any answer?” 

“No; the messenger has gone.” 

“Oh, all right!’ She did not look the 
landlady in the face; she was ashamed of 
not having paid her rent, and wondered 
grimly, without any hope, if the woman 
would begin to bluster again. 

“About this money owing to me 
said the landlady. 

“Oh, the Lord—off she goes!” thought 
Viola, turning her back on the woman and 
making a grimace at the stove. 

167 

” 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

“Tt’s settle—or it’s go!” The landlady 
raised her voice; she began to bawl. “I’m 
a lady, I am, and a respectable woman, I’ll 
have you know. Ill have no lice in my 
house, sneaking their way into the furni-_ 
ture and eating up everything. It’s cash 
—or out you go before twelve o’clock to- 
morrow.” 

Viola felt rather than saw the woman’s 
gesture. She shot out her arm in a stupid 
helpless way, as though a dirty pigeon had 
suddenly flown at her face. “Filthy old 
beast! Ugh! And the smell of her—like 
stale cheese and damp washing.” 

“Very well!” she answered shortly; “‘it’s 
cash down or I leave to-morrow. All 
right: don’t shout.” 

It was extraordinary—always before this 
woman came near her she trembled in her 
shoes—even the sound of those flat feet 
stumping up the stairs made her feel sick, 
but once they were face to face she felt 
immensely calm and indifferent, and could 
not understand why she even worried about 
money, nor why she sneaked out of the 
house on tiptoe, not even daring to shut the 

168 

THE SwInc oF THE PENDULUM 
door after her in case the landlady should 
hear and shout something terrible, nor why 
she spent nights pacing up and down her 
room—drawing up sharply before the 
mirror and saying to a tragic reflection: 
“Money, money, money!” When she was 
alone her poverty was like a huge dream- 
mountain on which her feet were fast 
rooted—aching with the ache of the size of 
the thing—but if it came to definite action, 
with no time for imaginings, her dream- 
mountain dwindled into a beastly “hold- 
your-nose”’ affair, to be passed by as quickly 
as possible, with anger and a strong sense 
of superiority. 

The landlady bounced out of the room, 
banging the door, so that it shook and 
rattled as though it had listened to the con- 
versation and fully sympathised with the 
old hag. 

Squatting on her heels, Viola opened the 
letter. It was from Casimir: 

“T shall be with you at three o’clock this 
afternoon—and must be off again this evening. 
All news when we meet. I hope you are 

happier than I.—CasimiR.” 
169 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

“Huh! how kind!” she sneered; “how 
condescending. Too good of you, really!” 
She sprang to her feet, crumbling the letter 
in her hands. “And how are you to know 
that I shall stick here awaiting your 
pleasure until three o’clock this after- 
noone” But she knew she would; her rage 
was only half sincere. She longed to see 
Casimir, for she was confident that this time 
she would make him understand the situa- 
tion. . ... “For, as it is, it’s intolerable 
—intolerable!” she muttered. 

It was ten o’clock in the morning of a 
grey day curiously lighted by pale flashes of 
sunshine. Searched by these flashes her 
room looked tumbled and grimed. She 
pulled down the window-blinds—but they 
gave a persistent, whitish glare which was 
just as bad. The only thing of life in the 
room was a jar of hyacinths given her by 
the landlady’s daughter: it stood on the 
table exuding a sickly perfume from its 
plump petals; there were even rich buds 
unfolding, and the leaves shone like oil. 

Viola went over to the washstand, poured 
some water into the enamel basin, and 

170 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
sponged her face and neck. She dipped 
her face into the water, opened her eyes, 
and shook her head from side to side—it 
was exhilarating. She did it three times. 
“I suppose I could drown myself if I stayed 
under long enough,” she thought. “I 
wonder how long it takes to become uncon- 
scious? . . . Often read of women drown- 
ing in a bucket. I wonder if any air enters 
by the ears—if the basin would have to be 
as deep as a bucket?” She experimented 
-—gripped the washstand with both hands 
and slowly sank her head into the water, 
when again there was a knock on the door. 
Not the landlady this time—it must be 
Casimir. With her face and hair drip- 
ping, with her petticoat bodice unbuttoned, 
she ran and opened it. 

A strange man stood against the lintel— 
seeing her, he opened his eyes very wide and 
smiled delightfully. “Excuse me—does 
Fraulein Schafer live here?” 

“No; never heard of her.” His smile 
was so infectious, she wanted to smile too— 
and the water had made her feel so fresh 
and rosy. 

171 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

The strange man appeared overwhelmed 
with astonishment. “She doesn’t?” he 
cried. ‘She is out, you mean!” 

“No, she’s not living here,’ answered 
Viola. 

“But—pardon—one moment.” Hemoved 
from the door lintel, standing squarely in 
front of her. He unbuttoned his greatcoat 
and drew a slip of paper from the breast 
pocket, smoothing it in his gloved fingers 
before handing it to her. 

“Yes, that’s the address, right enough, but 
there must be a mistake in the number. So 
many lodging-houses in this street, you 
know, and so big.” 

Drops of water fell from her hair on to 
the paper. She burst out laughing. “Oh, 
how dreadful I must look—one moment!” 
She ran back to the washstand and caught 
up atowel. The door wasstillopen.... 
After all, there was nothing more to be said. 
Why on earth had she asked him to wait a 
moment? She folded the towel round her 
shoulders, and returned to the door, sud- 
denly grave. “I’m sorry; I know no such 
name?” in a sharp voice. 

172 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

Said the strange man: “Sorry, too. 
Have you been living here long?” 

“Er—yes—a long time.” She began to 
Close the door slowly. 

‘““Well—good-morning, thanks so much. 
Hope I haven’t been a bother.” 

“Good-morning.” 

She heard him walk down the passage 
and then pause—lighting a cigarette. Yes 
—a faint scent of delicious cigarette smoke 
penetrated her room. She sniffed at it, 
smiling again. Well, that had been a fas- 
cinating interlude! He looked so amaz- 
ingly happy: his heavy clothes and big 
buttoned gloves; his beautifully brushed 
Haire indathat smile 2... lolly2-was 
the word—just a well-fed boy with the 
world for his playground. People like 
that did one good—one felt “made over” 
at the sight of them. Sane they were—so 
sane and solid. You could depend on them 
never having one mad impulse from the day 
they were born until the day they died. 
And Life was in league with them— 
jumped them on her knee—quite rightly, 
too. At that moment she noticed Casimir’s 

173 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
letter, crumpled up on the floor—the smile 
faded. Staring at the letter she began 
braiding her hair—a dull feeling of rage 
crept through her—she seemed to be 
braiding it into her brain, and binding it, 
tightly, above her head. ... Of course 
that had been a mistake all along. What 
had? Oh, Casimir’s frightful seriousness. 
If she had been happy when they first met 
she never would have looked at him—but 
they had been like two patients in the same 
hospital ward—each finding comfort in the 
sickness of the other—sweet foundation for 
a love episode! Misfortune had knocked 
their heads together: they had looked at 
each other, stunned with the conflict and 
sympathised . . . “I wish I could step out- 
side the whole affair and just judge it—then 
I’d find a way out. I certainly was in love 
with Casimir. ... Oh, be sincere for 
once.” She flopped down on the bed and 
hid her face in the pillow. “I was not in 
love. J wanted somebody to look after me 
—and keep me until my work began to 
sell—and he kept bothers with other men 

174 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
away. And what would have happened if 
he hadn’t come along? I would have spent 
my wretched little pittance, and then 
Yes, that was what decided me, thinking 
about that ‘then.’ He was the only solu- 
tion. And I believed in him then. I 
thought his work had only to be recognised 
once, and he’d roll in wealth. I thought 
perhaps we might be poor for a month— 
but he said, if only he could have me, the 
stimulus. ... Funny, if it wasn’t so 
damned tragic! Exactly the contrary has 
happened—he hasn’t had a thing published 
for months—neither have I—but then I 
Giamitmexpectsto.. Yes) the truth7is, 1m 
hard and bitter, and I have neither faith 
nor love for unsuccessful men. I always 
end by despising them as I despise Casimir. 
I suppose it’s the savage pride of the female 
who likes to think the man to whom she has 
given herself must be a very great chief 
indeed. But to stew in this disgusting 
house while Casimir scours the land in the 
hope of finding one editorial open door— 
it’s humiliating. It’s changed my whole 

175 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
nature. I wasn’t born for poverty—I only 
flower among really jolly people, and 
people who never are worried.” 

The figure of the strange man rose before 
her—would not be dismissed. ‘That was 
the man for me, after all is said and done— 
a man without a care—who’d give me 
everything I want and with whom Id 
always feel that sense of life and of being in 
touch with the world. I never wanted to 
fight—it was thrust on me. Really, there’s 
a fount of happiness in me, that is drying 
up, little by little, in this hateful existence. 
Ill be dead if this goes on—and’’—she 
stirred in the bed and flung out her arms— 
“T want passion, and love, and adventure 
—I yearn for them. Why should I stay 
here and rot?—I am rotting!” she cried, 
comforting herself with the sound of her 
breaking voice. 

“But if I tell Casimir all this when he 
comes this afternoon, and he says, ‘Go’—as 
he certainly will—that’s another thing I 
loathe about him,—he’s under my thumb— 
what should I do then—where should I go 
tor” There was nowhere. “I don’t want 

176 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
to work—or carve out my own path. I 
Want ease and any amount of nursing in the 
lap of luxury. There is only one thing I’m 
fitted for, and that is to be a great courte- 
san.” But she did not know how to go 
about it. She was frightened to go into the 
streets—she heard of such awful things hap- 
pening to those women—men with diseases 
—or men who didn’t pay—besides, the idea 
of a strange man every night—no, that was 
out of the question. “If I’d the clothes I 
would go to a really good hotel and find 
some wealthy man... like the strange 
man this morning. He would be ideal. 
Oh, if I only had his address—I am sure 
I would fascinate him. I’d keep him 
laughing all day—I’d make him give me 
unlimited money... .’ At the thought 
she grew warm and soft. She began to 
dream of a wonderful house, and of presses 
full of clothes and of perfumes. She saw 
herself stepping into carriages—looking at 
the strange man with a mysterious, volup- 
tuous glance—she practised the glance, ly- 
ing on the bed—and never another worry, 
just drugged with happiness. That was 

177 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
the life for her. Well, the thing to do 
was to let Casimir go on his wild-goose 
chase that evening, and while he was away 
What! Also—please to remember— 
there was the rent to be paid before twelve 
next morning, and she hadn’t the money for 
a square meal. At the thought of food she 
felt a sharp twinge in her stomach, a sen- 
sation as though there were a hand in her 
stomach, squeezing it dry. She was ter- 
ribly hungry—all Casimir’s fault—and 
that man had lived on the fat of the land 
ever since he was born. He looked as 
though he could order a magnificent din- 
ner. Oh, why hadn’t she played her cards 
better?—he’d been sent by Providence— 
and she’d snubbed him. “If I had that 
time over again, I’d be safe by now.” And 
instead of the ordinary man who had 
spoken with her at the door her mind 
created a brilliant, laughing image, who 
would treat herlikeaqueen.).). Dheres 
only one thing I could not stand—that he 
should be coarse or vulgar. Well, he 
wasn’t—he was obviously a man of the 
world and the way he apologised... I 

178 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
have enough faith in my own power and 
beauty to know I could make a man treat 
me just as I wanted to be treated.” . . . It 
floated into her dreams—that sweet scent 
of cigarette smoke. And then she remem- 
bered that she had heard nobody go down 
the stone stairs. Was it possible that the 
strange man was still therer ... The 
thought was too absurd—Life didn’t play 
tricks like that—and yet—she was quite 
conscious of his nearness. Very quietly 
she got up, unhooked from the back of the 
door a long white gown, buttoned it on— 
smilingly slyly. She did not know what 
was going to happen. She only thought: 
“Oh, what fun!” and that they were play- 
ing a delicious game—this strange man and 
she. Very gently she turned the door- 
handle, screwing up her face and biting 
her lip as the lock snapped back. Of 
course, there he was—leaning against the 
banister rail. He wheeled round as she 
slipped into the passage. 

“Da,” she muttered, folding her gown 
tightly around her, “I must go downstairs 
and fetch some wood. Brr! the cold!” 

179 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

“There isn’t any wood,” volunteered the 
strange man. She gave a little cry of 
astonishment, and then tossed her head. 

“You, again,” she said scornfully, con- 
scious the while of his merry eye, and the 
fresh, strong smell of his healthy body. 

“The landlady shouted out there was no 
wood left. I just saw her go out to buy 
some.” 

“Story—story!” she longed to cry. He 
came quite close to her, stood over her and 
whispered : 

“Aren’t you going to ask me to finish my 
cigarette in your roome” 

She nodded. “You may if you want to!” 

In that moment together in the passage 
a miracle had happened. Her room was 
quite changed—it was full of sweet light 
and the scent of hyacinth flowers. Even 
the furniture appeared different—exciting. 
Quick as a flash she remembered childish 
parties when they had played charades, and 
one side had left the room and come in 
again to act a word—just what she was do- 
ing now. ‘The strange man went over to 
the stove and sat down in her arm-chair. 

180 

THE SwING OF THE PENDULUM 
She did not want him to talk or come near 
her—it was enough to see him in the room, 
so secure and happy. How hungry she had 
been for the nearness of someone like that 
—who knew nothing at all about her—and 
made no demands—but just lived. Viola 
ran over to the table and put her arms round 
the jar of hyacinths. 

“Beautiful! Beautiful!’ she cried— 
burying her head in the flowers—and 
sniffing greedily at the scent. Over the 
leaves she looked at the man and laughed. 

“You are a funny little thing,” said he 
lazily. 

“Why? Because I love flowers?” 

“Yd far rather you loved other things,” 
said the strange man slowly. She broke 
off a little pink petal and smiled at it. 

“Tet me send you some flowers,” said the 
strange man. “TI’ll send you a roomful if 
you'd like them.” 

His voice frightened her slightly. “Oh 
no, thanks—this one is quite enough for 
me 

“No, it isn’t” —in a teasing voice. 

“What a stupid remark!” thought Viola, 

181 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
and looking at him again he did not seem 
quite so jolly. She noticed that his eyes 
were set too closely together—and they 
were too small. Horrible thought, that he 
should prove stupid. 

“What do you do all day?” she asked 
hastily. 

“Nothing.” 

“Nothing at all” 

“Why should I do anythinge” 

“Oh, don’t imagine for one moment that 
I condemn such wisdom—only it sounds 
too. good to be true!” 

“What's that?’—he craned forward. 
“What sounds too good to be truer” Yes 
—there was no denying it—he looked silly. 

“T suppose the searching after Fraulein 
Schafer doesn’t occupy all your days.” 

“Oh no”’—he smiled broadly—“that’s 
very good! By jove! no. I drive a good 
bit—are you keen on horses?” 

She nodded. “Love them.” 

“You must come driving with me—I’ve 
got a fine pair of greys. Will you?” 

“Pretty I'd look perched behind greys in 
my one and only hat,” thought she. Aloud: 

182 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
“T’'d love to.” Her easy acceptance pleased 
him. 

“How about to-morrow?” he suggested. 
“Suppose you have lunch with me to- 
morrow and I take you driving.” 

After all—this was just a game. “Yes, 
I’m not busy to-morrow,” she said. 

A little pause—then the strange man 
patted his leg. ‘Why don’t you come and 
sit down?” he said. 

She pretended not to see and swung on 
to the table. “Oh, I’m all right here.” 

“No, you're not”—again the teasing 
voice. “Come and sit on my knee.” 

“Oh no,” said Viola very heartily, sud- 
denly busy with her hair. 

“Why note” 

“T don’t want to.” 

“Oh, come along”—impatiently. 

She shook her head from side to side. 
“T wouldn’t dream of such a thing.” 

At that he got up and came over to her. 
“Funny little puss cat!” He put up one 
hand to touch her hair. 

“Don’t,” she said—and slipped off the 
table. ‘“I—I think it’s time you went now.” 

183 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
She was quite frightened now—thinking 
only: “This man must be got rid of as 
quickly as possible.” 

“Oh, but you don’t want me to go?” 

“Yes, I do—I’m very busy.” 

“Busy. What does the pussy cat do all 
day?” 

“Lots and lots of things!’ She wanted 
to push him out of the room and slam the 
door on him—idiot—fool—cruel disap- 
pointment. 

‘““What’s she frowning for?” he asked. 
“Ts she worried about anything?” Sud- 
denly serious: “I say—you know, are you 
in any financial difficulty? Do you want 
money? I'll give it to you if you like!” 

“Money! Steady on the brake—don’t 
lose your head!”’—so she spoke to herself. 

“T’ll give you two hundred marks if 
you'll kiss me.” 

“Oh, boo! What a condition! And I 
don’t want to kiss you—I don’t like kissing. 
Please coi” 

“Yes—you dol—yes, you do.” He 
caught hold of her arms above the elbows. 

184 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
She struggled, and was quite amazed to 
realise how angry she felt. 

“Let me go—immediately!” she cried— 
and he slipped one arm round her body, 
and drew her towards him—like a bar of 
iron across her back—that arm. 

“Leave me alone! I tell you. Don’t be 
mean! I didn’t want this to happen when 
you came into my room. How dare you?” 

“Well, kiss me and J’ll go!” 

It was too idiotic—dodging that stupid, 
smiling face. 

“fT won’t kiss you!—you  brute!—I 
won’t!”” Somehow she slipped out of his 
arms and ran to the wall—stood back 
against it—breathing quickly. 

“Get out!’ she stammered. “Go on 
now, clear out!” 

At that moment, when he was not touch- 
ing her, she quite enjoyed herself. She 
thrilled at her own angry voice. “To think 
I should talk to a man like that!” An 
angry flush spread over his face—his lips 
curled back, showing his teeth—just like 
a dog, thought Viola. He made a rush at 

185 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
her, and held her against the wall—pressed 
upon her with all the weight of his body. 
This time she could not get free. 

“T won’t kiss you. I won’t. Stop doing 
that! Ugh! you’re like a dog—you ought 
to find lovers round lamp-posts—you beast 
—you fiend!” 

He did not answer. With an expression 
of the most absurd determination he pressed 
ever more heavily upon her. He did not 
even look at her—but rapped out in a 
sharp voice: “Keep quiet—keep quiet.” 

“Gar-r! Why are men so _ strong?” 
She began to cry. “Go away—I don’t 
want you, you dirty creature. J want to 
murder you. Oh, my God! if I had a 
knife.” 

“Don’t be silly—come and be good!” 
He dragged her towards the bed. 

“Do you suppose I’m a light woman?” 
she snarled, and swooping over she fastened 
her teeth in his glove. 

“Ach! don’t do that—you are hurting 
me!” 

She did not let go, but her heart said, 
“Thank the Lord I thought of this.” 

186 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 

“Stop this minute—you vixen—you 
bitch.” He threw her away from him. 
She saw with joy that his eyes were full of 
tears. “You've really hurt me,” he said in 
a choking voice. 

“Of course I have. I meant to. That’s 
nothing to what I’ll do if you touch me 
again.” 

The strange man picked up his hat. 
“No, thanks,” he said grimly. “But Ill 
not forget this—I’ll go to your landlady.” 

“Pooh!” She shrugged her shoulders 
and laughed. “T’ll tell her you forced your 
way in here and tried to assault me. Who 
will she believer—with your bitten hand. 
You go and find your Schafers.” 

A sensation of glorious, intoxicating hap- 
piness flooded Viola. She rolled her eyes 
at him. “If you don’t go away this mo- 
ment I’ll bite you again,” she said, and the 
absurd words started her laughing. Even 
when the door was closed, hearing him de- 
scending the stairs, she laughed, and danced | 
about the room. 

What a morning! Oh, chalk it up. 
That was her first fight, and she’d won— 

187 

THE SWING OF THE PENDULUM 
she’d conquered that beast—all by herself. 
Her hands were still trembling. She 
pulled up the sleeve of her gown—great 
red marks on her arms. ‘‘My ribs will be 
blue. I’ll be blue all over,” she reflected. 
“Tf only that beloved Casimir could have 
seen us.” And the feeling of rage and dis- 
gust against Casimir had totally disap- 
peared. How could the poor darling help 
not having any money? It was her fault 
as much as his, and he, just like her, was 
apart from the world, fighting it, just as 
she had done. If only three o’clock would 
come. She saw herself running towards 
him and putting her arms round his neck. 
“My blessed one! Of course we are bound 
to win. Do you love me still? Oh, I have 
been horrible lately.” 

188 

A BLAZE 

ss AX, you silly devil, you’ll break 

M your neck if you go careering 

down the slide that way. Drop 

it, and come to the Club House with me and 
get some coffee.” 

“T’ve had enough for as I’m damp 
all through. ‘There, give us a cigarette, 
Victor, old man. When are you going 
home?” 

“Not for another hour. It’s fine this 
afternoon, and I’m getting into decent 
shape. Look out, get off the track; here 
comes Fraulein Winkel. Damned elegant 
the way she manages her sleigh!” 

“Tm cold all through. That’s the worst 
of this place—the mists—it’s a damp cold. 
Here, Foreman, look after this sleigh—and 
stick it somewhere so that I can get it with- 
out looking through a hundred and fifty 
others to-morrow morning.” 

189 

A BLAZE 

They sat down at a small round table 
near the stove and ordered coffee. Victor 
sprawled in his chair, patting his little 
brown dog Bobo and looking, half laugh- 
ingly, at Max. 

‘“What’s the matter, my dear? Isn’t the 
world being nice and pretty?” 

“T want my coffee, and I want to put my 
feet into my pocket—they’re like stones. 
... Nothing to eat, thanks—the cake is 
like underdone india-rubber here.” 

Fuchs and Wistuba came and sat at their 
table. Max half turned his back and 
stretched his feet out to the oven. The 
three other men all began talking at once 
—of the weather—of the record slide—of 
the fine condition of the Wald See for 
skating. 

Suddenly Fuchs looked at Max, raised 
his eyebrows and nodded across to Victor, 
who shook his head. 

“Baby doesn’t feel well,” he said, feed- 
ing the brown dog with broken lumps of 
sugar, “and nobody’s to disturb him—I’m 
nurse.” 

“That’s the first time I’ve ever known 

190 

A BLAZzE 

him off colour,” said Wistuba. “I’ve al- 
ways imagined he had the better part of 
this world that could not be taken away 
from him. I think he says his prayers to 
the dear Lord for having spared him being 
taken home in seven basketsful to-night. 
It’s a fool’s game to risk your all that way 
and leave the nation desolate.” 

“Dry up,” said Max. “You ought to be 
wheeled about on the snow in a perambula- 
pee 

“Oh, no offence, I hope. Don’t get 
nasty. . . . How’s your wife, Victor?” 

“She’s not at all well. She hurt her head 
coming down the slide with Max on Sun- 
day. I told her to stay at home all day.” 

“Y’m sorry. Are you other fellows go- 
ing back to the town or stopping on here?” 

Fuchs and Victor said they were stopping 
—Max did not answer, but sat motionless 
while the men paid for their coffee and 
moved away. Victor came back a moment 
and put a hand on his shoulder. 

“Tf you’re going right back, my dear, I 
wish you’d look Elsa up and tell her I won’t 
be in till late. And feed with us to-night 

IgI 

A BLAZE 
at Limpold, will you? And take some hot 
grog when you get in.” 

“Thanks, old fellow, I’m all right. Go- 
ing back now.” 

He rose, stretched himself, buttoned on 
his heavy coat and lighted another ciga- 
nettes 

From the door Victor watched him 
plunging through the heavy snow—head 
bent—hands thrust in his pockets—he al- 
most appeared to be running through the 
heavy snow towards the town. 

Someone came stamping up the stairs— 
paused at the door of her sitting-room, and 
knocked. 

“Ts that you, Victor?” she called. 

NOM ites. bie calm lecOmies n am 

“Of course. Why, what a Santa Claus! 
Hang your coat on the landing and shake 
yourself over the banisters. Had a good 
time?” 

The room was full of light and warmth. 
Elsa, in a white velvet tea-gown, lay curled 
up on the sofa—a book of fashions on her 
lap, a box of creams beside her. 

192 

A BLAZE 

The curtains were not yet drawn before 
the windows and a blue light shone through, 
and the white boughs of the trees sprayed 
across. 

A woman’s room—full of flowers and 
photographs and silk pillows—the floor 
smothered in rugs—an immense tiger-skin 
under the piano—just the head protruding 
—sleepily savage. 

“Tt was good enough,” said Max. ‘“Vic- 
tor can’t be in till late. He told me to 
come up and tell you.” 

He started walking up and down—tore 
off his gloves and flung them on the 
table. 

“Don’t do that, Max,” said Elsa, “you 
get on my nerves. And I’ve got a head- 
ache to-day; I’m feverish and quite flushed. 

Don’t I look flushed?” 

He paused by the window and glanced 
at her a moment over his shoulder. 

BNO. he said= lididn't noticeit: 

“Oh, you haven’t looked at me properly, 
and I’ve got a new tea-gown on, too.” 
She pulled her skirts together and patted 
a little place on the couch. 

193 

| A BLAZE 

“Come along and sit by me and tell me _ 
why you’re being naughty.” 

But, standing by the window, he sud- 
denly flung his arm across his eyes. 

“Oh,” he said,:“I can’t. I’m done— 
I’m spent—I’m smashed.” 

Silence in the room. The fashion-book 
fell to the floor with a quick rush of leaves. 
Elsa sat forward, her hands clasped in her 
lap; a strange light shone in her eyes, a red 
colour stained her mouth. 

Then she spoke very quietly. 

“Come over here and explain yourself. 
I don’t know what on earth you are talk- 
ing about.” 

“You do know—you know far better 
than I. You’ve simply played with Vic- 
tor in my presence that I may feel worse. 
You’ve tormented me—you’ve led me on 
—offering me everything and nothing at 
all. It’s been a spider-and-fly business 
from first to last—and I’ve never for one 
moment been ignorant of that—and I’ve 
never for one moment been able to with- 
stand it.” 

He turned round deliberately. 

194 

A BLAZE 

“Do you suppose that when you asked 
me to pin your flowers into your evening 
gown—when you let me come into your 
bedroom when Victor was out while you 
did your hair—when you pretended to be 
a baby and let me feed you with grapes— 
when you have run to me and searched in 
all my pockets for a cigarette—knowing 
perfectly well where they were kept—go- 
ing through every pocket just the same— 
I knowing too—I keeping up the farce— 
do you suppose that now you have finally 
lighted your bonfire you are going to find 
it a peaceful and pleasant thing—you are 
going to prevent the whole house from 
burning?” 

She suddenly turned white and drew in 
her breath sharply. 

“Don’t talk to me like that. You have 
no right to talk to me like that. I am an- 
other man’s wife.” 

“Ffum,” he sneered, throwing back his 
head, “that’s rather late in the game, and 
that’s been your trump card all along. You 
only love Victor on the cat-and-cream 
principle—you, a poor little starved kitten 

195 

A BLAZE 

that he’s given everything to, that he’s 
carried in his breast, never dreaming that 
those little pink claws could tear out a 
man’s heart.” 

She stirred, looking at him with almost 
fear in her eyes. 

“After all”—unsteadily—“this is my 
room; I’ll have to ask you to go.” 

But he stumbled towards her, knelt down 
by the couch, burying his head in her lap, 
clasping his arms round her waist. 

“And I Jove you—I love you; the hu- 
miliation of it—I adore you. Don’t— 
don’t—just a minute let me stay here—just 
a moment in a whole life—Elsa! Elsa!” 

She leant back and pressed her head into 
the pillows. 

Then his muffled voice: “I feel like a 
savage. I want your whole body. I want 
to carry you away to a cave and love you 
until I kill you—you can’t understand how 
a man feels. I kill myself when I see you 
—I’m sick of my own strength that turns 
in upon itself, and dies, and rises new born 
like a Pheenix out of the ashes of that hor- 
tible death. Love me just this once, tell 

196 

A BLAZE 

me a lie, say that you do—you are always 
lying.” 

Instead, she pushed him away— 
frightened. 

“Get up,” she said; “suppose the servant 
came in with the tea?” 

“Oh, ye gods!” He stumbled to his feet 
and stood staring down at her. 

“You’re rotten to the core and so am I. 
But you’re heathenishly beautiful.” 

The woman went over to the piano— 
stood there—striking one note—her brows 
drawn together. Then she shrugged her 
shoulders and smiled. 

“ll make a confession. Every word 
you have said is true. I can’t help it. I 
can’t help seeking admiration any more 
than a cat can help going to people to be 
stroked. It’s my nature. I’m born out of 
my time. And yet, you know, I’m not a 
common woman. I like men to adore me 
—to flatter me—even to make love to 
me—but I would never give myself to any 
man. I would never let a man kiss me 

prevents 

“Tt’s immeasurably worse—you’ve no 

197 

A BLAZE 

legitimate excuse. Why, even a prostitute 
has a greater sense of generosity!” 

“T know,” she said, “I know perfectly 
well—but I can’t help the way I’m built. 
... Are you going?” 

He put on his gloves. 

“Well,” he said, ‘“what’s going to hap- 
pen to us now?” 

Again she shrugged her shoulders. 

“Tf haven’t the slightest idea. I never 
have—just let things occur.” 

“All alone?” cried Victor. “Has Max 
been here?” 

“He only stayed a moment, and wouldn’t 
even have tea. I sent him home to change 
his clothes... . He was frightfully bor- 
ing.” 

“You poor darling, your hair’s coming 
down. I'll fix it, stand still a moment... 
so you were borede” 

“Um-m—frightfully.... Oh,  you’ve 
run a hairpin right into your wife’s head— 
you naughty boy!” 

She flung her arms round his neck and 

198 

A BLAZE 
looked up at him, half laughing, like a 
beautiful, loving child. 
“God! What a woman you are,” said 
the man. “You make me so infernally 
proud—dearest, that I... I tell you!” 

199 

A NOTE ON THE TYPE 
IN WHICH THIS BOOK IS SET 

The type in which this book has been set (on the Lino- 
type) is based on the design of Caslon. It is generally 
conceded that William Caslon (1692-1766) brought 
the old-style letter to its highest perfection and while 
certain modifications have been introduced to meet 
changing printing conditions, the basic design of the 
Caslon letters has never been improved. The type 
selected for this book is a modern adaptation rather 
than an exact copy of the original. Caslon’s letters 
are noted for their extreme legibility. 

THIS BOOK WAS COMPOSED, PRINTED, AND 

BOUND BY VAIL-BALLOU PRESS, INC., BING- 

HAMTON, N. Y. THE PAPER WAS MADE BY 
S. D. WARREN CO., BOSTON. 

Sis
