The Threshold of Religion
R. R. Marett, 1909
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Marett's landmark challenge to Tylor's animism — arguing that "mana"-like pre-animistic awe, not belief in spirits, stands at the threshold of religion. The founding text of the mana-taboo school of early anthropology of religion. Source: Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/cu31924014376150). This 1909 first edition (London: Methuen, 1909) is in the public domain in the United States.

========================================================================

THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 



THE THRESHOLD 
OF RELIGION 



BY 



R. R. MARETT, M.A. 

FELLOW AND TUTOR OF EXETER COLLEGE, OXFORD ; SECRETARY TO 

THE UNIVERSITY COMMITTEE FOR ANTHROPOLOGY; FELLOW 

OF THE ROYAL ANTHROPOLOGICAL INSTITUTE 



METHUEN & CO. 

36 ESSEX STREET W.C. 

LONDON 



»'ie'\ 



Hid 






Firsi PiOmHlS in igog 



vJ.' 



l:J^^ 






CONTENTS 

CHAP. PAGE 

I. Pre-Animistic Religion .... i 

II. From Spell to Prayer .... 33 

III. Is Taboo a Negative Magic? . . 85 

IV. The Conception of Mana . . 115 

V. A Sociological View of Comparative 

Religion 143 

Index 171 



TO 

M. N. 



PREFACE 

A T the International Congress for the 
'^*- History of Rehgions held recently in 
Oxford, several friends who listened to the 
paper on " The Conception of Mana," 
which appears fourth in the present collec- 
tion, were kind enough to suggest that it 
ought to be published under one cover with 
various scattered essays wherein aspects of 
the same subject had previously been ex- 
amined. The essays in question were: 
" Pre-Animistic Religion," Folk-Lore, June 
1900, pp. 162-182; " From Spell to Prayer," 
Folk-Lore, June 1904, pp. 132-165; "Is 
Taboo a Negative Magic? " Anthropological 
Essays, presented to Edward Burnett Tylor 
in honour of his y^th birthday, October 2, 1907, 
pp. 219-234; and " A Sociological View of 
Comparative Religion," Sociological Review, 
January 1908, pp. 48-60. By the kind 
leave of the Editor of Folk-Lore,th.e Delegates 

vil 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

of the Clarendon Press, and the Editor of 
the Sociological Review, it has been possible 
to proceed to the realisation of this idea, 
conceived as I have shown amid the fervent 
courtesies of a festive occasion. Now, how- 
ever, that in cold blood one contemplates 
the accomplished deed, the doubt not un- 
naturally arises whether, after all, it was 
worth while to reprint articles that in their 
original form received, from experts at all 
events, as full and favourable an attention 
as their author could venture to expect. 

It is true that the veteran psychologist, 
Wilhelm Wundt of Leipzig, has, in his 
important Volkerpsychologie (Vol. II., Pt. II., 
171 foil.), done me the honour of associating 
my name with what, under the designation 
of die prdanimistische Hypothese, he treats as 
a representative theory of the origin of 
religion, formulated in direct opposition to 
the Tylorian " animism." Had I any such 
ambitious doctrine to promulgate, I suppose 
I ought to embrace every opportunity of 
sowing my opinions broadcast. But, to be 
frank, I scarcely recognise myself in the r6le 
imputed to me. In the paper on " Pre- 

viii 



PREFACE 

animistic Religion " I had no intention of 
committing myself to a definite solution of 
the genetic problem. For me the first 
chapter of the history of religion remains in 
large part indecipherable. My chief concern 
was simply to urge that primitive or 
rudimentary religion, as we actually find it 
amongst savage peoples, is at once a wider, 
and in certain respects a vaguer, thing than 
" the belief in spiritual beings " of Tylor's 
famous " minimum definition." It there- 
fore seemed advisable to pr6vide the working 
anthropologist with a new category under 
which he could marshal those residual 
phenomena which a strictly animistic inter- 
pretation of rudimentary religion would be 
likely to ignore, or at all events to misrepre- 
sent. Before our science ventures to dog- 
matise about genesis, it must, I think, push 
on with the preliminary work of classifying 
its data under synoptic headings. My 
essay, then, more immediately served its 
turn when it succeeded in introducing a new 
classificatory term into the vocabidary of 
the working anthropologist. This, I think, 
it can be said to have done in view of the 

Ix 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

use to which the word " pre-animistic " has 
been put by writers such as Dr Preuss, Dr 
Farnell, Mr Clodd, Mr Warde Fowler, Mr 
Hodson, and others. I take it, however, 
that "non-animistic" would have served 
most of their purposes almost as well. 

At the same time it would be untrue to 
deny that the term " pre-animistic " was 
used by me designedly and with a chrono- 
logical reference. What I would not be 
prepared to lay down dogmatically or even 
provisionally is merely that" there was a 
pre-animistic era in the history of religion, 
when animism was not, and nevertheless 
religion of a kind existed. For all I know, 
some sort of animism in Tylor's sense of the 
word was a primary condition of the most 
primitive religion of mankind. But I believe 
that there were other conditions no less 
primary. Moreover, I hold that it can be 
shown conclusively that, in some cases, 
animistic interpretations have been super- 
imposed on what previously bore a non- 
animistic sense. 

I would go further still. I hold that 
religion in its psychological aspect is, funda- 



PREFACE 

mentally, a mode of social behaviour. To 
emphasise this point, which scarcely receives 
explicit attention in the previous essays, the 
fifth paper of this series is appended. Now 
I agree with those psychologists who hold 
that the most deep-seated and persistent 
springs of social behaviour are furnished, 
less by our ideas, than by our emotions, 
taken together with the impulses that are 
therein manifested.' llius awe, in the case ■ 
of religion, will, on this view, have to be 
treated as a far more constant factor in 
religion than any particular conception of 
the awful. Such awe, we may therefore 
expect, will be none the less of marked effect 
on social behaviour, because the power of 
representing the awful under clear-cut and 
consistent ideal forms is relatively back- 
ward. Hence I am ready to assume that, 
before animism, regarded as an ideal system 
of religious beliefs, can have come into its 
kingdom, there must have been numberless 

^ I would refer especially to the recently published work of my 
friend, Mr William M'Dougall (^An Introduction to Social Psychology, 
Methuen & Co., 1908), where this position is set forth more lucidly 
and plausibly than in any other psychological treatise known to me. 
His account of the emotions that underlie religion is especially 
illuminating. See 12% foil. , and again %a2,foll. 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

dimly-lighted impressions of the awful that 
owned no master in the shape of some one 
systematising thought. It is, I think, be- 
cause Wundt mistakes my " pre-animistic 
religion " for a system of ideas of alleged 
priority to animism that he accuses me of 
making the evolution of thought proceed 
from abstract to concrete instead of the 
other way about. My theory is not con- 
cerned with the mere thought at work in 
religion, but with religion as a whole, the 
organic complex of thought, emotion and 
behaviour. In regard to reUgion thus 
understood I say, not that its evolution 
proceeds from abstract to concrete — ^which 
would be meaningless — , but that it proceeds 
from indistinct to distinct, from undiffer- 
entiated to differentiated, from incoherent to 
coherent. And that, I claim, is a hypothesis 
which has the best part of evolutionary 
science at its back. 

I have said enough, I hope, to show that, 
in regard to. Tylor's animism, I am no 
irreconcilable foe who has a rival theory to 
put forward concerning the origin of religion. 
May I now be permitted to say a word about 

xii 



PREFACE 

the attitude adopted in my second, third and 
fourth papers towards the views of another 
great anthropologist — I mean Dr Frazer? 
It is more or less of a corollary from the 
position taken up in the first essay, that 
magic and religion are differentiated out 
from a common plasm of crude beliefs about 
the awful and occult. As far as Dr Frazer 
denies this, so far I should declare against 
him. If he means, for example, to exclude 
taboo from the sphere of religion (as he 
seems to do wl^en he identifies it with a 
negative magic, and identifies magic in its 
turn with the natural science of the primitive 
man), then in my opinion he understands 
religion in so narrow a sense that, for 
historical purposes, his definition simply will 
not work. I cannot, for instance, imagine 
how the British Sunday is to be excluded 
from the sphere of British religion. On the 
other hand, if he would consent not to press 
the analogy — ^for surely it is hardly' more — 
between primitive man's magic and what 
we know as natural science, I venture to 
think that his " magical " and my " pre- 
animistic " could be used as well-nigh 

xiii 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

convertible terms. Be this as it may, I 
woTild gratefully acknowledge that by far 
the richest collection in existence of what 
are for me pre-animistic phenomena is 
contained in that masterpiece of anthropo- 
logical research, The Golden Bough.^ 

Finally, I ought, perhaps, to say some- 
thing about the criticisms that have been 
levelled against the principles my sugges- 
tions embody. Apart from Wundt's objec- 
tions, which have already been considered 
and, I hope, met, they amount to very Uttle. 
The flowing tide is with us. Thus the 
contentions of my first essay were, some time 
after its first appearance (it was read to the 
British Association in September 1899, and 
published in Folk-Lore in the course of the 
following year), independently reaffirmed 
by Mr Hewitt's important article, " Orenda 
and a Definition of Religion," in the American 
Anthropologist, N.S., Vol. IV. (1902), 33 foil. 
Again, hardly had my essay " From SpeU to 
Prayer " seen the light in 1904, when MM. 

' I note also that Dr Haddon, in his useful little book, Magic ami 

Fetishism (A. Constable & Co., 1906), seems to find no difficulty in 

accepting Dr Frazer's main findings about magic, whilst at the same 

time endorsing my account of the psychology of the magical process. 

xiv 



PREFACE 

Hubert and Mauss published their far more 
systematic " Esquisse d'une theorie g6n6rale 
de la Magie " in V Annte Sociologique, Vol. 
VII., which no less independently reaffirmed 
my view of the common participation of 
magic and religion in notions of the mana 
type. Further, Mr Hartland has lent his 
great authority to this group of opinions, and 
has presented the whole case in the most 
telling fashion in his brilliant " Address to 
the Anthropological Section of the British 
Association," York, 1906 — a pamphlet 
which is unfortunately not so accessible as 
could be wished. Thus on reviewing the 
course of recent speculation concerning 
rudimentary religion one is led to hope that 
these views have come to stay. I ought to 
mention, however, that Mr Lovejoy, in his 
interesting paper on " The Fundamental 
Concept of the Primitive Philosophy " in 
The Monist, Vol. XVI., No. 3, objects that 
in my treatment of such a notion as mana I 
tend " to put the emphasis on the wrong 
side," namely, on the aspect in which it 
stands for the supernormal rather than on 
that in which it stands for the efficacious. 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

His own view is that the perceived energy is 
mysteriovis because it is so potent, not potent 
because it is mysterious in the first instance. 
Now I do not know that, for the purposes 
of general theory, I would care to emphasise 
either aspect at the expense of the other. 
It seems to me, however, that, in certain 
instances, at all events, say, in the case of a 
corpse, the awfulness is what strikes home 
first, the potency primarily consisting in the 
very fact that the dead body is able to cause 
such a shock to the feelings. A less friendly 
critic is Father Schmidt, whose terrible 
denunciations are even now in process of 
descending upon my head in the pages of 
his excellent periodical, Anthropos. On the 
principle, I suppose, that " he who is not 
with me is against me," he chooses to regard 
me as an enemy of true religion. I wish he 
would do me the honour to read my paper on 
" Origin and Validity in Ethics " in Personal 
Idealism, to see how, mutatis mutandis, 
I there in principle contend that the function 
of a psychological treatment of religion is to 
determine its history but not its truth. 
Meanwhile, the chief objection of an anthro- 

xvi 



PREFACE 

pological kind brought by him against my 
views is that I take no account of the presence 
of what Mr Lang calls " high gods " in 
primitive religion. Let me assure him that 
I have complete faith in Mr Lang's " high 
gods " — or in a great many of them, at all 
events. On the other hand, I am not at 
present prepared to admit (as apparently 
Father Schmidt would do) the postulate of 
a world-wide degeneration from the belief in 
such beings, as accounting for pre-animistic 
phenomena in general. On the contrary, 
I assume for working purposes that Mr 
Lang's " high gods " must have had a 
psychological pre-history of some kind which, 
if known, would connect them with vaguer 
and ever vaguer shapes — ^phantoms teeming i 
in the penumbra of the primitive mind, and/ 
dancing about the darkling rim of the tribal _. 
fire-circle. 

The upshot of these somewhat discursive 
considerations is that, if I am justified at all 
in publishing these essays, it is because they 
belong to a movement of anthropological 
thought which has for some time demanded 
a more permanent vehicle of expression than 

xvil 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

is afforded by periodical literature. Further, 
in view of the fact that to me personally 
there has been attributed in certain quarters 
a sweeping and even revolutionary dog- 
matism about religious origins, I gladly 
embrace the opportunity of showing, by 
means of this handful of gleanings and 
suggestions, what a small, humble and 
tentative affair my theory — so far as I have 
a theory — is. 

A note on a point of fact must be added. 
The statement about Ngai on p. 12, de- 
rived from Joseph Thomson, appears to 
be incorrect. Mr HoUis, who is thoroughly 
at home with the Masai language (whereas 
Thomson, I believe, was not), informs me 
that Eng-At is a thoroughly anthropo- 
morphic god, of much the same character 
as was the sky-god Zeus for the ancient 
world. Thomson, he thinks, must have 
misunderstood the Masai. They would 
never have alluded to his lamp, or to him- 
self, as Eng-A'i. It is possible, on the other 
hand, that they said e-ng-A't, or en-doki 
e^'ng-Ai\ "it is of God, it is something 
supernatural." Mr HoUis tells me also 

xviil 



PREFACE 

that the true form of the name of the volcano 
which Krapf calls Donyo Engai, and which 
for years figured on the maps as Donyo 
Ngai, is Ol-doinyo le-ng-A'i, the mountain of 
God. If it were a hill, it would be En- 
doinyo e-'ng-Ai. 



xix 



THE 
THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

THE object of the present paper is simply to 
try to give relatively definite shape to the 
conception of a certain very primitive phase o f 
Religion, as Religion may for anthropological 
purposes be understood. The conception in 
question wiU strike many, I daresay, as familiar, 
nay possibly as commonplace to a degree. Even 
so, however, I venture to think that it is one 
amongst several of those almost tacitly accepted 
commonplaces of Comparative Religion which 
serve at present but to " crib, cabin, and confine " 
the field of active and critical research. Com- 
parative Religion is stOl at the classificatory 
stage. Its genuine votaries are almost exclusively 
occupied in endeavouring to find " pigeon-holes " 
wherein to store with some approach to orderly 
and distinct arrangement the vast and chaotic 
piles of " slips " which their observation or reading 
has accumulated. Now in such a case the 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

tendency is always to start with quite a few 
pigeon-holes, and but gradually, and, as it were, 
grudgingly, to add to their number. On the other 
hand considerable division and sub-division of 
topics is desirable, both in the interest of specialised 
study, and in order to baffle and neutralise the 
efforts of popularisers to enlist prejudice on the 
side of one or another would-be s5aioptic version 
of the subject, based on some narrow and frag- 
mentary view of the data as provided by current 
science. Nay, so essential is it to detach " work- 
able " portions of the evidence for separate and 
detailed consideration, that it is comparatively 
imimportant whether the divisions at any moment 
recognised and adopted be capable of exact 
co-ordination in respect to one another,, so long as 
each taken by itself is clearly marked and leads 
immediately to business. Thus in the present 
case I have ventured to call attention to a phaseof 
early Religio n which, I believe, only needs clearly 
marking off by the aid of a few technical designa- 
tions, to serve as a rallying point for a quantity of 
facts that have hitherto largely " gone about 
loose." I have therefore improvised some techni- 
cal terms. I have likewise roughly surveyed the 
ground covered by the special topic in question, 
with a view to showing how the facts may there 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

be disposed and regimented. Choicer technical 
terms no doubt may easily be found. Moreover, 
my illustrations are certainly anything but choice, 
having been culled hastily from the few books 
nearest to hand. May I hope, however, at least 
to be credited with the good intention of calling 
the attention of anthropologists to the possibilities 
of a more or less disregarded theme in Comparative 
Religion; and may I, conversely, be acquitted of 
any design to dogmatise prematurely about 
Religious Origins because I have put forward a 
few experimental formulae, on the chance of their 
proving useful to this or that researcher who may 
be in need of an odd piece of twine wherewith to 
tie his scopce dissolutce into a handy, if temporary, 
besom? 

Definitions of words are always troublesome; 
and Religion is the most troublesome of all words 
to define. Now for the purposes of Anthropology 
at its present stage it matters less to assign exact 
limits to the concept to which the word in question 
corresponds, than to make sure that these limits 
are cast on such wide and generous lines, as to 
exclude no feature that has characterised Religion 
at any moment in the long course of its evolution. 
Sufl&ce it, then, to presuppose that the word stands 
for a certain composite or concrete state of mind 

3 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

wherein various emotions and ideas are together 
directly provocative of action. Let it be likewise 
noted at the start, that these emotions and ideas 
are by no means always harmoniously related in 
the religious consciousness, and indeed perhaps 
can never be strictly commensurate with each 
other. Now for most persons, probably, thej 
emotional side of Religion constitutes its more i 
real, more characteristic feature. Men are, how- 
ever, obliged to communicate expressly with each 
other on the subject of their religious experience by 
the way of ideas solely. Hence, if for no other 
reason, the ideas composing the religious state 
tend to overlay and outweigh the emotional 
element, when it comes to estimating man's 
religious experience taken at its widest. Thus we 
catch at an idea that reminds us of one belonging 
to an advanced creed and say. Here is Religion; 
or, if there be found no clear-cut palpable idea we 
are apt to say. There is no Religion here; but 
whether the subtle thrill of what we know in 
ourselves as religious emotion be present there or 
no, we rarely have the mindfulness or patience to 
inquire, simply because this far more delicate 
criterion is hard to formulate in thought and even 
harder to apply to fact. 
Now the object of this paper is to grope about 
4 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

amongst the roots of those beliefs and practices 
that at a certein stage of their deyelopment have 
usually been treated as forming a single growth 
which is labelled Animism, or more properly 
Animistic Religion. It is a region hard to explore, 
because the notions that haunt it are vague and 
impalpable ; the religious sense (if such it may be 
called) manifesting itself in almost unideated^ 



fedings that_dQubtless...fall to a large extent 
qutsidethe savage " field pL attention," and at 
anyrate fall wholly outside our field of direct 
observation. Now, even where there undeniably 
do exist precise ideas of the savage mind for 
Anthropology to grasp and gamer, everyone is 
aware how exceedingly difl&cult it is to do them 
justice. How much more difficult, therefore, must 
it be, in the case of the earliest dim heart-stirrings 
and fancies of the race, to truthfully preserve the 
indistinctness of the original, and yet make clear 
the nature of that germinal source whence our own 
complex beliefs and aspirations must be supposed 
to have arisen. 

Animism, as a technical term applied to Religion, 

\ calls attention to the presence of a. more .or. Jess 

jdefinite creed or body of ideas. According to Dr 

Tylor, who presented it to Anthropology, it 

signifies " the belief in the existence of Spiritual 

5 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Beings," ' that is to say, of " spirits " in the wide 
sense that includes " souls." A looser use of the 
word by some writers, whereby it is made to cover 
the various manifestations of what is commonly 
but cumbrously styled the " anthropomorphic " 
tendency of savage thought, will here be ignored, 
and a fresh expression substituted, seeing that 
such an extension of its meaning robs the term of 
its exacter and more convenient connotation, and, 
further, seeing that it has failed to win general 
recognition from men of science. 

No anthropologist, of course, has ever supposed 
himself able fuUy and finally to explain the origin 
of the belief in souls and spirits. Indeed, with 
regard to absolute origins of aU kinds we had best 
say at once with the philosopher that " Nothing 
is strictly original save in the sense that everything 
is." Dr Tylor and others, however, have with 
great plausibility put forward a view as to the 
specifically formative source of the idea, in what 
has been nicknamed " the dream-theory." This 
theory asserts that the prototype of soul and spirit 
i s to be soug ht especially in the dream-image and 
trance-images— that vision of the niglxt or day 
that comes to a man clothed distinctively in what 
Dr Tylor describes as " vaporous materiality," or, 

^ Prim, Cult. (3rd edition), i., 424. 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

as the Greenland angekok puts it, " pate and soft 
so that if a man try to grasp it he feels nothing " — 
par levibus ventis volucrique simillima somno. 
Perhaps it is only due to Mr Lang's latest re- 
searches '■ to say with regard to this theory that 
its centre of gravity, so to speak, has of late shown 
signs of shifting from dream to trance, so that 
" the hallucination-theory " might possibly now 
prove the more appropriate descriptive title. I 
shall not, however, pause to inquire whether the 
" thrill " of ghost-seeing is likely to have given 
form and character to the religious emotions of 
the savage more directly or forcibly than the less 
unfamiliar, yet more kindly and sympathetic, 
appearance of "dream-faces"; nor, again, 
whether the practical proofs, as they may be called, 
of Spiritualism (which after aU is but another name 
for Animism),* I mean clairvoyance and the Uke, 
were brought into earlier or greater prominence by 
normal dreamers or by abnormal " seers." It is 
enough for my present purpose to assume that 
Animism, the belief in the existence of visionary 
shapes, whether of the dead or sui juris, became 
with the savage, at a certain stage of his develop- 
ment, the typical, nay almost the universal, means 

^ Tie Making of Religion, Longmans, Green & Co., 1898. 
^ Pnm. Cult., i., 426. 

7 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

of clothing the facts of his religious experience in 
ideas and words, and the typical and aU but uni- 
versal theory on which he based his religious 
practice. And this being assumed, we reach our 
special problem : Before, or at anyrate apart from. 
Animism, was early man subject to any experience, 
whether in the form of feeling, or of thought, or of 
both combined, that might be termed specifically 
"religious "? 

Let us begin by asking ourselves what was the 
precise ground originally covered by animistic 
belief. The answer, if purely tentative, is soon 
made. The savage as we know him to-day believes 
in an infinitely miscellaneous collection of spiritual 
entities. " To whom are you praying? " asked 
Hale of a Sakai chief at one of those fruit festivals 
so characteristic of the Malay peninsula. " To 
the Hantus (spirits)," he replied — " the Hantus 
of the forest, of the mountains, of the rivers, the 
Hantus of the Sakai chiefs who are dead, the Hantus 
of head-ache and stomach-ache, the Hantus that 
make people gamble and smoke opium, the Hantus 
that send disputes, and the Hantus that send 
mosquitoes." * Now are aU these Hantus, ani- 
mistically speaking, on a par, or are some original, 
others derived? I take it that I am at one with 

*y. A. I., XV., 300-1. 
8 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

most orthodox upholders of Animism in supposing 
the Hantus of the dead to be the original animce 
whence the rest have derived their distinctively 
animistic, that is to say ghostly, characteristics. 
For this view it wiU perhaps be enough to allege a 
single reason. The revenant of dream and halluci- 
nation in its actual appearance to the senses 
presents so exactly and completely the type to 
which every spirit, however indirect its methods 
of self-manifestation, is believed and asserted to 
conform, that I am personally content to regard 
this conclusion as one amongst the few relative 
certainties which Anthropology can claim to have 
established in the way of theory. Suppose this 
granted, then we find ourselves confronted with 
the following important train of questions, yielding 
us a definite nucleus and raUying-point for our 
present inquiry : " How came an animistic colour 
to be attached to a number of things not primarily 
or obviously coimected with death and the dead? 
What inherent general character of their own 
suggested to man's mind the grouping together 
of the multifarious classes of so-called ' spiritual ' 
phenomena as capable of common explanation? 
Was not this common explanation the outcome 
of a common regard, a common and yet highly 
specific feeling or emotion? And is not this 

9 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

feeling related to the ideas wherein it finds as it 
were symbolical expression — ^as for example to the 
animistic idea — as something universal and fixed 
to something particular and transitory? " 

Now by way of answer to these questions, let 
me repeat, I have no brand-new theory to pro- 
pound. The doctrine that I now wish to formu- 
late imambiguously, and at the same time, so far 
as may be possible within the limits of a short 
article, to supply with a basis of illustrative fact, 
is one that in a vague and general form constitutes 
a sort of commonplace with writers on Religious 
Origins. These writers for the most part profess, 
though not always in very plain or positive terms, 
to discern beneath the fluctuating details of its 
efforts at self-interpretation, a certain Religious 
Sense, or, as many would call it, Instinct, whereof 
the component " moments " are Fear, Admiration, 
Wonder, and the like, whilst its object is, broadly 
speaking, the Supernatural. Now that this is 
roughly and generally true no one, I think, is 
likely to deny. Thus, to put the matter as broadly 
as possible, whether we hold with one extreme 
school that there exists a specific religious instinct, 
or whether we prefer to say with the other that 
man's religious creeds are a by-product of his 
intellectual development, we must, I think, in 

10 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

any case admit the fact that in response to, or at 
anyrate in connection with, the emotions of Awe, 
Wonder, and the like, wherein feeUng would seem 
for the time being to have outstripped the power 
of "natural," that is reasonable, explanation, 
there arises in the region of human thought a 
powerful impulse to objectify_aiid^yeii_perssQi^ 
t he myst erious or " supernatura l " som etlung 
felt, and in the region of will a corresponding 
impulse to render it innocuous, or better still 
propitious, by force of constraint, communion, or 
conciliation. Supernaturalism, then, as this uni- 
versal feeling taJcen at its widest and barest may be 
called, might, as such, be expected to prove iLot only 
logically butalso in some sense chronologically 
piiSrto J^nimism, constituting as the latter do^s 
but a particular ideal embodiment of the former. 
The appeal to fact that will occupy the rest of 
this paper, cursory though it must be in view of 
our space conditions, will suffice, I hope, to settle 
the matter. First, let us remind ourselves by the 
help of one or two typical quotations how widely 
and indiscriminately Supernaturalism casts its 
net. Thus EUis writes of the Malagasy : "What- 
ever is great, whatever exceeds the capacity 
of their understandings, they designate by the 
one convenient and comprehensive appellation, 
II 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Andriamanitra. Whatever is new and useful and 
extraordinary is called god. SUk is considered as 
god in the highest degree, the superlative adjective 
being added to the noun — Andnamanitra-indrinda. 
Rice, money, thunder and lightning, and earth- 
quake are all called god. Their ancestors and a 
deceased sovereign they designate in the same 
manner. Tarantasy or book they call god, from 
its wonderful capacity of speaking by merely 
looking at it. Velvet is called by the singular 
epithet, ' son of god.' " ^ So too of the Masai, 
though far lower than the Malagasy in the scale of 
culture, the account given by Joseph Thomson is 
precisely similar. " Their conception of the 
deity, " he says, " seems marvellously vague . I 
was Ngai. My lamp was Ngai. Ngai was in the 
steaming holes. His house was in the eternal 
snows of Kilimanjaro. In fact, whatever struck 
them as strange or incomprehensible, that they at 
once assumed had some connection with Ngai." ' 
As I have said, such quotations are typical and 
might be multiplied indefinitely. Andriamanitra 
and Ngai reappear in the Wakan of the North 
American Indian, the Mana of the Melanesian, the 
Kalou of the Fijian, and so on. It is the common 

• Ellis, Hist, of Madagascar, i„ 391-2. 
' Thomson, Atasailaml, 445. But see^Prefece ad fin. 
13 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

element in ghosts and gods, in the magical and the 
mystical, the supernal and the infernal, the un- 
known within and the unknown without. It is 
the Supernatural or Supernormal, as distinguished 
from the Natural or Normal; that in short which, 
as Mr Jevons phrases it, " defeats reasonable 
expectation." Or perhaps another and a better 
way of putting it, seeing that it calls attention to 
the feeling Jbehind the logic, is to say thatjt is the. 
Awful, and that everything wherein or whereby 
it manifests itself is, so to speak, a Power of 
Awfulness, or, more shortly, a Power (though this, 
like any other of our verbal equivalents, cannot 
but fail to preserve the vagueness of the original 
notion).' Of all English words Awe is, I think, 
the one that expresses^ the jundamental ReU^us 
Feehng most ne arly. Awe is not the same thing 
as " pure fimk." " Primus in orbe deos fecit 
iimor " is only true if we admit Wonder, Admira- 
tion, Interest, Respect, even Love perhaps, to be, 
no less than Fear, essential constituents of this 
elemental mood. 

Now ghosts and spirits are undoubtedly Powers, 
but it does not follow that all Powers are ghosts 
and spirits, even if they tend to become so. In 

■" .The Greek word that comes nearest to " Power '' as used above 
is T^pos. Perhaps "Teratism" may be preferred as a designation 
for that attitude of mind which I have termed " Supernaturalism." 

13 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

what follows I propose that we examine a few typi- 
cal cases of Powers, which, beneath the animistic 
colour that in the course of time has more or less 
completely overlaid them, show traces of having 
once of their own right possessed m^-animistic 
validity as objects and occasions of man's religious ^ 
feeling". 

' TSefus start with some cases that, pertaining as 
they do to the " Unknown Without " as it appears 
in most direct contradistinction to the " Unknown 
Within," are thus farthest removed from the 
proper domain and parent-soil of Animism, and 
may therefore be supposed to have suffered its 
influences least. What we call " physical nature " 
may very well be " nature " also to the savage in 
most of its normsd aspects ; yet its more startling 
manifestations, thunderstorms, eclipses, eruptions, 
and the like, are eminently calculated to awake in 
him an Awe that I believe to be specyically 
relijious _both in its essence and in its fruits. 
whether^nimign_h^ve, or have notj succeedgdJn 
iir^^ing._its..di&tin,ctiva .CQlaur-^upoa it. Thus, 
when a thunderstorm is seen approaching in South 
Africa, a Kaffir village, led by its medicine-man, 
will rush to the nearest hill and yell at the hurricane 
to divert it from its course.' Here we have Awe 

> Macdonald,y. A. I., xix„ 283. 
14 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

finding vent in what on the face of it may be no 
more than a simple straightforward act of per- 
sonification. It is Animism in the loose sense of 
some writers, or, as I propose to call it, Animatism; 
but it is not Animism in the strict scientific sense 
that implies the attribution, not merely of person- 
ality and will, but of " soul " or " spirit," to the 
storm. The next case is but slightly different. 
The Point Barrow natives, believing the Aurora 
Borealis to do them harm by striking them at the 
back of the neck, brandish knives and throw filth 
at it to drive it away.' Now I doubt if we need 
suppose Animism to be latent here any more than 
in the African example. Nevertheless the associa- 
tion of the Aurora's banefulness with a particular 
malady would naturally pave the way towards it, 
whilst the precautionary measures are exactly 
such as would be used against spirits. The 
following case is more dubious. When a glacier in 
Alaska threatened to swaUow up a valuable fishing 
stream, two slaves were killed in order to bring it 
to a standstill.' Here the advanced character 
of the propitiatoTLrite probably presumes ac- 
quaintance with some form of the animistic theory. 
It may very well be, however, that sacrifice is here 

' Murdoch, Poif^ Barrow Expedition, 432. 
' Peet, Am. Antig., ix., 327 ; an instance, however, that might 
be better authenticated. 

15 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

resorted to as a general religious panacea without 
involving any distinct recognition of a particiilar 
Racier spirit. And now let us take a couple of 
instances where the theory behind the reUgious 
observance is more explicit. The Fuegians abstain 
from killing young ducks on the ground that, if 
they do, " Rain come down, snow come down, 
haU come down, wind blow, blow, very much 
blow." The storm is sent by a " big man " who 
lives in the woods.' Now is this Animism? I 
think not. What may be called a " coincidental 
marvel " is explained by a myth, and Mythology 
need be no more than a sort of Animatism grown 
picturesque. When, however, a Point Barrow 
Esquimaux, in order to persuade the river to yield 
him fish, throws tobacco, not into the river, but 
into the ^r, and cries out " Tuana, Tuana " 
(spirit),' then here is a full-fledged Animism. 
Meanwhile, whatever view be taken of the parts 
respectively played by Animatism, Mythology, 
Animism, or what not, in investing these observ- 
ances with meaning and colour, my main point is 
that the quality of religiousness attaches to them 
far less in virtue of any one of these ideal construc- 
Hons than in yirtue of that basic feeling of Awe, 
which drives a man, ere he can think or theorise 

^ Fiteroy, ii., l8o. " Murdoch, ib., 433. 

16 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

jipon jt, into personal relations with the Super- 
natural. 

"In order to establish the thesis that the attitude 
of Supematuralism towards what we should call 
Inanimate Nature may be independent of animistic 
interpretations, much more is required in the way 
of evidence than what I have the space to bring 
forward here. In the case of matters so indirectly 
ascertainable as the first beginnings of human 
thought, the cumulative testimony of very numer- 
ous and varied data affords the only available 
substitute for crucial proof. As it is, however, I 
must content myself with citing but two more sets 
of instances bearing on this part of my subject. 

The first of these may be of interest to those 
who have lent their attention to Mr Lang's recent 
discovery of " Pure " — that- is to say, Ethical — 
religion in the wUds of Australia. I have to 
confess to the opinion with regard to Daramuhm, 
Mungan-ngaur, Tundun, and Baiamai, those 
divinities whom the Kumai, Murrings, Kamilaroi, 
and other Australian groups address severally as 
"Our Father," recognising in them the super- 
natural headmen and lawgivers of their respective 
tribes, that their prototype is nothing more or less 
than that well-known material and inanimate 
object, the bull-roarer. Its thunderous booming 
2 17 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

must have been eminently awe-inspiring to the first 
inventors, or rather discoverers, of the instrument, 
and would not unnaturally provoke the " ani- 
matistic " attribution of life and power to it. 
Then Mythology seems to have stepped in to 
explain why and how the bull-roarer enforces 
those tribal ceremonies with which its use is 
associated, and, after the manner of Myth, to 
have invented schemes and genealogies of bull- 
roarers whose wonderful history and dreadful 
powers it proceeded to chronicle. Thus, for 
example, Baiamai kills Daramulwn for devouring 
some of the youths undergoing initiation, but puts 
his voice into the wood of the bull-roarer.* Or 
Mungan-ngaur begets Tundun, who first makes 
the buU-roarers in actual use amongst the Kumai, 
and then becomes a porpoise." Further, Myth- 
ology is reinforced by S3nnbolistic ritual. Figures 
made of logs are set up on the initiation ground 
to represent Baiamai and his wife; or the men 
throw blazing sticks at the women and children as 
if it were Daramulun coming to bum them.^ As 
for Animism, however, we never get anywhere 
near to it save perhaps when Daramulun^s voice 
is said to inhabit the bull-roarer, or when he is 

^ Matthews,y. A. I., xxv., 298, ' Howitt,y. A. /., xiv., 312. 

' Matthews,y. A. /., xxiv., 416; xxv., 298. 

18 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

spoken of as living in the sky and ruling the ghosts 
of the dead Kumai.' Nevertheless, despite its 
want of animistic colouring, a genuine Religion (if 
reverence shown towards supernatural powers 
and obedience to their mandates be a sufficient 
test of genuineness) has sprung up out of the Awe 
inspired by the bull-roarer; and Mr Lang's asser- 
tion may safely be endorsed that Animism, with 
the opportunities it affords for spiritualistic 
hocus-pocus, could serve to introduce therein a 
principle of degeneration only. 

My other set of instances pertains to the fascin- 
ating subject of stone-worship — a subject, alas! 
from which I would fain illustrate my point at 
far greater length. Stones that are at all curious 
in shape, position, size, or colour — not to speak of 
properties derived from remarkable coincidences 
of all sorts — ^would seem specially designed by 
nature to appeal to primitive man's " super- 
naturalistic "tendency. A solitary pillar of rock, 
a crumpled volcanic boulder, a meteorite, a pebble 
resembling a pig, a yam, or an arrowhead, a piece 
of shining quartz, these and such as these are 
almost certain to be invested by his imagination 
with the vague but dreadful attributes of Powers. 
Nor, although to us nothing appears so utterly 

' Howitt,/. A. I., xxT., 321. 
19 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

inanimate as a stone, is savage animatism in the 
least afraid to regard it as alive. Thus the 
Kanakas differentiate their sacred stones into 
males and females, and firmly believe that from 
time to time little stones appear at the side of 
the parent blocks.' On the other hand, when a 
Banks' Islander sees a big stone with little stones 
around it, he says that there is a Vui (spirit) inside 
it, ready if properly conciliated to make the 
women bear many children and the sows large 
litters.'' Now, this is no longer Animatism, but 
Animism proper. A piece of sympathetic magic is 
explained in terms of spirit-causation. The 
following case from the Baram district of Borneo 
is transitional. A man protects his fruit trees by 
placing near them certain round stones in cleft 
sticks. He then utters a curse, calling upon the 
stones to witness it : " May he who steals this fruit 
suffer from stones in the stomach as large as these." 
Further, suppose a friend of the proprietor wish 
to eat of the fruit, he wUl light a fire, and ask the 
fire to explain to the stone that nothing wrong 
is being done.^ Here we seem to have simple 
Animatism, but it may be said to tremble on the 
verge of Animism, inasmuch as by itself — that is, 

' Ellis, Tour routtd Hawaii, 1 1 3. ' Codrington,/. A, /., x., 276. 

' Hose,/. A. /., xxiii., 161. 

20 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

by the mere attribution of life and will — it is 
unable to account for the magical powers of the 
stone. How this may be done with the help of 
Animism is shown us by the Banks' Islanders, 
already referred to, who, employing stones of a 
peculiar long shape in much the same way to 
protect their houses, do so on the explicit ground 
that the stones have " eaten ghost " — the ghost of 
a dead man being not unnaturally taken as the 
type and ne plus ultra of awful power.* Not to 
multiply instances, let me roundly state that, amid 
the vast array of facts relating to the worship of 
stones, there will be found the most divergent ideal 
representations of their supernatural nature and 
p^OT^erSj ranging from the vaguest semi-conscious 
belief in their luckiness,"" onwards through Animat- 
ism, to the distinct animistic conception of them as 
the home of spirits of the dead or the unborn, or 
astheJmage and visible .presence of a god; but 
that underlying aU these fluctuating interpreta- 
tions of thought there may be discerned a single 
imiversal f eeiing, namely the sense of an Awf ulness 

* Codrington, I.e. 

^ I am afraid it may be said that I have not given sufficient pro- 
minence to that " moment" in religious feeling which corresponds 
to the belief in Luck. I do not, however, regard it as a specific 
emotion in itself, but rather as a compound of the Wonder pro- 
duced by a coincidence and of sufficient Awe of the /flzc;?' therewith 
seemingly connected, to make it appear worth while to try to con- 
ciliate it. 

21 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

in them intimately affecting man and demanding 
of him the fruits of Awe, namely respect, venera- 
tion, propitiation,, service. 

Passing now from the region of what we regard 
as the Inanimate to that of the Sub-animate and 
the Animate, we come first in order of upward 
progress to that tantalising theme, the worship of 
plants and animals. Now to a large extent this 
coincides with the subject of Totemism, about 
which I shall say little, if only because it teems 
with controversial matter. This much, however, 
I take to be now relatively certain with regard to 
it, that in their origin totemistic observances had 
a magical Tiib.exJhan^a strictly religious impor t. 
TTiatTs to say, their object was not so much to 
conciliate powers in plant or animal form, as to 
establish sympathetic control over classes of 
serviceable plants and animals regarded simply 
as such, namely as clans or tribes very much on 
a par with the human ones. Now I am ready to 
suppose that sympathetic^ magic in the eyes of 
the savage is, primarily, no exclusive instrument 
of reli^on, but a means of caiisatiQi).. on_ a level 
with hisjather methods of exerting force — just as 
with him talking is not confined exclusively to 
praying. On the other hand, I believe that the 
abnormal, and mysterious element in magical 

22 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

causation is bound to strike him sooner or later, 
and to call for explanation in the terms most 
familiar and most satisfying to primitive mysti- 
cism. Thus, in the case of Totemism, the con- 
ception of an affinity between the spirits of the 
plants and animals and their human clients, as 
effected by Transmigration or some other animistic 
contrivance, is sure to arise, with the resxilt that 
the plants and a.nimals by reason of their " spirit- 
ualisati on " f orthwith assume Jhe plenary rank 
, and attributes, of JPoweg. Meanwhile, in order to 
show how this may come about, I shall bring 
forward one or two illustrations that have no 
direct coimection with Totemism, as they will 
then at the same time serve to caU attention to the 
qualities that constitute an intrinsic as opposed to 
a merely derivatory right to be revered as Super- 
natural and Awful. There are many animals that 
are propitiated by primitive man neither because 
they are merely useful nor merely dangerous, but 
because they are, in a word, uncanny. White 
animals (for example, white elephants or white 
buffaloes), birds of night (notably the owl), 
monkeys, mice, frogs, crabs, snakes, and lizards, in 
fact a host of strange and gruesome beasts, are to 
the savage, of their own right and on the face of 
them, instinct with dreadful divinity. To take a 

23 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

single instance, a fishing party of Crees catch a 
new and terrible-looking kind of fish. It is 
promptly returned to the water as a Manitu, and 
five days are wasted whilst it is being appeased.* 
Now in the case of Powers like these, S5nnpathetic 
magic wiU naturally suggest the wearing of tooth 
or claw, bone or skin as a means of sharing in the 
divine potency. Here is the chance for Animism 
to step in. Thus a Kennaiah chief who wishes to 
wear the skin of the Borneo tiger-cat for luck in 
war, wiU wrap himself in it, and before lying down 
to sleep wiU explain to the skin exactly what he 
wants, and beg the spirit to send him a propitious 
dream.^ Or in other cases mere association and 
coincidence wiU pave the way towards an animistic 
version of the facts. Thus I have no doubt that 
it is the imcanny appearance of the snake, com- 
bined with its habit of frequenting graves and of 
entering dwellings, which has led more than one 
savage people to treat it as the chosen incarnation 
of their ancestral ghosts.^ And here let me leave 
this part of the subject, having thus barely touched 
upon it in order to confirm the single point that 
Religious Awe is towards Powers, and that these 

^ Hind, Red River Exped., ii., 135. 
" Hose.y. A. I., xxiii., 159. 

' "Zulus," Macdonald, f. A. /., xx., 122. "Malagasy," 
Sibree, /. A. I., xxi., 227. 

24 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

are not necessarily spirits or ghosts, though they 
tend to become so. 

At length we reach what I have roughly de- 
scribed as the proper domain and parent-soil of 
Animism, namely the phenomena that have to do 
with dream and trance, disease and death. Here 
the question for us must be, " Do Supematuralism 
and Animism originally coincide in respect to 
these phenomena? " Or, in other words, " Is the 
Awful, in each and all of them alike, primarily soul 
or spirit? " My own belief is that the two spheres 
do not originally coincide, that the Awful in dream 
£uid trance is at first distinct from the Awful in 
death and disease, though the former readily 
comes to overlay and colour the latter. Thus I 
conceive that the trance-image, alike on account 
of its singularity, its accompaniments in the way 
of physical no less than mental derangement, and 
its coincidental possibilities, must have been 
originally and of its own right Awful ; and that so, 
though perhaps to a lesser extent, must have been 
the dream-image, if only on the ground last 
mentioned. Nor would I deny that, in regard to 
death, these two kinds of vision taken together 
would be bound to suggest to the savage mind that 
there is a something which survives the body. But 
have we here a complete account of the influences 

25 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

whereby there is produced that mingled fear and 
love of the dead which culminate in Manes- 
worship? I think not. For one thing, it is 
almost an axiom with writers on this subject, that 
a sort of Solipsism, or Berkleianism (as Professor 
Sully terms it as he finds it in the Child), operates 
in the savage to make him refuse to recognise 
death as a fact, there being at anyrate plenty of 
proof that he is extremely unwilling to recognise 
the fact of natural death. The influence, however, 
which I consider most fimdamental of all is some- 
thing else — namely the awf ulness felt to 5..ttasJi 
to the dead human body in itself . Here, I think, 
we probably have the cause of the definite assign- 
ment to a passing appearance like the trance- 
image of real and permanent existence in relation 
to a dead owner; and certainly the main source of 
the ascription of potency to the soul thus rendered 
substantive. The thrill of ghost-seeing may be 
real enough, but I fancy it is nothing to the horror 
of a human corpse instilled into man's heart by 
his instinct of self-preservation. In confirmation 
of this view I would refer to the mass of evidence 
dealing with the use of hiraian remains for piu"- 
poses of protective or offensive magic. A skull, 
a human hand, a scalp-lock, a portion of dried and 
pounded flesh are potent medicine in themselves, 

26 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

so long as S37mpathetic magic is at the stage at 
which it takes itself for granted. Magical pro- 
cesses, however, as we have seen, specially invite 
explanation. What more natural, then, given an 
acquaintance with the images of trance and dream, 
than to attribute the mysterious potency of a dead 
man's body to that uncanny thing his wraith? 
Let me quote just one instance to show how easy 
is the transition from the one idea to the other. 
A young native of Leper's Island, out of affection 
for his dead brother, made his bones into arrow- 
tips. Thereafter he no longer spoke of himself as 
" I," but as " we two," and was much feared.' 
The Melanesian explanation was that he had thus 
acquired the mana, or supernatural power, of the 
dead man. Clearly it is but a hair's breadth that 
divides the mana thus personified from the notion 
of the attendant ghost, which elsewhere so often 
meets us. 

There remains the difficult question whether "l 
Animism is primarily, or only derivatively, con- 
nected with the religious Awe felt in the presence 
of most kinds of disease. I am disposed to say 
" distinguo." As regards delirium, epUepsy, and 
kindred forms of seizure, the patient's experience 
of hallucinatory images, combined with the 

1 Codrington, /. A. /., six., 216-7. 
27 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

bystanders' impression that the former is, as we 
say, " no longer himself," would, I think, wellnigh 
immediately and directly stamp it as a case of 
possession by a spirit. Then all convulsive move- 
ments, sneezing, yawning, a ringing in the ear, a 
twitching of the eyelid, and so on, would be ex- 
plained analogously. On the other hand there is 
a large and miscellaneous number of diseases that 
primitive man attributes to witchcraft, without at 
the same time necessarily ascribing them to the 
visitation of bad spirits. Thus a savage will 
imagine that he has a crab or a frog, some red ants 
or a piece of crystal, in his stomach, introduced by 
magical means, as for instance by burying the 
crab (perhaps with an invocation to the crab- 
fetish) ' in his path. To remedy such supposed 
evUs the native doctor betakes himself to the 
sucking cure and the like, whilst he meets spirits 
with a more or less distinct set of contrivances, 
for instance the drum or rattle to frighten them, 
and the hollow bone to imprison them. Mean- 
while Animism undoubtedly tends to provide a 
general explanation for aU disease, since disease 
to the savage mind especially connotes what may 
be described as " infection " in the widest sense, 
and infection is eminently suggestive of the 

' ConoUy,y. A. /., xxvi., 151. 
28 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

workings of a mobile aggressive agency such as 
spirit appears intrinsically to be. Let me briefly 
refer, however, to one form of malady which aU the 
world over excites the liveliest religions Awe, and 
yet is, so far as I know, but rarely and loosely 
coimected with Animism by savage theorists. 
The horror of blood I take to be strictly parallel 
to the horror of a corpse already alluded to; and 
I believe that in what Westermarck has termed the 
" mystic detestation " of woman, or in the un- 
reasoning dread which causes a North American 
brave with a rimning sore to be banned from the 
camp,' we have a crucial case of a pure and 
virtually uncoloured religious feeling. The issue 
of blood " pertains to Wakanda," as the Omahas 
said.'' That is the primary vague utterance of 
Supematuralism ; and strictly secondary, I con- 
ceive, and by way of ex post facto justification, is 
the belief in the magical properties of the blood, 
the theory that the blood is the life, or the Maori 
notion that it is fuU of germs ready to turn into 
malicious spirits.^ 

At this point my list of illustrations must come 
to a close ; and it therefore only remains for me to 
utter a last word in my own defence for having 

^ Adair, Hist, of Am. Inti; 124. 
' Dorsey, Omaha Sociology, 267. 
' Cf. Tregear,/. A. I., xix., lot. 

29 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

called attention to a subject that many will be 
ready to pronounce both trite, and at the same 
time incapable of exact or final treatment, 

As regards the charge of triteness, I would only 
say that a disregarded commonplace is no common- 
place at all, and that disregard is, anthropologic- 
ally speaking, to be measured by the actual use 
to which a conception is put when there is available 
evidence in the shape of raw facts waiting to be 
marshalled and pigeon-holed by its aid. I do not 
find that the leading theorists have by the 
organisation of their material shown themselves 
to be sufficiently aware that the animistic idea 
represents but one amongst a number of ideas, for 
the most part far more vague than it is, and hence 
more liable to escape notice; all of which ideas, 
however, are active in savage rehgion as we have 
it, struggling one with the other for supremacy 
in accordance with the normal tendency of re- 
ligious thought towards uniformity of doctrinal 
expression. On the contrary, the impression left 
on my mind by a study of the leading theorists 
is that animistic interpretations have by them 
been decidedly overdone; that, whereas they are 
prone in the case of the religions of civiUsation 
to detect survivals and fading rudimentary forms, 
they are less inclined to repeat the process when 

30 



PRE-ANIMISTIC RELIGION 

their clues have at length led them back to that 
stage of primitive thought which perforce must be 
" original " for them by reason of the lack of 
earlier evidence, but is not in the least " original " 
in an absolute sense and from the standpoint of 
the racial history. 

As for the charge of inconclusiveness, this might 
be in point were it a question of assigning exact 
limits to the concept to which the word Religion, 
as employed by Anthropology, ought to corre- 
spond. As I have said, however, the only real 
danger at present can come from framing what is 
boimd to be a purely experimental and preliminary 
definition in too hard-and-fast a manner. Thus 
Dr Frazer, though he is doubtless well aware of 
all the facts I have cited, prefers to treat of Magic 
and Religion as occupying mutually exclusive 
spheres, whilst I regard these spheres, not indeed 
as coincident by any means, but stiU as overlap- 
ping. I, on the other hand, would hold out for the 
widest possible rendering of the idea of Religion on 
practical and theoretical grounds alike. As regards 
the former, I should fear to cut myself off pre- 
maturely from any group of facts that might 
possibly bear upon the history of man's religious 
evolution. As regards theory, I would rest my 
case on the psychological argument that, if there 

31 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

be reason, as I think there is, to hold that man's 
religious sense is a constant and universal feature 
of his mental life, its essence and true nature 
must then be sought, not so much in the shifting 
variety of its ideal constructions, as in that stead- 
fast groundwork of specific emotion whereby man 
is able to feel the supernatural precisely at the 
point at which his thought breaks down. Thus, 
from the vague utterance of the Omaha, " the 
blood pertains to Wakanda," onwards through 
Animism, to the dictum of the greatest living 
idealist philosopher, "" the Universe is a Spiritual 
Whole," a single impulse may be discerned as 
active — the impulse, never satisfied in finite 
consciousness yet never abandoned, to bring 
together and grasp as one the That and the What 
of God. 



32 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

THIS paper represents the fruit of some rather 
perfunctory, if only because interrupted, 
meditation on the broader and, so to speak, more 
philosophic features of the contrast drawn between 
magic and religion by Dr Frazer in the second 
edition of his Golden Bough. Meanwhile, it is more 
immediately written round the subject of the rela- 
tion of incantation to invocation, the spell to the 
prayer. I confess to having reached my con- 
clusions by ways that are largely a priori. By this 
I do not mean, of course, that I have excogitated 
them out of my inner consciousness, as the 
Teutonic professor in the story is said to have 
excogitated the camel. I simply mean that the 
preliminary induction on which my hypothesis is 
based consists partly in considerations pertaining 
to the universal psychology of man, and partly in 
general impressions derived from a limited amount 
of discursive reading about savages. The verifica- 
tion of my theory, on the other hand, by means of 
a detailed comparison of its results with the 
relevant evidence is a task beyond my present 
3 33 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

means. As for my illustrations, these have been 
hastily gathered from a few standard books and 
papers, and most of all, I think, from that house 
of heaped-up treasure, the Golden Bough itself. In 
these circumstances my sole excuse for challenging 
the views of an authority whose knowledge and 
command of anthropological fact is truly vast, 
must be that in the present inchoate state of the 
science there can be no closed questions, nor even 
any reserved ones — no mysteries over which ex- 
pert may claim the right to take counsel with 
expert, secure from the incursions of the irre- 
sponsible amateur. I would add that what I have 
to say is not intended in any way to abrogate 
Dr Frazer's contrast between magic and religion. 
On the contrary, I consider it to embody a work- 
ing distinction of first-rate importance. I merely 
wish to mitigate this contrast by proposing what, 
in effect, amounts to a separation in lieu of a 
divorce. A working principle, if it is to work, 
must not be pushed too hard. 

The question, then, that I propose to discuss is 
the following : Does the spell help to generate the 
prayer, and, if so, how? Now the spell belongs to 
magic, and the prayer to religiofi. Hence we are 
attacking, in specific shape, no less a problem than 
this : Does magic help to generate religion? 

34 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

Perhaps it will make for clearness of exposition 
if I outline the reply I would offer in what follows 
to this latter question. First, I suppose certain 
beliefs, of a kind natural to the infancy of thought, 
to be accepted at face value in a spirit of naive faith, 
whilst being in fact illusory. The practice corre- 
sponding to such naive belief I call " rudimentary 
magic." Afterwards I conceive a certain sense 
of their prima facie illusiveness to come to attach 
to these beliefs, without, however, managing to 
invalidate them. This I call the stage of " de- 
veloped magic." Such magic, as embodying 'a\ 
reality that to some extent transcends appearance, 
becomes to a corresponding extent a mystery. 
As such, on my view, it tends to fall within the 
sphere of religion. For I define the object of 
religion to be whatever is perceived as a my stery 
and treated accordingly. (Dr Frazer, however, 
defines religion differently, and this must be borne 
in mind in estimating the pertinence of such 
criticisms as I may pass on his interpretations 
of the facts.) 

Let us now turn to the Golden Bough to see what 
light it throws on this same problem, viz. whether 
magic is a factor in the genesis of religion. If I 
understand Dr Frazer aright — and of this I am by 
no means sure — his position comes to this. Magic 

35 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

is a negative, but not a positive, condition of the 
genesis of religion. The failure of magic is the 
opportunity of religio n. Hence it may be said to 
he5~tFgenerate religion in the sense in which the 
idle apprentice may be said to help to set up his 
more industrious rival by allowing him to step 
into his shoes. But it makes no positive contribu- 
tion to religion either in the way of form or of 
content. 

More explicitly stated, Dr Frazer's theory runs 
somewhat thus. (It is only fair to note that it is a 
theory which he puts forward " tentatively " 
and " with diffidence.")' Originally, and so long 
as the highest human culture was at what may be 
described as an Australian level, magic reigned 
supreme, and religion was not. But time and trial 
proved magic to be a broken reed. " Man saw 
that he had taken for causes what were no causes, 
and that all his efforts to work by means of these 
imaginary causes had been vain. His painful toil 
had been wasted, his curious ingenuity had been 
squandered to no purpose. He had been pulling 
at strings to which nothing was attached." 
Whereupon " our primitive philosopher " (and 
truly, we may say, did that savage of " deeper 
mind " and " shrewder intelligence " deserve this 

' G. A,M.,73«.,7S. 

36 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

title of "philosopher," if he could thus reason, 
as Dr Frazer makes him do, about " causes " and 
the like) advanced, " very slowly," indeed, and 
" step by step," to the following " solution of his 
harassing doubts." " If the great world went on 
its way without the help of him or his fellows, 
it must surely be because there were other beings, 
like himself, but far stronger, who, unseen them- 
selves, directed its course and brought about all 
the varied series of events which he had hitherto 
believed to be dependent on his own magic." 

Now the impression I get from these passages, 
and from the whole of those twenty pages or so 
which Dr Frazer devotes to the subject of the 
relation of magic to religion as such, is that the 
epic vein decidedly predominates therein. The 
glowiHg" periods in which the history of " the great 
transition " is recounted are not easily translated 
into the cold prose of science. Construed literally 
they appear liable to not a few serious strictures. 
For example, pure ratiocination seems to be credited 
with an effectiveness without a parallel in early 
culture. Almost as well say that when man found 
he could not make big enough bags with the 
throwing-stick, he sat down and excogitated the 
bow-and-arrow. Or again " unseen beings " seem 
to be introduced as " mysterious powers " sprung 

37 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

fully-armed from the brain of man, and otherwise 
without assigned pre-history.' Finally, magic 
and religion appear to be treated as in their inmost 
psychologic nature disparate and unsympathetic 
forces, oil and water, which even when brought 
into juxtaposition are so far from mixing that the 
observer has no difficulty in distinguishing what 
is due to the presence of each.' One's first im- 
pression is that a purely analytic method has 
escaped its own notice in putting on a pseudo- 
genetic guise, that mere heads of classification have 
first been invested with an impermeable essence, 
and then identified with the phases of a historical 
development which is thereby robbed of all 
intrinsic continuity. But on second thoughts 
one sees, I think, that to construe literally here 
is to construe illiberally. Dr Frazer, in order to 
dispose summarily of an interminable question, 
may be supposed to have resorted to a kind of 
Platonic myth. A certain priority and a certain 
absoluteness within its own province had to be 
vindicated for magic as against religion, if the 
special problem of the Golden Bough was to be 
kept free of irrelevancies. This vindication the 
myth contrives, and the rest is, so to speak, 
literature. If Dr Frazer contemplates a specific 

I G. £.,' i., 78. = Cf. it., 33, 45, etc. 

38 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

work on the early history of religion, he doubtless 
intends to fill in what are manifest gaps in the 
present argument. Meanwhile, as regards the 
inquiry we are now embarked on, we may say 
that, so far as he goes, Dr Frazer is against the 
view that magic is capable of merging in religion 
so as to become part and parcel of it, but that he 
does not go very far into the question, and leaves 
it more or less open to further discussion. Where- 
fore to its further discussion let us proceed. 

Now in the first place it would clearly simplify 
our task if we could find sufficient reason for 
assuming that, whatever it may afterwards have 
become, magic was originally something wholly 
unrelated to religion — that, in short, it was origin- 
ally sui generis. I may point out that this is by 
no means the same thing as to postulate, with Dr 
Frazer, an " Age of Magic," when religion simply 
was not." Our assumption would not exclude the 
possibility of some sort of religion having been 
coeval with magic. Which, let me add, might 
have been the case, even were it shoivn that magic 
can generate religion of a kind. For religion has 
all the appearance of being a highly complex and 
multifarious growth — a forest rather than a tree. 

That magic was originally sui generis might seem 

1 See G. B.,' i., 73, 
39 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

a doctrine that hardly calls for establishment, so 
universally is it accepted by anthropologists. Its 
peculiar provenance is held to be completely known. 
Thus Dr Frazer tells us that Magic may be " de- 
duced immediately from elementary processes of 
reasoning," meaning the laws of association, or, 
specifically, the laws of association by similarity 
and by contiguity in space or time.' 

Now it seems to me that, once more, these 
statements need to be construed liberally. The 
psychological purist might justly doubt whether 
Dr Frazer is literally able to deduce magic im- 
mediately from the laws of association. He 
would, at anyrate, deny Dr Frazer's right to 
describe the laws of association as " processes of 
reasoning " or " laws of thought " in any strict 
sense of these terms.'' A generation ago, no 
doubt, when the self-styled school of " experience " 
dominated British psychology, these expressions 
would have passed muster. In which context it 
is perhaps relevant to remark that Dr Frazer's 
theory of the associationalist origin of magic would 
seem to have been influenced by that of Dr Jevons, 
and that of Dr Jevons in its turn by that of Dr 
Tylor, which was framed more than thirty years 
ago, and naturally reflects the current state of 

> G. B.,"" i., 70. Cf. 62. ^ lb., 70 and 62. 

40 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

psychological opinion. To-day, however, no psy- 
chologist worth seriously considering holds that 
association taken strictly for just what it is suffices 
to explain anything that deserves the name of 
reasoning or thought, much less any form of 
practical contrivance based on reasoning or 
thought. First of all, association is no self-acting 
" mental chemistry," but depends on continuity 
of interests Secondly, thought, that is, thought- 
construction, instead of merely reproducing the 
old, transforms it into something new. The 
psychological purist, then, might justly find fault 
with Dr Frazer's remarks as lacking in technical 
accuracy, were technical accuracy to be looked for 
in a passage that, to judge from its style, is semi- 
popular in its purport. Even so, however, this 
loose language is to be regretted. Seeing that an 
all-sufficient associationalism has for sound reason 
been banished from psychology, the retention of 
its peculiar phraseology is to be deprecated as 
liable to suggest that anthropology is harbour- 
ing an impostor on the strength of obsolete 
credentials. 

A word more touching the want of precision in 
Dr Frazer's language. As in his account of the 
interior history of the genesis of religion, so in his 
characterisation of the inner nature of magic he 

41 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

seems to exaggerate the work of pure ratiocination. 
Thus he speaks of magic as a " philosophy " con- 
sisting in " principles " from which the savage 
" infers " and " concludes " this and that;' magic 
" proceeds upon " such and such " assumptions "; 
and so on." Now on the face of them these appear 
to be glaring instances of what is known as " the 
psychologist's fallacy." The standpoint of the 
observer seems to be confused,with the standpoint 
of the mind under observation. But there are 
indications that Dr Frazer expects us to make the 
necessary allowance for his metaphorical diction. 
Thus one of the " assumptions " of magic is said 
to consist in a " faith " that whilst " real and 
firm " is nevertheless " implicit."' Meanwhile, 
from the point of view of the psychological purist, 
implicit, that is, unconscious, inferences, assump- 
tions, and so on, are little better than hybrids. 
Now doubtless a considerable amount of real 
inference may be operative at certain stages in 
the development of magic. Nay, certain forms of 
magic may even be found to have originated in 
a theorising about causes that did not arise out 
of practice save indirectly, and was the immediate 
fruit of reflection. I refer more ^especially to 
divination, if divination is to be classed under 

' G. B.? i., 9. 2 lb., 49. 3 lb. Cf. 62 with 61. 

42 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

magic, as Dr Tylor thinks that it should.' But, 
speaking generally, the working principle we had 
better adopt as inquirers into the origin of magic 
is, I suggest, the following: to expect the theory 
to grow out of the practice, rather than the other 
way about ; to try to start from a savage Monsieur 
Jourdain who talks prose whilst yet unaware that 
he is doing so. 

In what follows I shall seek to observe this 
working principle. MeanwhUe, I cannot pretend 
to a systematic and all-inclusive treatment of a 
subject which, for me, I confess, has at present 
no well-marked limits. Dr. Frazer's division of 
magic into two kinds, imitative and sympathetic," 
is highly convenient for analysis, but I^nTlioir so 
sure that it directly subserves genesis. Not to 
speak of the question already touched on whether 
divination falls under magic, there are other 
practices quasi-magical in form, for instance the 
familiar sucking-cure, which cannot be easily 
reduced to cases either of imitative or sympathetic 
magic, and which nevertheless, I believe, are of 
connate psychological origin with practices of one 
or other of the last-mentioned types. In these 
circumstances my attempt at a derivation of magic 

' See his article " Magic" in Encycl. Brit, (ninth edit.). 
2 G. ^.,M.,9. 

43 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

must be taken in the spirit in which it is offered — 
namely as illustrative merely. I shall keep as 
closely as I can to undisputed forms of magical 
practice, for instance the casting of speUs by 
means of an image, in the hope that their develop- 
ment moves along the central line of historical 
advance. 

To start, then, as Dr Frazer seems to suggest 
that we might,' from the brutes. When a bull is 
in a rage — and let us note that the rage as deter- 
mining the direction of interest has a good deal to 
do with the matter * — it will gore my discarded 
coat instead of me, provided that the coat is 
sufficiently near, and I am sufficiently remote, for 
the proximate stimulus to dominate its attention. 
Of course it is very hard to say what really goes on 
in the bull's mind. Possibly there is little or no 
meaning in speaking of association as contributory 
to its act, as would be the case supposing it be 
simply the sight of something immediately gorable 
that lets loose the discharge of wrath. On the 
other hand, suppose it to perceive in the coat the 
slightest hint or flavour of the intruding presence 
of a moment before, suppose it to be moved by the 
least aftertaste of the sensations provoked by my 

1 Cf. G. B.,H.,7Q. 

' Cf. Stout, Groundwork of Psychology , Section on "Emotion 
as determining ideal revival," p. 120. 

44 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

red tie or rapidly retreating form, and we might 
justly credit association with a hand in the matter. 
And now to pass from the case of the animal to 
that of man, in regard to whom a certain measure 
of sympathetic insight becomes possible. With a 
fury that well-nigh matches the bull's in its narrow- 
ing effect on the consciousness, the lover, who 
yesterday perhaps was kissing the treasured glove 
of his mistress, to-day, being jilted, casts her 
portrait on the fire. Here let us note two things. 
Firstly, the mental digression, the fact that he is 
for the nonce so " blind," as we say, with love or 
rancour, that the glove or the portrait has by 
a ssociation become s ubstituted f or the original 
object of his sentiments, namely his mistress. 
Secondly, the completeness of the digression. This 
dear glove ntoiflyTo be kisiedTtEisTiatefQl portrait 
fit only to be burnt, occupies h is whole atjteation, 
and is therefore equivalent to an irresistible belief 
that realises itself as inevitably as a suggestion 
does in the case of the hypnotic patient. Such at 
least is the current psychological explanation of 
the phenomenon known as " primitive credulity." 
Now can the man who throws the faithless 
maiden's portrait into the fire, simply because the 
sight of it irresistibly provokes him to do so, be 
said to be practising magic? I think, hardly. 

45 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Since, however, it is better that the class-concepts 
of anthropology should be framed too wide rather 
than too narrow, let us speak of a " rudimentary 
magic," of which the act of primitive credulity is 
the psychological terminus a quo. I contrast such 
" rudimentary magic " with the " developed 
magic " whereof the spirit is expressed in the 
formula: As I do this symbolically, so may 
something else like it be done in reality. In the 
former naive belief prevails, in the latter a make- 
believe, in what immediately foHows we~siSr 
be concerned with the psychological history of 
the transition from the rudimentary to the 
developed form. 

The feature which it is most important for our 
purpose to note in the act of primitive credulity 
is that, to coin a phrase, it_K.not^ojective. This 
is well illustrated by the case of the bull. The 
bull does not gore my coat with any ulterior 
motive prejudicial to me. On the contrary, it 
contentedly gores the coat, and, unless I am 
unfortunate enough to recall the bull's attention to 
myself, I escape. Thus there is none of that 
projectiveness to be ascribed to the bull's motive 
which so characteristically enters into the motive 
of the act of developed magic. We may be sure 
that the bull does not conceive (a) that he is acting 

46 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

symbolically, that, in child-language, he is " only 
pretending " ; (b) that at the same time his 
pretending somehow causes an ulterior effect, 
similar as regards its ideal character, but different 
in that it con stitutes that r eal thing w hich is the 
ultimate object of the whole proceeding. 

And nowTet us^go" on to consider how such 
primitive credulity is sundered from the beginnings 
of enlightenment — if to practise projective magic 
is to be enlightened — only by the veriest hair's- 
breadth. The moment the bull's rage has died 
out of him, the coat he was goring becomes that 
uninteresting thing a coat must be to the normal 
animal whose interest is solely in the edible. Now 
the bull, being a bull, probably passes from the one 
perceptual context to the other, from coat gorable 
to coat inedible, without any feeling of the relation 
between them; they are simply not one coat for 
him at all, but two. But now put in the bull's 
place a more or less brute-like man, with just that 
extra dash of continuity in his mental life that is 
needed in order that the two coats — the two 
successive phases of consciousness — may be com- 
pared. How will they be compared? We may 
be sure that the comparison will be, so to speak, 
in favour of the more normal and abiding experi- 
ence of the two. If it be more normal to ignore 

47 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

the coat than to gore it, there will arise a certain 
sense — you may make it as dim as you will to 
begin with, but once it is there at all it marks a 
step in advance of primitive credulity — of the 
gorable aspect of the coat as relatively delusive and 
unreal, of the act of passion as relatively mis- 
directed and idle. 

Meanwhile, notwithstanding this new-found 
capacity to recognise later on that he has been 
deluded, rage will continue to delude the subject 
so long as its grip upon him lasts. Nay more, 
directly there is a nascent self-consciousness, a 
sort of detached personality to act as passive 
spectator, the deluding passion may be actually 
accompanied by an awareness of being given over 
to unreal imaginings and vain- doings. Doubtless 
your relatively low savage might say with Kip- 
ling's philosopher of the barrack-room: 

" [I've] stood beside an' watched myself 
Be'avin' like a blooming fool." 

Make-believe, however, such as we meet with in 
developed magic, involves something more than 
mere concurrent awareness that one is being fooled 
by one's passion. It involves positive acquiesc- 
ence in such a condition of mind. The subject is 
not completely mastered by the suggestion, as in 

48 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

the act of primitive credulity. On the contrary, 
he more or less clearly perceives it to be fanciful, 
and yet dallies with it and lets it work upon him. 
Now why should he do this? Well, originally, I 
suspect, because he feels that it does him, good. 
Presumably, to work off one's wrath on any 
apology for an enemy is expletive, that is, cathartic. 
He knows that he is not doing the real thing, but 
he finds it does him good to believe he is doing it, 
and so he makes himself believe it. Symbol and 
ulterior reality have fallen apart in his thought, 
but his " will to believe " builds a bridge from the 
one to the other. Symbolic act and ulterior act 
symbolised are, we must remember, connected by 
an ideal bond, in that they are more or less alike, 
have a character partially identical which so far 
as it is identical is provocative of one and the same 
type of reaction. All that is required for the 
symbolic act to acquire projectiveness is that this 
ideal bond be conceived as a real bond. Since, 
however, the appearance of mere ideality can 
ex hypothesi be no longer ignored, it must instead 
be explained away. Primitive credulity no longer 
suffices. In the place of a naive and effortless 
faith there is needed the kind of faith that, to 
whatever extent it is assailed by doubt, can recover 
itself by self -justification. 
4 49 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

The methods of self- justification as practised by 
the primitive mind, become aware that it is pre- 
tending, yet loth to abandon a practice rooted in 
impulse and capable of affording relief to sur- 
charged emotion, are well worth the attention of 
tlie anthropologist. The subject tends to be 
ignored in proportion as association pure and 
simple is regarded as be-all and end-all of the " art 
magic." Now we need not suppose that because 
the primitive mind is able to explain away its 
doubts, there is therefore necessarily any solid and 
objective truth at the back of its explanations. 
Given sufficient bias in favour of a theory, the 
human mind, primitive or even civilised, by 
unconsciously picking its facts and by the various 
other familiar ways of fallacy, can bring itself to 
believe almost any kind of nonsense. At the 
same time there does happen to be an objectively 
true and real projectiveness in the kind of symbolic 
magic we have been especidly considering — the 
discharge of wrath on the image or what not. 
We know that as a fact to be symbolically tortured 
and destroyed by his enemy " gets on the nerves " 
of the savage, so that he is apt really to feel 
torturing pains and die.' The psychology of the 
matter is up to a certain point simple enough, the 

> See e.g. G. B.,H., 13. 
50 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

principles involved being indeed more or less 
identical with those we have already had occasion 
to consider. Just as the savage is a good actor, 
throwing himself like a child into his mime, so 
he is a good spectator, entering into the spirit of 
another's acting, herein again resembling the child, 
who can be frightened into fits by the roar of what 
he knows to be but a " pretended " lion. Even if 
the make-believe is more or less make-believe to 
the victim, it is hardly the less efficacious; for, 
dominating as it tends to do the field of attention, 
it racks the emotional system, and, taking ad- 
vantage of the relative abeyance of intelligent 
thought and will, sets stirring aU manner of deep- 
lying impulses and automatisms. Well, this being 
objectively the fact, are we to allow that the 
savage magician and his victim may become 
aware of the fact? I think we must. Of course 
the true reasons of the fact, namely that suggestion 
is at work, and so on, are beyond the ken of primi- 
tive man. But I submit that the projectiveness 
of the magical act is grounded, not merely on a 
subjective bias that " fakes " its facts, but on one 
that is met half-way, so to speak, by the real facts 
themselves. I woiild even suppose that the kind 
of magic practised by man on man, since it lent 
itself especially to objective verification, may 

51 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

very well have been the earliest kind of developed 
magic — the earliest kind to pass beyond the stage 
of impulse to that of more or less conscious and 
self-justifying policy. Were this the case, one 
would have to assume that the savage extended 
his sphere of operations by some dim sort of 
analogous reasoning. If, despite appearances to 
the contrary, magic really answered in the case of 
man, it would reaUy answer in the case of the 
weather and so on, to vent one's spleen on the 
weather being, meanwhile, as a naive impulsive 
act, hardly, if at all, less natural than to do so in 
the case of one's human foe.' Thus I surmise that 
the proved effectiveness of the social department 
of developed magic gave the greater share of such 
logical support as was required to the meteorologi- 
cal and other branches of the business. 

It is high time that we address ourselves to the 
more immediate subject of our interest, the spell, 
the nature of which, however, could not fail to be 
misunderstood so long as the magical act was 
vaguely conceived on its psychological side, that is, 
the side of its true inwardness, the side to which 
it is the supreme business even of an anthropology 
that prides itself on its " objective methods " to 
attend. To begin, then, at the beginning, why 

1 Cf. G.B.y'i., 108-9. 

52 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

should there be an accompanying spell at aU? Is 
it, in fact, an indispensable part of the true magical 
ceremony? Now it is true that not infrequently 
the absence of any incantation from a piece of 
magical ritual as at anyrate performed to-day is 
expressly noted. To give but one example. 
Among the Khonds of Orissa a branch cut by a 
priest in the enemy's country is dressed up and 
armed so as to personate one of the foe. There- 
upon it is thrown down at the shrine of the war 
god, but this " appeal " to him for co-operation is, 
we are expressly told, " silent,'" and that notwith- 
standing the semi-religious character which the 
magical rite has put on. On the other hand, the 
use of the spell as an accompaniment or rather 
integral portion of the magical performance is so 
prevalent, that I am inclined, merely on the 
strength of the historical evidence, to regard its 
presence as normal in the perfect and uncon- 
taminated ceremony. This supposition would, 
however, be immensely strengthened if we could 
discover good psychological reason why the spell 
ought to be there. 

I preferred a moment ago to speak of the spell 
as an integral portion, rather than as the mere 
accompaniment, of the magical rite, since it is 

!/• ^- J'-' ix-. 362- 
53 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

rather with developed than with rudimentary- 
magic that we shall be concerned when in the 
sequel we consider actual specimens of the kind of 
spell in use. Corresponding to the act of primitive 
credulity there may be, I conceive, a kind of spell, 
if spell it can be called, which is no more than a 
mere accompaniment. Such a verbal accompani- 
ment will either be purdy^£letivet_or jt rnay^be 
what'I'sKallcaJl." descriptive," as when a child 
making a picture of a man says aloud to himself, 
" I am making a man "; that is, supposing him 
to be merely playing spectator to himself, and not 
to be assisting himself to imagine that what he 
draws is a man. Such descriptive accompani- 
ments would of course tend to pass, unaltered in 
form, into instruments of make-believe as soon as 
the make-believe stage of magic begins. Never- 
theless, the whole psychological character of the 
spell is from that moment changed. It henceforth 
forms an integral part of the rite, since it helps 
the action out. 

What do I mean by " helping the action out "? 
Let us recur to the notion of developed magic 
as a more or less clearly recognised pretending, 
which at the same time is believed to project itself 
into an ulterior effect. Now I cannot but suppose 
that such projectiveness is bound to strike the 

54 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

savage as mysterious. " But no," says Dr 
Frazer; " magic is the savage equivalent of our' 
natural science." This I cannot but profoundly 
doubt. If it is advisable to use the word " science " 
at all in such a context, I should say that magic 
was occult science to the savage, " occult " standing 
here for the very antithesis of " natural." Dr 
Frazer proceeds to work out his parallel by 
formulating the assumption he holds to be common 
to magic and natural science. Both alike imply 
" that in nature one event follows another neces- 
sarily and invariably without the intervention of 
any spiritual or personal agency " ; or again, " that 
the course of nature is determined, not by the 
passions or caprice of personal beings, but by the 
operation of immutable laws acting mechanic- 
ally."' But the " necessity," the " law," implicit 
in developed magic as revealed by the correspond- 
ing type of spell, namely the type of spell which 
helps the action out, is surely something utterly 
distinct in kind from what natural science postu- 
lates under these same notoriously ambiguous 
names. It is not the " is and cannot but be " of 
a satisfied induction. On the contrary, it is 
something that has but the remotest psychological 

' G. £.,'{., 6i, 63. In hi,, 459, however, the view that magic 
and science have any real presupposition in common seems virtu- 
ally to be given up. 

55 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

affinity therewith, namely such a " must " as is 
involved in " May so and so happen," or "I do 
this in order that so and so may happen." Such a 
" must " belongs to magic in virtue of the pre- 
monitory projectiveness that reveals itself in the 
operator's act of imperative willing. Meanwhile 
so far as the process fails to explain itself in this 
way — and it must always, I contend, be felt as 
something other than a normal and ordinary act 
of imperative willing — it will inevitably be felt 
to be occult, supernormal, supernatural, and will 
participate in, whilst pro tanto colouring, whatever 
happens to be the general mode of accounting for 
supernaturalistic events. But this, I take it, will 
always tend to be some theory of quasi-personal 
agency. 

Dr Frazer, however, is so far from allowing this 
that he makes the implicit presupposition to be 
the very opposite of the notion of personal agency, 
namely the idea of mechanical causation. He 
does not, however, attempt to go into the psy- 
chology of the matter, and the psychological 
probabilities, I submit, will be found to tell dead 
against this view of his. Mechanical causation is 
indeed by no means unknown to the savage. 
From the moment he employs such mechanical 
aids as tools he may be supposed to perceive that 

56 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

the work he does with them proceeds as it were 
directly and immediately from them. He throws 
a spear at his enemy; it hits him; and the man 
drops. That the spear makes the man drop he 
can see. But when a wizard brandishes a magic 
spear simply in the direction of a distant, perhaps 
absent and invisible, person, who thereafter dies, 
the wizard — ^not to speak of the bystanders — is 
almost bound to notice something in the action of 
the symbolic weapon that is indirect, and as such 
calls aloud for explanation on non-mechanical 
lines. The spear did not do it of itself, but some 
occult power, whether in, or behind, the spear. 
Further, his own consciousness cannot fail to give 
him an intuitive inkling of what this power is, 
namely, his projection of will, a psychic force, a 
manifestation of personal agency, mana. It is a 
secondary consideration whether he locate the 
personal agency, the " devil," in the spear, in 
himself, or in some tertium quid that possesses it or 
him. In any -case the power is represented quasi- 
personally. I am quite prepared to believe with Mr , 
Lang that gods tend at first to be conceived as 
exercising their power precisely as a magician 
does.' But it does not therefore follow, as it must 
if Dr Frazer's theory of magical as mechanical 

' Myth, Ritual, and Religion, i., 120. 

57 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

causation be accepted, that in some sense the early 
gods came down to men " from out of a machine." 
We have been hitherto considering the magical 
act from the point of view of the operator. Let us 
now inquire what sort of character is imposed by 
it on the other party to the transaction, namely 
the victim. If our previous hypothesis be correct, 
that to the operator the magical act is generically 
a projection of imperative will, and specifically one 
that moves on a supernormal plane, it follows 
that the position of the victim will be, in a word, 
a position compatible with rapport. As the 
operator is master of a supernormal " must," so 
the victim is the slave of that same " must." 
Now surely there is nothing in such a position on 
the part of the victim that is incompatible with the 
possession of what we know as wiU. On the 
contrary, might we not expect that the operator, 
as soon as he comes to reflect on the matter at all, 
would think of his power as somehow making 
itself felt by his victim, as somehow coming home 
to him, as somehow reaching the unwilling will of 
the man and bending it to an enforced assent? 
On this theory a magical transaction ought^ hardly^ 
if at all^less naturally than a religious transaction, 
to assume the garb of an. affair between persons. 
We shall see presently whether there is evidence 

58 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

that it actually does. On Dr Frazer's view, 
however, magic and religion are systems based on 
assumptions that are as distinct and wide apart as 
matter and mind, their ultimate implications. 
Hence if magic and religion join forces, it is for 
Dr Frazer a mere contamination of unrelated 
originals incapable of presenting the inward unity 
of a single self-developing plot. He is driven to 
allege a " confusion of ideas," a " mixture," a 
" fusion," an " amalgamation," such as can take 
place only under the pressure of some extrinsic 
influence.' For a satisfactory clue, however, to 
the nature of the collocating cause we search his 
writings in vain. 

Meanwhile, Dr Frazer seems to admit the thin 
end of the wedge into his case for a mechanically- 
causative magic by allowing that the material- on 
which it works is composed not merely of " things 
which are regarded as inanimate," but likewise of 
" persons whose behaviour in the particular 
circumstances is known to be determined with 
absolute certainty."' Now of course magic may 
be conceived as taking effect on a person through 
his body, as when that which is projected takes 
the form of an atnongara stone, viz. a piece of 

1 G.B.,'i.,67,69. 

' See G. B.," i., 63, where this is.clearly implied. 

59 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

crystal, or of something half-material, half- 
personal, like the arungquiltha of the Arunta, or 
the badi of the Malays.' After all, magic in one of 
its most prominent aspects is a disease-making. 
But Dr Frazer's interest is not in these secondary 
notions. He is seeking to elucidate the ultimate 
implication of magic when he explains " determined 
with absolute certainty " to mean — determined, as 
is " the course of nature," "by the operation of 
immutable laws acting mechanically.'" But a 
person conceived as simply equivalent to an 
inanimate thing — for that is precisely what it 
comes to — is a fundamentally different matter, 
I contend, from the notion I take to be, not im- 
plicit, but nascently explicit ^ here, namely that 
of a will constrained. No doubt the modem 
doctrine of a psychological automatism virtually 
forbids us to speak any longer of " will " in such 
a connection. To naive thought, however, as 
witness the more popular explanations of the 
phenomena of suggestion current in our own time, 
the natural correlative to exercise of will on the 
part of the operator will surely be submission, 
i.e. of will, as we should say, on the part of the 

' Cf. Spencer and Gillen, Tie Native Tribes of Central Amtralia, 
S3 1 and S37. Skeat, Malay Magic, 427. 

' G. .S.,M.,63. 

' Compare the effect on the woman ascribed to the lonka-lonka, 
below, p. 75 

60 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

patient. For the rest, it would seem that Dr 
Frazer bases his case for it being a kind of physical 
necessity that is ascribed by the savage to the 
workings of his magic, on the explanation which 
the medicine-man gives of his failures, when he 
alleges that nothing but the interference of another 
more potent sorcerer could have robbed his speU 
of its efficacy.' But the excuse appears to imply, 
if anything, a conditionality and relativity of 
will-power, of mana, the analogy of the scientific 
law being manifestly far-fetched. And surely it 
is in any case somewhat rash to deduce the implicit 
assumptions of an art from such a mere piece of 
professional " bluff." 

If, then, the occult projectiveness of the magical 
act is naturally and almost inevitably interpreted 
as an exertion of wiU that somehow finds its way 
to another will and dominates it, the spell or 
uttered " must " will tend, I conceive, to embody^ 
the very life and soul of the affair. Nothing in- 
itiates an imperative more cleanly, cutting it 
away from the formative matrix of thought and 
launching it on its free career, than the spoken 
word. Nothing, again, finds its way home to 
another's mind more sharply. It is the very type 

' G. JB.,' i. , 6i. See, however, Sp. and G„ 532, from which it 
appears that the medicine-man by no means sticks to a single form 
of excuse. 

61 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

of a spiritual projectile. I do not, indeed, believe 
that what may be called the silent operations of 
imitative magic are ultimately sign-language and 
nothing more. I prefer to think, as I have Eilready 
explained, that they are originally like the fire 
drawn from an excitable soldier by the tree-stump 
he mistakes for an enemy, or, more precisely, mis- 
carriages of passion-clouded purpose prematurely 
caused by a chance association; and that what 
might be called their prefigurative function is an 
outgrowth. But I certainly do incline to think 
that, when the stage of developed magic is reached 
and the projectiveness of the mimic act is estab- 
lished as a fact, a fact however, that as mysterious, 
occult, calls aloud for interpretation, the pro- 
jective character of the silent part of the magical 
ritual will come to underlie its whole meaning; 
and further, that the spell, as being the crispest 
embodiment of the " must," as spring and soul of 
the projection, will naturally provide the general 
explanatory notion under which the rest will be 
brought, namely that of an imperative utterance. 
Let us now consider typical specimens of the 
various kinds of spell in common use, partly in 
order to test and substantiate the foregoing con- 
tentions, but more especially so that haply we 
may observe the spell pass by easy gradations 

62 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

into the prayer, the imperative into the optative. 
To begin with, I would suggest that at the stage of 
developed magic the most perfect spell is one of 
the following form — a form so widely distributed 
and easily recognised that a single example will 
suffice to characterise it. In ancient Peru, when 
a war expedition was contemplated, they were 
wont to starve certain black sheep for some days 
and then slay them, uttering the incantation:' 
" As the hearts of these beasts are weakened, so 
let our enemies be weakened." Precisely the same 
type is found all over the world, from Central 
Australia to Scotland.'' I call this form perfect,' 
because it takes equal notice of present symbolisa- i 
tion and ulterior realisation, instrument and end. { 
Here the instrument is the weakening of the 
beasts, the end the weakening of the enemy. Let 
us not, however, overlook the explicitly stated link 
between the two, the unifying soul of the process, 
namely the imperative " let them be weakened." 
It is apt to escape one's attention because the 
operator, instead of obtruding his personality 
upon us, concentrates like a good workman on 
his instrument, which might therefore at the first 
glance be credited with the origination of the force 
it but transmits. Not unfrequently, however, the 

' Acosta, ii., 342. ^ Cf. Sp. and G., 536, and G. B.,^ i., 17, 
63 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

>q)ersonal agency of the operator appears on the 
surface of the spell, as when sunshine is made in 
New Caledonia by kindling a fire and saying: 
" Sun! I do this that you may be burning hot.'" 
Here the sun is treated as a "you," so that the 
operator is perhaps not unnaturally led to refer to 
himself as the other party to this transaction 
between persons. Meanwhile, though our second 
instance is interesting as indicating the true source 
of the mana immanent in the spell, namely the 
operator's exertion of will-power, it is better not 
to insist too strongly on the difference between 
the instrument and the force that wields ^nd as it 
were^fills it. Both alike belong to what may be 
called the protasis of the spell. The important 
logical cleavage occurs between protasis and 
apodosis — the firing of the projectile and the hitting 
of the target — the setting-in-motion of the instru- 
ment and the realisation of the end. Every true 
speU, I submit, distinguishes implicitly or explicitly 
between the two. I say implicitly or explicitly, 
for we find curtailed speUs of the kind " We carry 
Death into the water," no mention being made of 
the symbol.^ It would be quite wrong, however, 
to argue that here is no make-believe, no disjoining 
of instrument and end requiring an exertion of 

' Cf. C. ^.,M., ii6. ' 16., Ti., 83. 

64 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

credulity that simply takes the one act for the 
other. This is shown by the occurrence of the 
same sort of spell in fuUer form, e.g. " Ha, Kore, 
we fling you into the river, like these torches, that 
you may return no more."" The participants in 
the rite know, in short, that they are " only 
pretending." They have the thought which it is 
left to Mr Skeat's Malays to express with perfect 
clearness: " It is not wax that I am scorching, it 
is the liver, heart, and spleen of So-and-so that I 
scorch."' 

This relative disjunction, then, of instrument 
and end, protasis and apodosis, being taken as 
characteristic of the spell of developed magic, let 
us proceed to inquire how each in turn is in general 
character fitted to promote the development of the 
prayer out of the speU (assuming this to be possible 
at aU). First, then, let us consider whether magic 
contributes anything of its own to religion when 
we approach the subject from the side of what has 
been called the instrument. Under this head we 
have agreed to take account both of the projective 
act and of the projectile — in other words, both of 
the putting forth of the " must " and of the symbol 
in which the " must " is embodied. 

Now the projective act, I have tried to show, 

1 Cf. G. B.,' ii., io8. ^ M.M., 570. 

S 65 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

whilst felt by the operator as essentially a kind of 
imperative willing, is yet concurrently perceived by 
him to be no ordinary and normal kind of impera- 
tive willing. Inasmuch as the merely symbolised 
and pretended reproduces itself in an ulterior and 
separate shape as solid fact, the process is mani- 
festly occult or supe rnor mal. Now I have 
elsewhere tried to show probable reason why the 
prime condition of the historical^enesis of refigion 
shoidd be sought in the awe caused in man's mind 
bj^Jthe perc eption of~lBe~superna,tu ral, that is, 
supeniOTmalTas it occurs within him and about 
him> /For the purposes of the anthropologist I 
would have the limits of primitive reUgion coincide 
with those of primitive " supematuralism." To 
adopt a happy phrase coined by Mr Hartland when 
noticing my view, the supernatural is the original 
" theoplasm, god-stuff."' Is, then, the occult or 
supernatural as revealed in magic at first the one 
and only form, of supernatural manifestation 
known to man? Emphatically I say. No. To 
take but one, and that perhaps the most obvious, 
example of an object of supematuralistic awe that 
anthropology must be content to treat as primary 
and sui generis, the mystery of human death may 
be set over against the miracle of the magical 

' Folk-tore, xii., 27. 

66 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

projection as at least as original and unique a 
rallying-point of superstition. On the other hand, 
I am quite prepared to believe that magical 
occultism was able of its own right to colour 
primitive supematuralism to a marked and note- 
worthy extent. I suggest that the peculiar 
contribution of magic — at all events of the kind of 
magic we have been considering — to religion was 
the idea of mana. No doubt, the actual mana of 
the Melanesians will on analysis be foxmd to yield 
a very mixed and self-contradictory set of mean- 
ings, and to stand for any kind of power that 
rests in whatever way upon the divine. I suppose 
it, however, to have the central and nuclear sense 
of magical pow er; and, apart from the question 
of historical fact, let me, for expository purposes 
at anyrate, be allowed to give the term this con- 
notation. The inwardness of such mana or magical 
power we have seen reason to regard as derived by 
the magician from a more or less intuitive per- 
ception of his projective act of will as the force 
which occultly transmutes his pretence into 
ulterior reality. But if the essence of his super- 
normal power he in precisely this, then wherever 
else there be discoverable supernormal power 
under control of a person, will not its essence tend 
to be conceived as consisting in the same? Mean- 

67 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

while, all manifestations of the supernatural are 
likely to appear as in some sense manifestations 
of power, and as in some sense personally con- 
trolled. That they should be noticed at all by 
man they must come within the range of his 
practical interests, that is, be as agents or patients 
in regard to him; and, if he is in awe of them, it 
wiU assuredly be as agents, actual or potential, 
that is, as powers, that he will represent them to 
himself. And again, whatever is able to stand up 
against him as an independent and self-supporting 
radiator of active powers will be inevitably 
invested by him with more or less selfhood or 
personality like in kind to what he is conscious of 
in himself. Thus there is no difficulty in explain- 
ing psychologically why mana should be attributed 
to those quasi-personal powers of awful nature by 
which the savage, immersed in half-lights and 
starting like a child at his own shadow, feels him- 
self on every hand to be surrounded. 

Why, then, does Dr Frazer, whilst admitting 
that for the magician to seek for mana at the hands 
of ghosts of the dead, stones, snakes, and so on,' is 
characteristic of that " earlier stage " in the 
history of religion when the antagonism between 
sorcerer and priest as yet was not, nevertheless 
treat this as a " confusion of magic and religion," 

68 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

and go on to lay it down that " this fusion is not 
primitive"?' Is it not simply that he ignores 
the possibility of the origin of the idea of mana 
itself in the inward experience that goes with the 
exercise of developed magic? For Dr Frazer this 
seeking for supernatural aid on the part of the 
sorcerer is a "passing into another kind." The 
sorcerer's exertion of power and the mana he craves 
of his gods have no direct psychological afi&nity. 
If, however, our argument has not been aU along 
proceeding on a false track, there is a specific 
identity of nature common to the force which 
animates the magical act as such, and that 
additional force which in certain cases is sought 
from an external supernatural source. Psycho- 
logically speaking, there seems every reason why, 
granting that the magical act is regarded as occult, 
and as such falls into line with whatever else is 
occult and supernatural, its peculiar inwardness 
as revealed to the operator should be read into 
whatever else has the prima facie appearance of a 
quasi-personal exertion of supernatural power. 
After aU, we know that, in point of fact, the savage 
is ready enough to put down whatever effects he 
cannot rationally account for (e.g. disease) to 
what may be termed sorcery in the abstract. 

■ (F.^.,«i., 65-6,69. 

69 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

But, once it is established that to feel like and 
inwardly be a supernatural agent is to feel oneself 
exerting the will-power of a human magician, then 
what more natural than that a human magician 
when in difficulties should seek, by any one of 
the many modes of entering into relations 
with the divine to reinforce his own mana 
from the boundless store of selfsame mana 
belonging to those magicians of a higher order 
whom, so to speak, he has created after his 
own image? 

All this, however, I confess, it is easier to deduce 
than to verify. When we try to study the matter 
in the concrete, we soon lose our way amongst 
plural causes and intermixed effects. For instance, 
it is clear that the savage has inward experience 
of the supernormal, not only in his feats of pro- 
jective magic, but likewise in his dreams, his fits of 
ecstasy, and so on (though these latter seem to 
have no place within the sphere of magic proper). 
Or again we have been dealing with the act of 
magic from the point of view of the operator. 
But there is also the point of view of the victim, 
whose suggestibility wDl, we may suppose, be 
largely conditioned by the amount of " asthenic " 
emotion — fear and fascination — induced in him. 

Hence any sort of association with the supernatural 

70 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

and awful which the sorcerer can establish will be 
all to the good. An all-round obscurantism and 
mystery-mongering is his policy, quite apart from 
the considerations that make his own acts mysteri- 
ous to himself. However, the quotations cited by 
Dr Frazer from Dr Codrington seem fairly crucial 
as regards the hypothesis I am defending.' Mana 
is at aU events the power which is believed to do 
the work in Melanesian magic, and to obtain 
mana on the other hand is the object of the rites 
and practices that make up what anthropologists 
will be ready to call Melanesian " religion." Or 
once more we seem to find exactly what we want 
in the following prayer of the Malay pawang at the 
grave of a murdered man: " Hearken, So-and-so, 
and assist me ... I desire to ask for a little 
magic.'" I submit, then, that mana, as I have 
interpreted it, yields the chief clue to the original 
use of names of power in connection with the spell, 
from " in the devil's name "^ to " Im Namen 
Jesu."^ Mr Skeat has compared the exorcising 
of disease-demons by invoking a spirit of some 
powerful wild beast, the elephant or the tiger, to 
the casting out of devils through Beelzebub their 

^ G. B.f i., 65-6. Cf. the same authority in /. A. I., xi., ■Joq. 

\ M. M., 60-1. 3 Cf. G. B. ,' i., 121. 

' Cf. W. Heitmiiller, Im Namen /esu, Gottingen, 1903. 

71 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

prince." Admitting the comparison to be just and 
apt, is there not at the back of this the notion of 
the magic-working power — the " control " — in- 
herent in the supernatural being as such?' 
Secondary ideas will of course tend to superimpose 
themselves, as when, as Mr Skeat has abundantly 
shown, the magician invokes the higher power no 
longer as an ally, but rather as a shield. " It is 
not I who am burying him (in the form of a waxen 
image), it is Gabriel who is burying him."^ Still 
Gabriel, I suggest, was primarily conceived as a 
magic-working power, and indeed as such is able 
to bear all responsibility on his broad shoulders. 
Compare the huntsman's charm addressed to the 
(more or less divine) deer: " It is not I who am 
huntsman, it is Pawang Sidi (wizard Sidi) that is 
huntsman; It is not I whose dogs these are, it is 
Pawang Sakti (the ' magic wizard '), whose dogs 
these are."* 

But I must move forward to another aspect of 
the inherent tendency of the magical instrument 
to generate religion. Instead of taking the form 
of a divine feUow-operator who backs the magician, 
the mana may instead associate itself so closely 

1 Fo/i-Lore.xiii., IS9- 

' The Malay charm-book quoted by Mr Skeat puts the matter 
typically, "God was the Eldest Mi^cian." M.M., 2. 
^ M. M., S71. Cf. G. B.} i., ii. * lb., 175- 

72 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYEE 

with the magician's symbol as to seem a god whose 
connection is with it rather than with him. The 
ultimate psychological reason for this must be 
sought, as I have already hinted, in the good 
workman's tendency to throw himself literally, as 
far as his consciousness goes, into the work before 
him. He is so much one in idea with his instru- 
ment that the mana in him is as easily represented 
as resident in it. Meanwhile the capacity of naive 
thought to personify whatever has independent 
existence must help out the transference, as may 
be illustrated abundantly from such a magnificent 
collection of speUs as we get in the Golden Bough. 
Contrast the following pair of cases. In West 
Africa, when a war party is on foot, the women 
dance with brushes in their hands, singing " Our 
husbands have gone to Ashantee land; may they 
sweep their enemies off the face of the earth.'" 
In much the same way in the Kei Islands, when a 
battle is in progress, the women wave fans in the 
direction of the enemy. What they say, however, 
is, " golden fans! let our bullets hit and those 
of the enemy miss."' We must not make too 
much of such a change from impersonal mention 
to personal address. It implies no more than a 
slight increase in vividness of idea. Still, as far as 

'G. £.,'{., u- 'Ii.,33- 

73 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

it goes, I take it, it is all in the direction of that 
more emphatic kind of personification which gives 
the. thing addressed enough soul of its own to 
enable it to possess mana. In the following 
Russian example we seem to see the instrument 
first created, then invested with personality, and 
lastly filled with mana more or less from without : 
" I attach five knots to each hostile infidel shooter. 
... Do ye, O knots, bar the shooter from every 
road and way. ... In my knots lies hid the 
mighty strength of snakes — from the twelve-headed 
snake."' Here the mana is added more or less 
from without, for, though a knot is enough like a 
snake to generate the comparison, yet the twelve- 
headed snake sounds like an intensification 
definitely borrowed from mythology. The ex- 
ample, however, is not sufficiently primitive to 
bear close scrutiny as regards the thought it con- 
tains. On the other hand, the Australians are, 
n Dr Frazer's eyes at least, as primitive as you 
please, and it is precisely amongst them that he 
finds a magic free of religion. Yet Australia 
presents us with a crucial case of the deification of 
the magical instrument. 
To punish their enemies the Arunta prepare a 

' G. B.J' i., 399. Cf. iii., 360, which introduces us to a ten- 
headed serpent (Greek). 

74 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

magic spear. It is named the arungquiltha, this 
name, let us note, being equally applicable to the 
supernatural evil power that possesses anybody or 
anything, and to the person or object wherein it is 
permanently or for the time being resident. They 
then address it, " Go straight, go straight and kill 
him," and wait till the arungquiltha is heard to 
reply, " Where is he? " — being, we are told, 
" regarded in this instance as an evil spirit resident 
in the magic implement.'" Thereafter a crash of 
thunder is heard, and a fiery appearance is seen 
streaking across the sky — a beautifully concrete 
image, by the way, of the projectiveness ascribed 
by the savage to his magic. It is but a step from 
this to the identification of the arungquiltha with 
comets and shooting-stars." By a converse move- 
ment of mythologising thought, when a man 
wishes to charm a certain shell ornament, the 
lonka-lonka, so that it may gain him the affections 
of a woman, he sings over it certain words which 
convey an invitation to the lightning to come and 
dwell in the lonka-lonka. The supposed effect of 
this on the woman is precisely that we nowadays 
attribute to suggestion. She, though absent in 
her own camp, sees, with the inward eye as it were, 
since she alone sees it, the lightning flashing on the 

> Sp. and G., 548-9. 'li., 550. 

75 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

lonka-lonka, " and all at once her internal organs 
shake with emotion.'" Now why these easy 
transitions of thought from the magical instru- 
ment to a celestial portent, and vice versa, not to 
speak of the identification of arungquiUha with 
other manifestations of the supernatural embodied 
in stones, alcheringa animals, and what not?" 
Simply, I answer, because magic proper is aU along 
an occult process, and as such part and parcel 
of the " god-stufE " out of which religion fashions 
itself. And more than this, by importing its 
peculiar projectiveness into the vague associations 
of the occult it provides one, though I do not say 
the only, centre round which those associations 
may crystallise into relatively clear, if even so 
highly fluid and unstable, forms. We may see 
why the medicine-man is so ready to press into his 
service that miscellaneous mass of " plant," dead 
men's bones, skins of strange animals, and what 
not; and why these objects in their turn come to 
be able to work miracles for themselves, and in 
fact develop into non-human medicine-men. But 
all these things were psychologically next door to 
impossible, if magic were in origin a mechanical 
" natural science " utterly alien in its inward essen- 
tial nature to all religion, and as such capable only 

' Sf. and G., 545. ' lb. , SJO-I. 

76 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

of yielding to it as a substitute, and never of join- 
ing forces with it as ally and blood-relation. Surely, 
if we look at the matter simply from this side alone, 
the side of the instrument, there is enough evidence 
to upset the oil-and-water theory of Dr Frazer. 

Before we leave the subject of the instrument 
let us finally note that concurrently with the 
personification and progressive deification of the 
instrument, as it may be called, the spell evolves 
into the prayer. Thus, on the one hand, the name 
of power associated with the spell, instead of being 
merely quoted so as by simple juxtaposition to add 
mana to mana, may be invoked as a personal 
agency by whose good grace the charm as a whole 
is caused to work. Dr Frazer provides us with 
an instance of this from the Kei Islands. When 
their lords are away fighting, the women, having 
anointed certain stones and fruits and exposed 
them on a board, sing : " O lord sun and moon 
let the buUets rebound from our husbands . . . 
just as raindrops rebound from these objects 
which are smeared with oil.'" Dr Frazer speaks 
of " the prayer to the sun that he wUl be pleased 
to give effect to the charm " as "a religious and 
perhaps later addition." No doubt in a sense it 
is. We have seen reason to believe, however, 
1 G. B.? i., 33. 
77 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

that such a development is natural to the spell; 

and this particular development would be especially 

natural if we regard the sun and moon as invoked 

not merely as magic-working powers in general, 

but as powers of the sky which send the rain 

and are thus decidedly suggested by the spell 

itself. At^ anyrate it seems quite certain that 

reflection on the occult working of a speU will 

generate the notion of external divine agency, and 

this notion in its turn give rise to prayer. Thus 

the New Caledonia rainmakers poured water over 

a skeleton so that it might run on to some taro 

leaves. " They believed that the soul of the 

deceased took up the water, converted it into rain, 

and showered it down again." From this belief 

it is but a step to prayer. And so we find that in 

Russia, where a very similar rite is practised, whilst 

some pour water on the corpse through a sieve, 

others beat it about the head, exclaiming, " Give 

us rain.'" In these cases the power invoked is 

more or less external to the symbol. On the other 

hand, it may be identical with the symbol. Thus 

he Fanti wizard puts a crab into a hole in the 

( ground over which the victim is about to pass, 

I and sprinkles rum over it with the invocation: 

^" O Crab-Fetish, when So-and-so walks over you, 

> G. B.?\., 100. 
78 



^. 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

may you take life from him.'" Here the crab, I 
suggest, was originally a magical symbol on a par 
with the stones which in Borneo serve to protect 
fruit trees, the idea of which is that the thief may 
suffer from stones in the stomach Hke to these. 
These Borneo stones are similarly treated as 
personal agencies. They are called on to wit- 
ness the anathema. Or again, if a friend of 
the proprietor wishes to pluck the fruit, he first 
lights a fire and asks it to explain to the stones 
that he is no thief.' In short, there is fairly 
crucial evidence to show how naturally and 
insensibly the c harm -symbol may pass _into 
the.Jdal.^ AU that is needed is that there 
should be sufficient personification for prayer 
to be said. 

It remains to speak very briefly of the corre- 
sponding personification and gradual deification 
of what in contrast to the " instrument " I have 
called the " end." Now clearly the curtailed 
form of speU with suppressed protasis is to all 
outward appearance a prayer and nothing else. 
Take a single very simple example — the " Fruit, 
Fruit, Fruit, Fruit," which we find at the end of 

>/. A. /., xxvi., 151. Cf. G. B., Hi., 69-70, where the divine 
cuttle-fish is propitiated, lest it make a cuttle-fish grow in the man's 
inside. 

' /i., xxiii., 161. ^ Cf. Dr Haddon in/. A, I., xix., 324. 

79 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

various Malay charms connected with the practice 
of " productive " magic' According to our 
previous conclusions, however, this is no prayer so 
long as the force which sets the spell in motion 
is felt by the operator as an exertion of 
imperative wiU and an attempt to establish 
control. But, given a form of words which 
need suffer no change though the thought at the 
back of it alter, what more natural than that 
the mind of the charmer should fluctuate be- 
tween " bluff " and blandishment, conjuration 
and cajolery? 

Mr Skeat provides us with examples of how 
easily this transition effects itself in the course of 
one and the same ceremony. Thus " Listen, O 
listen, to my injunctions " — which is surely prayer 
— is immediately followed by threat backed by the 
name of power: " And if you hearken not to my 
instructions you shall be rebels in the sight of 
Allah.'" And, that we need not suppose this 
transition to involve a change of mind from 
overweening pride of soul to humility and rever- 
ence,^ the same authority makes it clear that 
prayer may be resorted to as a trick, may be a 



' Cf. Mr Skeat in Folk-Lore, xiii., l6l. ' Folk-Lore, xiii., 142. 
s Contrast what Dr Frazer says about man's new-found sense of 
his own littleness, etc., G. B.^ i., 78, 

80 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

civil request that but masks a decoy,' a complica- 
tion which in itself shows how artificial must ever 
be the distinction we draw, purely for our own 
classificatory purposes, between magic and re- 
ligion. So far we have considered the transition 
from the side of the operator. And now look at 
it from the side of the patient or victim — the wiU 
he seeks to constrain. That it is truly as a will 
constrained, and not as a person conceived as 
equivalent to an inanimate thing, we have already 
argued. An example of the way the savage 
figures to himself the effects of the control he exerts 
was provided by the Arunta description of the 
woman who with the inward eye sees the lightning 
flashing on the lonka-lonka, and aU at once her 
inward parts are shaken with the projected passion. 
Now savage thought finds no difficulty in postulat- 
ing wiU constrained where we deny will and 
personality altogether. And, once personify, you 
are on the way to worship. Thus in China they 
sweep out the house and say, " Let the devil of 
poverty depart.'" In Timorlaut and Ceram they 
launch the disease boat, at the same time crying, 
" O sickness, go from here."^ Already here we 
seem to find the speU-form changed over into 
the prayer-form. Meanwhile in Euro the same 

^ M. M., no, zoS. 2 G. ^.,Mu., 83. " B.,g^■». 

6 81 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

rite is accompanied by the invocation: "Grand- 
father Small-pox, go away.'" Here the " Grand- 
father " is clearly indicative of the true spirit of 
prayer, as might be illustrated extensively. Or 
so again the magical ploughing of the Indian 
women is accompanied by what can only be 
described as a prayer to " Mother Earth."' 
Clearly the cults of the rice-mother, the maize- 
mother, the corn-mother, and so on, wherein magic 
is finally swallowed up in unmistakable religion, 
are the natural outcome of such a gradually- 
intensifying personification. But this personifica- 
tion in its turn would foUow naturally upon that 
view of the magical act which we have all along 
assumed to have been its ground-idea, namely the 
view that it is an inter-personal, inter-subjective 
transaction, an affair between wills — something, 
therefore, genericaUy akin to, if specifically 
distinct from, the relation which brings together 
the suppliant and his god. 

One word only in conclusion. I have been 
dealing, let it be remembered in justice to my 
hypothesis, with this question of the relation of 
magic to religion, the speU to the prayer, abstractly. 

\ It is certain that religion cannot be identified 
merely with the worship directly generated by 

'ff.^., 98. »/i.,M.,99. 

82 



FROM SPELL TO PRAYER 

magic. Religion is a far wider and more complex 
thing. Again, there may be other elements in 
magic than the one I have selected for more or less 
exclusive consideration. It is to some extent a 
matter of definition. For instance, divination 
may, or may not, be treated as a branch of magic. 
If it be so treated, we might, as has already been 
said, have to admit that, whereas one kind of 
magic develops directly out of quasi-instinctive 
practice, namely the act of primitive credulity, 
another kind of magic, divination, is originally due 
to some sort of dim theorising about causes, the 
theory engendering the practice rather than the 
practice the theory. Meanwhile, if out of the im- 
mense confusion of beliefs and rites which the 
student of savage superstition is called upon to 
face, we shall haply have contrived to isolate, and 
more or less consistently keep in view, a single 
abstract development of some intrinsic interest 
and importance, we shall have done very well. 
Every abstraction that is " won from the void and 
formless infinite " is of value in the present vague 
and shifting condition of anthropology. Dr 
Frazer's abstract contrast of magic and religion 
is a case in point. But abstraction needs to 
be qualified by abstraction that the ideal whole 
may at length be envisaged as a unity of many 

83 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

phases. My object throughout has been to 
show that, if from one point of view magic and 
religion must be held apart in thought, from 
another point of view they may legitimately be 
brought together. 



84 



IS TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC? 

IT is always easier to criticise than to construct. 
Many affirmative instances usually go to the 
founding of an induction, whereas a single contra- 
dictory case suffices to upset it. Meanwhile, in 
anthropology, it will not do to press a generalisa- 
tion overmuch, for at least two reasons. The 
first of these reasons is the fundamental one that 
human history cannot be shown, or at anyrate 
has not hitherto been shown, to be subject to 
hard-and-fast laws. Hence we must cut our coat 
according to our cloth, and be fully content if 
our analysis of the ways and doings of man dis- 
closes tendencies of a well-marked kind. The 
second reason is that, in the present state of the 
science, field-work, rightly enough, predominates 
over study-work. Whilst the weather lasts and 
the crop is stiU left standing, garnering rather than 
threshing must remain the order of the day. 
Working hypotheses, therefore, the invention of 
theorists who are masters of their subject, are not 
so plentiful that we can afford to discard them at 
the first hint of an exception. If, then, some one 
comes forward to attack a leading view, it is not 
enough to arm himself with a few negative in- 

85 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

stances. It is likewise incumbent on the critic 
to provide another view that can serve as a 
substitute. In the present case I have sought to 
do this after a fashion, though I am painfully 
aware that, in defining taboo by means of mana, 
I am laying myself open to a charge of explaining 
obscurum per obscurius. I can only reply pro- 
phetically that the last word about mana has not 
yet been said; that it represents a genuine idea 
of the primitive mind, an idea no less genuine and 
no less widely distributed than the idea of taboo, 
as several writers have recently suggested, and as 
further investigation will, I believe, abundantly 
confirm. I would also rejoin that if the accusation 
of obscurum per obscurius hardly applies directly 
to the theory I am criticising — since to identify 
" magic " with the sympathetic principle yields 
a perfectly definite sense — ^yet the natural associa- 
tions of the word are so much at variance with 
this abstract use of the name of a social institution 
that the expression " negative magic " is more 
likely to cause confusion than to clear it up. 

So far back as when Dr Tylor published his 
epoch-making Researches into the Early History of 
Mankind -we find the suggestion put forward of a 
certain community of principle between taboo and 
that " confusion of objective with subjective con- 

86 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

nection " which " may be applied to explain one 
branch after another of the arts of the sorcerer and 
diviner, till it almost seems as though we were 
coming near the end of his list, and might set down 
practices not based on this mental process as 
exceptions to a general rule." ' " Many of the food 
prejudices of savage races," continues Dr Tylor, 
" depend on the belief which belongs to this class 
of superstitions, that the qualities of the eaten pass 
into the eater. Thus, among the Dayaks, young 
men sometimes abstain from the flesh of deer, lest 
it should make them timid, and before a pig-hunt 
they avoid oil, lest the game should slip through 
their fingers, and in the same way the flesh of slow- 
going and cowardly animals is not to be eaten by the 
warriors of South America ; but they love the meat 
of tigers, stags, and boars, for courage and speed." ° 
Recently ^ Dr Frazer has universalised Dr 
Tylor's partial correlation, and has pronounced 
" the whole doctrine of taboo " to be a negative 
magic, understanding by magic a misapplication 
of the association of ideas by similarity and con- 
tiguity. A very similar definition had already 
been proposed by MM. Hubert and Mauss. ♦ They 

1 op. dt., 3rd. edit., 129. ^ lb., 131. 

^ Lectures on the Early History of the Kingship, 52. 
* L' Annie Sociologique, vii., 56. It is to be noted that Dt Frazer 
arrived at his conclusion by independent means ; cf. Man, 1906, 37. 

87 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

limit the identification, however, to what they 
name " sympathetic taboo," implying that taboo 
includes other varieties as well. Again, although 
here they seem to make the sympathetic principle 
the differentia of magic, the final gist of their 
admirable essay is rather to find this in the anti- 
social character ascribed to the magician's art. 

Now, according to the foregoing view, taboo is a 
ceremonial abstinence based on the fear of definite 
consequences. Just as sympathetic magic says, 
" As I do this, so may that which this symbohses 
follow," taboo says, " I must not do this, lest there 
follow that which is the counterpart of this." 

In violent contrast we have the view of Dr 
Jevons, which, at first sight at anyrate, seems to 
declare all consideration of consequences to be 
foreign to the taboo attitude. He bases his theory 
of taboo on an alleged " fact that among savages 
universally there are some things which categoric- 
ally and unconditionally must not be done," 
insisting " that this feeling is a ' primitive ' senti- 
ment." ' Now it is not easy to discover what is 
here meant, so great is the departure from the 
recognised terminology of philosophy. " Cate- 
gorically " and " unconditionally " are expressions 
that smack of Kantian "rigorism "; but Kant's 

' An Introduction to the History of Religion, 85. 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

famous analysis of duty as a categorical and 
unconditional imperative makes obligation directly 
antagonistic to sentiment of all kinds. A senti- 
ment as such has a history and assignable develop- 
ment. The Kantian law of duty, a priori, ob- 
jective, absolute, has none whatever. Is Dr 
Jevons, then, speaking here strictly according to 
philosophic tradition? Or would he recognise a 
growth of moral principle, say, on some such lines 
as those which Dr Westermarck or Mr Hobhouse 
has recently laid down ? If he were of the former 
persuasion, then he would be irrelevantly inter- 
polating a non-genetic view of morality that for 
purposes of psychological and sociological explana- 
tion could have no value or significance at all. 
But if he is of the other and less uncompromising 
faith — ^which appears more probable, seeing that 
his book is professedly dealing with religion from 
the historical standpoint — then " categorical " 
and " unconditional," in their application to a 
mere sentiment, are to be given an elastic sense. 
No more is meant, we must in that case suppose, 
than that the taboo feeling of "Do not meddle " 
involves no very explicit condition, no very clear 
or specific idea of unpleasant consequences to be 
avoided, but as it were threatens by aposiopesis — 
" Do not meddle, or, if you do, . . . ! " If this is 

89 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

as much as Dr Jevons intends — and it seems at 
anyrate to be all that is meant by MM. Hubert and 
Mauss when they speak in very similar terms 
of the absolute, necessary, and a priori character 
of the " magical judgment " ' — then I think this 
view has very much to be said for it. 

My own contention is that, whilst there is always 
a sanction at the back of taboo in the shape of some 
suggestion of mystic punishment following on a 
breach of the customary rule, yet the nature of the 
visitation in store for the offender is never a 
measurable quantity. Even when the penalty is 
apparently determinate and specific — which, how- 
ever, is by no means always the case, as I shall 
endeavour to show later — an infinite plus of 
awfulness will, I believe, be found, on closer 
examination, to attach to it. Taboo, on my view, 
belongs, and belongs wholly, to the sphere of the 
magico-religious. Within that sphere, I venture 
to assert, man always feels himself to be in contact 
with powers whose modes of action transcend the 
ordinary and calculable. Though he does not on 
that account desist from attempting to exploit 
these powers, yet it is with no assurance of limited 
liability that he enters on the undertaking. In 
short, dealings with whatever has mystic power 

' op. cit., vii., 125. 
90 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

are conducted at an i ndefinite risk ; and taboo 
but embodies the resolution to take no unnecessary 
risks of this indefinite kind. This contention I 
shall now try to make good. 

First, to attack the theory that taboo is negative 
magic (in Dr Frazer's sense of the terra " magic ") 
on the side on which that theory is strongest, 
namely where sympathy is most in evidence. 
I do not for one moment deny that in some taboos 
a sympathetic element is present and even 
prominent. Indeed, I see no harm in speaking, 
with MM. Hubert and Mauss, of sympathetic 
taboo, where " sympathetic " stands for the 
differentia or leading character of a variety, and 
the genus " taboo " is taken as already explained 
in independent terms. The presence of the 
sympathetic principle is, to my mind, amply and 
crucially proved in the case of those food restric- 
tions mentioned in the passage quoted from Dr 
Tylor, the prohibition to eat deer lest one become 
timid, and so on. Another telling set of examples 
is provided by those remarkable taboos on the use 
of knots which, as Dr Frazer has abundantly 
shown, are wont to be observed at critical seasons 
such as those of child-birth, marriage, and death.' 
But even here, I suggest, the consequences tend to 

' The Golden Bought i., 392 sqq. 
91 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

remain indefinite and vague, and that for more 
than one kind of reason. 

We can distinguish a sociological reason and a 
hierological or religious reason, though for the 
purposes of the historical study of religion, from 
the standpoint of which taboo is usually considered, 
the first may be treated as subordinate to the 
second. 

To begin with, these, no less than any other 
taboos, are customary observances, a portion of 
the unwritten law of society. To this fact, then, 
must be ascribed part at least of the force that 
renders them effective. There are always penalties 
of a distinctively social kind to be feared by the 
taboo-breaker. In extreme cases death will be 
inflicted; in all cases there will be more or less of 
what the Australian natives call " growling," ' 
and to bear up against public opinion is notoriously 
the last thing of which the savage is capable. 
Moreover, this social sanction is at the same time 
a religious sanction. To speak the language of a 
more advanced culture. State and Church being 
indivisibly one, to be outlaw is ipso facto to be 
excommunicate. Given the notion of m3^tic 
danger — of which more anon — social disapproval 

' Cf. B. Spencer and F. Gillen, The Native Tribes of Central 
Australia, 196. 

92 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

of all kinds will tend to borrow the tone 
and colour of religious aversion, the feeling 
that the offender is a source of spiritual peril 
to the community; whilst the sanctioning 
power remains social in the sense that society 
takes forcible means to remove the curse from 
its midst. 

It may be argued that these social consequences 
of taboo-breaking are secondary, and thus scarcely 
bear on the question of the intrinsic nature of 
taboo. Such an objection, however, will not be 
admitted by anyone who has reflected at all deeply 
on the psychology of religion. On the broadest of 
theoretical grounds religion must be pronounced 
a product of the corporate life — a phenomenon of 
intercourse. Confirmation a posteriori is obtained 
by the examination of any particular taboos of 
which we have detailed information. Take, for 
example, the elaborate list of food-restrictions 
imposed amongst the Arunta on the ulpmerka or 
boy who has not yet been circumcised.' The 
sympathetic principle is probably not absent, 
though its action happens here not to be easily 
recognisable. When we learn, however, that 

^ Spencer and Gillen, op. cit., 470 sqg. Here, by the way, in 
the systematic assignment of penalties to offences we seem to have 
a crucial disproof of the pure " nnconditionality " of taboo. 

93 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

eating parrots or cockatoos will produce a hollow 
on the top of the head and a hole in the chin, we 
may suspect that the penalty consists in becoming 
like a parrot or cockatoo. On the other hand, 
the same penalty, for instance premature old age, 
follows on so many different kinds of transgression 
that it looks here as if a tendency to dispense with 
particular connections and generalise the effects 
of mystic wrong-doing were at work. Meanwhile, 
in regard to all these taboos alike our authorities 
assure us that the underlying idea throughout 
is that of reserving the best kinds of food for the 
use of the elder men, and of thereby disciplining 
the novice and teaching him to " know his place." 
Here is a social reason with a vengeance. Even 
if some suspect that our authorities over-estimate 
the influence of conscious design upon tribal 
custom, they wiU hardly go the length of asserting 
that sympathy pure and simple has automatically 
generated a code so favourable to the elderly 
gourmet. A number of succulent meats to be 
reserved on the one hand, a number of diseases 
and malformations held in dread by the tribe on 
the other, and possibly a few sympathetic connec- 
tions established by tradition between certain foods 
and certain diseases to serve them as a pattern — 
with this as their pre-existing material the 

94 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

Australian greybeards, from all we know about 
them, would be quite capable of constructing a 
taboo-system, the efficient cause of which is not 
so much mystic fear as statecraft. Even if the 
principle of sympathy lurk in the background, we 
may be sure that the elders are not applying it very 
consciously or very strictly ; and again we may be 
sure that society in imposing its law on the 
ulpmerka is at much greater pains to make it clear 
that he must not eat such and such than why he 
must not — if only because there are so many 
excellent reasons of a social kind why the young 
should not ask questions, but simply do as they 
are bidden. 

But there is, I believe, another and a deeper 
reason why sympathy pure and simple cannot 
account for taboo. Taboo, I take it, is always 
something of a mystic a ffair. But I cannot see 
why there should be anything mystic about 
sympathy understood, as Dr Frazer understands 
it, simply as a misapplication of the laws of the 
association of ideas. After all, the association 
of ideas is at the back of all our thinking (though 
by itself it wiU not account for any of our think- 
ing) ; and thinking as such does not fall within the 
sphere of the mystic. Or does the mystery foUow 
from the fact that it is a " misapplication " of the 

95 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

laws aforesaid? ' Then the savage must be aware 
that he is misapplying these laws; for taboo is for 
him a mystic affair. But if he knows he is indulg- 
ing in error, why does he not mend his ways? 
Clearly Dr Frazer cannot mean his explanation of 
magic or of taboo to be an explanation of what it 
is for the savage. Now, perhaps he is entitled 
to say that magic, in his sense, is not a savage 
concept or institution at aU, but merely a counter 
for the use of the psychology that seeks to explain 
the primitive mind not from within but from 
without. He is, however, certainly not entitled 
to say that taboo is not a savage concept or in- 
stitution. In Polynesia tapu is a weU-recognised 
term that serves as perhaps the chief nucleus 
of embryonic reflection with regard to mystic 
matters of all kinds; in some of the islands the 
name stands for the whole system of rehgion.' 
Moreover, from every quarter of the primitive 

' Dr Frazer writes, Lecturts on the Early History of the King- 
ship, S3, "It is not a taboo to say, 'Do not put your hand in the 
fire ' ; it is a rule of common sense, because the forbidden action 
entails a real, not an imi^nary, evil," It is not a taboo, but a rule 
of common prudence, for the savage. But not for the reason 
alleged. In his eyes there is nothing imsjginary, but something 
terribly real, about the death or other disaster he observes to 
overtake the taboo-breaker. How, then, does he come to bring 
this kind of evil under a category of its own ? Surely it ought to 
be the prime concern of Anthropology to tell us that. 

' Cf. E. Tregear, Maori-Polynesian Comparative Dictionary 
S.v. tapu. 

96 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

world we get expressions that bear the closest 
analogy to this word. How then are we to be 
content with an explanation of taboo that does 
not pretend to render its sense as it has sense for 
those who both practise it and make it a rallying- 
point for their thought on mystic matters? As 
well say that taboo is " superstition " as that it is 
" magic " in Dr Frazer's sense of the word. We 
ask to understand it, and we are merely bidden to 
despise it. 

If, on the other hand, we cast about amongst 
genuine primitive notions for such as may with 
relative appropriateness be deemed equivalent 
to the idea of magic, as that idea is to be under- 
stood and employed by a psychology that tries 
to establish community between savage and 
civilised thought, we have the choice between two 
alternative types. 

My own preference is for those primitive 
expressions that are definitely dyslogistic or con- 
demnatory, as when we speak of the " black art." 
The clearest cases that I know are Australian. 
Thus the arungquiltha of the Arunta is " associated 
at bottom with the possession of supernatural evil 
power." ' Perhaps we may say broadly that, as 
contrasted with churinga, the term stands for 

^ Spencer and Gillen, op. cit., 548 n. 
7 97 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

magic as opposed to religion — for magic, that is, 
as the witch-haunted England of the seventeenth 
century understood it, namely as something anti- 
social and wholly bad. The Kaitish ittha seems 
to be the exact analogue of arungquiltha /' and 
so do the mwparn of the Yerklamining, " the mung 
of the Wurunjerri,' and the gubbuna of the Yuin.* 
In aU these cases the notion seems to be that of a 
wonder-working of a completely noxious kind. 
Amongst the Arunta a man caught practising such 
magic is severely punished, and probably killed.' 
Some, however, might choose rather to assign 
the meaning of " magic " to the wonder-working 
in general, and not simply to its bad variety. 
Thus amongst the last-mentioned Yuin " evil 
magic " may be practised by the gommera or 
medicine-man ; but in this tribe he is the leader of 
society, and a wielder of good supernatural power 
no less than of evil. The wonder-working power 
he possesses goes by the comprehensive name of 
joia, translated " magic " by Howitt, and de- 
scribed as an " immaterial force " set in motion 
not only by the gommera but also by certain sacred 

' Spencer and Gillen, The Northern Tribes of Central Australia, 
464 n. 
* A. W. Howitt, The Native Tribes of Sotah-East Australia, 4TO. 
8 0>. «V.,36S. *n.,3n- 

' Spencer and Gillen, Native Tribes, 536. 
98 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

animals.' Here we seem to have a case of that 
very widespread notion of which the most famous 
representatives are the mana of the Pacific and the 
orenda of the Iroquois. A good deal of attention 
has lately been paid by anthropologists to these 
latter expressions, and I may perhaps be permitted 
to take certain of their findings for granted. It 
would appear that the root-idea is that of power — 
a power manifested in sheer luck, no doubt, as well 
as in cunning, yet, on the whole, tending to be 
conceived as a psychic energy, almost, in fact, as 
what we would call " will-power." " Further, 
though it may be that every being possesses its 
modicum of mana, the tendency is for the word 
to express extraordinary power, in short a wonder- 
working. 

Nowbetweenthe ordinary and the extraordinary, 
the work-a-day and the wonderful is a difference, 
if you will, of degree rather than of kind. The 
sphere of the miraculous is, subjectively, just the 

1 Op. cit., 533, s6o-i. 

^ It is very interesting to note, as Tregear's excellent dictionary, 
s.v. mana, enables one to do at a glance, how the root mana 
underlies an immense number of the terms by which psychical 
faculties and states are rendered. Thus in Samoan we find 
mana'o to desire, wish, manatu to think, manamea to love, 
atuamanatu to have a good memory ; in Tahitian manao to think, 
manavaru eager desire ; in Hawaiian manao to think, mananao 
thought, manaoio to believe, manaiva feelings, affections; and 
so on. 

99 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

sphere of a startled experience, and clearly there 
are endless degrees in the intensity of felt surprise; 
though society tends to fix hard-and-fast limits 
within which surprise is, so to speak, expected of 
one. How the savage proceeds to differentiate 
the normal from the abnormal was brought home 
to me in the course of an interview I was accorded 
by the Pygmy " chief " Bokane.' I was tr57ing to 
verify Col. Harrison's statement " that if a Pygmy 
dies suddenly the body is cut in two to see whether 
or not the death is caused by ouiah — ^the " devU," 
as Col. Harrison renders it, though, for my part, I 
could not discover the slightest trace of personahty 
attaching to this evil principle.^ I asked Bokane 
how his people told whether the death was due to 
ouiah or not. He replied that, if an arrow-head 
or a large thorn were found inside the body, it 
was an arrow or a thorn that had killed the man ; 
but, if nothing could be found, then oud,ah must 
have done it. If a dangerous animal killed a man, 
I learnt on further inquiry, it was not ouddh, but 
it was oudah if you cut your finger accidentally. 

^ I spent about five hours in all in private talk with the Pygmies, 
assisted, I need hardly say, by an interpreter, at Olympia in 
London, Jan. 8 and 9, 1907. 

' Life among the Pygmies, Lond. , igo6, 20. 

' Nothing, apparently, is done to avert or propitiate oudah. 
Bokane denied that the pots of honey placed at the foot of trees 
were for oudah. 

100 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

When strange sounds were heard in the forest 
at night and the dogs howled, that was oudah. 
On some such lines as these, then, we may suppose 
other savages also to have succeeded in placing 
the strange and unaccountable under a category 
of its own. In the case of mana and orenda I am 
inclined to think that the core of the notion is 
provided by the wonderful feats — wonderful to 
himself, no doubt, as well as to his audience — of 
the human magician; which notion is then ex- 
tended to cover wonder-working animals, nature- 
powers, and the like by an anthropomorphism 
which is specifically a " magomorphism," so to say. 
Of course other elements beside that of sheer 
surprise at the unusual enter into the composition 
of a predominant notion such as that of mana, 
which in virtue of its very predominance is sure to 
attract and attach to itself aU manner of meanings 
floating in its neighbourhood. For example, as 
the history of the word " mystic " reminds us, the 
wonderful and the secret or esoteric tend to form 
one idea. The Australian wonder-worker owes no 
little of his influence over the minds of his fellows 
to the fact that in most tribes an exhibition of his 
power forms part and parcel of the impressive 
mystery of initiation. Let it suffice, however, 
for our present purpose to identify mana with a 

lOI 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

wonder-working power such as that of 
the magician — a. power that may manifest 
itself in actions of the S3anpathetic type, 
but is not limited to this t5rpe, being all 
that for the primitive mind is, or promises 
to be, extraordinarily effective in the way of 
the exertion of personal, or seemingly personal, 
will-force. 

Now, if " magic " is to mean mana (which, how- 
ever, is not Dr Frazer's sense of " magic," nor, 
indeed, mine, since I prefer to give it the imiformly 
bad meaning of arungquiltha, that is, of the anti- 
social variety of mana), then in describing taboo 
as negative magic we shall not, I believe, be far 
wide of the mark. Taboo I take to be a mystic 
affair. To break a taboo is to set in motion 
against oneself mystic wonder-working power in 
one form or another. It may be of the wholly 
bad variety. Thus it is taboo for the headman 
of the water-totem in the Kaitish tribe to touch 
a pointing-stick lest the " evil magic " in it turn 
aU the water bad.' On the other hand, many 
tabooed things, woman's blood or the king's 
touch, have power to cure no less than to kill; 
whilst an almost wholly beneficent power such as 
the clan-totem or the personal manitu is neverthe- 

' Spencer and Gillen, Northern Tribes, 463. 
102 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

less taboo.' Indeed, it is inevitable that, whenever 
society prescribes a taboo in regard to some 
object in particular, that object should tend to 
assume a certain measure of respectability as an 
institution, a part of the social creed ; and, as the 
law upholds it, so it will surely seem in the end to 
uphold the law by punishing its infraction. It is 
to be remarked, however, that many taboos 
prescribed by the primitive society have regard to 
no object in particular, but are of the nature of 
general precautions against mystic perils all and 
sundry, the vaporous shapes conjured up by 
unreasoning panic. It is instructive in this con- 
text to consult the admirable account given by 
Mr Hodson of the communal taboos or gennas 
observed throughout the Manipur region.'' On aU 
sorts of occasions the gennabura or religious head 
of the village ordains that the community shall 
keep a genna. The vUlage gates are closed, and 
the friend outside must stay there, whilst the 
stranger who is within remains. The men cook 
and eat apart from the women during this time. 



' Is Dr Frazer henceforth prepared to explain totemism on 
purely sympathetic principles? It would, on the other hand, be 
easy to show that the ideas of mana and of maniiu and the like 
go very closely together. 

* T. C. Hodson, " The ' Genna ' amongst the Tribes of Assam," 
J. A. I., XXX vi., 92 sqq. 

103 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

The food taboos are strictly enforced.' All trade, 
aU fishing, all hunting, all cutting of grass and 
felling of trees are forbidden. And why these 
precautions? Sometimes a definite visitation will 
have occurred. " Phenomena such as earthquakes 
and eclipses, or the destruction of a village by 
fire, occasion general gennas. . . . We also find 
general gennas occasioned by the death of a man 
from wounds inflicted by an enemy or by a wild 
animal, by the death of a man from snakebite or 
from cholera or smaU-pox, or by the death of a 
woman in child-birth." " At other times nothing 
untoward has happened, but something important 
and " ticklish " has to be done — the crops sown, 
the ghosts laid of those who have died during the 
year. It is a moment of crisis, and the tribal 
nerves are on the stretch. Mr Hodson, indeed, 
expressly notes that " the effect of gennas is 
certainly to produce in those engaged in them 
a tension which is of great psychological interest."^ 

' Some of these food taboos have a sympathetic character- 
Thus "young unmarried girls are not allowed to taste the flesh 
of the male of any animal or of female animals which have been 
killed while with young," li., 98. Even here, however, an element 
of miracle enters, unless the Manipuris find parthenogenesis no 
more odd than the Arunta are by some supposed to do. Another 
taboo is on dog's flesh, the mystic penalty being an eruption of 
boils. Here there is no obvious sympathetic connection. Boils 
are uncanny, and have to be accounted for on mystic lines — if not 
sympathetically, yet by some reference to evil magic ; for disease 
is always evil m^ic for the savage; cf. Spencer and Gillen, 
JVativt Tribes, 548. ' lb., 96. ' Tb., loi. 

104 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

Is not what he takes for the effect rather the cause 
of gennas ? Anxiety says, " Let us abstain from 
aU acts that may bring upon us the ill-will of the 
powers." Anxiety sees every outlet of activity 
blocked by a dim shape, endowed with no definite 
attributes such as the sympathetic theory is obliged 
to postulate, but stationed there as simply a 
nameless representative of the environing Unknown 
with its quite unlimited power of bringing the 
tribal mana — its luck and cunning — to nought by 
an output of superior mana, to be manifested who 
knows how? 

It may be objected that, whereas we have made 
it of the very essence of mana that it shotild be 
indefinite and mysterious in its effects, there can 
be nothing indefinite or mysterious on the Dyak 
view — to recur to the example from which we 
started — ^about the effect of deer-meat, since it 
produces timidity exactly as it might be thought 
to produce indigestion. Perhaps it is enough to 
reply that to the savage a fit of indigestion would 
likewise be a phenomenon explicable only in 
mystic terms. The common sense of the primitive 
man may — to take Dr Frazer's instance — ^recog- 
nise that normally and as a matter of course the 
fire burns whoever thrusts his fingers into it ; but 
the moment that the fire burns someone " acci- 

105 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

dentally," as we say, the savage mind scents a 
mystery. Just so for the Pygmy. His knife 
acts normally so long as it serves him to trim his 
arrow-shaft. As soon, however, as it slips and 
cuts his hand, there is oudah in, or at the back of, 
the " cussed " thing. Given, then, an5d;hing that 
behaves " cussedly " with regularity, that is nor- 
mally abnormal in its effects, so to speak, and a 
taboo or customary avoidance wiU be instituted. 
It becomes the duty of society to its members to 
keep before their eyes the nature of the direful 
consequences attending violation of the rule. 
Society shakes its head solemnly at careless youth, 
and mutters fiopfice. Careless youth does not 
believe all it is told, yet is nevertheless impressed 
and, on the whole, abstains. Kafir children must 
not eat certain small birds.' If they catch them 
on the veld, they must take them to their grand- 
parents, who alone may eat the body, though the 
children are given back the head. " If the parents 
catch children eating birds on the veld, they tell 
them they wiU turn out witches or wizards when 
they grow up. " Here we have the mystic sanction. 
And there is a social sanction in reserve. " The 
boys naturally get sound thrashings from their 
fathers, who feel it their duty to prevent their sons 

* Dudley Kidd, Savagt Childhood, a Study of Ka/ir Children, 193. 
106 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

from turning out abandoned wretches in after 
life." Nevertheless, youth is sceptical, or at any- 
rate intractable. " Children do not see the logic 
of this rule, and consequently try to eat the bird 
on the veld, when they think they wUl not be 
found out. . . . There is no time when boys and 
girls are so free from observation as when watching 
the fields ; consequently, at such times they have 
glorious feasts off the birds they catch." Now the 
sympathetic principle may underlie this food 
taboo, or it may not, but clearly by itself it is not 
enough to account for the customary observance 
in the concrete. Society has to keep the taboo 
going, so to say ; and to keep it going it relies partly 
on the vis a tergo of brute force, but still more on 
the suggestion of mystic evil in store for the 
offender, not an imaginary evil, pace Dr Frazer, 
but what is quite another thing, an evil that ap- 
peals to the imagination, an indefinite, unmeasured, 
pregnant evil, a visitation, a doom, a judgment. 

Hitherto we have had in view mainly such cases 
of taboo as seemed most closely bound up with the 
sympathetic principle, minor matters of routine 
for the most part, outlying and relatively isolated 
portions of the social system, which for that reason 
might be expected to contain their own raison 
d'etre unaffected by the transforming influence of 

107 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

any higher synthesis. If, however, we turn to the 
major taboos of primitive society, the classical 
weU-nigh universal cases of the woman shunned, 
the stranger banned, the divine chief isolated, and 
so on, how infinitely more difi&cult does it become 
to conceive sympathy, and sympathy only, as the 
continuously, or even the originally, efficient 
cause of the avoidance. Unfortunately, con- 
siderations of space utterly prohibit a detailed 
treatment of matters covering so wide an area 
both of fact andof hypothesis. It mustsuffice here 
to assert that the principles already laid down 
will be found to apply to these major taboos with 
even greater cogency. Here, too, there are at 
work both a social and a mystic sanction (so far 
as these can be kept apart in thought, the mystic 
sanction being but the voice of society uttering 
bodings instead of threats). As for the mystic 
sanction, we shall probably not be far wrong if 
we say that the woman has mana, the stranger has 
mana, the divine chief has mana, and for that 
reason pre-eminently are one and all taboo for 
those who have the best right to determine the 
meaning of taboo, namely those who practise and 
observe it. 

If there were room left in which to consider these 
taboos in some detail — ^the three notable cases 
io8 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

mentioned do not, of course, by any means com- 
plete the list of taboos of the first rank ' — ^it might 
turn out that in our running fight with the up- 
holders of the sympathetic theory serious opposi- 
tion must be encountered at certain points, yet 
never so serious, let us hope, that it might not be 
eventually overcome. 

Thus the first case on our list — that of the taboo 
on woman — ^provides our opponents with a really 
excellent chance of defending their position. 
There can be no doubt that a sympathetic interpre- 
tation is often put upon this taboo by savages 
themselves. Mr Crawley, who has made the 
subject of what he terms the sexual taboo peculi- 
arly his own, brings forward evidence that, to my 
mind at least, is conclusive on this point.""- Among 
the Barea man and wife seldom share the same 
bed, the reason they give being that " the breath 
of the wife weakens her husband." Amongst the 
Omahas if a boy plays with girls he is dubbed 
" hermaphrodite." In the Wiraijuri tribe boys 
are reproved for playing with girls, and the culprit 

1 Thus one of the most notable and widespread of taboos is 
that on the dead. Sympathetic interpretations of this taboo are 
by no means unknown amongst savages, but it would not be hard 
to show that they do not exhaust the mystery_ of death, of all 
human concepts the most thickly enwrapped in imaginative at- 
mosphere. 

2 E. Crawley, The Mystic Rose, 93, cf. 207 sqq. 

109 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

is taken aside by an old man, who solemnly ex- 
tracts from his legs some " strands of the woman's 
apron " which have got in. And so on in case after 
case. Here clearly what is primarily feared is the 
transmission of womanly characteristics, in a word, 
of effeminacy. Mr Crawley even goes so far as to 
speak of the belief in such transmission as " the 
chief factor in sexual taboo." ' Whether this be so 
or not,° he likewise shows, with singular clearness 
and force, that it is not the only factor. Owing, he 
thinks, to a natural nervousness that one sex feels 
towards the other, as well as to the unaccoimtable 
nature of various phenomena in the life-history of 
woman such as menstruation and child-birth, the 
notion of her as simply the weaker vessel " is 
merged in another conception of woman as a 
' mysterious ' person. . . . She is more or less of 
a potential witch."' With this I cordially agree, 
and shall not labour the point more except to the 
extent of asking the question, How, on the 

' E. Crawley, The Mystic Rose, 207. 

* Mr Crawley does not tell us on what principle he would pro- 
ceed to estimate predominance as between such fectors. I should 
have thought that the moral of his excellent study, abounding as 
it does in psychological insight, was to lay stress on the subcon- 
scious grounds of action rather than on the reasons whereby more 
or less ex post facto the dawning reflection of the savage seeks to 
interpret and justify that action. I myself believe the sympathetic 
explanation to be little more than such an ex post facto justification 
of a mystic avoidance already in full swing. 

» lb., 206. 

IIO 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

hypothesis that what is dreaded is simply the 
transmission of womanliness, are we to account for 
the fact — to quote but the best-known story of the 
kind — ^that when an Australian black-fellow dis- 
covered his wife to have lain on his blanket he 
wholly succumbed to terror and was dead within a 
fortnight ? ' Only a twilight fear, a measureless 
horror, could thus kill. And to show how mix^d 
a mode of thought prevails as to the workings of 
the sanction set in motion, in a very similar case 
from Assam it is not the man but the woman who 
dies of fright.° 

The case of the taboo on strangers seems at first 
sight to afford a clear proof of the effect of mere 
strangeness in exciting dread, especially when we 
compare the results of contact with novelties of 
all kinds. Dr Jevons, however, argues that 
" strangers are not inherently taboo, but, as belong- 
ing to strange gods, bring with them strange super- 
natural influences."^ In support of this view he 
instances the fact that newcomers are frequently 
fumigated to drive away the evil influences they 
bear in their train. But, after all, there are no 
taboos that religion has not learnt to neutralise 
by means of one or another ceremonial device. 

1 /. A. I., ix., 4S8. ' Hodson, op. cit., lOO. 

' An Introduction to the Hittory of Religion, 71. 

Ill 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Woman, for example, is inherently taboo, yet with 
proper precautions she may be married.' So too, 
then, strangers may be entertained after a purify- 
ing ceremony. It by no means follows, however, 
that they have lost all their mystic virtue, any 
more than it follows that woman has ceased to be 
mysterious after the marriage ceremony. Witness 
the power to bless or to curse retained by the 
stranger within the gate — a matter for the first 
time brought clearly to light by Dr Westermarck's 
striking investigation of the religious basis of 
primitive hospitality. ° Meanwhile, even if Dr 
Jevons's contention were to be granted that the 
taboo on strangers is really a taboo on the tabooed 
things he may have been in contact with, it is hard 
to see how the sympathetic explanation of taboo 
is going to be stretched to cover the indefinite 
possibility of definite sympathetic contagions of 
all sorts. We are left asking why mere uncer- 
tainty in itself can rouse imaginative fears — a line 
of inquiry that must presently lead to the conclu- 
sion that mere strangeness in itself can do the same. 

^ I accept Mr Crawley's hypothesis that "marriage ceremonies 
neutralise the dangers attaching to union between the sexes.*' 
The Mystic Rose, 322. 

* E. Westermarck, The Origin and Development of the Moral 

Ideas, \., 583 sgq. Dr Westermarck's view, by the way, is that 

" the unknown stranger, like everything unknown and everything 

strange, arouses a feeling of mysterious awe in superstitions minds." 

112 "^ 



TABOO A NEGATIVE MAGIC 

The third of our cases — that of the tabooed chief 
— need not detain us long. At all events in Poly- 
nesia, the eponymous home of taboo, they have no 
doubt about the explanation. The chief has 
mana, and therefore he is feared. Men do not 
dread contact with the king lest they become 
kingly, but lest they be blasted by the superman's 
supermanliness. Such, at least, is the native 
theory of the kingly taboo on its religious side. 
On its highly developed social side it is a fear of 
the strong arm of the State mingled with a respect 
for estabhshed authority — just as religious taboo 
is for the most part not aU cringing terror, but 
rather an awe as towards mystic powers recognised 
by society and as such tending to be reputable. 

We have cast but a rapid glance over an im- 
mense subject. We have but dipped here and 
there almost at random amongst the endless facts 
bearing on our theme to see if the sympathetic 
principle — a perfectly genuine thing in its way — 
would take us to the bottom of the taboo feeling 
and idea. We conclude provisionally that it will 
not. Indefinite rather than definite consequences 
appear to be associated with the violation of a 
taboo, and that because what is dreaded is essenti- 
ally a mysterious power, something arbitrary and 
imaccountable in its modes of action. Is, then, 
8 113 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

taboo a negative mana ? Yes — ^if mana be some- 
what liberally interpreted. Is it a negative magic, 
understanding by magic sympathetic action? 
With aU my respect and admiration for the great 
authority who has propounded the hypothesis, 
I must venture to answer — No. 



114 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

IT is no part of my present design to determine, 
by an exhaustive analysis of the existing 
evidence, how the conception of mana is under- 
stood and applied within its special area of 
distribution, namely the Pacific region. Such a 
task pertains to Descriptive Ethnology; and it 
is rather to a problem of Comparative Ethnology 
that I should like to call your attention. I pro- 
pose to discuss the value — that is to say, the 
appropriateness and the fruitfulness — of either 
this conception of mana or some nearly equivalent 
notion, such as the Huron orenda, when selected 
by the science of Comparative Religion to serve as 
one of its categories, or classificatory terms of the 
widest extension. 

Now any historical science that adopts the 
Comparative Method stands committed to the 
postulate that human nature is sufficiently homo- 
geneous and uniform to warrant us in classifying 
its tendencies under formulae coextensive with the 
whole broad field of anthropological^research. 

115 '^ 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Though the conditions of their occurrence cause 
our data to appear highly disconnected, we claim, 
even if we cannot yet wholly make good, the right 
to bind them together into a single system of 
reference by means of certain general principles. 
By duly constructing such theoretical bridges, as 
Dr Frazer is fond of calling them, we hope eventu- 
ally to transform, as it were, a medley of insecure, 
insignificant sandbanks into one stable and 
glorious Venice. 

So much, then, for our scientific ideal. But 
some sceptical champion of the actual may be 
inclined to ask: "Are examples as a matter of 
fact forthcoming, at anjnrate from within the 
particular department of Comparative Religion, 
of categories or general principles that, when tested 
by use, prove reasonably steadfast? " To this 
challenge it may be replied that, even when we 
limit ourselves to the case of what may be described 
as " rudimentary " religion — ^in regard to which 
our terminology finds itself in the paradoxical 
position of having to grapple with states of mind 
themselves hardly subject to fixed terms at all — 
there are at aU events distinguishable degrees of 
value to be recognised amongst the categories in 
current employment. Thus most of us wiU be 
agreed that, considered as a head of general 
ii6 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

classification, " tabu " works well enough, but 
" totem " scarcely so well, whilst " fetish " is 
perhaps altogether unsatisfactory. Besides, there 
is at least one supreme principle that has for many 
years stood firm in the midst of these psychological 
quicksands. Dr Tylor's conception of " animism " 
is the crucial instance of a category that success- 
fully applies to rudimentary religion taken at its 
widest. If our science is to be compared to a 
Venice held together by bridges, then " animism " 
must be likened to its Rialto. 

At the same time, " lest one good custom should 
corrupt the world," we need plenty of customs; 
and the like holds true of categories. In what 
follows I may seem to be attacking " animism," in 
so far as I shall attempt to endow " mana " with 
classificatory authority to some extent at the ex- 
pense of the older notion. Let me, therefore, de- 
clare at the outset that I should be the last to wish 
our time-honoured Rialto to be treated as an obso- 
lete or obsolescent structure. If I seek to divert 
from it some of the traffic it is not naturally suited 
tobear, lamsurely offeringitno injury, buta service. 

One word more by way of preface. There are 
those who dislike the introduction of native terms 
into our scientific nomenclature. The local and 
general usages, they object, tend to become 

117 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

confused. This may, indeed, be a real danger. 
On the other hand, are we not more likely to keep 
in touch with the obscure forces at work in 
rudimentary religion, if we make what use we can 
of the clues lying ready to hand in the recorded 
efforts of rudimentary reflection upon rehgion? 
The mana of the Pacific may be said, I think, 
without exaggeration to embody rudimentary 
reflection — to form a piece of subconscious philo- 
sophy. To begin with, the religious eye perceives 
the presence of mana here, there, and everywhere. 
In the next place, mana has worked its way into 
the very heart of the native languages, where it 
figures as more than one part of speech, and 
abounds in secondary meanings of all kinds. 
Lastly, whatever the word may originally have 
signified (as far as I know, an unsettled question), 
it stands in its actual use for something lying more 
or less beyond the reach of the senses — ^something 
verging on what we are wont to describe as the 
immaterial or unseen. AH this, however, hardly 
amounts to a proof that mana has acquired in the 
aboriginal mind the fuU status of an abstract idea. 
For instance, whereas a Codrington might decide 
in comprehensive fashion that all Melanesian 
religion consists in getting mana for oneself,' it is 

' R. H. Codrington, Tki Melanesiam (Oxford, 1891), 119 ». 
118 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

at least open to doubt whether a Melanesian sage 
could have arrived, unassisted, at a generalisation 
so abstract — a " bird's-eye view " so detached 
from confusing detail. Nevertheless, we may well 
suspect some such truth as this to have long been 
more or less inarticulately felt by the Melanesian 
mind. In fact, I take it, there would have been 
small difficulty on Bishop Codrington's part in 
making an intelligent native realise the force of 
his universal proposition. What is the moral of 
this? Surely, that the science of Comparative 
Religion should strive to explicate the meaning 
inherent in any given phase of the world's religious 
experience in just those terms that would naturally 
suggest themselves, suppose the phase in question 
to be somehow quickened into self-consciousness 
and self-expression. Such terms I would denomin- 
ate " sympathetic " ; and would, further, hazard 
the judgment that, in the case of aU science of the 
kind, its use of sympathetic terms is the measure 
of its sympathetic insight. Mana, then, I contend, 
has, despite its exotic appearance, a perfect right 
to figure as a scientific category by the side of tabu 
— a term hailing from the same geographical area 
— so long as a classificatory function of like 
importance can be found for it. That function 
let us now proceed, if so may be, to discover. 

119 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

Codrington defines mana, in its Melanesian use, 
as follows : "a force altogether distinct from 
physical power, which acts in all kinds of ways for 
good and evil, and which it is of the greatest 
advantage to possess or control " ; or again he 
says: "It is a power or influence, not physical, 
and in a way supernatural ; but it shows itself in 
physical force, or in any kind of power or excellence 
which a man possesses." It is supernatural just 
in this way, namely, that it is " what works to 
effect everything which is beyond the ordinary 
power of men, outside the common processes of 
nature." He illustrates his point by examples: 
" If a man has been successful in fighting, it has not 
been his natural strength of arm, quickness of eye, 
or readiness of resource that has won success; he 
has certainly got the mana of a spirit or of some 
deceased warrior to empower him, conveyed in an 
amulet of a stone round his neck, or a tuft of leaves 
in his belt, in a tooth hung upon a finger of his bow 
hand, or in the form of words with which he brings 
supernatural assistance to his side. If a man's 
pigs multiply, and his gardens are productive, it is 
not because he is industrious and looks after his 
property, but because of the stones full of mana for 
pigs and yams that he possesses. Of course a 
yam naturally grows when planted, that is well 

120 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

known, but it will not be very large unless mana 
comes into play; a canoe will not be swift unless 
mana be brought to bear upon it, a net will not 
catch many fish, nor an arrow inflict a mortal 
wound.'" 

From Pol37nesia comes much the same story, 
Tregear in his admirable comparative dictionary of 
the Polynesian dialects ° renders the word, which 
may be either noun or adjective, thus: "super- 
natural power ; divine authority ; having qualities 
which ordinary persons or things do not possess." 
He seems to distinguish, however, what might be 
called a " secular " sense, in which the term stands 
generally for " authority," or, as an adjective, for 
" effectual, effective." He cites copious instances 
from the various dialects to exemplify the super- 
natural mode of mana. Thus the word is applied, 
in Maori, to a wooden sword that has done deeds so 
wonderful as to possess a sanctity and power of its 
own; in Samoan, to a parent who brings a curse on 
a disobedient child; in Hawaiian, to the gods, or 
to a man who by his death gives efiicacy to an idol ; 
in Tongan, to whoever performs miracles, or 
bewitches; in Mangarevan, to a magic staff given 

' Codrington, 0p. cit,, 1 1 8-20. 

' E. Tregear, The Maori- Polynesian Comparative Dictionary 
(Wellington, N. Z., 1891), s.v. mana. 
121 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

to a man by his grandfather, or, again, to divina- 
tion in general; and so forth. In short its range 
is as wide as those of divinity and witchcraft 
taken together. If, on the other hand, we turn to 
what I have called the sectilar sense attributed to 
mana, as, for example, when it is used of a chief, 
a healer of maladies, a successful pleader, or the 
winner of a race, we perceive at once that the 
distinction of meaning holds good for the civilised 
lexicographer rather than for the unsophisticated 
native. The chief who can impose tabu, the caster- 
out of disease-devils, and, in hardly less a degree, 
the man who can exercise the magic of persuasion, 
or who can command the luck which the most 
skilled athlete does not despise, is for the Poly- 
nesian mind not metaphorically " gifted " or 
" inspired," but literally. Of course, as in Europe, 
so in Polynesia the coin of current usage may have 
become clipped with lapse of time. Thus Plato 
tells us that both the Spartans and the Athenian 
ladies of his day used to exclaim of any male 
person they happened to admire, Qeiot av^p, " what 
a divine man! " ' It need not surprise us, there- 
fore, that in Mangarevan you may say of any 
number over forty manamanana — an " awful " 
lot, in fact. Such an exception, however, can 

1 Plato, Meno 99 D. 
122 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

scarcely be allowed to count against the generalisa- 
tion that, throughout the Pacific region, mana in 
its essential meaning connotes what both Codring- 
ton and Tregrear describe as the supernatural. 

Now mark the importance of this in view of the 
possible use of mana as a category of Comparative 
Religion. Comparative Religion, I woiild main- 
tain, at all events so long as it is seeking to grapple 
with rudimentary or protoplasmic types of re- 
ligious experience, must cast its net somewhat 
widely. Its interest must embrace the whole of 
one, and, perhaps, for savagery the more con- 
siderable, of the two fundamental aspects under 
which his experience or his universe (we may ex- 
press it either way) reveals itself to the rudiment- 
ary intelligence of man. What to call this aspect, 
'so as to preserve the flavour of the aboriginal 
notion, is a difficulty, but a difficulty of detail. 
The all-important matter is to establish by in- 
duction that such an aspect is actually perceived 
at the level of experience I have called " rudi- 
mentary." This, I believe, can be done. I have, 
for instance, shown elsewhere that even the Pygmy, 
a person perhaps not overburdened with ideas, 
possesses in his notion of oudah an inkling of the 
difference that marks off the one province of 
experience from the other. Of course he cannot 

123 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

deal with oudah abstractly; provinces of experi- 
ence and the like are not for him. But I found 
that, when confronted with particular cases, or 
rather types of case, my Pygmy friend could 
determine with great precision whether oudah was 
there or not. What practical results, if any, 
would be likely to flow from this effort of discern- 
ment my knowledge of Pygmy customs, un- 
fortunately, does not enable me to say; but I 
take it that the conception is not there for nothing. 
I shall assume, then, that an inductive study of 
the ideas and customs of savagery will show, firstly, 
that an awareness of a fundamental aspect of life 
and of the world, which aspect I shall provisionally 
term " supernatural," is so general as to be typical, 
and, secondly, that such an awareness is no less 
generally bound up with a specific group of vital 
reactions. 

As to the question of a name for this aspect 
different views may be held. The term our 
science needs ought to express the bare minimum 
of generic being required to constitute matter for 
the experience which, taken at its highest, though 
by no means at its widest, we call " religious." 
" Raw material for good religion and bad religion, 
as well as for magic white or black " — ^how are we 
going to designate that in a phrase? It will not 

124 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

help us here, I am afraid, to cast about amongst 
native words. Putting aside oudah as too in- 
significant and too little understood to be pressed 
into this high service, I can find nothing more 
nearly adapted to the purpose than the Siouan 
wakan or wakanda ; of which M'Gee writes : 
" the term may be translated into ' mystery ' 
perhaps more satisfactorily than in \_sic\ any other 
single English word, yet this rendering is at the 
same time too limited, as wakanda vaguely denotes 
also power, sacred, ancient, grandeur, animate, 
immortal.'" But when vagueness reaches this 
pitch, it is time, I think, to resort to one of our own 
more clear-cut notions. Amongst such notions 
that of " the supernatural " stands out, in my 
opinion, as the least objectionable. Of course it is 
our term; that must be clearly understood. The 
savage has no word for " nature." He does not 
abstractly distinguish between an order of uniform 
happenings and a higher order of miraculous 
happenings. He is merely concerned to mark and 
exploit the difference when presented in the 
concrete. As Codrington says : "A man comes 
by chance upon a stone which takes his fancy; 
its shape is singular, it is like something, it is 

' W. J. M'Gee, Fifteenth Annual Report of the V.S. Bureau of 
Ethnology (Washington, 1898), 182. 

125 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

certainly not a common stone, there must be mana 
in it. So he argues with himself, and he puts it to 
the proof; he lays it at the root of a tree to the 
fruit of which it has a certain resemblance, or he 
buries it in the ground when he plants his garden; 
an abundant crop on the tree or in the garden 
shows that he is right, the stone is mana, has that 
power in it." ' Here, however, we have at all 
events the germs of our formal antithesis between 
the natural and the supernatural; which, by the 
way, is perhaps not so nicely suited to the taste of 
the advanced theology of our day that it would 
have much scruple about dedicating the expression 
to the service of rudimentary religion. I should 
like to add that in any case the English word 
" supernatural " seems to suit this context better 
than the word " sacred." L'idde du sacr^ may be 
apposite enough in French, since sacr^ can stand 
either for " holy " or for " damned "; but it is an 
abuse of the English language to speak of the 
" sacredness " of some accursed wizard. Hence, 
if our science were to take over the phrase, it must 
turn its back on usage in favour of etymology; 
and then, I think, it would be found that the Latin 
sacer merely amounts to tabu, the negative mode of 
the supernatural — a point to which I now proceed. 

' Codrington, o/. cit., 119. 
126 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

Tabu, as I have tried to prove elsewhere, is the 
negative mode of the supernatural, to which mana 
corresponds as the positive mode. I am not 
confining my attention to the use of these terms 
in the Pacific region,' but am considering them as 
transformed, on the strength of their local use, 
into categories of world-wide application. Given 
the supernatural in any form there are always two 
things to note about it : firstly, that you are to be 
heedful in regard to it ; secondly, that it has power. 
The first may be called its negative character, the 
second its positive. Perhaps stronger expressions 
might seem to be required. Tabu, it might be 
argued, is not so much negative as prohibitive or 
even minatory ; whilst mana is not merely positive 
but operative and thaumaturgic. The more 
colourless terms, however, are safer when it is a 
question of characterising universal modes of the 
supernatural. Given this wide sense tabu simply 
implies that you must be heedful in regard to the 
supernatural, not that you must be on your guard 

' Indeed, in Melanesia at all events, rongo answers more nearly 
to the purpose than does tamiu { = iaiu), since the latter always 
implies human sanction and prohibition. A place may, in fact, be 
tamiu without being nmg-o, as when a secret society taboos the 
approaches to its lodge by means of certain marks, which are quite 
effectual as representing the physical force commanded by the 
association. So Codrington, o}. cit., 77. Surely, however, every 
secret society possesses, or originally possessed, a quasi-religious 
character, and as such would have mana at its disposal. 
127 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

against it. The prohibition to have dealings with 
it is not absolute; otherwise practical religion 
would be impossible. The warning is against 
casual, incautious, profane dealings. " Not to be 
lightly approached " is Codrington's translation 
for the corresponding term used in the New 
Hebrides.' Under certain conditions man may 
draw nigh, but it is well for him to respect those 
conditions. Thus " prohibitive " and " mina- 
tory " are too strong. Tabu, as popularly used, 
may in a given context coimote something Uke 
absolute prohibition, but in the universal appUca- 
tion I have given to it can only represent the 
supernatural in its negative character — ^the super- 
natural, so to speak, on the defensive. 

We come now to mana. Here, again, we must 
shun descriptions that are too specific. Mana is 
often operative and thaumaturgic, but not always. 
Like energy, mana may be dormant or potential. 
Mana, let us remember, is an adjective as well as 
a noun, expressing a possession which is likewise 
a permanent quality. The stone that looks like a 
banana is and has mana, whether you set it 
working by planting it at the foot of your tree 
or not. Hence it seems enough to say that 
mana exhibits the supernatural in its positive 

' Codrington, op. cit., i88; cf. l8i. 
128 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

capacity — ready, but not necessarily in act, to 
strike. 

At this point an important consideration calls 
for notice. Tabu and mana apply to the super- 
natural solely as viewed in what I should like to 
caU its first, or existential, dimension. With its 
second, or moral, dimension they have nothing to 
do whatever. They register judgments of fact, 
as philosophers would say, not judgments of 
value; they are constitutive categories, not 
normative. Thus whatever is supernatural is 
indifferently tabu — ^perilous to the unwary ; but as 
such it may equally well be holy or unclean, set 
apart for God or abandoned to devil, sainted or 
sinful, cloistered or quarantined. There is plenty 
of linguistic evidence to show that such distinctions 
of value are famihar to the savage mind. Nor is 
it hard to see how they arise naturally out of the 
tabu idea. Thus in Melanesia everything super- 
natural is at once tambu and rongo, words implying 
that it is fenced round by sanctions human and 
divine ; but there is a stronger term buto meaning 
that the sanctions are specially dreadftil and there- 
upon becoming equivalent to "abominable,"' 
where we seem to pass without a break from degree 
of intensity to degree of worth. Passing on to 

^ Codrihgton, o^. cit., 31. 
9 129 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

mana, we find exactly the same absence of moral 
significance. The mystic potentiality is alike for 
good and evil. Take, for example, two Samoan 
phrases found side by side in Tregear's dictionary :' 
fa'a-mana, to show extraordinary power or energy, 
as in healing; fa'a-manamana, to attribute an 
accident or misfortune to supernatural powers. 
Or again, in Melanesia European medicine is called 
pei mana, but on the other hand there is likewise 
mana in the poisoned arrow.'' Similarly, orenda 
is power to bless or to curse; and the same holds 
good of a host of similar native expressions, for 
instance, wakan, qube, manitu, oki, not to go out- 
side North America. Meanwhile, in this direction 
also moral valuations soon make themselves felt. 
Thus in the Pacific region we have plenty of special 
words for witchcraft ; and in Maori mythology we 
even hear of a personified witchcraft Makutu 
dwelling with the wicked goddess Miru, of whom 
Tregear writes : " the unclean tapu was her power 
{mana)."^ Or again, in Huron there is a word 
otgon denoting specifically the malign and de- 
structive exercise of orenda ; and Hewitt notes 
the curious fact that the former term is gradually 
displacing the latter — as if, he observes, the bad 

' Tregear, s.v. mana. ' Codrington, op. cit., 198, 308. 

^ Tregear, s.vv. Makutu, Miru. 

130 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

rather than the good manifestations of super- 
natural power produced a lasting impression on the 
native mind.' Elsewhere I have given Australian 
examples of a similar distinction drawn between 
wonder-working power in general, and a speciiicaUy 
noxious variety of the same, such as, for instance, 
the well-known arungquiltha of the Arunta. 

I have said enough, I trust, to show that there 
exists, deep-engrained in the rudimentary thought 
of the world, a conception of a specific aspect 
common to all sorts of things and living beings, 
under which they appear at once as needing 
insulation and as endowed with an energy of high, 
since extraordinary, potential, — all this without 
any reference to the bearing of these facts on 
human welfare. In this connection I would 
merely add that our stock antithesis between 
magic and religion becomes applicable only when 
we pass from this to the second or moral dimension 
of the supernatural. Presented in its double 
character of tabu and mana the supernatural is 
not moral or immoral, but simply unmoral. 
It is convenient to describe its sphere as that of 
the magico-religious ; but strictly speaking it is 
that which is neither magical nor religious, since 

1 J. N. B. Hewitt, The American Anthropologist (1902), N.S. 
iv., 37 n. 

131 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

these terms of valuation have yet to be super- 
induced. I am aware that the normative function 
of these expressions is not always manifest, that 
it is permissible to speak of false religion, white 
magic, and so on. But, for scientific purposes at 
anyrate, an evaluatory use ought, I think, to be 
assigned to this historic disjunction, not merely 
in view of the usage of civilised society, but as a 
consequence of that tendency to mark off by 
discriminative epithets the good and the bad 
supematuralisms, the kingdoms of God and of the 
Devil, which runs right through the hierological 
language of the world. 

The rest of this paper will be concerned with a 
more perplexing, and hence, probably, more 
controversial, side of the subj ect. Put in a nutshell 
the problem is the following : How does " anim- 
ism " fit into the scheme? Is the supernatural 
identical with the spiritual, and is mana nothing 
more or less than spiritual power? Or, on the 
contrary, are mana and " soul " or " spirit " 
categories that belong to relatively distinct 
systems of ideas — do the two refuse to combine? 

As regards this latter question, our minds may 

quickly be set at rest. Somehow these categories 

do manage to combine freely, and notably in that 

very Pacific region where mana is at home. The 

132 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

Melanesia!! evidei!ce collected by Codrington is 
decisive. Wherever mana is fou!!d — and that is 
to say, wherever the supernatural reveals itself — 
this mana is referred to one of three originating 
sources, namely, a living man, a dead man's 
ghost, or a "spirit"; spirits displasdng one of 
two forms, that of a ghostlike appearance — as a 
native put it, " something indistinct, with no 
definite outline, grey like dust, vanishing as soon 
as looked at '" — or that of the ordinary corporeal 
figure of a man. Other manifestations of the 
supernatural are explained in terms of these three, 
or rather the last two, agencies. A sacred animal, 
or again, a sacred stone, is one which belongs to a 
ghost or spirit, or in which a ghost or spirit resides.' 
Can we say, then, that " animism " is in com- 
plete possession of the field? With a little 
stretching of the term, I think, we can. Ghosts 
and spirits of ghostlike form are obviously ani- 
mistic to the core. Supernatural beings of human 
and corporeal form may perhaps be reckoned by 
courtesy as spirits; though really we have here 
the rudiments of a distinct and alternative 
development, namely a nthrop omor phic thekm . 
a mode of conception that especially appeals to 
the mythological fancy. Finally, animism can 

' Codrington, op. cit., 151. « lb., 178 sqq. 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

be made without much trouble to cover the case 
of the Hving man with mana. If a man has mana, 
it resides in his " spiritual part '" or " soul," 
which after his death becomes a ghost. Besides, 
it appears, no man has this power of himself; 
you can say that he has mana with the use of the 
substantive, not that he is mana, as you can say 
of a ghost or spirit. This latter "puts the mana 
into the man " {manag — a causative verb) or 
" inspires " him; and an inspired man will even 
in speaking of himself say not " I " but " we two."^ 
There seems, however, to be a certain flaw in the 
native logic, involving what comes perilously 
near to argument in a circle. Not every man has 
mana, nor every ghost ;^ but the soul of a man of 
power becomes as such a ghost of power, though 
in his capacity of ghost he has it in greater force 
than when alive.* On the ground of this capacity 
for earning, if not enio5ang, during life the right 
to be mana, I have ventured provisionally to class 
the living man with the ghost, and the spirit as an 
independent owner of mana ; but it is clear that, 
in defiance of logic, animism has contrived to 
" jump the claim." 

^ Codrington, op. cit., 191. ' 16., igi, 210, 153. 

' Codrington, op. cit., 119, 125, 258; but 176 shows that even 
the buiying-places of common people are so far sacred that no one 
will go there without due cause. * lb., 258. 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

Having thus shown in the briefest way that 
mana and " animism " can occur in combination, 
I proceed to the awkward task of determining 
how, if treated as categories applicable to rudi- 
mentary religion in general, they are to be pro- 
vided each with a classificatory function of its own. 
Perhaps the simplest way of meeting, or rather 
avoiding, the difficulty is to deny that " animism " 
is a category that belongs intrinsically to our 
science at all. Certainly it might be said to per- 
tain more properly to some interest wider than the 
magico-reUgious, call it rudimentary philosophy 
or what we will. It makes no difference whether 
we take animism in the vaguer Spencerian sense 
of the attribution of life and animation — an atti- 
tude of mind to which I prefer to give the dis- 
tinguishing name of " animatism " — or in the 
more exact Tylorian sense of the attribution of 
soul, ghost, or ghost-like spirit. In either case we 
are carried far beyond the bounds of rudimentary 
religion, even when magic is made co-partner in 
the system. There is obviously nothing in the 
least supernatural in being merely alive. On the 
other hand, to have soul is, as we have seen, not 
necessarily to have mana here or hereafter. The 
rudimentary philosophy of Melanesia abounds in 
nice distinctions of an animistic kind as follows. 

135 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

A yam lives without intelligence, and therefore 
has no tarunga or " soiil." A pig has a tarunga and 
so likewise has a man, but with this difference that 
when a pig dies he has no tindalo or " ghost," but 
a man's tarunga at his death becomes a tindalo. 
Even so, however, only a great man's tarunga 
becomes a tindalo with mana, a " ghost of wor- 
ship," as Codrington renders it. Meanwhile, as 
regards a vui or " spirit," its nature is apparently 
the same as that of a soul or at anyrate a human 
soul, but it is never without mana.^ Thus only 
the higher grades of this animistic hierarchy rank ■ 
as supernatural beings; and you know them for 
what they are not by their soul-like nature, but 
by the mana that is in them. 

It remains to add that mana can come very near 
to meaning " soul " or " spirit," though without 
the connotation of wraith-like appearance. Tre- 
gear supplies abundant evidence from Polynesia.' 
Mana from meaning indwelling power naturally 
passes into the sense of " intelligence," " energy of 
character," "spirit"; and the kindred term 
manawa (manava) expresses " heart," " the in- 
terior man," " conscience," " soul "; whilst vari- 
ous other compounds of mana between them yield 

1 Codrington, <?/. cit., 249; cf. 123-6. 
' Tregear, op. cit., s.vv. mana, manawa. 

136 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

a most complete psychological vocabulary — ^words 
for thought, memory, belief, approval, affection, 
desire, and so forth. Meanwhile, mana always, I 
think, falls short of expressing " individuality." 
Though immaterial it is perfectly transmissible. 
Thus only last week a correspondent wrote to me 
from Simbo in the Solomon Islands to say that a 
native has no objection to imparting to you the 
words of a mana song. The mere knowledge will 
not enable you to perform miracles. You must 
pay him money, and then ipso facto he will transmit 
the mana to you — as we should say, the " good- 
will " of the concern. On the other hand, 
animism lends itself naturally to this purpose. 
It is true that there is often very little individu- 
ality attaching to the nameless spirit (vui) that 
may enter into a man. But the ghost (tindalo) 
that inspires you is apt to retain its full selfhood, 
so that the possessed one speaks of "we two — So- 
and-so and I." 

I conclude, then, that mana, or rather the tabu- 
mana formula, has solid advantages over animism, 
when the avowed object is to found what Dr 
Tylor calls " a minimum definition of religion." 
Mana is coextensive with the supernatural; 
animism is far too wide. Mana is always mana, 
supernatural power, differing in intensity — ^in 
137 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

voltage, so to speak — but never in essence; 
animism splits up into more or less irreducible 
kinds, notably " soul," spirit," and " ghost." 
Finally, mana, whilst fuUy adapted to express the 
immaterial — the unseen force at work behind the 
seen — ^yet, conformably with the incoherent state 
of rudimentary reflection, leaves in solution the 
distinction between personal and impersonal, and 
in particular does not allow any notion of a high 
individuality to be precipitated. Animism, on 
the other hand, tends to lose touch with the 
supernatural in its more impersonal forms, and is 
not well suited to express its transmissibility nor 
indeed its immateriality; but, by way of com- 
pensation, it can in a specialised form become a 
means of representing supernatural agents of 
high individuality, whenever the social condition 
of mankind is advanced enough to foster such a 
conception. 

This last consideration paves the way for a 
concluding observation. Throughout I have been 
in search of classificatory categories applicable 
to rudimentary religion as a whole. In other 
words, I have assumed that the subject is to be 
treated as if it represented a single level of ex- 
perience, and, moreover, that the treatment is to 
limit itself to the work of classifying — ^that is, 
138 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

arranging the facts under S5Tioptic headings. 
Now such, I think, must be the prime object of 
our science at its present stage of development. 
We must not try to move too fast. Some day, 
however, when our knowledge is fuller and better 
organised, we may hope to be able to deal with 
the history of religion genetically — to exhibit 
the successive stages of a continuous process of 
orthogenic or central evolution, whilst making at 
the same time fxill allowance for the thousand and 
one side-shoots of the wide-spreading family-tree 
of human culture. Now when it comes to ex- 
hibiting genesis, it may well be, I think, that, 
along certain lines of growth, and perhaps along 
the central line itself, mana will at a certain point 
have to give way to one or another type of 
animistic conception. Where marked individu- 
alities tend to be lacking in society, as in Australia, 
there it will be found that the supernatural tends 
normally to be apprehended under more or less 
impersonal forms. This holds true even within 
the strict habitat of the mana doctrine. Thus in 
the New Hebrides, where the culture is relatively 
backward, the prevailing animistic conception is 
that of the vui or " spirit," a being often nameless, 
and, at the best, of vague personality. On the 
other hand, in the Solomon Islands, where the 
139 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

culture is more advanced, the religious interest 
centres in the tindalo mana or ghost of power — 
the departed soul of some weU-knovm individual.' 
In effect, hero-worship has, with the evolution of 
the hero, superinduced itself upon some sort of 
polydaemonism redolent of democracy. But I 
refrain from further speculations about religious 
evolution. They are tempting, but, in the present 
state of our knowledge, hardly edifsdng. I would 
merely add, glancing forwards for a moment from 
rudimentary religion to what we call " advanced," 
that to the end animism never manages to drive 
the more impersonal conceptions of the super- 
natural clean out of the field. The " ghost," 
clearly, does not hold its own for long. Anthro- 
pomorphic theism, on the other hand, a view that 
is bred from animatism rather than from animism 
proper, dominates many of the higher creeds, 
but not aU. Buddhism is a standing example 
of an advanced type of religion that exalts the 
impersonal aspect of the divine. It is, again, 
especially noticeable how a thinker such as Plato, 
with aU his interest in soul, human personality, 
and the subjective in general, hesitates between 
a personal and an impersonal rendering of the 
idea of God. Thus the ambiguity that lies sleep- 

' Codriogton, op. cit., 122. 
140 



THE CONCEPTION OF MANA 

ing in mana would seem to persist to some extent 
even when religious experience is at its most self- 
conscious. In the meantime all religions, low 
and high, rudimentary and advanced, can join 
in saying with the Psalmist that " power belongeth 
unto God." 



141 



A SOCIOLOGICAL VIEW OF COM- 
PARATIVE RELIGION 

I. Comparative Religion as a branch of Psychology. 

ALTHOUGH anthropologists of the British 
school have on the whole troubled little 
to make explicit to their readers or even to them- 
selves the precise method of their researches in 
Comparative Religion, there is no doubt that one 
and aU, if challenged, would declare that method 
to be, broadly speaking, psychological. In other 
words, they would profess to be trs^ng to under- 
stand the religious consciousness, or religious ex- 
perience, of mankind " from the inside," as the 
phrase is. Treating ritual, language, organisa- 
tion, and so on, as but the " outward signs " of 
an " inward and spiritual " condition, they seek 
to penetrate, they would say, beyond and beneath 
these phenomena, by the only available, if in- 
direct, means, namely the exercise of sympathetic 
insight, to those subjective factors of which the 
objective manifestations form the more or less 
loose-fitting garment. Further — though here 
143 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

might be found a greater divergence of opinion — 
religious experience would be characterised by 
most thinkers of this school as pre-eminently of 
the practical rather than of the speculative or 
mystic type, a mode of the life of purpose and 
action rather than of the life of thought or faith. 
After all, considering the national tendency to 
emphasise the ethical side of Christianity, it is not 
surprising that the scientific conception of re- 
ligion should echo this pragmatic tone. 

Does the rest of the world agree with the 
British school in regarding psychological and 
subjective elements as fundamental in rehgious 
history? Of course no one in their senses — ^not 
even a theorist defending a thesis — would deny 
that subjective elements are there to be taken 
stock of, or that, when taken stock of, they have 
a certain value in revealing ultimate conditions. 
But a profoimd distrust of the subjective as pro- 
viding altogether too shifting a base for the phil- 
osophy of the human sciences exists both here and 
abroad. Indeed, if British anthropologists (from 
amongst whom Spencer may for our present 
purpose be excluded as fotuider of a distinct 
school of his own) have acquiesced in purely 
psychological results, might not the reason be 
that, busy with their beloved facts, they have 
,144 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

not troubled to look beyond the ends of their 
noses? Hence, both here amongst admirers of 
the Sjmthetic Philosophy, and abroad where 
system is more of a cult, determined efforts of all 
sorts have been made to reduce the psychological 
to its presumed non-psychological and objective 
conditions. Sociological or historical method in 
general rather than the method of Comparative 
Religion in particular has naturally furnished the 
immediate topic of most pronouncements. Yet it 
would be easy to show that Comparative Religion 
no less than any other of the special departments 
of Social Science has been seriously affected by 
this and that attempt to refer the wiU and fancy 
of man to causes that transcend the arbitrary. 

To enumerate and classify the multitude of 
these objectivist theories is too formidable a task 
to be attempted here, but some representative 
views may be cited by way of illustrating, and at 
the same time criticising, their general tendency. 
First we have the evolutionism of the biological 
school with its organicist or even mechanist 
analogies, which applied wholesale and uncon- 
ditionally to Sociology have notoriously begotten 
a mythology. When all has been said in favour 
of the suggestiveness of the ideas of such writers 
as Novicow or Espinas, it remains certain that 
10 145 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

sociological phenomena belong primarily to a 
plane distinct from that of instinct, and admit of 
specific explanation in terms not heterogeneous 
but appropriate. No doubt there are remoter 
conditions of a biological order that have a certain 
relevancy. To exalt these, however, at the ex- 
pense of proximate conditions, as this school is 
led by its a priori bias to do, is gratuitously to 
hamper observation and description with a radi- 
cally false perspective. Closely associated with 
the line of thought is the view of such thinkers 
as Lapouge and Ammon, who make race the 
dominant factor in human development — a notion 
which seems likewise to underlie the somewhat 
different work of Gumplowicz. But, strictly 
taken, race is the vaguest and most elusive of 
conceptions, as any physical anthropologist is 
perfectly ready to admit.' The races of mankind, 
it is plain, are a thoroughly mixed lot. If on the 
other hand race be taken loosely in the sense of 
nationality, it is clear that analysis has not yet 
said its last word. In another category are the 
economic interpretations of Loria and others, 
this type of theory deriving itself from the 
" historical materialism " of Marx. Distinct, but 

' Compare, for instance, P. Topinard, Eliments dCanthropologie 
giniraU (1885), p. 202. 

146 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

of very similar tendency, is the anthropogeography 
of Ratzel and his school, a method that is rapidly 
gaining ground in this country. Now regarded 
in themselves such studies, whether of food supply, 
or of soil or climate, in relation to distribution of 
population and other objective matters, are 
highly important, nay indispensable. National 
character and policy are certainly not to be under- 
stood apart from the consideration of environing 
conditions of this kind. It is only when, or so far 
as, they are taken to explain the national history 
to aU intents and purposes finally, milieu or some 
prominent aspect thereof being regarded as the 
determining cause of genius itself, that no soundly 
empirical and tentative philosophy of man can 
bear with them any longer. The trouble with 
all these theories we have reviewed is their aprior- 
ism. It is assumed offhand firstly, that for all 
the manifestations of mind, individual and 
collective, there must be an explanation in terms 
of necessary causation of a physical and external 
type; secondly, that some one cause must be 
more fundamental than the rest, and must there- 
fore be capable of accepting responsibility, as it 
were, for the whole affair. But these are but 
prejudices, begotten it may be by a passion for 
the objective, but nevertheless deserving the 
147 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

denomination of subjectivist at its most abusive. 
As empiricists we must work, not from meta- 
physical fancies, but from facts — ^from that 
which, as Aristotle puts it, is " better known to 
us." 

A defender of these views will retort : " But 
granting you that instinct and race are some- 
what intangible, here in food-supply or soil are 
the very facts you profess to be after. Surely they 
are ' better known to us,' because directly pre- 
sented to the senses, than the accompan5nng 
subjective states that sympathetic insight must 
indirectly divine." To this the reply is that 
undoubtedly they are directly presented to us 
as facts; but not as causes. Description may 
well begin from them; it does not follow that 
explanation wiU end with them. We begin, let 
us say, by describing in objective terms the pro- 
portion borne by the agricultural to the manu- 
facturing portion of the population in this country, 
or its position as a group of islands set over against 
a continent. Is it possible for explanation to 
deduce therefrom without further ado the amount 
of corn we import or the size of our battle fleet? 
If this seem possible to some, it is only because 
the middle term, a fact of another order, a psychical 
fact, namely the national desire for self-preserva- 
148 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

tion, is tacitly assumed as a constant factor in the 
situation. But nations make mistakes. They 
are capable of ignoring or at least misconceiv- 
ing the dictates of self-preservation. The " free 
fooders " and the " blue-water school " do not 
have it aU their own way. But what becomes then 
of the "laws " supposed objectively and necessarily 
to connect preponderance of manufacturing popu- 
lation with the importation of grain, or insular 
position with the command of the sea? They 
turn out to be but laws of the moral type, laws 
which ought to be kept if certain ends are to be 
realised, but which actually are broken as often 
as these ends are not affirmed by the general wiU. 
In short, if we are not composing in the slap-dash 
style of evolutionary biology some a priori science 
of national health in general, but are seeking 
empirically to describe in their detailed relations 
to each other the actual conditions under which 
the historical life of peoples is carried on, psychical 
factors must not only be considered, but specially 
emphasised. For the peoples concerned, and 
therefore for the observer, the psychical factors — 
this sentiment, that policy, and so on — ^underlie 
and condition the material factors. If more re- 
motely the psychical factors be themselves con- 
ditioned, it is certainly not by the material factors 
149 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

as directiy presented either to the observer or to 
those he is observing, but by certain transcendent 
causes somehow discerned by the metaphysician 
at the back of these factors. We may add that 
we have represented the case for objective deter- 
minants of an economic and geographical kind at 
its strongest, namely where, as when food or de- 
fence from foes is in question, the psychical 
accompaniments are relatively simple and con- 
stant. 'Where art or religion have to be accounted 
for, material explanations at once become palpably 
incomplete and arbitrary. It is true that we have 
gone for our illustration to a civilised nation where 
sentiments and policies are clearly in evidence. 
But the primitive tribe has its sentiments and even 
its policies likewise. That they are harder to 
discover does not confer the right to treat them as 
directly deducible from milieu. 

There remains to be considered another group 
of sociologists, the school of Durkheim and his 
brilliant colleagues of UAnnee Sociologique. These 
thinkers are, or tend to be, objectivist, but theirs 
is a psychological not a materialistic objectivism. 
Their explanations are framed in terms of idea, 
sentiment, and purpose, which is the aH-important 
matter. So long as they do not force the psy- 
chology to suit their metaphysical postulate of 
150 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

determinism — and they show no strong inclination 
to do that, a test-case being their handling of the 
association of ideas on sound apperceptionist 
principles — there can be no harm in believing, 
with at least half the psychological world, that 
ultimately the subjective and objective orders are 
at one in a cause-bound necessary series or system 
of correlated realities. If they admit the phe- 
nomenal existence of the contingent in the shape 
of human purpose, they are welcome to disbelieve 
in its real existence, whatever that may mean. 
Their merit is that they go straight to the facts, 
objective and subjective, of human life as directly 
or indirectly observed, philosophising as to 
principles of explanation as they go, that is, as 
the principles are demanded by the actual work 
of specific and detailed research. With these, 
therefore, the British school of anthropology, with 
its radical empiricism that puts facts before laws 
and is happy if it can see a stride-length ahead in 
the dark, has no quarrel; nay from them it has 
much to learn. What this school names Morpho- 
logic Sociale, the study of the exterior conditions 
and forms of social agglomeration, of all in short 
that a statistical demography should describe, 
is a branch of investigation to which more atten- 
tion might well be paid on this side of the Channel, 

151 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

as witness sundry gaps in the questionnaires our 
anthropologists are wont to circulate among 
workers in the field.' But you may have too 
much of a good thing, if the other good things of 
life are for its sake neglected. There are certain 
signs that Psychology may in the long run suffer 
from one-sided explanations of morphological 
derivation. Thus that most able and thorough- 
going of anthropological researchers, M. Mauss, 
in his Essai sur les variations saisonnihres des 
Sociitis Eskimos '' goes so far as to claim that he 
has here verified crucially,' the hypothesis that all 
the forms, including the rehgious form, of the 
social life of the Eskimo are a function of its 
material substrate, namely the mass, density, 
organisation, and composition of their modes of 
agglomeration. All he shows, however, is that, 
if the mode of agglomeration changes, the rehgious 
custom and so on does as a fact alter. Just so in 
the case of the individual, as the brain-matter is 
modified, the ideas appear to change; but surely 
it does not foUow necessarily that thought is a 
function of the brain, if this is to mean that thought 
is the effect, or even the unconditional correlate, 
of cerebration. Yet if it mean less than this, 

' Cf. V Annie Sociologique, ix., 138. '' lb., 39 sgq. 

' lb., p. 129. 

152 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

and unknown conditions may possibly vitiate the 
correspondence, explanation is not reached, since 
we are left with the merely analogical. A similar 
tendency would seem to be the stress laid by the 
school of Durkheim on the objectivity of their 
method — on the fact that throughout they are 
dealing with " things." They appear to regard 
social phenomena, whether morphological or 
psychological, as objective simply in the sense of 
independent of individual control. Now no doubt 
the individual often finds himself powerless in face 
of the mass, though the mass is probably in every 
case moved by its ringleaders. No doubt, again, 
the subconscious nature of most popular con- 
tagions favours a treatment which verges on a 
mechanist djmamic. But do these writers mean 
more than that in a certain abstract aspect of 
society mechanism, or something psychologically 
equivalent, prevails? Probably not. But they 
at least show no wish or power (happily for those 
who have profited largely from their researches) 
to limit their science to the study of this abstract 
element and its conditions — a bare fragment at 
most, suppose it per impossibile isolated, of the 
vast mass of sociological material calling for 
analysis. The truth would seem to be that these 
thinkers, in reacting against the ideological con- 
153 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

structions of the fancy-free anthropologist — a 
pretender who is fast being hustled from the field 
even in this land of distinguished amateurs — ^have 
bent the stick over to the other side. By all means 
let us avoid what Bacon calls anticipatio as con- 
trasted with interfretatio naturae — the flying to 
the widest axioms without progressively graduated 
research. But at least let Psychology as Psycho- 
logy preserve its integrity as a kind of bridge- 
work between the objective and the subjective 
elements of our experience. Let no premature 
abstraction cut up the field into strips before the 
whole has been surveyed. One day, perhaps, 
social explanations may be assimilated to 
mechanical; or one day, as I incline to hope, 
the very opposite may come about. In the mean- 
time, however, whilst so much observation re- 
mains to be accomplished, let metaphysical 
questions, so far as they do not immediately bear 
on the exigencies of practical procedure, remain 
open. In particular, let necessity and contingency 
be treated as complementary, though antithetic, 
bases of explanatory construction in dealing 
with a human experience that, in despite of logic, 
empirically faces both ways at once and together. 



154 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION , 

II. Comparative Religion as a branch of Social 
Psychology. 

There seems, then, to be good reason to respect 
the British tradition which ordains that Psychology 
must preside over the investigations of Compara- 
tive ReUgion. It remains to make explicit wh9,t 
anthropologists of the British school have hitherto 
recognised but vaguely, that a Social, not an 
Individual, Psychology can alone be invested 
with this function. 

The ordinary Psychology bases itself on the 
assumption that this soul of yours or mine is 
something individual. There can be no great 
harm in this if individual here mean no more than 
self-complete. What is fatal, however, is to take 
it — as is often done by inadvertence — in the 
sense of self-contained. It is absolutely necessary 
to assume with common sense that souls can 
coimnunicate — by indirect means, let us say, 
putting aside the question of the possibility of 
telepathy — ^and that by communicating they 
become more or less complementary to one another 
in a social system. For certain Umited purposes, 
however. Psychology has found it convenient to 
make abstraction of the social dimension, as it 
may be termed. In so doing it can never afford 
155 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

for a moment to forget that it is dealing with 
what, being highly abstract, it is safest to term 
a fiction — to wit, a soul stripped of ninety-nine 
himdredths of its natural portion of soul-life. 
Herodotus ' tells how King Psammetichus of 
Egypt caused certain infants to be isolated and 
in their inarticulate babbling sought for the 
original tongue of man, with results more satisfy- 
ing to himself than to a critical posterity. Such 
an incubator-method, as it may be termed, is by 
no means to be despised in certain psychological 
contexts. As is well known, the instincts of new- 
bom animals have been distinguished by precisely 
this means. So, too, in a somewhat similar if 
less exact way the psychologist who merely 
observes having made abstraction of the pabulum 
provided by society together with such effects on 
the mental digestion as may be traced to the 
particular nature of the food, may pay exclusive 
attention to the digestive apparatus which the 
individual is supposed to bring with him to the 
feast. But apply this incubator-method to the 
origins of language, of law, of morals, of religion, 
and how is the fallacy of Psammetichus to be 
escaped? Yet on all sides this appUcation is 
being made. To take but the case in which we 

' Herodotns, ii., 2. 
156 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

are primarily interested, namely that of religion, 
what is commoner, than to imagine a religious 
instinct, inherent in our individual nature, that 
out of itself by a sort of partheno-genesis bears 
fruit in the shape of historical religion? Or if the 
stimulus to religion is thought of as coming not 
so much from within as from without, from God 
by revelation, or from the world by the awakening 
of awe at its marvels, it is stiU the self-sufficient 
individual who is thought of as the subject of the 
experience. An example from a neighbouring 
field is the claim of various anthropologists to 
be able to deduce the phenomena of magic from 
the laws of association as they work in the in- 
dividual mind. And yet that very incubator- 
method which is here parodied and abused might 
have taught these all too simple theorists their 
mistake. We cannot, perhaps, isolate an infant 
after the example of Psammetichus, and watch 
to see whether propria motu it not merely talks 
but prays. We might, however, transplant the 
infant from savage to civilised surroundings, or, 
for the matter of that, might reverse the process. 
With what result? Would a young totemist 
notwithstanding evolve in the one case and a young 
Christian in the other? Or would not the child 
acquire the religion of its adopted home, of the 
157 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

society that rears and educates it? Even when 
full allowance is made for the fact that each child 
reacts on its education in individual fashion, can 
there be the slightest shadow of a doubt that the 
supreme determining influence must rest with 
the social factor? 

If religion, then, is pre-eminently the concern 
of a Social, and not an Individual, Psychology, 
in what sort of shape will its natural laws or 
tendencies be exhibited? It has just been 
pointed out that a religion is so closely bound up 
with a particular organisation of society that to 
abandon the one is to break with the other. May 
we, therefore, go further and say that a religion 
is identical with a particular organisation of 
society, that it is a social institution? Certainly 
not, unless we are speaking loosely. We must 
say that the religion is materialised, incorporated, 
enshrined, in the corresponding institution or 
group of institutions. Perhaps an analogy may 
be drawn (though analogies are always dangerous 
if pressed) between a rehgion embodied in a social 
structure and a piece of literature, the work of 
many hands, consigned to a manuscript. In 
either case the one depends for very existence on 
the other, yet they differ as spirit from outer 
form ; and the spirit is to a greater or less extent 

158 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

functionally independent of the form, since often 
it palpably governs it, stamps it with its own 
pattern, makes it the instrument of its own intent. 
Bad literature, indeed, will conform itself to the 
manuscript; just so many pages are wanted; 
the scribe must not be troubled to rewrite. And 
so bad religion enslaves itself to the outer form, 
truckles to a usage that imposes bounds, becomes 
fossilised to suit its ministers' convenience. 
Judged by which test, it must be admitted, there 
is a vast amount of bad religion in existence. 
Nevertheless world-literature and world-religion 
at their best and most typical are by no means the 
hacks of publishers and priests. In view, then, 
of the functional independence of the spirit, that 
is, the ruling meaning and purpose, of historical 
religion at its most essential, its laws or tendencies 
must be described in terms appropriate to spirit, 
in terms of meaning and purpose. A Social, no 
less than an Individual, Psychology is concerned, 
primarily and directly, with soul only. 

But at once the question occurs: Whose soul? 
Whose spirit? Whose meaning and purpose? 
For those who recognise the possibility of a Social 
Psychology, there can be but one answer. 
Primarily and directly, the subject, the owner as 
it were, of religious experience is the religious 
159 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

society, not the individual. Now the subject of 
psychical states and processes as conceived by 
Individual Psychology is in no small measure 
abstract and fictitious; and there is no harm in 
this abstraction so long as Individual Psychology 
knows what it is about and does not claim sub- 
stance for its shadow-pictures. It remains to 
add, in fairness, that Social Psychology too has 
to operate on a figment — a. figment which it is the 
business of Sociology to exhibit in its true nature, 
namely, as a methodological device of an abstract 
kind. Suppose we wish to explain the totemism 
of an Australian tribe. There is only one possible 
way to do this appropriately and essentially, 
namely to describe its general meaning and purpose 
by means of what Seignobos would call a formule 
d' ensemble.' Do we thereby commit ourselves 
to the assertion that this meaning and purpose 
exist? Most certainly yes in a sense. For whom, 
then, do they exist in this sense? Not for the 
individual tribesman taken at random, nor even 
for a leading elder, but for the society as a whole. 
It is absolutely necessary, if we would avoid the 
psychologist's fallacy, the mistake of letting our 
own feelings mix with what has to be impersonally 

^ Cf. Langlois et Seignobos, Introduction aux itudes historiques, 
1898, p. 244. 

160 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

observed, that we should fix our eyes throughout 
on the meaning and purpose totemism has, not for 
us, but for them, and for them not as so many 
individuals but as a group. Totemism is one of 
those psychical effects of intercourse which are 
methodologically, that is, for the working purposes 
of our science, specific. In terming such effects 
specific, however, Empirical Psychology implies 
no more than that they feel, think, and act in 
society otherwise than if apart, in a degree and to 
an extent deserving careful discrimination. It 
does not pronounce, because it has no methodo- 
logical interest in pronouncing, on the meta- 
physical question whether, as common sense 
inclines to hold, a society as such has no self- 
contained unitary soul, or, as Green and Bosanquet 
would affirm, the general will belongs to a collective 
soul of another and higher power than this soul 
of yours or mine. 

Social Psychology, then, would appear to be 
immediately concerned with the soul-Ufe of this 
abstraction or figment, the social subject. It is 
the business, however, of Sociology, understood 
as the general philosophy of the social sciences, 
in which capacity its concern is with method 
rather than results, to remind Social Psychology 

of the abstract and conditional nature of its 
II i6i 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

findings; since it is notorious that in science one 
is apt to hug one's pet abstraction so devotedly 
that one's fool's paradise comes in the end to be 
mistaken for the real world. Sociology, therefore, 
will do well to insist that, in dealing with such a 
subject as religion in the concrete variety of its 
historical manifestations. Social Psychology should 
qualify its results by making allowance for those 
of an applied form of Individual Psychology on 
the one hand, and for those of Social Morphology 
on the other. 

Thus in the first place, though its interest is 
primarily in the social subject. Social Psychology 
must never for an ingtaj it^ ignore the qualify ing 
fact of the existence of the individual subject. We 
should be very far from the truth were we to 
suppose that the savage society as such assigns 
any consistent meaning and purpose to its totem- 
ism, or, for the matter of that, were we to impute 
consistency of view and intention to the most 
intelligent and organic religious society the world 
has ever known. Souls communicate, but always 
imperfectly. They are always more or less at 
cross-purposes and cross-meanings. It is well to 
remember this when we feel inclined to deify 
society, the collective intelligence, the public 

conscience, the spirit of the age, and the like. 
162 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

Objectively viewed, no doubt, society dwarfs 
the individual, such is the impressiveness of its 
sheer mass and momentum. Subjectively con- 
sidered, however, society compares badly with the 
best individuals. The social mind is not merely 
hazy but even distraught, whether we look at it 
in its lowest manifestation, the mob, or in its 
highest, namely the state. At its best it is the 
mind of a public meeting, at its worst it is the 
mind of Babel. It is pointless to retort that 
society is always right. Society is always actually 
right (until physical catastrophe occurs), in the 
sense that whatever happens happens. But it 
does not know and will the ideally right, the right 
that is not actual but to-be-actualised, to anything 
like the same extent as do the best individuals. 
So much is this the case that the historian of 
civilisation, when he seeks to render the inward- 
ness of some development or movement, will 
be tempted to abandon the strictly social stand- 
point for another which may be termed the stand- 
point of the representative individual. Thus 
how describe the spirit of the French Revolution? 
Socially, it is a seething mass of cross-currents. 
In a representative individual, say Rousseau, 
at least we can distinguish the general set of the 

tide. At the level of primitive culture, however, 
163 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

where representative individuals are not easily 
met with, where, to our eyes at least, one man is 
very like another, the socialjnethod, the method 
of the composite photograph, may and must have 
the preference. Yet social Psychology cannot 
afford to forget that the individual members of 
a primitive society find it extremely hard to 
communicate successfully with each other, to 
understand what they are severally or together 
after. Hence there is a danger of ascribing a 
psychical tendency to a social movement where 
there is none. The very word tendency is ambigu- 
ous. It may stand for a drifting together, which 
is physical, or for a pursuing or at least a groping 
together, which is psychical. The latter kind of 
tendency is the only one that concerns a Social 
Psychology as such. If therefore the collective 
mind of a savage society is asserted to mean and 
purpose this or that, proof must be forthcoming 
that there actually is something of a mutual under- 
standing to this or that effect ; and it will always 
be wise to make allowance for the possibihty of 
alternative interpretations in regard to even the 
most firmly rooted custom, as well as for the 
possibility of interference on the part of that 
bugbear of Social Science, the individual who has 

a view of his own. 

164 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

A second qualifying circumstance to be con- 
stantly borne in mind when working from the 
notion of a social subject or collective mind is one 
that is likely to appeal more strongly than the 
other to those who are in sympathy with Con- 
tinental sociology. This is the fact already 
alluded to that socjgI _meaning s and purposes 
exist rnainIy_a^embodied in social ins titution s. 
We have claimed for the former at their best and 
most typical a certain functional independence 
that entitles them to be dealt with as phenomena 
essentially psychical. At the same time this 
independence, it is clear, can never be absolute; 
whilst often it is purely titular, the form, a thing 
in itself wholly soulless and material, riding in the 
place of the spirit. Moreover, religion in particular 
would seem of all the spiritual activities of man 
the most subservient to form; ritual is religion's 
second nature. Hence a Social Psychology must 
beware lest in religion or elsewhere it pretend to 
find Uving purpose where there is none or next to 
none. The organism may be lying dead in its 
shell. Or, as is the commoner case, whilst the 
shell persists intact, the original owner may have 
disappeared, and in its place another more or less 
inappropriate and alien tenant have crept in, to 
the confusion of honest naturalists unpractised 
165 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

in detecting sports. Nay, to pursue the metaphor, 
the empty shell may harbour quite a crowd of 
such casual immigiiants. Bad religion is quite 
capable of saying: This is what you must aU do; 
but each may think as he likes. Now it is perhaps 
the most characteristic feature of civihsation 
that it encourages the free meaning, giving it the 
power to dispense, not indeed with form altogether, 
but with this or that form whenever it is found to 
hamper. But primitive culture is form-bound 
through and through. A proof is the extreme 
difficulty with which ideas travel from tribe to 
tribe. So integrally are they embodied in the 
tribal customs that apart from those customs 
they are but empty ineffectual ghosts of them- 
selves. No wonder that many a sociologist says 
in his haste that they are the customs, neither 
more nor less. But Social Morphology cannot 
rightfully thus supersede Social Psychology any 
more than grammar can supersede logic. Yet 
Social Psychologj^joM^L-MJlk ^3d±h_S^^ 
phology ever at its elbow. Let us remember that 
social purposing has a psychical nature of a very 
low order, especially when, as at the level of 
savagery, it is not continuously fed by contribu- 
tions from the minds of enlightened individuals. 

The policy of an enUghtened individual may be 
i66 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

said to start from some more or less definite 
character, mental disposition, or whatsoever we 
like to call it. At least we cannot get behind 
this, however well-informed we may be as to the 
man's heredity and milieu; for us there is in 
greater or lesser degree spontaneous origination, 
a fresh cause to be reckoned with. All this is far 
less true of the action of a society as such. Never- 
theless, in a- civilised society genuine originators 
are to be found amongst the prophets and leaders 
and other representatives of the social tendency 
to progress, who, apart from their personal con- 
tribution to its furtherance, stand as vouchers for 
the diffused presence in the community at large 
of the power to originate by conscious and re- 
flective means. Turn, however, to primitive 
society, and self-caused ideas as moving forces 
are but rarely to be met with. Instead, we are 
for the most part thrown back on mental processes 
of the lowest order — say, Tarde's " cross-fertilisa- 
tion of imitations," or something equally cre- 
puscular in its psychical quality. Meanwhile, 
lest we civilised observers lose our way in these 
regions of mist, there before our eyes stands the 
rite, objective, persistent, of firm outline; and, 
however much we desire to psychologise, we are 

bound to cling to it as our makeshift standard of 
167 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 

reference. Nor is our convenience the only 
excuse for working round to spirit by way of form. 
For the savage society likewise the rite forms a 
sort of standard of reference. Out of it proceed 
the random whys; back to it go the indecisive 
therefores; and at this the common centre the 
meanings coalesce and grow ever more consistent, 
so that at last, perhaps, they react as one syste- 
matic idea on the supporting custom, and may 
henceforth rank as an originating psychical force 
of the higher order. Since, then, it falls to the lot 
of the social morphologist to describe the rite as 
externally presented, his ways and those of the 
social psychologist can never he far apart at the 
level of the lower culture. And, even if the 
latter has a distinct and from the human stand- 
point a higher task, at least he must check his 
account of the tendencies of the social mind by 
constant use of the data provided by his colleague. 
To sum up. Comparative Religion is a branch 
of empirical science which aims at describing in 
formulae of the highest generality attainable the 
historical tendencies of the human mind considered 
in its reUgious aspect. Its method will primarily 
be that of a Social Psychology ; since it will work 
directly from the implied or explicit notion of a 

social subject, to which the tendencies it describes 
i68 



COMPARATIVE RELIGION 

will be held to belong essentially. The use of this 
method wiU, however, be qualified throughout 
by a secondary attention to the methods of two 
allied disciplines, namely Individual Psychology 
and SocialMorpholQgy. On the one hand, 
allowance will be made for the effects of the 
indirectness and imperfection inherent in the 
communications of the individual members of 
society with one another, as also for the results 
of individual initiative. On the other hand, 
there wiU be taken into account the influence on 
sentiments, ideas, and purposes of social forms 
and institutions in their external character as 
raUsdng and transmitting agencies, or again as 
agencies that fossilise and pervert. 



169 



INDEX 



Native words in italics. Prtposed technical terms in inverted commas. 



Ammon, O., 146 

Andriamanitra, 12 

Animals, in religion, 23, 28, 71/, 

loi, 133 
"Animatism," 15, 16, 20, 135 
Animism, viii, x, S/i 21, 30, 117, 

132/ 
Anthropomorphism, 6, loi, 133 
"Apodosis" of spell, 64/ 
Arungquiltha, 60, 74/, 97, 98, 

102, 131 
Association of Ideas, see Magic 
Awe, xi, II, 13, 24, 29, 60, 113 

Badi, 60 
Baiamai, 17, 18 
Berkleianism, see Solipsism 
Blood, in religion, 29, 102, no 
Bosanqaet, B., 161 
Buddhism, 140 
Bnll-roarer, 17/ 
Buto, 129 

Causation, to tlie savage, 56/ 
Chief, in religion, 113, 122 
Churinga, 97 
Classificatory Method, ix, \f, 

"6/; 138 
Clodd, E., X 

Codrington, R. H., 71, n8/ 
Comparative Religion, I, 115/, 

143/. 168 
Corpse, 76, 78 
Ctavfley, E., 109/, 11 2» 
Credulity, see Primitive Credulity 



Daramtilun, 17, i8 

Death, to savage, 9, 25/, 66, 91, 

104, lopn 
Determinism, 145/, 151^; 154 
" Developed Magic," see Magic 
Divination, 42/, 83 
Dream, 6/, 9, 25, 70 
Durkheim, E., 150, 153 

Emotion, in magic, see Magic 

, , in religion, see Religion 
"End "of spell, 63/ 
Eng-A'i, xviii, 12 
Esotericism, loi 
Espinas, A., 145 

Farnell, L. R. , X 

Fetish, 117 

Food-taboos, 87, 91, 93, 104, 105, 
106 

Fowler, W. W.,x. 

Frazer, J. G., on magic and re- 
ligion, 31, 34/ 
59> 68, 77, 83 
I, on magic and 

science, xiii/, 

SS/. 61 
„ on taboo, 87, 91, 

95/, iD3« 
Genna, 103/ 
Green, T. H., 161 
Gubburra, 98 
Gumplowicz, L., 146 

Haddon, A. C, xiv«, 79» 
Hallucination, see Trance 



171 



THE THRESHOLD OF RELIGION 



Hantus, 8/ 
Hanison, J. , lOO 
Haitland, S. > xv, 60 
Heitmiiller, W., 71 
Heio-woiship, 140 
Hewitt, J., xiv, 130 
Hobhouse, L., 89 
Hodson, T., x, 1037; 11 1 
Hollis, A. C., xviii 
Hospitality, 112 
Howitt, A. W.,98 
Hubert, H., xv, 87, 90, 91 

Ideas, association! of, see Magic 
„ in religion,^;ee Religion. 
" Instrument " of spell, 63/ 74/ 
Ittha, 98 

Jbvons, F. B. , on magic, 40 

,, supernatural, 13 

„ taboo, 88y^ III/ 

foia, 98 

Kalou, 12 
Kant, I., 88 
Knots, 74, 91 

Lang, A., on Animism, 19 

„ gods as m^icians, 

57 

„ high gods, xvii, 17 

„ trance, 7 

Lapouge, G. de, 146 
Lonka-lonka, 6o», 75, 81 
Loria, A., 146 
Lovejoy, A., xv 
Luck, 2I», 99 

Magic, age of, 36, 39 

,, and religion, 31, 34/ 39, 

77, 81/, 131/ 
,, andscience, xiii;^55/, 61, 

76 
,, and taboo, 87 
,, anti-social character of, 

88, 97, 102 
,, as between persons, 58/ 



Mmic, association of ideas in, 40/, 

45. 87, 95/ 
,, developed, 35, 46, 69 
,, emotion in, 44, 70, 75, 81 
,, imitative, 43 
„ make-believe in, 48/, 51 
, , occultness of, 55, 69 
„ projectiveness of, 46, 49, 

SO, 62, 6s, 73 
„ rudimentary, 35, 46 
„ suggestion in, 45, 75 
, , symbolism in, 49, 64, 72/ 
„ sympathetic, 43, 88, 91 
, , verification in, 49/ 
„ will in, 60, 81, 99 

" Magico-religious," 90, 131/ 

" Magomorphism," loi 

Makutu, 130 

Mana, xv, 12, 27, 67, 69/, 77, 
86, 99, loi, 102, I03n, 105, 
108, 113, 114, 118/, 127/, 131/ 

Manitu, 24, 102, I03», 130 

Marx, K., 146 

Mauss, M., XV, 87, 90, 91, 152 

M'Dougall, W., xin 

M'Gee, W. J-, 125 

Mint, 130 

" Moral dimension " of the super- 
natural, 129/ 

Mung, 98 

Mungan-ngaur, 17, 18 

Mupam, 98 

Mythology, 16, 18, 75 

Names, 71/, 80 

Nature, to the savage, 11, 13, 14, 

Negative magic, 87/ 
' ' Negative mana," 114 
Ngai, see Eng-A'i 
Novicow, J., 145 

Oki, 130 

Orenda, xiv, 99, loi, 115, 130 
Origins, no absolute, 3, 6, 31 
Oudah, 100/, 106, 123/ 
172 



INDEX 



Parthenogenesis, io4« 

Plato, 140 

"Powers," 13, 19,24, 68 

Prayer, 34, 79/ 81 

" Fre-animistic," viii, xiii, i/, 11, 

14 
Preuss, T. K., X 
"Primitive Credulity," 45, 47, 

49.83 
" Projective," see Magic 
" Protasis," of spell, 64/, 79 
Psammetichus, 156/' 
" Psychologist's feillacy," 42, 160 
Pygmy, see Oudah 

Qube, 130 

Race, 146 

Ratzel, F., 147 

Religion and magic, see Magic 
, , and taboo, 90, 95, 96 
„ complexity of, 39, 82 
,, definition of, ix, 3^ 31, 

35 
„ emotion in, xi, 4 
,, ethical in Australia, 17 
,, ideas in, xi, 4, 144 
,, psychological view of, 

xvi, 1437; 15s/ 
,, social character of, xi, 
92, 103, 106, 15s/ 

Ritual, 167/ 

Kongo, I27«, 129 

" Rudimentary Magic," see Magic 

Sacer, 126 

Sacri, 126 

Sacrifice, 15 

Schmidt, W., xvi 

Science and magic, see Magic 

Secret society, I27« 

Seignobos, C, 160 

Skeat, W. W., 65, 71 

Snakes, in religion, 23, 24 

" Social Morphology," ijl, 162, 
166, 169 

Solipsism, of sav^e, 26 

Spell, and prayer, 34, 79/ 
„ function in magic, 61/ 



Spell,normal in magic, 53 

„ types of, 63/ 
Spencer, H., 135, 144/ 
Stones, in religion, 19/, S9i 79, 

120, 133 
Stranger, in religion, 111/ 
Sucking cure, 28, 43 
Suggestion, see Magic 
Sully, J., 26 
Supernatural, as object of religion, 

10/, 19, 23, 121, 123/, 137 
" Supernaturalism," 11, 19, 29, 60 
Sympathy , 43, 88, 91, 93, I04«, 1 1 2 

Taboo (tabu, tambu, iapu), xiii, 

86/, 102/, 107, 117, 126/ 
" Tabu-mana fotvaaXa," 137 
Tarde, G., 167 
Tarunga, 136 
"Teratism," I3« 
"Theoplasm,"66, 76 
Thomson, J., xviii 
Tindalo, 136/, 140 
Totemism, 22/ I03», 117, 160 
Trance, 7, 9, 25, 27/, 70 
Transmigration, 23 
Tregear, E., 99», 121, 130 
Tuana, 16 
Tuttdun, I7i 18 

Tyler, E. B., on animism, viii, x, 
xii, 5/, 117, 135, 

137 
,, on definition of re- 

ligion, ix 
,, on divination, 43 

,, on magic, 40 

,, on taboo, 86/ 91 

Vui, 20, 136/, 139 

fVakan {Wakanda), 12, 29, 32, 

125, 130 
Westermarck, E.,29, 89, 112 
Will, in magic, see Magic 
Woman, in religion, 29, 102/, 

109/, 112 
Wundt, W., viii, xii 

Zeus, xviii 

173 
