Odontornithes: A Monograph on the Extinct Toothed Birds of North America (Othniel Charles Marsh, 1880)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: Internet Archive scan of the 1880 government monograph (https://archive.org/details/odontornithesmon00mars). O. C. Marsh (1831-1899) - toothed birds: the fossil link between reptiles and birds.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

fi a) 
ey Hehe vi a 
i 
i 


Ha 
si pais 
a 


3, mae 
=e 
= Seas Sas 


a 


RU ip 
} ‘f ST bi j 
fe 
ans ae 4 
nS, a 
mp Hie 
Lifes 


‘ 
¥ 
i 
a 
¢ 
. 
= ‘ 
‘ - 
woe 
. 
we 
. 
+ 
‘ . 
‘ 
‘ 
‘ * 
‘ = 
. 
‘ 
rf 
. 
. 2 
Ps = 
. 
« 
‘ 
; : 
io 
, ‘ 
oa 
i‘ 
4 
, - 
ay g 
4 j “af ‘ 
, a ‘ 


An edition of this volume, identical except for title-page, 


was published in 1880 as 


Memoirs of the Peabody Museum of Yale College 
Vol. I 


and was printed for the Museum in New Haven, Conn. 


That edition is now exhausted. 


UNITED STATES GEOLOGICAL EXPLORATION OF THE FORTIETH PARALLEL. 
CLARENCE KING, GEOLOGIST-IN-CHARGE. 


ODONTORNITH ES: 


MON OGRA PEL 


ON THE 


EXTINCT TOOTHED BIRDS OF NORTH AMERICA; 


WITH THIRTY-FOUR PLATES AND FORTY WOODCUTS. 


BY 


OTHNIEL CHARLES MARSH, 


PROFESSOR OF PALZONTOLOGY IN YALE COLLEGE. 


SUBMITTED T0 THE CHIEF OF ENGINEERS AND PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE SECRETARY OF 
WAR UNDER AUTHORITY OF CONGRESS. 


WASHINGTON: 
GOVERNMEN! PRINTING OFFIOE. 
1880. 


\ 


TABLE OF CONTENTS. 


Page 
FRET Fer OR SV OL UM os Bo pea chee epee DE UY pat es ERO hs re HAR ys ah yA Vv 
AVABLE ROR, ( CONTE NTSSY se foe te yer sy pes cen i Aap ated sd PLA aie SL AN aa vii 
PASTOR LMUSTRA TIONS oe Satya ee Ne fea n ee Ne ates eae RLY SPACE yes eel ee ac ix 
IPE EFAGES (6s oS SE Scheele ROPES a ead cee UAL CE Oa Ly CEA xiii 
EDV ODUCTION se cots ane re NG Nett PK cea de ESE YEN tl re eee ew 1 
PART L—ODONTOLCA, 
Cuapter L Ere SU OR MEMES PR ORINTS se a ae anemone eee enrages 5 
<e I. he RE ETH OR eELESPERORNIS) = tates yee ny ae nee been nee anes 13 
< Il Tue Presacrat VERTEBR OF HESPERORNIS,-_--------------- 17 
<e TV. Tuer SsHourper-Girpie AnD Riss or HespERoRNis, -_--------- 57 
és Vv Tar Prtyic Axcu or Hrsprrornis,..---_------------------ 69 
ce VI Tse Cavpst VerRTEBRaz or HeEsPERORNIS,___._.-.--.------- Wh 
a Wit) lax ines ANDwH EET) OF pEESPERORNIS Wes eee eee ene eee eee 87 
oe VILL Tue Restoration or Husprrornis,-__---------------------- 111 
PART IL—ODONTOTORM &. 
Cuarren IX. Tue Sku anp TrEerrs oF IcHTHYORNIS,.-.___.._----------= 119 
C xs, Tue PRESACRAL VERTEBR& OF ICHTHYORNIS, __._-___--_---- UD 
oy XI Tue Suourper-Girpie or IcHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS, ------ 141 
ce XII. Tue Wines or IcuTHyornis AnD APATORNIS,---------------- 149 
a XU. Tue Petvic Arcu or Icutuyornis AND APATORNIS,-_--__--_- 161 
&: XIV. Tus Cavpat VERTEBRz OF JCHTHYORNIS,.---..._-_-_-_.---- 166 
& XV. Tue Lees anp Freer or IcuTruyornis anD APATORNIS, -.------ 171 
£ MVE Ulan RrsToraTroNlon el CHTHYORNIS st areas eee eae 177 
o: EVIE CON CLUSION, fhe cose ee en mete aise em IU en Mee a 185 
APpPENDIX.—SYNOPSIS OF AMERICAN CRETACEOUS Birps,_----___-_--_.-_____-- 191 


ILLUSTRATIONS. 


List oF Prares, PART I. 

B77. 7 hal De ee 2s SEO eae Rene ee SkuLtt anp Lower Jaws or HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Soo EDs taleeiem: ce EUR a cette! TEETH AND SKULL oF HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Soo bs ND es 2a arse ae Lien hee, Ne Sane CERVICAL VERTEBRZ OF H&ESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Soin MLV femetbrteen oe 3 cae eA phn ti CERVICAL VERTEBRZ OF H&ESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
eA EOE Niet ae TI CERVICAL AND DorsAL VERTEBR& OF HrspERORNIS REGALIS. 
Ce ae aes rere a ae SEA Scaputar ArcH AND STERNUM OF HeESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
on SW LIe Se Se ee res SrerNuM, Coracor, snp CLAVICLE oF HEsPERORNIS CRASSIPES. 
«VII. _---Huwerus, Scapuna, anp SHoULDER-GIRDLE oF HEsPERORNIS REGALIS. 
oe |b, Ciena bt Eee ae Riss anp UncinaTe Processes oF HrsPERORNIS REGALIS. 
LF Ge oe Nl eRe INN Le Nes COMTI eS ARLE) SEITEN Prtyis oF HersPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Coie.) DAP ic naps eRe Thee SUL R RZ a ER SAT EeA CIRO M PrEtvis oF HEsPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Fl Fatah gee AC 5 Pee oR a ee oe CAUDAL VERTEBR& OF HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
Ee Ce ANAT Dees BAL BY Byars Ee ey aera RR yp Neane Femur or H&rsPERORNIS REGALIS. 
SE ORV Be eh SEN PA Nae Siu rae Sy iaet Sa Ia sPl os LAME MS TIBIA OF H&SPERORNIS REGALIS. 
CONOEED. G1 Hi sp Mcera gM ee cm Im Oe A DS ParetLta AnD Freuta or HEsPERORNIS REGALIS. 
OO wal ORGIES Sa eae a SN pia SRE eae TARSO-METATARSAL OF HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
SE ERO VAL saat ape i ea TARSO-METATARSAL OF HEsPERORNIS CRASSIPES. 
cia hie) BCS siete I Mie ities a sora ei RN RU sea PHALANGES oF HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 
LD. GD. nee ear he PHALANGES AND First MerararsaL or Hrsprrornis REGALIS. 
COPE Se eth ted OER ane RIN) Aa ead REsTORATION OF HESPERORNIS REGALIS. 

PART II. 

25 op Gig fo. DG De om Rn eal pcdren Sxurt, Lowrr Jaw, anp Treru or IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR. 
COE ONOKAD Say ES 2 Soe neh eS eae eae Dh VERTEBR# AND SAcCRUM oF ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR. 
rsp. . 1 BD ene eee me ea ire eet ne OR SrernumM anp Coracoip or IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR. 
EC REN Vp certs eeu ee whys jhe Are ating ots AMM La WinG BONES OF ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR. 
Ct PED. ©. hi ee ie Am SERS ONS cen ee ar Femur anp Trs1a or IcHrHyornis DISPAR. 
LED PERG MEN cree ae op age ean A Ca La Pe Ee Ne pct gps ae ReEsTorRATION OF ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR. 
Hie DO. 0 0 ae ee hs CERVICAL AND DORSAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS VICTOR. 
“ XXVII.___Sacrum or Aparornis, AnD CaupaL VERTEBR& or IcHTHYORNIS. 
eee. 2.4 D. Cea see SrrernuM sND ScapuLar Arco or APATORNIS AND ICHTHYORNIS. 
COENEN ee fe ta pain Bele WING BONES oF APATORNIS AND IcHTHYORNIS. 
Bs PRONE Leys yy AE NE Ray? See WING BONES OF APATORNIS AND ICHTHYORNIS. 
Cee ERO NON Dope cect ceo 2 Lh iy Shae pas) MNT Ey Pe.iyis or APATORNIS AND ICHTHYORNIS. 
LC WER, 4.4 10 Se See Spee ap EE ae Sey sa Lea Bones OF APATORNIS AND JCHTHYORNIS. 
BEAD SORE Wtopeaesney tnt er ee AN Foal pa et Restoration or JIcHTHyornis vIcror. 


1X 


x ILLUSTRATIONS. 


List or Woopcuts. (Original.) Page 

FieurE 1. Outline of skull and brain-cavity of Hesperornis regalis,.-_-..---- 9 
se 2. Outline of skull and brain-cavity of Colymbus torquutus,---------- 9 
s 3. Cast of brain-cavity of young Alligator, _......-.----..-----2-- 9 
s 4. Vertical section of tooth of Hesperornis regalis,..-.-..--------_-- 15 
ce SEL ORIZOnt alle SeChION OLMSAINehGOO tise eye eneg seas oak enn ese uTLUaFE 15 
es Gs MMOOHN CE: YZRSDAROHNOS RAMOS aoa eee eee eos aes eae SaaS Ue 15 
re Uo Allon ore JORIS (ORIG T OS, = Se oe SE oe 15 
8. Thirteenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis,.......--------------- 35 
sf 9s Ehejsame\ vertebra, posterlon views 225222525 5- 2455 sass ese e ee 35 
«10. Fifteenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis,-.......-=.---2=--:54.- 39 
oe ie Sixteenth) vertebra of Hesperornis 19 alis, 5 a= ans a eee 41 
«12. Seventeenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis,......----2-----.--=- 43 
“18. Transverse vertical section of twentieth vertebra,___-___.______-- 49 
GE Step onlene Girdn Ole SF AGTORORMAS RAMS <8 coos Haas Seka eae eens 58 
«15. Sternum of Emeu (Dromaius Nove-Hollandie),.......---.------ 60 
Soren Grenier e vis O fob Cll Wane bau cape Dyan aan ey eat eg Seals hala en cena cle Ra val 
cianliemabelvisior «Gre bes (-0d1ce)s OCeedentalts) ae san i= ee ae es ee val 
a She Mheisames;seenwsirommsa bovier eae eyes ae a eee eye hea ep pear val 
Cm ONmmeExelvastOlm GeOCOCcy/ a kOMUa ONC 101. Sys meee epee pe eee 73 
SMD eee livil SO 1410700177100 9 2750 OLLSLULS Ma a aan oon ecg es OL 73 
“« 21. Twenty-fourth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis,........---------- 74 
<c~ 22. “Whe ‘same vertebra; posterior view, -=--==2.- 2222502205 5--25 52 v4 
oea2ouy Caudal verte breeOl Wl Cs Per OTILiSuneG CLLSa esse a ny a ete eee re 86 
«24, Transverse section of femur of Hesperornis regalis,_--..--.----_-- 88 
<i 5 aleran SVeTSeySCCULONZOl SAIC, See Mea nen ream ity, Seay ee aeam 88 
<> 26., Dransverse'section of tibia of Hesperonnts))2— = 22 Pea eee 91 
Ce MLLAN SWCTSESEC UL OME Oilers aiTI Cue ea espe ener ee ela ea 91 
ce 28> Quadrate*bone of Jchthyornis victory 82 sae ek he a 121 
«¢ 29. Outline of skull and brain-cavity of Ichthyornis victor, .--.------- WOR 
«80. Outline of skull and brain-cavity of Sterna cantiaca,...----------- 122 
Ge Bile Ser Onl Eve Hue obey GOT MOODS WACO 2 Sh eee 143 
«32. +Twelfth cervical vertebra of Jchthyornis dispar,_....----.------- 180 
(oo bhersamenvierte bra. seenstromthelsid cys ane ean eee 180 
“34, ‘Third cervical vertebra of Ichthyornis victor, =~ =_-_---_--22_22- 180 
« 35. ‘Thirteenth cervical vertebra of Hesperornis regalis,._--.__--__---- 180 
ie S6u hey same).vertebras POSberlone vale Waa = eee eas os eee eee 180 
«37. Tarso-metatarsal of Baptornis advenvis, --_.- 2-222-222-2252 5--- 193 
cre oS Mine samen bOnesyiSLOELVIG Ways ete ae oro ys erat en ce Ru egeeeng 193 
Cavs OM eh eysamm eybone si back-avd Gnvyacasyoceh eer een eee yep 193 
pened OSm et aStO tests SIC7207:100SKCROSSOI) CS ier ae ea eee el omen ee 196 


Poy ies © i? 


Tue present volume is the first of a series of Monographs designed 
to make known to science the Extinct Vertebrate Life of North America. 
In the investigation of this subject, the writer has spent the past ten years, 
much of it in the field, collecting, with no little hardship and danger, the 
material for study, and the rest in working out the characters and affinities 
of the ancient forms of life thus discovered. 

During this decade, the field work, extending from the Missouri River 
to the Pacific Coast, has so predominated, as the subject unfolded, that a 
plan of gradual publication became a necessity. The more important 
discoveries were briefly announced soon after they were made, but only 
where the specimens on which they were based admitted of accurate 
determination. The principal characters of the new groups were next 
worked out systematically, and published, with figures of the more 
important parts. When the investigation of a group is completed, the 
results, with full descriptions and illustrations, will be brought together in 
a monograph. ‘This system has been carried out with the Odontornithes, 
and will be continued with the other groups. The investigation of several 
of these is now nearly completed, and the results will soon be ready for 
publication. 

X111 


X1V ODONTORNITHES. 


The material is abundant for a series of monographs on the marvel- 
lous extinct vertebrates of this country, and the results already attained are 
full of promise for the future. A somewhat careful estimate makes the 
number of new species of extinct vertebrates, collected since 1868, and 
now in the Yale College Museum, about 1,000. Nearly 300 of these have 
already been described by the writer, and some have been noticed or 
described by other authors, but at least one-half remain to be investigated. 

Among the new groups brought to light by these researches, and 
already made known by descriptions of their principal characters, are the 
following, which will be fully described in subsequent volumes of the 
present series. 

The first Pterodactyles, or flying reptiles, discovered in this country, 
were found by the writer in the same geological horizon with the Odontorni- 
thes, described in the present memoir. ‘These were of enormous size, some 
having a spread of wings of nearly twenty-five feet; but they were espe- 
cially remarkable on account of having no teeth, and hence resembling 
recent birds. They form a new order, Pteranodontia, from the type genus 
Pteranodon. Of this group, remains of more than six hundred individuals 
are now in the Yale College Museum—ample material to illustrate every 
important point in their osteology. 

With these fossils, were found also great numbers of Mosasauroid 
reptiles, a group which, although rare in Europe, attained an enormous 
development in this country, both in numbers and yariety of forms. 
Remains of more than fourteen hundred individuals, belonging to this 
order, were secured during the explorations of the last ten years, and are 
now in the Museum of Yale College. 

The most interesting discoveries made in the Jurassic formation were 
the gigantic reptiles belonging to the new sub-order Sauropoda, including 
by far the largest land animals yet discovered. Another remarkable 
group of large reptiles found in the same formation were the Stegosauria. 
Other Dinosaurs from the same horizon, the ‘ Atlantosaurus beds,” 
show that this was the dominant form of vertebrate life in that age, and 
many hundred specimens of these reptiles are now in the Yale Museum. 


PREFACE. XV 


In a lower horizon of the same formation, the ‘ Sauranodon beds,” were 
found the remains of a peculiar new group of reptiles, the Sawranodontia, 
allied to Ichthyosauwrus, but without teeth. 

In the Eocene deposits of the Rocky Mountains, the writer discovered 
a new order of huge mammals, the Dinocerata. Remains of several 
hundred individuals were secured, and a monograph on the group will 
follow the present memoir. In the same formation were found the remains 
of another new order of mammals, the Tillodontia, in many respects the 
most remarkable of any yet discovered. In the same Eocene deposits 
were secured the first remains of fossil Primates known from North 
America, as well as the first Cheiroptera, and Marsupialia. Abundant 
material also was found in the same region to illustrate the genealogy of 
the Horse, and a memoir on this subject is in course of preparation. 


To General Sherman and General Sheridan, of the United States 
Army, my grateful acknowledgments are especially due, since without 
their continued assistance the investigations—of which the present volume 
is the first fruits—could not have been made. To the many other officers 
of the Army who aided me in the field during my various explorations, 
often in regions dangerous from hostile Indians, my sincere thanks are 
likewise due. 


For important aid in the preparation of the present volume, I desire 
to express my full acknowledgments to Mr. Oscar Harger, Assistant in 
Paleontology, in the Museum of Yale College. My thanks are also due 
to Mr. George Bird Grinnell, Assistant in Osteology, for much valuable 
assistance, especially while the volume was in the press. 


Yate Cottece, New Haven, Conn., June 16th, 1880. 


ay 
May 


INTRODUCTION. 


THE remains of Birds are among the rarest of fossils, and very few 
haye been discovered except in the more recent formations. According to 
present evidence, the oldest known Birds were imbedded in the Jurassic 
deposits of Europe, which have yielded three individuals belonging to the 
genus Archeopteryz, so well preserved that the more important characters 
can be determined. The only other remains of birds found in the Mesozoic 
of the Old World are a few specimens from the Cretaceous of England, 
which are too fragmentary to throw much light on the extinct forms 
they represent. 

The earliest traces of Birds hitherto found in the strata of this country 
are from the Cretaceous, although we may confidently predict their 
discovery in the Jurassic beds, if not ata still lower horizon. There is at 
present no evidence whatever that any of the three-toed impressions in the 
Triassic, described as the footprints of Birds, were made by Birds; and 
the proof now seems conclusive that nearly all of them are the tracks of 
Dinosaurian reptiles, bones of which occur in the same deposits. 

In the Cretaceous beds of the Atlantic Coast, and especially in the 
ereen-sand region of New Jersey, various remains of Birds have been 
found, and described by the writer! These fossils, although often in 
excellent preservation, occur mainly as isolated bones, and hence their near 


affinities have not as yet been determined with certainty. 


‘See Synopsis at the end of this volume, 


2 ODONTORNITHES. 


Along the eastern slope of the Rocky Mountains, and especially on the 
adjoining plains in Kansas and Colorado, there is a series of Cretaceous 
strata remarkably rich in vertebrate fossils. The deposits are all marine, 
and, away from the mountains, they lie nearly horizontal. They have 
suffered much from erosion, and are still wasting away, especially along 
the river valleys. These beds consist mainly of a fine yellow chalk and 
caleareous shale, both admirably adapted to preserve delicate specimens, 
and here have been found the extinct Birds which form the subject of 
the present memoir. 

The geological horizon of the known Odontornithes is in the Middle 
Cretaceous, and corresponds to the strata named by the writer the 
‘“‘Pteranodon beds.” The latter are included in sub-division number three, 
in Meek and Hayden’s section. The accompanying fossils are Mosasauroid 
reptiles, which are very abundant; Plesiosaurs, allied to Pliosaurus; 
Pterodactyles, of the genus Pteranodon ; and many Fishes. With these 
occur Rudistes, and occasionally Ammonites, Belemnites, and various: 
other Cretaceous invertebrates. 


The first Bird fossil discovered in this region was the lower end of the: 
tibia of Hesperornis, found by the writer in December, 1870, near the 
Smoky Hill River in Western Kansas. Specimens belonging to another 
genus of the Odontornithes were discovered on the same expedition. The 
extreme cold, and danger from hostile Indians, rendered a careful explora- 
tion at that time impossible. 

In June of the following year, the writer again visited the same 
region, with a larger party, and a stronger escort of United States troops, 
and was rewarded by the discovery of the skeleton which forms the type 
of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh. Various other remains of Odontornithes were 
secured, and have since been described by the writer. Although the fossils 
obtained during two months of exploration were important, the results 
of this trip did not equal our expectations, owing in part to the extreme 
heat (110° to 120° Fahrenheit, in the shade) which, causing sunstroke and 
fever, weakened and discouraged guides and explorers alike. 


INTRODUCTION. 3 


A considerable part of these Cretaceous deposits still remained unex- 
plored, and in the autumn of 1872, a third expedition through this territory 
was undertaken by the writer, with a small party. Additional specimens 
of much interest were secured, including the type of the genus Apatornis, 
and one nearly complete skeleton of Hesperornis,—an ample reward for the 
hardship and danger we incurred. 


The specimens thus secured by these various expeditions have since 
been supplemented by important additions, collected in the same general 
region by different parties equipped and sent out by the writer, who no 
longer could give his personal supervision to work in that field. The fossil 
Birds procured in this region since 1870, by these different expeditions, 
include remains of more than one hundred different individuals of the 
Odontornithes. ‘These are all in the Museum of Yale College, and form 
the material on which the present volume is based. 


A study of this extensive series of Bird remains brings to light the 
existence in this class of two widely separated types, which lived together 
during the Cretaceous period, in the same region, and yet differed more 
from each other than do any two recent birds. Both of these types 
possessed teeth, a character hitherto unknown in the class of Birds, and 
hence they have been placed by the writer in a separate sub-class, the 
Odontornithes. One of these groups includes very large swimming birds, 
without wings, and with the teeth in grooves ( Odontolce ), and is represented 
by the genus Hesperornis. 'The other contains small birds, endowed with 
great powers of flight, and having teeth in sockets (Odontotorme), and 
biconcave vertebree; a type best illustrated by the genus Ichthyornis. 
Other characters, scarcely less important, appear in each group, and we 
haye thus a vivid picture of two primitive forms of bird structure, as 
unexpected as they are suggestive. A comparison of these two forms 
with each other, and with some recent birds, promises to clear away many 
difficulties in the genealogy of this class, now a closed type; and hence 
they are well worthy of the detailed description and full illustration here 


devoted to them. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


The fossil birds now known from the Cretaceous deposits of this 
country are included in nine genera, and twenty species. These have 
all been described by the writer, and are represented, at present, by the 
remains of about one hundred and fifty different individuals. This is 
evidence of a rich and varied avian fauna in America during Mesozoic time, 


and likewise indicates what we may expect from future discoveries. 


ODO IN WORN hae: 


Am ete Sok 


©.) ONT ©@-E C-24e,. 


(Plates I-XX.) 


Clete diaues - It. 


THE SKULL OF HESPERORNIS. 


(Plates I-II and XX.) 

Ir is most fortunate for science that Hesperornis regalis—with a single 
exception, the oldest bird known—should now be represented by remains 
as complete as any fossil skeleton yet discovered, even in the later 
formations. Nearly all the bones of the specimens obtained were almost 
as perfect as in life, when first found in the matrix; although the more 
delicate parts were sometimes unavoidably broken in removal, and 
occasionally small fragments were lost. Many of the bones were near 
their natural position when discovered, and in such cases a special effort 
was made to preserve this position, or retain a record of it, by drawings. 
However difficult such a method of collecting really is, in the region 
explored, its importance will be fully appreciated by anatomists. 


Various remains belonging to about fifty different individuals of 
Hesperornis are now in the Museum of Yale College, and the most 
important of them are described in the present memoir. 


6 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue Sxuuu. (Plates I-II.) 


The skull of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh, is long and narrow, the rostral 
portion forming about two-thirds of its entire length (Plate I, figure 1). 
Viewed from above, the outline of the whole skull is wedge-shaped; and 
from the side, it presents a similar form, but somewhat more acute. It has 
a general resemblance to the skull of Colymbus torquatus, Briinnich (figure 
2, page 9); but the brain-case is smaller, and the facial portion more 
produced. The position and size of the orbits, and of the anterior nasal 
apertures, are similar; but the likeness soon ceases, for the type of cranial 
structure is essentially different in the two genera. 

In its more important characters, the skull of Hesperornis resembles 
that of the Ratite, or Struthious birds, and we shall find other striking 
evidences of affinity with this group in various portions of the skeleton. 
The base of the skull shows nearly all the cranial characters which 
Huxley, in his invaluable memoir on the Classification of Birds, lays down 
to distinguish the Ratite,! namely : 

(1.) The posterior ends of the palatines, and the anterior ends of the 
pterygoids are very imperfectly, or not at all, articulated with the 
basisphenoid rostrum. 

(2.) Strong ‘“ basipterygoid” processes, arising from the body of the 
basisphenoid, and not from the rostrum articulate with facets which are 
situated nearer the posterior than the anterior ends of the inner edges of 
the pterygoid bones. 

(3.) The upper, or proximal, articular head of the quadrate bone is 
not divided into two distinct facets. 


The occipital condyle in Hesperornis is cordate in outline, and its 
articular face is only moderately convex (Plate II, figure 4.) It is much 
less rounded than the condyle in the Ratite, and has a longer base. The 
articulation looks backward, and there is a shallow median groove on the 
upper half. The foramina in the base of the skull have the same general 


position as in recent Struthious birds. 


* Proceedings Zoological Society of London, 1867, p. 418. 


SKULL OF HESPERORNIS. 7 


The palatines resemble those of the Ostrich. They are long, slender 
bones, extending from their union with the pterygoids, parallel with the 
axis of the skull, and joining the premaxillaries. In one specimen, they 
lie nearly in position, the left palatine being immediately beneath the left 
maxillary. In front of their junction with the pterygoid, and just anterior 
to their widest expansion, there is a deep pocket, very similar to that in the 
palatine of the Ostrich. The anterior half of the bone is slender, and 
tapers gradually to the extremity. 


The vomers in Hesperornis are separate, as in lizards and a few existing 
birds. They are smaller than the palatines, and resemble the vomers of 
Rhea, more than those of the other Ratite. They are broadest at the base, 
which is obliquely truncated, and they taper gradually to the pointed 
extremity in front (Plate II, figure 8.) The thick posterior end may 
possibly have united with the pterygoid, as well as with the palatine. 
Both yomers are preserved in the skull figured in Plate I, but are displaced. 


The bones of the brain-case are ankylosed, but in other parts of the 
skull the sutures are distinct, and many of them are open, as in the Ostrich 
and other Ratite. The orbits are large, and placed near together. There 
is a well-ossified interorbital septum, which is perforated by a large 
fenestra. (Plate I, figure 1, of) The superior temporal arch is wanting, 
and the orbit was closed below by the strong quadrato-jugal bar. There 
was a large temporal fossa, bounded in front by a distinct postorbital 
process. There are well marked glandular depressions extending along 
the roof of the orbits, as in Colymbus and some other recent aquatic birds. 


The quadrato-jugal bone is slender, and its articular head fits into a 
deep pit in the lower end of the quadrate. There is a large triangular 
lachrymo-nasal fossa, between the orbit and the anterior nasal opening. 
The latter is long and narrow, and closed behind by the nasal bone. The 
suture between the frontals and the beak was quite open. The lachrymal 
bone is distinct, and articulates with the frontal, nasal, and maxillary. 
The nasal is deeply excavated in front for the anterior narial aperture, and 
below joins both the maxillary and premaxillary. 


8 ODONTORNITHES. 


The premaxillaries are elongate, and separate throughout their 
posterior two-thirds (Plate I, figure 5.) Their extremities touched the 
frontals. Their sides are deeply excavated for the anterior nares, and in 
front they are ankylosed, and form a long pointed beak, the end of which 
is somewhat decurved. This extremity, back to the nasal openings, has its 
surface pitted with irregular vascular foramina, indicating, apparently, that 
it was once covered with a horny bill, as in modern birds. 


The various cranial characters above described may nearly all be 
found in recent birds, if we search through different groups; but in 
Hesperornis the stout maxillary bones were armed with well developed 
teeth, a feature unknown in this class, before the discovery of the remains 
described in the present volume. These teeth were set in a-deep continuous 
alveolar groove, with only faint indications of separate sockets (Plate IT, 
figure 1.) ‘They resemble most nearly, in form and structure, the teeth of 
reptiles, and are fully described in the following chapter. There were no 
palatal teeth, and none in the premaxillaries. 


THE Brat. 


The brain of Hesperornis was quite small, and more reptilian in type 
than in any adult bird hitherto examined. On page 9, figure 1, the skull 
in this genus is represented, with the outline of the brain-cavity in position. 
The skull of the Loon is added in figure 2, also with a cast of the brain in 
its natural position, and life size. A comparison of the two, places the 
relative magnitude and proportions of the brain in each in strong contrast. 
The reptilian type is shown on the same page in figure 3, which represents 
in natural size a cast of the brain-cavity of a young Alligator. 

In Hesperornis regalis the olfactory lobes (figure 1, o/) were large and 
elongate, and their nerves passed out of the cranium by separate orifices, 
one on each side of the interorbital septum. The cerebral hemispheres 
(figure 1, c) were of very moderate size, much smaller, proportionally, 
than in any existing birds, and strongly resembling the corresponding part 


in some reptiles. The two lobes were narrow, and sub-ovate in outline, 


SKULL OF HESPERORNIS, 9 


Fig. 1. 


Figure 1. — Outline of skull and brain-cavity of MHesperornis regalis, Marsh; seen from above; three-fifths 
natural size. 
Fievre 2. — Outline of skull and brain-cavity of Loon, (Colymbus torquatus, Briinnich); same view; natural size. 
Figure 3. — Cast of brain-cavity of young Alligator ; seen from above; natural size. 
ol. olfactory lobes; c. cerebral hemispheres; op. optic lobes; cb. cerebellum; /. flocculi; m. medulla. 


2 ’ 


10 ODONTORNITHES. 


and were separated above by an osseous median crest, depending from the 
roof of the brain case. The optic lobes (figure 1, op) were large, and 
very prominent, and only slightly covered above by the cerebral hemis- 
pheres. Their similarity in size and position to the optic lobes of reptiles 
is especially noteworthy. The optic nerves were large. The cerebellum 
(figure 1, cb) was quite large, and reptilian in its general features. The 
flocculi were well developed, and lodged in distinct cavities. 


In contrasting the brain-cavity of Hesperornis with that of Colymbus, as 
shown together in figures 1 and 2, a striking difference is seen in the size, 
the latter being about three times the bulk of the former. The two skulls 
are represented of the same absolute length, for the purpose of direct 
comparison. If, moreover, the relative size of the entire skeleton in each 
case be likewise considered, the brain of Hesperornis would have even less 
than one-third the relative capacity of that of the Loon. As the two birds 
were evidently similar in shape, and habits, the comparison seems to be a 
fair one. Another marked difference in the brain of the two genera is seen 
in the relative size of the cerebral hemispheres, as represented in figures 1 
and 2. The cerebral lobes of Colymbus are very large, and much expanded 
transversely ; and it is in this portion of the brain that the real difference 
of size is most apparent. 

These facts are especially important, since they tend directly to show 
that the essential principles of the law of brain-growth, established by the 
writer in extinct mammals, applies also to birds. This law, briefly stated, 
is as follows: 

1. All Tertiary mammals had small brains. 


wo 


There was a gradual increase in the size of the brain during this 
period. 

3. This increase was confined mainly to the cerebral hemispheres, 
or higher portion of the brain. 

4. In some groups, the convolutions of the brain have gradually 
become more complicated. 

5. In some, the cerebellum and the olfactory lobes have even 


diminished in size. 


SKULL OF HESPERORNIS. 11 


6. There is some evidence that the same general law of brain- 
growth holds good for Birds and Reptiles, from the Cretaceous to the 
present time.! 

The concluding suggestion was in part based on facts now published 
for the first time in the present memoir. 


Tue Lower Jaws. (Plate T, figures 2--4,) 


The lower jaws are long and slender, and were thickly set with teeth. 
The rami were united at the symphysis in front only by ligament, a feature 
unknown in modern adult birds. There is an imperfect articulation 
between the splenial and angular elements, which probably admitted of 
some motion ; and all the other sutures are open, or distinguishable. There 
was apparently a mandibular foramen. There is a well marked shallow groove 
on the outer superior margin of each dentary bone, for the reception of the 
maxillary teeth, when the jaws were closed. (Plate I, figure 3, b.) The 
angle of the mandible extends backward but a short distance beyond the 
articular face for the quadrate, and the extremity is obliquely truncated. 


The following measurements of the skull of Hesperornis regalis are 
taken mainly from the very perfect specimen figured in Plate I, and 
recorded as number 1206, in the Geological Catalogue of Yale College 
Museum. The other dimensions are derived from number 1207, of the 
same Catalogue, to which reference is made in all the numbers of specimens 


given in the descriptions that follow : 


Measurements of Skull. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1206.) 


Length of skull, from occipital condyle to end of premaxillary,_...--.---.---- 257.0" 
Greatest transverse diameter, behind temporal fosse,..-.-.-.-.---.----------- 61.0 
Least transverse diameter, between temporal fosse,.....-..-----.----------- 30.0 
Greatest transverse diameter, between temporal fossze and orbits,..---..------ 42.0 
Least transverse diameter, between orbits,..------ .-------+--.-+-=--------- 9.0 
Transverse diameter of premaxillaries, at anterior nares,--------------------- 9.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of anterior nares, _---_._-_- -----_-=-------=--2-_ 55.0 


? American Journal of Science and Arts, vol. viii, p. 66, July, 1874; and vol. xii, 


p- 61, July, 1876. 


12 ODONTORNITHES. 


iimamsversexdiameter of mantenior Naressnss soe esa soe eee en 
Extent of premaxillary in front of anterior nares,--..-..--------------------- 
itiansvierse: diameter of occipital’ condylesssos = seen] sae oes sees nee eee eee 
Vertical diameter of occipital condyle, -------------- Seen ee eos aes 
ransversen diameter ofmoramen magnum see ee sees see nee nee se Seen 


Measurements of Skull. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1207.) 


transverse Miameteriotxoccipitalicondy)eyses=ea=asee eases eae a eee eee ene 
iWerticalidiametenotxoccipitallmcon diy] ete am seem pene eee es 
Mransverse diameter of. foramen magnum,-—.------------==-----=--------5- 
Distance between external margins of quadrate articulation,----------------- 
Greatest width of skull, behind quadrate articulations,.-....-.-- --.-------- 
Transverse diameter of quadrate articulations, ....-...-.------------------- 
Antero-posterior diameter of quadrate articulations,.-.----------------- Here 
Hen ot hOhquadra tetany me nee ore ae Minter homie, eee Mee eine ates are 
Mransyerseydianreterno fie pro xd al ker Cl same ee aera ae aa ee 
AMtero-posterion diameter Or proximal endss see eee see sees ee see aa ae 
iiransverse)diametermofushatt, at emid dese ese sees semper 


Vierticalediameterof pititor quadrato-jucalyes=sesee sacs sees eee ee eae ee ae 


Antero-posterior diameter of pit for quadrato-jugal, ...-..-.------.---------- 
Longest diameter of inferior condyle of quadrate, ........-.----------------- 


Measurements of Lower Jaw. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1206.) 


Meno thvorwlOwergawaeesclieee ten on smeje ete ane we ya cee Saerneee yao s 
Greatest) vertical diameter lof lower jaws 2s ss-cesee sae 2s eee sees ee 2 eo 
EixcentiolpalvecolarigroOves sae saecn ase neces ate omen ee ep eretar tee rts cea 
Depihvotealveol ary oroove wesc ae eee eae eee aaa eee 
Greatest diameter of posterior facet for articulation with quadrate, .-.--------- 
Least diameter of posterior facet for articulation with quadrate,....--..------- 


9.6™™ 
88.0 
10.0 

6.0 

9.0 


a0 
8.0 
12.5 
49.0 
55.0 
8.0 
6.5 
32.0 
9.0 
7.0 
4.0 
6.0 
4.0 
‘12.9 


257.0"™ 
25.0 
138.0 
5.0 
14.0 
5.0 


CEA PR il: 


THE TEETH OF HESPERORNIS. 


(Plates I, II, and XX.) 


THE absence of teeth has long been regarded as one of the best 
distinctive characters of Birds; since teeth are present in some members of 
all the other classes of vertebrates. All existing Birds have the jaws 
covered with a horny sheath, which is usually smooth. In some groups, 
this beak-covering is more or less serrated, and in a very few forms the 
elevations correspond to slight projections of the bone beneath, but no 
indications of true teeth have yet been found. This may all be said like- 
wise of existing Turtles. 

Geofiroy Saint-Hilaire and others have, indeed, detected in the young 
of some recent birds vascular papillae which resembled those of embryonic 
teeth; but they were apparently portions of the undeveloped horny beak. 

The teeth of Hesperornis are true teeth, with their distinctive charac- 
ters as well marked as those of any reptile. In the upper jaw, they are 
confined to the maxillary bone alone, the premaxillary being entirely 
edentulous. In the lower jaw, the teeth extend from very near the anterior 
extremity of the ramus along the entire upper border of the dentary bone. 

The teeth above and below were implanted in a continuous groove, 
somewhat like those of Ichthyosaurus. From the sides of the groove, 
slight projections extend between the teeth, thus forming faint indications 
of sockets; but these projections are not sufficient to materially lessen the 


width or depth of the groove. (Plate II, figure 11). 
13 


14 ODONTORNITHES. 


The teeth were evidently held in position by cartilage, which permitted 
some fore and aft movement; but lateral motion was much restricted by 
the depth and narrowness of the groove, and the large size of the fangs. 
With the decay of this cartilage after death, the teeth readily lost their 
erect position, and became more or less displaced. 

In the best preserved specimen of Hesperornis regalis (number 1206), 
most of the teeth had fallen out of the grooves, when found, and were 
lying scattered along beside the jaws, as often seen in specimens of 
Ichthyosawrus. 'The embryonic sockets, in this specimen, indicate that 
there were fourteen functional teeth in the maxillary bone, and _thirty- 
three teeth in the corresponding ramus of the lower jaw, as shown in 
Plate I, figures 1-4. In Hesperornis crassipes (wumber 1474), a number 
of teeth were likewise found in position in the jaws, but the exact number 
originally in each could not be determined. 

The teeth of Hesperornis were gradually replaced by successional 
teeth, and this took place in a manner very similar to that in some reptiles. 
The germ of the young tooth was formed.on the inner side of the fang of 
the tooth in use, and, as it increased in size, a pit for its reception was here 
gradually made by absorption. The old tooth at last became undermined, 
and was expelled by the new one, which occupied the same position, the 
number of teeth thus remaining the same. , 

The teeth of Hesperornis have conical pointed crowns, covered with 
smooth enamel, and supported on stout fangs. In form of crown and base, 
they closely resemble the teeth of Mosasauroid reptiles, one of which is 
represented on page 15, figure 7, for comparison. The outer and inner 
surfaces of the crown are separated by sharp ridges, which are without 
serrations. The outer side is nearly plane, and the inner surface strongly 
convex. 

The crowns of the teeth are mainly composed of firm dentine, invested 
with a layer of enamel. The relative proportions of these are shown in 
figure 4. The pulp cavity was large, and in the specimen above repre- 
sented. was filled with calcite. The coronal walls of this cavity are smooth, 
and well defined. ‘The fang consists of osteo-dentine. 


TEETH OF HESPERORNIS. 15 


Fig. 4. Fic. 6. 


Ficvre 4. — Vertical section of tooth of MHesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1206). 

Fiecure 5. — Horizontal section of same tooth; both enlarged thirty-two diameters. 

Fiavre 6. — Tooth of Hesperornis regalis (No. 1206); enlarged eight diameters. 

FIGURE 7. — Tooth of Mosasaurus princeps, Marsh; half natural size. 
a, enamel of crown; 6. dentine; c. pulp cavity in crown; 0’ root of tooth; c’. absorbed cavity in root, 
d. young tooth; ss. intersection of horizontal and vertical sections. 


16 ODONTORNITHES 


The layer of enamel gradually increases in thickness from the base 
of the tooth to the apex, as shown in figure 4, a. It is also somewhat 
thicker over the anterior cutting edge than in other portions of the base 
of the crown, as indicated in figure 5. The line of junction between the 
enamel and the dentine is everywhere sharply defined. The enamel is 
dense and hard, the calcification having proceeded so far, in the specimens 
examined, that the constituent fibres could not be distinguished. The 
external surface of the enamel is nearly smooth, but marked by delicate 
strie. There is no indication of cement on the coronal surfaces. 

The dentine, which forms the mass of the crown, shows a well marked 
structure in both the vertical and horizontal sections, figures 4 and 5, 0. 
It is firm and compact, and the calcigerous tubes are well defined. Near 
the base of the crown, they radiate horizontally, and in transverse section 
appear nearly straight, as shown in figure 5. Higher up in the crown, 
these tubes curve upward, diverging from the axis of the tooth less and less, 
until beneath the apex they become nearly parallel. In the dentine, there 
are distinct concentric lines of growth. These are seen near together and 
numerous in transverse section, figure 5, while those which appear in the 
vertical section, figure 4, are fewer in number, and more strongly marked. 


The teeth of Hesperornis, taken by themselves, appear to resemble 
more nearly the detached teeth of Mosasauroid reptiles, than any others 
known, not excepting the teeth of Ichthyornis, which will be fully described 
in a subsequent chapter. The teeth in the latter have compressed crowns, 
and are implanted in distinct sockets. In all their main features, the teeth 
of Hesperornis are essentially reptilian, and no anatomist would hesitate 
to refer them to that class, had they been found alone. Combined with 
the other reptilian characters of Hesperornis, noted elsewhere in the present 
volume, they clearly indicate a genetic connection with that group. 


CEA AER pias 


THE PRESACRAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 
(Plates III-V and XX.) 


‘Iy the type specimen of Hesperornis regalis, a number of vertebre 
were preserved from various parts of the series, including nearly all of the 
caudals. Other individuals of this species, since discovered, have furnished 
all the missing vertebrze, except the atlas. An examination of the occipital 
condyle and of the anterior parts of the axis leaves little doubt as to the 
form and proportions of the atlas, so that the entire axial skeleton can now 
be determined with almost absolute certainty. 

The presacral vertebree of Hesperornis resemble in their more 
important characters the corresponding vertebra of existing birds. The 
articular faces of the centra conform strictly to the modern ornithic type, 
an interesting fact, as we shall see, when we compare them with the 
vertebree of another group of Odontornithes, from the same geological 
horizon. 

The neck of Hesperornis regalis was long and slender. Including the 
atlas and axis, there were seventeen cervical vertebre ; and twenty-three 
in all between the skull and sacrum. The last three cervicals have free 
ribs, and would be called cervico-dorsals by some anatomists, and dorsals 
by some others. As the eighteenth vertebra is the first united to the 
sternum by the intervention of a sternal rib, it seems best to regard it as 


the first dorsal, and this view will be adopted in the present volume. 
3 il! 


18 ODONTORNITHES. 


There are fourteen vertebrz in the codssified sacral series represented in 
Plates X and XI, and there were twelve more in the tail, as shown in Plate 
XII, making the entire column consist of forty-nine vertebre. This is a 
very large number for this class, and is equaled in but very few recent birds. 

None of the vertebree of Hesperornis were ankylosed together, except 
in the sacral series, and at the extremity of the tail. None of the vertebree 
contained pneumatic openings, although some were lightened by medullary 


cavities. 


THe Atias anp Axis. (Plates III and XX.) 


The atlas was evidently a short ring of bone, very similar to the first 
vertebra in modern aquatic birds. Its articular cup for the reception of 
the occipital condyle was not deep, and was cordate in outline. The atlas 
articulated with the axis by well developed zygapophyses above, and by a 
crescent-shaped tubercle below. The centrum of the atlas is codssified 
with the axis, as the odontoid process. 


The axis (Plate III, figure 1) is well preserved, and resembles the 
corresponding vertebra of the Loon (Colymbus torquatus, Briin.); but it is 
one-third larger, and a much stouter bone. The posterior articular face is 
much less oblique, being nearly vertical. The odontoid process is 
relatively shorter and broader, and its articular face is more extended 
backward, along the median line below. This process is slightly concave 
above, in prolongation of the floor of the neural canal. The centrum of 
the axis is expanded at each end, for its articular surfaces. The anterior 
expansion is considerably greater, and somewhat more gradual, than the 
posterior; and, at the least expanded portion, its thickness is less than two 
millimeters. The anterior articular surface is reniform, the upper. outline 
being emarginate, to make room for the base of the odontoid process. The 
articulation is concave in both directions, but much more deeply concave 
vertically than transversely. 

_ The anterior portion of the centrum of the axis is deeply excavated 
at the sides, nearly on a level with the floor of the neural canal, for the 
transmission of the vertebral artery. A very delicate bridge of bone 


CERVICAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 19 


may have existed here, completing the foramen. In the succeeding 
cervical vertebra, this foramen is well developed, and may conveniently 
be termed the lateral foramen. It is formed by the diapophysis above and 
the parapophysis below, and closed externally by their union with the 
intervening pleurapophysis. In life, this aperture probably protected both 
the vertebral artery and vein, and the main trunk of the sympathetic 
nerve, as in most recent birds. A hypapophysis extending over about the 
posterior half of the centrum is indicated, but is not preserved. The 
posterior articular surface is nearly square in outline, with rounded corners. 
It is only slightly oblique, the lower portion projecting but little beyond 
the upper margin. As in ordinary birds, it is distinctly concave vertically, 
and convex transversely. 

The neural arch was surmounted by a well developed neural spine, 
which is broken off in the present specimen. The pre-zygapophyses are 
small, oval, convex facets, slightly raised above the surrounding bone, and 
looking outward and upward at an angle of about 45°. The post- 
zygapophyses are much larger. They are concave, and look nearly 
directly downward. The neural canal is somewhat depressed, perhaps in 
part by crushing. The post-zygapophyses extend within about two milli- 
meters of the posterior articular surface of the centrum. They are 
strongly supported above by a ridge arising upon the side of the neural 
arch, and running outward and backward over the post-zygapophyses. 
No vascular or pneumatic foramina are visible upon this vertebra. 

This description of the axis of Hesperornis regalis is derived mainly 
from the specimen, number 1207, in which the series of presacral vertebree 
is nearly complete. The following measurements are taken from the same 


vertebra: 
Measurements of Axis. (No. 1207.) 

Length of centrum, including odontoid process, ._--_.---------------------- 29.9™™ 
Menetin of cen trtiinis: aes seis a) se Set Dae pee avy er wee ie rene ete eM 21.0 
Least transverse diameter of centrum (approximate),_--..-.-.--------------- 2.0 
Bengtitrotsod ontoidiprocess macs =m ete = eae ae tte eee 8.0 
Transverse diameter of odontoid process, at base,__-.-.----------------~----- 7.2 
Vertical diameter of odontoid process, at base,....-..----------------------- 4.0 


Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,-.--.--.------------- 13.0 


20 ODONTORNITHES. 


Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,.----..-._.-.---------- 6.0™™ 
SUperloly oe ee eseees 9.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centr median} sae eese aes 7.0 
iMterlores eae 8.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,..---.---------------- 8.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,..----------------- 13.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses (approximate), .__--- 24.0 
Greatest diameter of pre-zygapophyses,...... ---.-.-2--52 2222222222252 20- 5.5 
iGeast) diameter) of pre-zygapophyses,= 2220222522222 ee ee eee 4,0 
] 1 yo 
Diameters of pstaysapophyses, | Novtantaly ns 
ene throtslooroteneuralecam alse ses ese a= es eee eee eee ae oe eee 30.0 
Length of roof of neural canal (approximate),.......---.-2.-.=----------.-- 26.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior opening of the neural canal,....------------- 7.5 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of the neural canal, ---.--------------- 6.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior opening of the neural canal,._-.------------ 8.8 
Vertical diameter of posterior opening of the neural canal,......------------ 5.0 


Tue Tuirp VERTEBRA. (Plate III, figure 2.) 


The third vertebra of Hesperornis regalis resembles that of the Loon, 
but has the articular faces of the centrum less oblique. The centrum is 
compressed laterally, as in the axis, becoming quite narrow at and behind 
the middle; then expanding suddenly, for the posterior articulation. The 
anterior articular face is supported by a more gradual expansion. The 
face itself is somewhat oblique, looking downward at an angle of less than 
30°. It is concave transversely, and convex vertically, as in ordinary 
birds. Immediately behind this articulation, the under surface of the 
centrum is excavated. Beyond the excavation, the hypapophysis gradually 
becomes prominent, quite thin in front, but expanded and flattened into a 
button-shaped process, below the posterior articulation. The latter face is 
very similar in shape to that of the axis, but is somewhat larger, as shown 
by the measurements, and slightly more oblique. 

The neural arch bore a less powerful spine than that of the axis. 
The pre-zygapophyses are much longer, and larger than in the axis, and 
they look inward and upward, instead of outward, as in that vertebra. 
They are, however, turned only slightly inward. The post-zygapophyses 
are less elongated than the pre-zygapophyses; and, as in the axis, are 
strengthened by a ridge beginning about the middle of the upper part of the 


CERVICAL VERTEBR2& OF HESPERORNIS. 21 


neural arch, and continued outward and backward. Between this ridge 
and the neural spine, the surface of the vertebra is excavated posteriorly, 
but the posterior edge of the neural arch is considerably thickened, and 
rises in a ridge connecting the post-zygapophyses with the base of the 
neural spine. Over the post-zygapophyses, this ridge is developed into a 
projecting tubercle. The lateral foramen for the vertebral artery is small, 
and over-arched by a strong bridge of bone, from which a short, stout, 
obtuse pleurapophysis projects backward, and somewhat downward. The 
floor of the foramen is continued as a groove for a short distance backward 
upon the side of the vertebra, bounded below by a well developed nearly 
horizontal ridge. A similar, but much smaller, ridge is seen above; and, 
over this, a slight ridge appears on some specimens, extending a little 
farther back on the vertebra. 

The measurements given below show the principal dimensions of the 
third cervical vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, in the type specimen, number 
1200, and in two other skeletons: 


Measurements of Third Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Length of centrumy 2) seen ls ss shee ae ae Se ey gales 22.5m™™ 
Transverse diameter of-anterior articulation of centrum,.-.-------:------- 9.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,’._-.--------------- 6.0- 8.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.-.-----.-------- 9.8— 8.2 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,-.---.-.-.---------- 7.0- 9.6 
Transyerse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .-.----.-------- 19.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across lateral foramina,------.------.--.- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, .----.---------- 22.5-21.0 
Diameters of pre-zy Cc apophiy Ses; erate ae ea ee eee eee aos OO nO 
rameters On Post-zyC1poOphy Sess =e ae eis el eee eee 25 I= 80 
hength of floor of neuralicanal, := 32222 soo asc: a5 see Coane eee ee BOD 
Genet ofp noo ofeneunalycan aly mcrae eee ale ene eee 21.0 
ibepapaday Ort lin qre qe ON IEh -ocs chee Soy one poowece cena ost oH oneD cobeoscoce 6.5 
Measurements. (No. 1206.) 
[Gib Gn GON, S222 o-5 Solsco sues Sonseeseat cnbonososuaasaces se 24,9mm 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_---.------------- 10.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,-.--------------- 9.0-— 9.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.- -..------------- 6.0— 8.0 


‘ Where two measurements of the same part are given together, as in this case, they 
refer to the greatest and least dimensions of the portion named. 


22 ODONTORNITHES. 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 2359mm 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---------------- 29.0 
Diameters OhepLe-zyjio ap OPV SCS espe eee ee eae eee eee ee 7.0-11.0 
Diameters of post-zygapophyses,..-.--.-------------- eG cregedee ee IN NOY Seg a 8.0-10.0 
Menethvolenoorofeneuralkc mallee meee eee sea eee eee 24.0 
Weriicalediametersof latenaletorameny eee ==> eee eee ane eee eee 4.0 
Menethvotep)] cunapophiysi steers esses eee eee eae en eee ee 14.0 
ihength ot free: portion\of pleurapophysis)_=--=22---2--- 2-222 22- 22 See 10.0 
Extent of hypapophysis below vertebral articulation,--...--.------------- 6.0 
Diameter of terminal tubercle of hypapophysis,----.------. -------------- 7.5 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


enlosth@ofacon tau ese a et ete ee ire lye ad AR a a ural eat 2250 ew 
east transverse aiametervon centrumye sss) eee se oe eee eee eee 1.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------ 10.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_--.---------------- 5.2 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,-------.-.-.----- 8.6- 9.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,------------------- 7.2— 9.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,-------.-------- 18.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across. post-zygapophyses, ------.-------- 28.0 
Diamdetersrotspre=Zyjoap Op Wy SCS see ees oe eae ae eee eee 8.0— 4.0 
WD iameterstolpOst=Ziyj2ApOp My SeS ye see eee ee ee ee ee ee 7.5— 8.6 
eno rhvotell oorgofemeunalyca mal): meee sere ese ra ea rte pee 22.0 
enothvoferoofmotememnale cama ers ey te a ees ne eng me ey a yes eee eee ge a 22.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,.---..------------ 7.5 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neural canal, ..-.-...-------.---- 6.0 


THe FourtH Verresra. (Plate III, figure 3.) 


The fourth vertebra resembles the third, but is larger and longer. 
The centrum is much excavated in the postero-lateral region, so as even 
to become somewhat translucent over a small area, about seven millimeters 
in advance of the posterior articulation. The latter is supported upon a. 
very abrupt expansion of the centrum. In front, the centrum thickens 
quite evenly toward the anterior face. The under surface of the centrum 
presents, immediately behind the anterior articulation, a rather deep 
triangular fossa, the apex of the triangle pointing backward. Behind this 
fossa, the lower surface is nearly flat, with an acute median ridge, which 
divides below the posterior articular face, and sends, downward and out- 


ward, two somewhat triangular ear-like processes. The articular ends of 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 23 


the centrum are much as in the third vertebra, being slightly larger, and 
presenting about the same obliquity. 

The neural arch is strong, flattened above, and strengthened behind 
by a ridge, as in the third vertebra. The neural spine extended more than 
half the length of the neural arch, and terminated behind just in advance 
of a median notch. The anterior zygapophyses are elongated, and are 
directed forward, upward, and a little more inward than in the third 
vertebra. The post-zygapophyses are strengthened by a lateral ridge, as 
in the preceding vertebra. The upper surface of the neural arch on each 
side of the spine is less depressed posteriorly. The lateral foramen was 
larger than in the third vertebra, and the pleurapophyses were longer, and 
directed nearly horizontally backward. In one specimen (number 1206), 
the median hypapophysial ridge is produced near the middle of the 
centrum into a conspicuous pointed hypapophysis. 

The following measurements are taken from the fourth cervical 
vertebra of two individuals of Hesperornis regalis, and one, number 1474, 


of Hesperornis crassipes : 


Measurements of Fourth Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Length: ofvcentrunny ee a eee ee dagae Ie eS Leta haps) Be Oa ual 26.0™™ 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,--..--.----«------ 12.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,-_.--.----.--------- 5.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -.---.------ cles a 9.0-12.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, .--------.--- Ss OU aS 7.0— 9.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - --------- Nese ee 19.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, .--..----------- 26.0 
Diameters obipre-zycapophyses, se srs saat sie eae Seta eee 7.0-12.0 
Diameters off post-nycapopliy Sessa =a eae eee eye een Oil 
eng th ofptioomoteneural canal asses sarees epee eee 26.0 
heneth- oie pl cunupopiysisssct= ces eerste arene ere ete etter trate 21.0 
Length ofxee portion’ of, pleurapophysis,2s-= 222 = 22) j2= ee eee 17.0 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


IDEA (ennai oh Sees Oe ee eS cn sor socedooadobeoos 24,9™™ 
east transverse diameter. of centrum seo ea eee eee eee ee eee 0.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,---...-.---.-------- 11.8 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,__.------------------ 4.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, .--.----.-------. 9.0-11.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,......-------.---.--- 8.0-10.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---.------------ 21.0 


24 ODONTORNITHES. 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,.--------------- 29.05 
Greatestidiameter ol; pre-zycapophyses,--see en aseees eee ee aes sees eee 9.0 
Least diameter of pre-zygapophyses,----_.--------..-------------------- 4.5 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophyses,-._-....._.--.----.------------=- 9.6 
Least diameter of post-zygapophyses,..._...--.-.-.-.------------------- 8.2 
ILENE O Tikoor OF menue Cae to ee ook oa dooaaso es oocousaaeuede 24.5 
Len OF ROOE OF MeN CEMA, = 66 oo oe Sek ee coo cess boas cdscasuoeeas. as 24.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,------------------ 8.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,..__.._-_------------ 5.2 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,----------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,.--.--------------- 6.0 


Measurements. (No. 1474.) 


keno thxofscentGum’ =: sehacss be seme ee ates eres See a eee ete 24,9™™ 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,.-----------.------- 5.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,__---------.----- 11.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_----.------------- 7.5-11.0 
ene thvoisfiooworeneuralicanalsss =e seme sees eee eee eee eee eee 26.0 


Tue Firra Vertesra. (Plate III, figure 4.) 


The fifth vertebra is a little longer and larger than the fourth, to 
which in most respects it is similar. The centrum, however, is not so 
much excavated in the postero-lateral region. The ridge above the groove 
entering the lateral foramen is more pronounced. The ventral side of the 
centrum is less deeply hollowed out behind the anterior articulation, and 
the depression blends more gradually with the general under surface, which 
bears no hypapophysis, but is excavated throughout its length. The 
articular surfaces are much as in the fourth vertebra, with the inferior por- 
tion of each a little more expanded. The pre-zygapophyses slope 
somewhat inward, and the post-zygapophyses are surmounted by a 
tubercle pointing outward and backward. The lateral foramen is larger 
than in the fourth vertebra, and the pleurapophysis longer. The base of 
the neural spine stops a little short of the anterior margin of the roof of 
the neural canal, and terminates at a notch posteriorly. 

The measurements given below of the fifth cervical vertebra of 
Hesperornis regalis are derived from two different specimens, numbers 
1206 and 1207. 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 25 


Measurements of Fifth Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Thenabh) of: cen trem tees esses 2 or hh ely beth he ila Re ay 2 aie ea ne 28,9mm 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,.__.-.------------ 11.0-13.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,....-__.-.----------- 6.0— 9.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_-_-___-..------- 10.0-15.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ----------------- 27.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---------------- 27.5 
Wiamefersiofe past: zy.0.p 0p ly Sessa mys eee a ens ee ere a eer ep 8.0-10.0 
iransverseidiameter ot lateral toramensas se a eee ee ee 3.5 
Merticalldiametercon lateralliforamens sss oes sss ae ee ee 6.5 
ene thi of pleura pophiysisy ee os snes oie ae By pu ap Reg 25.0 
Length of tree portion of pleurapophysis,..-.-.-. .----------------- .---- 17.0 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


Bength of centrum geese i eh ea BN Mg ct RRP 280um 
Hearst transverse diameter of-centrumyn. sso o sees eee eee ee 1.8 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-.------.--------- 11.0-13.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__------------------ 5.5— 8.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, .-----.------------ 8.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 27.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ..-.------------ 28.0 
Greatest diameter of pre-zygapophiyses,. 22.22.2252 2 Pee ee ae 10.0 
east diameter ‘of pre-zygapophyses.e-o2 see - oe eee eee ee eee ene 5.5 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophyses,_---..---- -----422. 222252252222 10.0 
Least diameterjor post-zygapophiysessie 28a) See os eos on eee 8.0 
eneth of floorgof neural canals 2552s gs wae nc ea eee Sane 28.0 
Hength of roof of neuralcanalits soe ees see ele NS ales A peer epic 27.5 
Transyerse diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,...__---.--.------ 9.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neural canal, .-...-.------------- 6.5, 
Mransverse diameter, on lateral) forament seo jester ee eee 3.5 
Wertical diameter/of lateral foramen;2-- > == 2225 <2 sss son oe ee eee 5.0 


Tue Sixra Vertepra. (Plate III, figure 5.) 


The sixth vertebra is larger than any of the preceding, and in general 
form resembles the fifth. The ridge on the side of the centrum, above the 
excavation for the lateral foramen, is continued downward and backward, 
until it falls into the much more prominent ridge, or crest, separating the 
lateral and ventral surfaces of the centrum. This latter ridge is strongly 
developed. Arising near the lower external angle of the front articulation, 
it first forms a considerable floor for the groove of the vertebral artery ; 
and then is continued backward, and terminates on each side in a tubercle, 

4 


26 ODONTORNITHES. 


directed outward, backward and downward, and situated below the upper 
portion of the posterior articulation. 

The ventral surface of this vertebra is excavated behind the anterior 
articular face, and. between the ridges on the opposite sides of the centrum. 
This excavation, however, is less pronounced than in the fifth vertebra, and 
has no definite posterior limit; but the depression continues through the 
whole length of the vertebra, nearly disappearing a little behind the middle 
of the centrum, and becoming again deeper posteriorly. The tubercle upon 
the upper part of the lamina enclosing the lateral foramen is larger and 
more prominent than in the fifth vertebra, and is situated farther from the 
pre-zygapophysis. It represents the diapophysis, and attains its full 
development in the dorsal vertebra. The lateral foramen is larger than in 
the fifth vertebra. In the specimen from which the figures are mostly 
drawn, this vertebra is united to the following one by the matrix, and hence 
its posterior articular face is not exposed. The neural arch, also, is crushed, 
and the dotted outline of the neural spine is drawn from another specimen 

The dimensions of the sixth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis here 
recorded include those of the type specimen, number 1200, and two others, 
both well preserved. 


Measurements of Sixth Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


en athyotecentrwm mses sae See cr epee Ga AaNMS ent ns a pa ean 29.9m™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, --.----.----.-.--- 12.0-15.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_-_...---------------- 6.0-10.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ..-...----------- 10.0-14.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,---.-.--...-------- 8.5-11.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,-.-------------- 19.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses,.-..--.------------- 25.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pleurapophyses, at base,---..-- ---- 21.0 
Diametersiotspre-zyjo a0 phyisesha ss aee ee ere ee eee ee eee 6.5= 9.8 
Wenothyote tl corso fen eunali cam alesse spss ope eee ee Wenn ene tre ct ee ae os lee 30.0 
Vertical diameter of lateral foramen,___._____- aps AE, AYA PPO en ey ORE | ata ELS BND 
iiransverse diameter ofmlateral foramens: s- = =) 55255-52052 5 22) ee 3.0 


Measurements. (No. 1206.) 


en othy ors centrum sesamin ais see tie lay Seung le A eel eae eee Ue ee ae 31.0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -_--.------------ 10.0-12.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, _.--------.-------- 6.0- 9.0 


Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,... -----..2----- 10.0-16.0 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 27 


Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,........-.--------- 8.0-11.0"™ 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ----.---------- 20.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,.--.----------- 21.0 
Diameters Of spre-zycapophysess. cfu Ae ened IIMs WAU Ne ee ae ayaa IG e512 0, 
Diameters of POSt=zyiSaApophy Ses, as Sse ee el a ee a ees ee Ose 0 
ene thvo ten oorvoteme uma lg cam ll see ee ate tte ere are 31.0 
sRotal leno thvotapleurayo pliyisissee se eer eee ear a pen a a er ee 29.0 
ihength*of free! portion\ of, pleurapophysisy =. 2222 (5022222555 eee ee 21.0 
Measurements. (No. 1207.) 
Hen oth offcentrum poe soe wie art yi tebe veal Deine Sib t IASUln a Caan pe ens anata 30.0"™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,._.-----_--_----- 11.5-14.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,....--..----.------ 5.5— 9.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, .---.--.--------- 16.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,-.------.------- 28.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,----.--- ------ 27.0 
Greatest diameter) of pre-zycapophiysesss sess 285 sees eee ee ese 9.0 
east: diametertote pre=zyiospo phy, Sess sae eared sera ue a eee on ora 5.2 
Greatest diameter of; post-zygapophyses,.-.: -22-/--- 22222252522 e lee 10.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,... _.-----.------ 10.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neura! canal,-----.----------..-- 7.0 
Length: of pleurapophyssisy: 2.22 52) te os 5 Sea a aie oan eae 23.0 
Length. of free portion of pleurapophysis, 22222 2) 422 22 ee ee ee 18.0 
Diameter of free portion of pleurapophysis, at base,..-.-------.---------- 5.5 
WMertical diameteriot lateral foramentea= see se = tes een ees eee eee 5.8 
Transverse diameter of lateral foramen,:—-. 2223222) 2225520522222 2s a 4.0 


Tue Seventh VertEepRA. (Plate III, figure 6.) 


The seventh vertebra is slightly longer and larger than the sixth. The 
centrum has the lateral ridge above the groove for the vertebral artery less 
developed than in the sixth, and not coalescing with the ridge below; 
which, on the other hand, is well developed, and clearly bounds the lower 
surface of the centrum. This surface is broader than in the sixth vertebra, 
and widely excayated longitudinally, throughout, the excavation being 
much deeper and wider anteriorly than in the sixth vertebra, and nowhere 
disappearing on the surface of the centrum. Just behind the outer 
inferior margin of the anterior articular face on each side, is a tubercle, 
somewhat elongated longitudinally with the vertebra, and projecting 
downward, and slightly inward. These tubercles become a prominent fea- 
ture on some of the succeeding vertebree of the series, but only the faintest 
trace of them is visible on the sixth vertebra, and they may be considered 


28 ODONTORNITHES. 


as commencing upon the seventh. A similar structure is seen in the cor- 
responding vertebra of the Loon. In hea, these tubercles suddenly appear 


upon the sixth vertebra. The elongated tubercles in which the lateral - 


ridges terminate posteriorly are smaller and less conspicuous in the seventh 
than in the sixth vertebra. The articular surfaces are larger, and some- 
what more expanded below. 

The pre-zygapophyses are nearly flat, being only slightly convex. 
The post-zygapophyses are slightly concave, especially near the internal 
angle. The base of the neural spine extends over nearly the whole 
length of the neural arch, but was probably shorter antero-posteriorly 
above, than in the sixth vertebra. The lateral foramen is slightly larger, 
and the diapophysis upon its outer wall is greater, more produced down- 
ward and forward, and farther from the pre-zygapophysis than in the 
sixth vertebra. A short ridge rising into a crest over the post-zygapophysis 
is developed in one specimen (number 1208). The posterior outline of 
the neural arch is notched behind at the termination of the neural spine, 
as in the preceding vertebrae, but less deeply. The pleurapophyses are 
longer than in the sixth vertebra. 

The measurements of two specimens of the seventh cervical vertebra 
of Hesperornis regalis are given below: 


Measurements of Seventh Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Ibenethyoficentrumy sass eine ae Soe cise hee eros iy ae eee 32.0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_-_----.---------- 10.0-16.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__._-------.--------  7.0-10.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 25.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,--------------- 27.0 
Diameters: Olspost-zaycapophysesys= 9 een ane seen eee see eo cece cieee 8.0-11.0 
Motalglencthworanleumap.op hy sissy seer oak me pee nee nas oe ones 31.0 
Length of free portion of pleurapophysis,_-._.....-.---...-------.-------- 23.0 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


Mens thmohecen tums ey tects te as SO a ee er eR Ian ees ee 32,9™™ 
Least transverse diameter of base of centrum,-__.__.__...._._---=.--._--- 8.5 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_._-_..-.-------- 11.0-16.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,..__--------------- 6.5-10.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_---....-----.-- 11.0-15.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.__._-- Skene a el 6.5-10.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,_....-.--------. 26.5 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. — - 29 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,---.----------- Tt Oar 
Greatest diameter of pre-zyeapophysis,---.--.-.----------2-+=-2=-=----- 10.5 
ease diameter) ofepre-zycapophysisse ema. see eee ee ee see eee 6.4 
Greatest diameter of post-zye@apophysis.s9- = oss aoe aoe eae eee eee 12.0 
Least) diameter of post-zycapophysisss see eee eee sos Seen eee 8.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-------------------- 6.5 
heneth\ ofpleurapophiysisiesa- seis 2 seas See oe ele eee 31.0 
Diameter otapleurapophysiss at bases es see eee ee ee ees 6.5 
Merticalidiameterofelateralisto mann crises ee ee eer eat any ees er nets 6.5 
ransversediameterof lateral foramen,e see. s52= eee se ene eee ea eee 3.4 


Tue Ereutn Vertesra. (Plate III, figure 7.) 


The eighth vertebra is the largest cervical of the series, slightly 
exceeding both the seventh and the ninth in length. It closely resembles 
the seventh, being slightly larger in nearly all its dimensions. The ventral 
surface of the centrum is more broadly and deeply excavated anteriorly 
than in the seventh, and the tubercles, or processes, on each side of this 
excavation are more developed, and considerably incurved. They stand 
somewhat wider apart at their bases than in the seventh vertebra, and the 
whole under surface is more widely excavated. The two tubercles near 
the posterior end of the lower surface are small. The lateral ridge, start- 
ing at the upper end of the foramen for the vertebral artery, fades out 
upon the side of the centrum earlier than in the preceding vertebra. The 
diapophysis is somewhat stronger and larger than in the seventh vertebra, 
and the foramen itself is larger. 

The neural spine is shorter than in the seventh cervical. It tapers 
rapidly almost to a point above, and terminates posteriorly at the margin of 
the neural arch. The latter shows no median notch at this point, as in the 
preceding vertebreze, the margin being gently and evenly excavated between 
the zygapophyses. The pre-zygapophyses are slightly convex, and the 
post-zygapophyses concave. The latter are strengthened by a ridge 
running along the side of the neural arch, and rising and becoming more 
prominent over the zygapophyses. The articular surfaces of the centrum 
are larger, and especially broader, below, than in the seventh vertebra. 
The pleurapophyses are of nearly the same length as in that vertebra. 


30 ODONTORNITHES. 


The principal dimensions of the eighth vertebra, as determined from 


two specimens of Hesperornis regalis, are as follows: 


Measurements of Eighth Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


eno thio fi centrum) seme ee ese eae ene ae cere eee eae eer ent 33,0™™ 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ..------------- - 11.0-15.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------.------:----- 8.0-12.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses (approximate), - - 22.5 
Dinmeterstotepre-ayoapophysesyes ea = se eee eee ee 7.0-11.0 
Diam eterstciapost-zyie apo p biy/Sesse see eee a er ere ean 7.5-13.0 
Mento theo foro ofe cote ela) acam allan eye oee ay ears eee ese et ee nee 30.0 
Notalelencthwot, pleurapophysisssssse- sess 2 aan Sane eee 33.0 
Wenathyvortreemportionor pleurapophysisysses= =~ na ee ne eee ee eae 25.0 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


Meno thmotse cen frum ys) cere eae ae IA i Nea a a tr nee aa 33,07" 
ILenss Gliemmaior Or CEMA, By WAS scasesceos es ssesou ces oaueeeoesoecee 9.8 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_--.------ ------- 12.0-17.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,.------.------------ 7.0-11.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,.-.--..---------- 16.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, .---.-----------.---- 1 OO 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,- .-. - - ----- hot 30.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,-_-.-..---------- 29.0 
Greatestidiameter, of pre-zycapophysisy:. sos = ae pee eee 10.5 
Weastadiameter sol prez Ca pOpbiysises cess eee ate ees ee 7.8 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophysis,..---.--. .---:--------------=--- 12.0 
ILENE OF MYO Ot mem Crm. cosa dec o see See ces asda os see SogaSeaue= 28.2 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------.------ 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,--.------.--------- 2 Gh} 
MotalMlen cthyo fal eurary oo lysis spe eee nee eee ao 32.0 
Length of free portion of pleurapophysis,--_---.-.--.----.-------2------ 21.0 
Drameterxofapleniapophysis, at bases saya =e eer ee earn E 9.0 
Werticalldiametersonlateral forarmensyys steerer en anemia ey = ae er e 8.0 
iiransverserdiameter of lateral foramen; s=os5 522266 eee meee Sen ae eee 4.5 


THe Ninto Vertesra. (Plate III, figure 8.) 


The ninth vertebra has a centrum slightly shorter than the eighth, but 
somewhat broader and stouter. The under surface of the centrum is 
slightly broader, and is more deeply and widely excavated anteriorly. 


This excavation, as in the preceding vertebra, is somewhat over-arched by , 


two descending incurved processes, which are longer and larger than in 


the eighth vertebra, and are also set somewhat farther forward, so as to be 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. ail 


on a line with the posterior margin of the articular surface. The tubercles 
at the posterior end of the lower surface are small, and scarcely noticeable. 
The ridge above the arterial groove upon the side of the centrum is much 
as in the eighth vertebra. The articular surfaces of the centrum are slightly 
broader below than in the preceding vertebra. 

The ridge strengthening the posterior zygapophysis is well developed, 
and rises into a tubercle above the zygapophysis. This tubercle is espe- 
cially developed in number 1206. The neural spine extends over slightly 
less of the neural arch than in the eighth vertebra, and probably was not 
as high. The outline of the arch is evenly concave between the post- 
zygapophyses, and not notched on the median line. The diapophysis is 
developed about as in the eighth cervical. The pleurapophyses are longer 
than in the preceding vertebra. 

The dimensions of the ninth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis are shown 
in the tables given below: 


Measurements of Ninth Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Tene th’ ‘oft centrum; 322s Sa a ar st aera ha tary pn pane a ee 325mm 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,__. “.-.__-_.-_--- 16.8 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, .------- es eek 12.2 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,.--.--------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ------------ se 30.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---.---.------- 33.0 
Diameters ofspost-zycapophysesip see aesee ee Sees se eee eee eee 10.5— 8.0 
engthy of fooriof meuralecanal, =s= ease e een eee es 33.0 
Eengthof-pleurapophysis,.- 2): 222 seu neh Moo ee ee Sperone 31.0 
Length of free portion of pleurapophysis,_...----.----------2.--.---=.-2- 22.0 


Measurements, (No. 1207.) 


lUGThad CMOS TUN ete orecnesan Sess boes Sep SaaS eecsEecdleoseoenes SOs 
Least diameter ofiicentrum: atibasey=— > ose sae ee ae eee ee ae eee 10.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,--.-----.--------- 13.0-16.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior. articulation of centrum,---.-.-------------- 8.0-13.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,-----.-..-----.--- W212 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,.-.------.--------- 7.0 
Transverse diameters of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---.----------- 27.0-34.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,- .------------- 31.0 
Greatest diameter. of prezycapophysisye] we = sneer ee ea ee 10.5 


Beist, diameter’ of pre-zycapophysisyes ee os e8 ese ae sere eee ere 8.0 


32 ODONTORNITHES. 


Greatest diameter of post-zygapophysis,......----.--------------------- WAY 
keno tho till oorof neural canal a= sareeene se eee ee eee 31.5 
Men ouhkorsroonmoreneuyall cans) mee ae sey se oe a ae ee 28.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ---- ---------.---- 8.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ...--.-------------- 6.5 
Menothwofapleurapophysisyss «iam ses as es Snes a a etet a eee ee 31.0 
eng thro fitreesportioniof pleurapophiysis;sse se ess ee ae eee 20.0 
Miameter olnpleurapopmysisy au) DASC jesse see oe eae ae ese eee 9.0 
Werticaludiameterotelateralle tora crises seein ano 7.0 
ibransversemaiameterrofelaterallsforam en sees oats ec eats ne eee 5.5 


Tue TentH VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 1.) 


The tenth vertebra is shorter and stouter than the ninth. The under 
surface is perceptibly broader, and somewhat more deeply excavated in 
front. The descending incurved processes, also, are longer than in the 
ninth vertebra, but the tubercles at the posterior ends of the lateral ridges 
are scarcely apparent. The ridge on the side of the centrum, above the 
vertebrarterial groove, is very similar to the one on the last vertebra. The 
neural spine is short, small, and low. 'The post-zygapophyses occupy a 
slightly more anterior position in this vertebra than in the preceding ones, 
a change that becomes more marked in the following vertebra, where 
the zygapophyses are brought nearer together, in order to facilitate the 
dorsal flexure of the neck, near its base. The diapophysis is larger and 
more prominent than in the ninth vertebra, and the pleurapophyses are 
somewhat longer. 

The proportions of the tenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis are fully 


given in the accompanying measurements from two different specimens : 


Measurements of Tenth Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


fem o-Ghyrotgncemtiyuies teeta eS ee aS eG EE ais eco a am 32,0" 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,. -.-------------- 12.0-17.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_....-.----....------ 7.0-11.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, .--------------- 12.0-16.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_--..-------------- 7.5-11.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --..------------ 34.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -.------------- 32.0 
Greatestdiametersotegpre-zycapo phiysissasts ye =e os eee een eee 14.5 
Iseastidiameter of pre-zycapophysisseee esses a= see ae eee eee 8.0 
IL@MNeKIN We oo Gre mena! Ca = Ae Bo 55 case sees oeco SSeS coed eecasesscus 30.0 


Wencthvotoofiofameurallcan else aes ae aa eee epee 26.0 


: 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 33 


Measurements. (No, 1207.) 


Benoth-oficentrirmye pyc ea sculls ele il ade Rue Gv een alee sere age 30.0°™ 
Leake diameter of centrum, at. base, Lr ices lars OU SR a Mae See RR aE Te Pa 10.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, EERO aes a ee 13.0-15.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,....-.-...------.--- 6.5—11.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.._.-------- ---- 11.0-15.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,---..--.-.--------= 8.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,--. -.---- ------ 36.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,---. .---------- 32.0 
Greatest diameter of PLe-ZySaApOphySessees se wale sane eee es 12.0 
ilieast; diam eteriokipre-zycapophy sess cm see cee eee eee 8.0 
Greatest diameter of post-zy gapophyses, LOE Seyret ea iy parce nvnd nn aR ate 13.0 
east) diameter vofepost-zycapopbiy sess esa sei era ysatan airs ii sete gull 8.0 
Hencthioitoorormmneral Canal see see ses pana een suse a eee 29.0 
ILE GN OH RoE Oe rureM MIN oe ee eee 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-.__--.--.------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ..-_-----.----.----- 5.5 
ene thjofpleurapophysiss. = 2s ee eee et be) See rhe oe 33.0 
Length of free portion of pleurapophysis,.-----.-----+----2-2---22------ 23.0 
Diameter/otepleurapophysiss ate bases seam eee sem) a ney nee y ess ete 3) 
Transverse diameter of lateral foramen,.--_.--. ---- ---2-_. -2.-4-- SSuaus 5.5 
Wierticalidrameterofel ateraletorarm em siee ee ppa renee tee ny me mE 8.0 


THe ELEVENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 2.) 


The eleventh vertebra is shorter than the tenth, and appears much 
shorter when seen from above, owing to the approach of the zygapophyses 
toward each other, to aid in the flexure of the neck. Its inferior surface 
is slightly less excavated than in the preceding vertebra, and the anterior 
descending processes occupy a more anterior position. The diapophysis 
is here developed into a prominent, tubercular, oblique ridge, running 
backward, downward and outward, and forming the antero-lateral margin 
of the vertebral outline, as seen from above. The neural spine is short, 
and small. The ridge running from the side of the vertebra to the post- 
zygapophysis rises into a prominent tubercle on each side of the upper 
surface of the vertebra. The post-zygapophyses are more oblique, and 
the pleurapophyses rather shorter than in the preceding vertebra. 

The size and proportions of the eleventh vertebra of Hesperornis 


regalis are given in the measurements below: 
je 


34 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Eleventh Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


IL@MEKIN OF GAIT, cs5ca5ensq5 bans osoa sens 655 sen eeeecesa seonacee soS5 29,0™™ 
Weastrarmeter oficentrom. at DAaSeye == eee eee ee eee eee 9.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-----.------------- 14.0-17.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_--.--.--.---------- 8.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 11.0-14.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ...--.-.------------ 7.5-12.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 39.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --.------------ 32.0 
Greatestydiameter of pre-zygapophyses)=- -- 2 2h ee eee eee 13.0 
heastudiam etersofapre-zy Capo phy Ses, sae mamas aes ate ee nee 8.0 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophyses,..-..--.---.-------------------- 13.0 
Least diameter. of post-zygapophyses,..--..-.---.---,----------------- 9.5 
enc thvoretoorsofem eurallscam al ey se,s ate see see ae eee 27.5 
Menothroferoofotene ural cana less seas a eee ere ee 21.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,---.------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-.----.--.--------- 5.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,-------------.-- 10.0 
Ho talulensthyofspleurapopliysisss as seat ayaa ohana nt sears es eens ere 80.0 
Iength ofiinee portion-of plenrapophysis,---+----2 -----— -se= = ee 24.0 
Diameterotypleurapophy sis, at Dasesss eee ee ee eee le ee eZ 
Mransyverse diameter of lateral foramen,-----4-.-s224 22-2 ---ss2ce eso nse 7.0 
Wierlicaludiametenotelateraltoram en. sepa e = eee eee ae ee 8.0 


Tue TwetrtH VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 3.) 


The twelfth vertebra is shorter than the eleventh, and the zyga- 
pophyses are more approximated. The post-zygapophyses are tubercular 
above, and the neural spine is rudimentary. The diapophysis is more 
projecting, but a little less elongated, than in the eleventh vertebra. 
The lateral foramen for the vertebral artery is larger, and the descending 
processes stronger. The pleurapophyses are somewhat shorter than in the 
preceding vertebra. 

The dimensions of a nearly perfect twelfth vertebra of Hesperornis 
regalis are given in the table which follows: 


Measurements of Twelfth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


eng thigo hacentrmnayereye ee eee Sse cree St tacts yo eer Se ogee ee 24,0™™ 
ILE CHETINEIOP Oe GNOMES Sasa cane saue Hoos soca ceaSs Souaeoeeeese 7.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,____..-___._____-- 12.0-14.2 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-__--_.-.--..------. 7.5- 9.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,---------------- 46.5 


or 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 


(3X) 


Transverse diameter cf vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --------------- 32.8 
Greatest diameter of pre-zysapophyses,.-----_---- .------++------+------ 13.0 
iheast diameter) of prezyeapophy ses, see saan ee see see seem eee 10.2 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophyses,----.--..----------------------- 12.2 
east: diameter oh post-zycapophysesseee see eee eee 10.0 
IFAT AN ON ioe or mene Gael 3 ee eee be ecosces heed d4dace 22.0 
Meno throlerooteoteneurallnc syn ail sees eete elane apne tana eet pes aan 16.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.-----.---------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -------------------- 6.6 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,--.-------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,-.---------.-.----- 6.0 
ERotalilenotheots pleura op lay.si sss sy java eee evan nee ney ses ee 25.0 
Keng thiof; tree! portion of pleuarapophysisy 2.5--e-2 seen eee eee 15.0 
Diameterworspleurapophiy/sisaiatil ases ears eee anys =e at epeees ae eel pere i ae 7.0 
Transverse diameter of, lateral) foramen,sseeso = see eee eeee seen 10.0 
Werticalidiametertofelateralitorame nse eyes esa ere an one 7.5 


THe THIRTEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 4.) 


The thirteenth vertebra in many respects resembles the twelfth, and 
is of about the same length. It is rather more excavated at the sides, and 
has apparently a somewhat larger lateral foramen. The neural spine is 
but slightly indicated, and in this and the next vertebra reaches its mini- 
mum of development. The anterior and posterior zygapophyses approach 
still nearer to each other, to aid the flexure of the neck, which is greatest 
at this point. The descending processes are short and stout, and the 
pleurapophyses much as in the twelfth vertebra. 

The figures given below represent the anterior and posterior aspects 
of the vertebra here described. 


Fic. 9. 


Fiaure 8. — Thirteenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1207), front view; natural size. 
Figure 9.— The same yertebra; posterior view. d. diapophysis; p. parapophysis; f lateral foramen ; 
ne. neural canal; s. neural spine; %. pre-zygapophysis; 2’. post-zygapophysis. 


Oo 
[=p 


ODONTORNITHES. 


The dimensions of the thirteenth cervical vertebra in one series of 


Hesperornis regalis are given below: 


Measurements of Thirteenth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


Ment hye fe centrum ce a lela ee 25:00 
eastadiameters ofacentrumatmbase esate ee cee ae ee ie eer re 6.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, _----.------------ 14.0-15.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ---- ---------------- 7.0-11.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---. ------------- 10.0-14.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---. .-------------- 9.0-13.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .--- ------------ 49.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -----.-------. -- 31.5 
Greatest diameter of. pre-zygapophyses,..-- ------------5------++-+----- 14.0 
east diameter of; pre-zygeapophyses, -------- ---- - see ee 9.0 
Greatest diameter of post-zygapophyses,__.---.--. .--------------------- 12.0 
east diameter of post-zygapophyses,---2-----_ ---- 5 ee 10.0 
ILeReWn GE Tibor OF mawel Gane, oS o= 5 Ceo Soo soso sone seosuscobSse cous 25.0 
Irene thao feroofe ota eu calli cem al ieee eee pete ye rar ee tee er err 17.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-- .-------------- 8.8 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,---. -----.---------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, .-_------------- 8.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ..--.-..---.-.----~ 9.0 
Imeng thyof hypapophysis) below, centrum, 22> 2222 eens tee wees 9.0 


Ture Fourteenth VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 5.) 


The fourteenth vertebra measures a little less than the thirteenth along 
the centrum. The zygapophyses are approximated, and the neural spine 
is rudimentary, as in that vertebra. The lateral foramen appears to have 
been large, and enclosed by bone, which is in part broken away in the 
specimen represented in Plate IV. The most conspicuous feature of this 
vertebra is the great development of the inferior descending processes, or 
“catapophyses,” as they are sometimes called. These are much flattened, 
with nearly parallel sides, and rounded ends. They arise near together on 
the antero-lateral lower part of the centrum, and descend obliquely for- 
ward, and a little outward. They are somewhat strengthened along their 
inner faces at the base by a low, broad, rounded ridge, which at its base 
forms, with its fellow of the opposite side, a pulley-shaped surface. They 
do net appear to have been quite symmetrical in their distal portions on 
the opposite sides. 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 57 


The tubercle below the pre-zygapophysis begins in this vertebra to 
assume the form of a true diapophysis, or upper transverse process, but 
presents no articular surface for a rib. The centrum is somewhat excavated 
at the sides, and the excavation is bounded posteriorly by a rounded ridge. 
The latter begins near the posterior end of the inferior surface, and runs 
forward, upward and outward to the base of the diapophysis, on the lower 
part of which it is continued. Above this ridge, and behind the dia- 
pophysis, there is a shallow fossa. 

This vertebra would be regarded by some anatomists as the last true 
cervical. Its dimensions taken from three well preserved specimens of 
Hesperornis regalis are given below: 


Measurements of the Fourteenth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


henge th: of centrum ee sys sty sles 1 Gani A aoe Nee A eal aye mee a cen Le 23.0™™ 
east diameter of centri at} laseye s\n g th ea ap ke aye en 7.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__--.. - --------- 12.5-18.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,..--...-..---------- 7.0-11.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -_-.-.-..--.---.- 11.0-15.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,..... -----------.- 8.0-11.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,--....----------- 58.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, - - ---- Sec als 30.0 
Diameters of prezycapophysesy-.—- oso eee sa wees ee eR 23010 
Diameters of post-zygapophysesy- = see nee seek ee eee ee ee ee eae 11.0-11.0 
Kength of floorof neural canaliese = aoe te Uae ea ae outa weeny oes weep oy 20.5 
engthvof roof ofeneuraly cama). sie saya yey rae aes ie re espe Rong 16.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, .----------.------ 9.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-. ....--.1.-2-+-.--- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,_ .----.-----.---- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ...-_.--------.---- 7.0 
Length of inferior descending processes,.---.------ 222-252. 52222222 2-22 17.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


hen gthi ‘of centramy sci: on 22 eke Ce ee eet lsat Sele ere el 24,9mm 
iheast/ diameteriof. centrum: 229 2a. se eo eee sone beeen ee ce eeeees 8.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,---.----.----------- 8.8 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,._-..--.----.--.- 10.5-15.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ..-------.---.------ 9.5-13.0 
enoth of floor ofmenural cana) poe see eee eee A is Ailey Sb issn sever 21.0 
ihensthot root, of neural canals ees ase ese a= ey a) eee mere eee aoe 16.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ---.----------.- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, .---.--.------------ 8.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, .--------------- 9.0 


Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,-..--.-.-2-.------ 8.0 


38 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Fourteenth Vertebra. (No. 1477.) 


Meno thworacentrum, ie =) ses Sees ese ee eee ees ree eee Tae el oe eiaerete 24,9m™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ---.-------------- 13.0-19.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_------------------- 7.0-11.5 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,----.------------- 11.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, .------------------- 9.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---.------------ 39.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, .--------------- 33.0 
Wiametersvoltgpnre-zycapophiySeSseese ee eee ere eee eee eee 9.0-14.0 
Drametersiofapost-zycapophyses\acsee ee seem ae ee eee = eee eee 9.0-13.0 
ene thy oftloon .ofun eunala canal jee semen eee eer tye ee yA yore eames 22.0 
eng throteroofeofumeuralycan all ee ers a eee een ee ee senses 15.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,--.---.----------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-------------------- 8.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, --.-------------- 8.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,-.--.-------------- 9.0 
Distance between extremities of anterior and posterior zygapophyses, .----- 31.0 


Tue FirrrentH VERTEBRA. (Plate IV, figure 6.) 


The fifteenth vertebra is shorter than the fourteenth, and of peculiar 
shape. The centrum is deeply excavated at the sides, and its articular 
faces are transversely elongated. Below, it sends downward and forward 
a strong prismatic, or elongate pyramidal, hypapophysis, as long as the 

_centrum. The shaft of this process is quadrate in horizontal section, with 

the anterior face excavated, and bearing a prominent pointed tubercle on 
its right margin, near the end. This peculiar hypapophysis is bifurcated 
at the extremity, and the prongs are divergent. They are somewhat 
unsymmetrical, the left one being slightly longer than the right, and 
directed a little more outward. 

There is no lateral foramen, but a distinct subtriangular facet for the 
head of the first rib is borne on a short parapophysis, projecting to the 
anterior margin of the articular face of the centrum, and somewhat below 
it. The small rib supported by this articular face is represented in Plate 
VIII, figure 1. The diapophyses are broken off, just below the articular 
faces for the tubercle of the rib. The zygapophyses are rather less 
approximate than in the preceding vertebra, and the neural spine, though 
still rudimentary, is larger. 


CERVICAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 39 


In addition to the figures of this vertebra given in Plate IV, the 
accompanying cut shows the posterior aspect of the same specimen. 


Fig, 10. 


FIGURE 10.—Fifteenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1207), posterior view; natural size. d. 
diapophysis; p. parapophysis; hk. hypapophysis; zc. neural canal; s. neural spine; z. pre-zygapophysis ; 
z’. post-zygapophysis. 


The measurements given below are from three vertebra, in different 


individuals of Hesperornis regalis. 


Measurements of Fifteenth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


eng ths of centrum: et oa sie a rare alee See eye Nae is EP cap agar eta 2270 
Transyerse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----- SRN Heute te 14.0-22.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_------------------- 6.5- 7.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,..-------.------ 14.0-19.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,.-..-.--.-.-------- 13.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,.--------------- 36.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ..-------------- 33.0 
Piametersiolpre-zy SAapop ly Sesyem eee eee ai eat eae pea ar 12.5-12.0 
Diametersiof#post-zycapophysesyseee tesa eee see eee eee eee Se a 13.0-11.0 
eneth of flooriof meuralicanal ose. eae ee Pee eee ee ae al 22.0 
Bencth of-roof of meuralicanallye ee crys sia earn Ao aay alate epee ean 19.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,---.--.---------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-.-..------.-------- eo 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,....------------ 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,....-.---------_--- 9.0 
enothof-hypapophysis;sacs tosses oe ee eaien vere eeeoe 20.0 
ene th of bifide poxtionvot bypapophysisseees se aes ee eee 5.0 


Diameters of articulation for head of rib,-25- s5-- 252-2 ----s2--e waceitea Ober osD 


40 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Fifteenth Vertebra. (No..1476.) 


keno throfcentrum,s 23e2 ssa 68 — see. Ae ae Bete Ses ay eee 22mm 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, .- .------------=--- 22.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__----------------- 6.0- 9.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, --------------- 14.0-19.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,----._..---------- 8.0-14.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --.-------------- 36.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses,------------------.- 30.5 
Diameterstofapre-zy.c apoplySes) == yo ere 2 eee ee eee een ee 10.0-10.5 
enathyoteioorotmennral:canaly 1293952 -2 ot sae Seen ages eee 23.0 
ILEDGWN OE KOOL OF worl CH = ase eos Shen oe sone eses Sena so5K Se 20.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.. .-------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, .------.------------ 7.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,----.----------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, .--...------------- 8.0 
Diameters ofsarticulation\for, head! of, willbe =e eee et ee ee 6.0— 5.0 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


elem etheo tt cem brunet ee hse oe eas i pee ae ee sae a ene 220mm 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, .__._---.-------- 14,5-22.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,___-_---.-_-------- 6.0— 7.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---- ---.-------- 15.0—22.5 : 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,__.--..------------ 8.0-14.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - --------------- 34.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,-- ..----------- 32.5 
Diametersworapre-ZyCapOp My Sess apse yews anaes tele aeney speeee eee ee OS Os) 
DiometersH or post-zyeupop Diy Sessa. = ae yee eee lee ey gee ee 10.5-14.0 
ILenetiln Or uloor Or menmAl Cai Seana Sha ae sad see ese 2 ss see eee uses 21.0 
Leal OF Trawie CH? WeDo Gly Seek Le 20.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,___-------------- 10.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------- Bilask oo aaa 8.0 
Men ot htotshiyip apo phiysistirs sees som ets wee epee One ana meats RO teeta Lee 15.0 
Wiametersvolganti culationetor trea dio frie sey ye ey oe eee 7.0- 7.5 
Distance between extremities of anterior and posterior zygapophyses, -.. .--- 37.5 


Tue SrxteentH Verresra. (Plate LV, figure 7.) 

The sixteenth vertebra: differs considerably from the fifteenth, and 
begins to assume the distinctive features of the dorsal vertebra. It is 
shorter than the fifteenth, and is the shortest vertebra between the atlas 
and the sacrum. ‘he centrum is excavated at the sides, and its articular 
faces are laterally expanded, but of little vertical extent. A strong hypa- 
pophysis descends from the inferior surface, rather more vertically than in 
the preceding vertebra. The articular face for the head of the second rib 


CERVICAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. Al 


is sub-oval in outline, with the long axis nearly vertical. The para- 
pophysis supporting it is less prominent than in the fifteenth vertebra, and 
does not extend in front of, nor below, the anterior articulation of the 
centrum. The diapophyses are well developed, and somewhat ascending 
(Plate IV, figure 7, >). They are flattened above, and strengthened by a 
rounded riage below. This ridge is united with the posterior portion of 
the diapophysis, but anteriorly they are separated by a rounded groove, 
which is shallow distally, but continues proximally into a deep excavation 
under the anterior zygapophysis. 

The neural spine is well developed, and tubercular at the top, as in the 
succeeding vertebra, but of less antero-posterior extent. It is irregularly 
excavated at the base posteriorly by a fossa for the attachment of a liga- 
ment. The post-zygapophyses are less projecting, and somewhat nearer 
together than in the preceding vertebra. 

The posterior aspect of the sixteenth vertebra is well represented in 
the following figure : 


Ficure 11.—Sixteenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1477), posterior view; natural size. d. 
diapophysis; p. parapophysis; hk. hypapophysis; zc. neural canal; s. neural spine; 2. pre-zygapophysis; 
z. post-zygapophysis. 


Full measurements of three specimens of the sixteenth vertebra of 


Hesperornis regalis will be found in the following tables: 
6 


42 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Sixteenth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


ILeMRIN OF GRMNINNIN, ooo SSSosdoassastcasses Soscemacqos Sans soaoserisesds 18.0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_----.--.-------- 17.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-----------.-------- 5.0-10.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.---..-----.----- 13.0-19.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_------------------ 7.5-14.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,_--.-------- --- 30.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses,--...---------.------- 61.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --------------- 27.0 
Diameters\olspre-zyCapop ly Ses, sears ae =a ee ee eae eee oe eee 13.8-11.0 
Wiameterslofepost-7y ca pop ly Ses sees se eee eee Se See eee ee eee 13.0-10.0 
eng thvorstloorotmneuralycanall sees setae ata rere eee aes erases 20.0 
eno throtarootormeura lace tall sways essai st eres eet ae eee 20.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 10.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----.--------------- 8.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, .---.------------ 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,-.--------------.-- 8.0 
Diameterswotarticulationwion head tolenrlowere ee eee eee eee ee ee eee 8.8— 6.0 
Diameters of articulation for tubercle ofribys225. 225 =e see eee eee ek 7.0- 4.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,.-..-.---------.------- 29.0 
AMtero-posteriol) diameter ofmeuralispine ness ee sens ceeeee es tenes eee 12.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


ene thmoficentrumse. Sots see Se eee ok nh Sy aeele e aesroiaie eee 18.07™ 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,.._....------.---- 24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-._------ --------- 5.0-10.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,.-._------------- 16,0-20.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 35.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses,....------- -------- 33.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, ..------------------- 65.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --------------- 30.0 
Diametens mote pre-zy SC apODHVSeS as ar sacra eee eee eee ae see 12.5-12.5 
iMiameterssongpost-zycapophySessa=seres eee eee es sees ee eee eee eae 10.0-11.5 
ILE SN OF toon OF menmll: Camel, o5 oace socsansS case aassncee secdecosuaue 23.0 
enothvoferoofofmeural (canalsese eases ee ae nee Ret teeee Sete eee 21.0 
Diameters of articulation for head of rib,..---...----------------------- 5.8- 8.6 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


Ten ota wo fetcen tii Ram eat ris ape tile ds LIEU |e alate hae caee ue arto aed meee ears Iyer 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__..--_.-----_--- 13.0-22.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_-----------.------ 6.0-10.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,---------------- 15.0-23.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,------------------ 9.0-13.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses,.-------- -.-------- 46.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses,---------------+--- 30.0 


Wiameters\of-pre-zyeapophy ses, sae oneness eee eae eae eee een eer een OLo— 14.0 


CERVICAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 48 


Miameterstahpost=zyj cap Op li, Ses see =a mee ee ee ee aE! 220-10 Oe 
en othvore tl oor.oten erralecein 2] same ae eee eee 22.0 
ent hWo be buyin a0 pity si sees rae =e ee nT e 18.0 
Diametersrofvarticulationtforphead i ofsril ness y= eta eee een ReneS en 7.0— 9.0 


THE SEVENTEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 1.) 


The seventeenth vertebra, the last true cervical, is slightly longer than 
the sixteenth, and has assumed the more general characters of the dorsal 
vertebre. The excavations at the sides of the centrum are rather less 
pronounced than in the preceding vertebra. The hypapophysis is strong, 
directed vertically downward, and is expanded at its distal end, as shown 
in the figure below. 


Fie. 12. 


Ficure 12.—Seventeenth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1477), posterior view ; natural size. 


The posterior articulation of the centrum has a greater vertical extent 
than in the sixteenth vertebra. The articular surface for the head of the 
rib is larger, and a little more elevated, but not more prominent than in 
that vertebra. The diapophyses are directed somewhat upward, and 
supported beneath by a strong rounded ridge, above which as in the 
preceding vertebra, is a groove, ending in a deep pit below the pre-zyga- 
pophysis. The neural spine has a somewhat greater antero-posterior 
extent, and is higher than in the last vertebra. It is thickened and 
truncated at the top, as in the succeeding vertebre. The posterior 
zygapophyses are less prominent, and nearer together, than in the 


sixteenth vertebra. 


44 ODONTORNITHES. 


Full measurements of the seventeenth vertebra in Hesperornis regalis 


will be found below: 


Measurements of Seventeenth Vertebra, (No. 1207.) 


ILGMe tN OW COMIN, 85 he Boe eases eee meee Sebo Ssausscssesacsesecas 20.0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 16.0—27.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 6.0-10.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ----..---------- 13.5-19.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,._----------------- 9.0-13.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 28.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, --------------------- 64.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -..-.---------- 24.0 
Dame ferstotppre-Zyi ap Op WyiSCss eet Se ee ee a ee ee 12.5— 9.0 
DiametersrorypOst-ZyjCap Op ly Sess mee y seem ae are ees oe eee 9.0— 8.5 
ILenen OF Toor or mem CWA. Lo oe ee oe soo cee 22.0 
Wenothvorerootsofmneuralicana seems eee eee ees 21.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----..----------- 9.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -----.-------------- 7.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- fie5) 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 7.5 
Mrameterstoimaniiculatlon torn eae O teers] ly sae eae eee eee eae eee 8.5— 6.0 
Diametenotarticulation’ tor tubercleiot ribye = see or sea = eee eee = ee 7.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,__......--------------- 29.0 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine, -_-_---.---------------------- 13.5-18.5 
Measurements. (No. 1476.) 
keno chrotacentrumyes eh A Blan ee tay etek et cl eens oe eee ee a DP {DE 
Weastadiametencofecentrum, sent as a oo ey Sb ene eels eye ee eae 7.5 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-__---_----------- 15.0-21.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 5.0-10.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---.------------ 13.0-19.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 10.0-14.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 25.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, ----.--.------------ 21.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ..-.--...--.---- 21.5 
IDKENMNGS? OE PPRALA TEA NO ONS = oe ee eee ene sons seme eoes uses 12.0 
Diameterssot post-zycapophySesys= eee sess oe ae ee eee 8.5- 9.5 
LONGTIN@r oor @ranemiell erm Sees Sasa Sea eee Sone aces kaa eseusaee 24.0 : 
eno thtoteroo fro tame uta uc arya eae es een aes oye suse ay a ee apn eer Dies 
Diameterotartrculationstoriheadtot arises ses aa ee 6.5 
: Measurements. (No. 1477.) 

ren gthrofxcen trum eee eas se estes See ete, Manone te ecraye, rg Renee 20.0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_______.__-______ 13.5-25.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,______-_______..___- 5.0-10.0 


Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,_---__--_______- 15.0-21.0 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 45 


Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,___-__------------- 9.0-14.5"™ 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 29.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, --------------------- 63.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, -------------------- 32.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --------------- 27.0 
Diameters/otpre-zycapop hiy Sess me es) peepee ipa ie etapa ype aE 9.5-11.0 
Diametersrof post-zyeapop ly ses = =a. e sees a ae eee ae a 7.5= 9.0 
GGT Cre iileyore @se EM CoM ea ER 23.0 
en schol roohtor mentale canals emya et loi yseipu hfe a ieee ep siia eel ea aye mop apes 21.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 7.5 
eneth of, hypapophy sissy 22 ses os je sear Wed Us Aca atie gugin  S 9eper sa 19.0 
Diameters of articulation tor headwoti rile. ae eae ee See 7.5— 9.0 


Tue E1cHTeentu, or First Dorsat, VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 2.) 


The eighteenth vertebra is a little longer than the seventeenth, and 
its centrum is stouter, and less excavated at the sides. The hypapophysis 
descends vertically, is longer than the centrum, and bears an oblique un- 
symmetrical expansion at the end. The articular face for the head of the 
rib is a little more elevated than in the preceding vertebra, but no larger. 
The rib supported by this vertebra is represented in Plate VIII, figure 4, 
and the adjoining sternal rib, in figure 16. The diapophyses are much as 
in that vertebra, and are preceded by a deep pit, extending beneath the 
posterior part of the pre-zygapophysis. A much smaller excavation is 
situated just behind the base of the diapophysis. The neural spine was 
somewhat larger than in the preceding vertebra, but is broken off in the 
specimen figured. (Plate V, figures 2, 2¢.) The post-zygapophyses are 
a little more approximate than in the seventeenth vertebra. 

The size of the present vertebra and of its various parts in Hesperornis 
regalis is given in detail below: 


Measurements of Eighteenth Vertebra. No. 1207.) 


Ista ili OY CCM een Seco e eae See eras am enereaaseanas SoaSerneeauSS BO) (Qe 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,--_------___--__--- 17.0-26.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,;-_----------------- 7.5-11.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,-------------_--- 13.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, ._..---------------- 10.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 25.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, ---..--.--------.--- 61.5 


46 ODONTORNITHES. 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --------------- 20.0™" 
Diameters of pre-zy.gapophyses, -------------------------=-------------= 9.5— 7.0 
DMiamefers’ot post-zveapophysesyea= eee eee ea ae ae ee eee 9.5-— 8.0 
iene thvotsfloonmor meuxalvcanal, === mene = ee ane eee eee eee eee ee 23.0 
ene thro ter ootsotmneuralcanal ale ne eee eee ee eee eee 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 10.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, --.---------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------~------- 7.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------ 7.0 
Diametersiofvarticulationston headiorenib,= 92226 -e one ee eee ee 8.2- 6.5 
Diameter of articulation for tubercle of rib,_---_------.---------------- 6.5 


Measurements of Highteenth Vertebra. (No. 1476.) 


Wenothwotucenthumsss2eces ee os Pe ee eee eC ee wee me ee 25.0nm 
IVER StRC LATHE LEI O fkC Om LIU TIN sy: Sere aya oe nya Nan IN erntey teatcs palo ln a ATA sno BE 8.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, --------_-------- 15.0-23.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__--__--____------- 9.0-11.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -------.-------- 13.0-20.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 13.0-14.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - --------------- 24.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, ------------------- 30.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,-_____-____-_- 19.0 
Diameterno ha pLe-Ziyio' a Op DiyiSS, ea tae ero eae are tere al ea gn 10.0 
Diametersjofapost-aycapop biyiSessee ese ae ete ae tee ent eee 8.0— 9.0 
Wenothvot oor oteneunala camellias y= mets ot aaeeis ne aoe mye ely aye oieune ya 25.0 
Weng thvotirootiotuneunalucamalsmee ss sam ete aye san) uiamere eee ta op) aaa eee nm 24.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------.---------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, --------_----------- 6.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,---------------- 7.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, -----------_------- 6.5 
Diameterstotarticulationvforshead) of wiles. ae eee ee 7.0- 9.0 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


Gene thyotgcen trum eee aere ene ols Ut) See abn te, ie ll Aare pa eatnic aem aReL 22.9"™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_________-______- 17.5-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__________________- 7.0-11.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -_-_-------------- 15.0-22.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,__--_---__--_-__--- 10.0-15.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 23.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, ------------------- 32.0 
Diametexstofepre-Zyicap Op liyjSeswese sae eee ee ae ee eee 7.0— 8.5 
Gentethyo frtloorgoteente niall ec arm all aes a aes es nee ny ge ey ee 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 10.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,---------------- 8.5 


Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, 7.0 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 47 


THe NINETEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 3.) 


The nineteenth vertebra is slightly longer than the eighteenth, and 
has a somewhat stouter centrum. The latter is as broadly, but rather less 
deeply, excavated at the sides, and was provided with a less powerful hypa- 
pophysis, which, however, is not preserved in the specimen figured. The 
articular surface for the head of the rib is a little higher on the side of the 
vertebra, and supported upon a rather less prominent parapophysis. The 
diapophyses, as in the preceding vertebra, point somewhat diagonally 
upward, and backward. They are grooved, especially near the base in 
front, and preceded by a much smaller and shallower pit than in the 
eighteenth vertebra. The depression behind the diapophysis is nearly as 
in that vertebra. The neural spine expands more antero-posteriorly at the 
top than in the eighteenth vertebra, and there is a somewhat larger fossa 
behind its base. The zygapophyses are similar to those in that vertebra. 

Measurements of the nineteenth vertebra in Hesperornis regalis, taken 
from three specimens, will be found below: 


Measurements of Nineteenth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


Length of ‘centrum: Soe Shee ee es cic eee A eels oan 24;9™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,___-__-_--------- 16.5-23.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,._--_---_---------- 9.0-12.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---._----------- 13.5—22.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -_--_-------------- 10.0-14.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, -.-------------- 21.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, ---.------.---------- 61.0 
‘Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --.-...-------- 19.0 
Diameters, ot pre-zy cap ophiySes\emee rsa eee ee eee re eels 10.0— 7.0 
Diameters Of POst=zy Gap Op liyiSes, me ms eae er ae ee ae a aepee ne 10.0— 8.0 
Keng th ofsflooriof neurallicanaly =. 222 ees oes ene) Speer 25.5 
henpthiotmoomoL meurallicanal ees ees a= es eeterta ees meee mone mea eee 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,---_--------------- 6.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- He 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 7.0 
Diameters of articulation torsheadvot sribyees sees eo ee ee eee 8.0— 6.2 
Diameter of articulation for tubercle! of bil es52) {eee ee ee eee 75 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal, __-------_------------- 33.0 


Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine, ------25--2-__---2-- == 222 - 23.0 


48 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Nineteenth Vertebra. (No, 1476.) 


TLemeqin OF GoM, oo hes Sect batedessuas Sasso ashsecsaseseseess- MG) ja 
Meastidiameter.or. centrum =a ase = eee ee ee Se Gees Ce eee tea ae ee 8.6 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 15.0-23.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 13.0-12.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 13.0-14.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -_----------------- 13.0-20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across spre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 21.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, -------------------- 30.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, -------------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --.------------ 19.0 
DAMME LELS HOt PLE- ZV SAP Op LiySCS, meyers ee ee ee yea 7.5— 8.0 
Diamefersmol pOst=-Zy2 apOp liyiSeSye aise a eae yee nape yee 10.0-10.0 
Gen othe oleh oorrof mera lie cam ally eee nes Se eyes een ee aan ey sre 27.0 
eno th ofeootoreneurall(canal sec sss saa ere epee eaeese a eee ee ee 25.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------- 6.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- 7.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, -----_------------ 6.5 
Miametersiotmaxrhiculatronstor hea dose rissa eee eee aes ee 6.0-— 7.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine at base,_-.------.-------------- 18.0 
Measurements. (No. 1477.) 

hemarth yo fscen tryst Sy seh leper cpa et age ee ee an as Sa eye 24.9™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-___------------- 17.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,___-.-------_------- 8.5-12.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ----_----------- 15.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 12.0-15.0 : 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, -_--------------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, - --- ---- - oie pies ae 30.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --_._-.-----_-- 19.0 
Diametersiohgpre-zyjoapOpliyises, == seems eee ae ae ee ae ee Se 7.0— 8.0 
Diameters of post-zyeapophy sess se = =a eee ase ee ae eee 7.0— 8.0 
Meno thyofetloorgo fame ural sci allege ey a ae a 25.0 
ILEMGIA OF TOO Or maul CHEN oes acme Soasee sale oSsnessoassaasos 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -------------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 6.5 
Diametersrotaanticulationstorsheadion mibss=] se eee eee eae eee 6.2— 8.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine at. base, -..-...-.--.---.----_--- 15.0 


Tue TWENTIETH VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 4.) 


The twentieth vertebra is of about the same length as the nineteenth, 
or slightly longer, and is somewhat less deeply excavated at the sides. 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 49 


Its articular faces are perceptibly larger. The hypapophysis is shorter 
and weaker, and the parapophyses are higher on the side of the 
vertebra, than in the last. The diapophyses point directly outward, and 
somewhat upward. They are thin, and scarcely grooved in front, and 
there is only a rudimentary pit at the base, but behind, there is a more 
pronounced depression. In number 1476, there is a pit on one side, and 
none on the other. The neural spine begins to increase slightly in height 
in this vertebra. Its base is broad, and it expands but little antero- 
posteriorly toward the top. The fossa at its base behind is large, and 
most of its anterior border is decidedly roughened for ligamentary 
attachment. The centrum of this vertebra is constricted, and has a 
medullary cavity, as shown in the figure below. 


Fie. 13. 


FictRE 13.—Transverse vertical section of twentieth vertebra; (No. 1477). Front view; natural size. 
d. diapophysis; c¢. outline of posterior end of centrum; m. medullary cavity; nc. neural canal; s. neural 
spine; 2’. outline of post-zygapophysis. 


The dimensions of two well preserved examples of the twentieth 
vertebra in Hesperornis regalis are as follows: 


Measurements of Twentieth Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


Beng thi of cemtrumy ay oe as ae ey a ae tata payee mee an ne ge Di epee 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 17.0-25.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 10.0-12.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, _--------------- 14.0-21.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, --.----------------- 11.5-15.2 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .---.----------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses,....--..------------- 61.0 


7 


50 ODONTORNITHES. 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,.-------------- 21-02 
DAME cers tOLspre=Z yi Pap OP My SCS, aes re 10.0-— 8.0 
Dyrameters:ol spost-zyCapop hiySesy aes ees eae ae 9.5— 9.0 
Wen throtedtl oor fh meural cama) ee ye ee see ee eee 26.0 
LEME OE Root OF mammal CAMA OSS = oe eS oo ees cet Sae seceoseaseesee ees 23.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------- 6.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, --------------- (lee 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,__.--------------- 6.2 
eno thvolthypapophiysiss Sa see Me sete et eas hoa eee ee eee 5.0 
Migmetensrotmaniicula tt omenory led aO teas) sess see eee ene enna Se 8.0— 6.4 
Diameter omarticulation or jubercleof riby= = sea eee 7.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,__-..-.._.------------- 34.0 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine, -----------------_------------ 17.5-23.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


Wemothyo centrum sees tae. eee Stes eral Sine on Ne pae aie one erate Seats 26:02" 
ILCs TREES Chere Or Cann en eee eo aes aS apeaceeeescoes 9.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,--_--_-------__-- 14,0-22.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ___-_--__----_--___- 12.5-13.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------_--- 14.0-22.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -------.----------- 13.0-15.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses,-------------------- 27.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---.---.------- 17.0 
Diametensiotppre=Zyi2aPOplyiSesy ese y sissy eyes arene eee eee a 8.5-10.5 
Miametiersiofspost-zyicap Oph yes, asym ain ee ee te eyes eu aye ee 8.5-10.0 
Wenlothvotstloorofsenemrally canal spe yeas ee eet epee oe yen ay ame ee ee 27.0 
eno thvolsroolkotemneural mca a) eps essa ape eet yet yeep See a eg ne Cae 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ---.-.-----.-------- 55 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, -------.-------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 5.5 
Diameterstotarticulatrontorsh cadeot rity: srs ey eee eee eee een en 7.0— 8.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine, at base,_----------------------- 19.0 


THe Twenty-First VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 5.) 


The twenty-first vertebra is slightly longer than the twentieth, and 
the centrum is stouter, and less excavated at the sides. The hypapophysis 
is short and weak. The parapophyses are very short, so that the articula- 
tion for the head of the rib is scarcely raised above the general surface of 
the vertebra. It is situated nearly on a level with the neural canal, but 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 51 


extends somewhat below. The diapophyses in this vertebra begin to 
shorten, though but slightly, and are directed horizontally outward, and 
somewhat anteriorly. Neither in front of, nor behind their base, is there 
any proper pit in the vertebra. The neural spine is somewhat higher, but 
of less antero-posterior extent, than in the preceding vertebra, and the 
surfaces before and behind near the base are rather more roughened for 
the attachment of ligaments. 

To indicate the range of variation in the vertebree of Hesperornis 
regalis, measurements of the twenty-first vertebra in five individuals are 
given in the tables below. Number 1200 is the type of the species. 


Measurements of Twenty-first Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Meneth of Centrum yey! = = Se Se cis) ee ee es Oe ye tee nag aaa 24,9=m 
east transverse diameter of Genbrums sees ene eens eye ltes 9.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------ 16.5-23.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__-.__--_----------- 9.0-13.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,-_--------------- 14.8—-22.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 10.5-16.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, --.----------------- 27.0 
Diameters of pre-zy capophy Ses; = 8. soe eae eae ee Rr ee 9.5-8.5 
ens th of oor tofeneunall cam alley srer eye eer apts anes ase eh rese peeapey en ee 25.5 
beng th: of roof: ofsneural can alas 2 ts) sepa eee lone ye ye pinca a 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 7.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.------------------- 5.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,...---------------- 6.0 
Diameters of articulation stor bead (of silos as eee Mey gee ae 7.0— 8.0 
Measurements. (No. 1206.) 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 16.0-24.0™™ 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -------------------- 12.0-13.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, --_.---.------------ 25.0 
DWyameters) of anteriomzycapophyses;s a2 26 eee ae eee eee 9.5-11.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ---__------------ ied 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, --..--------------- 6.0 
Diameters of articulation tor head of ribiyse ee eee ea eee 6.0— 9.0 
rene t hot sly yap Op iyi St Spee eta rat a ae tere pee era ee ee eee 14.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,__.-_.....----------.-- 33.0 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine,---~-..-.--~---2-=-------5=-=- 17.0-21.0 


52 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Twenty-first Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


denmihvot Centrum). 26) 20 e Sas ene eae ee nee ee Seale ee ei 25,0™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 17.0-27.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -------------------- 11.0-14.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 15.0-23.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 12.0-17.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - --- ------------ 20.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, - --- ----------------- 5.7 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---------------- 19.0 
Diameters of pre-zycapophyses,-.=-------- = =-<-=- 2-225 oe ee 8.2— 9.8 
ey Wrametersiorpost-zycapophysesas asses essen eee eee eel 8.8— 8.8 
Wencthvokimoorofneurall Canal sos Wee see ee ee eee en 26.0 
Wena hvornoo.LPonmneutal ycamallyessyeers Seperate eee eee eee yl 23.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- ; 8.2 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -------------------- 6.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ---------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 6.6 
iDiametersrot articulation tormheadiotirib sss ce 22s ae. mene ue eres care 8.2— 8.2 
Miameteriot articulationstor tubercleof ibys see o. hoses ees el ne 6.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,___._------------------ 36.0 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine, ----_------------------------- 15.0-18.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


Geniothvotscenti umn ys. epee ahaa We Ms ERAN ue ae ein nie Nee © Serer 26.0™™ 
Least transverse diameter of centrum,____._____-____------------------- 11.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, ------------------ 21.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, _-------------------- 13.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 15.5-21.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 12.5-16.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 15.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, --..---------------- 28.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --...----------- 18.0 
Mianmeterskofa pre: ZyjCap OP hiy Sse see see oe ere eats ee ee eee 8.5-11.0 
DiametersvouNpost-zyjeap Opuy Sess ese ete a eee eater cave ay estan eee 8.0-10.0 
eno thyo ten oororen eure Can als mpe secre ee eee ten ie sees neat oleae ese 26.0 
IDSINOs Ee @HE TRO ORE Ga TIERONE CHR ee oe eee case peeceesneseuses 25.0 
Diameterspormanticulationstorshead ot nibs sa eee eee see ee ee eee ee 6.5— 8.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine, at base,__--------------------- 17.0 
Measurements. (No. 1477.) 
MBE not hyo bc erty mt spe sae Sah eis ek Shwe aera kml ge seta Be VON oe ele eee Sree 25.0"™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,------.---------- 17.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__________--_------- 10.0-15.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,-_-------------- 16.5-25.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,___-_-.------------ 13.0-17.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,---------------- 18.0 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 53 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, -------------------- 27.5"™ 
iensth oteloorofeneuraly canal sees sees ae ae eee ape 25.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,--_-------------- 8.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 6.6 
Diameters ofanticulationttor head cof prise eye eee 7.0— 8.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,_____.----------------- 38.0 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine,------------------------------ 14.0-20.0 


THE TWENTY-SECOND VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 6.) 


The twenty-second vertebra is slightly shorter than the twenty-first. 
The centrum is stouter, and the articular faces are larger. The hypa- 
pophysis is short, and rudimentary. Parapophyses can hardly be said to 
exist, as the articular surface for the head of the rib is only elevated at its 
margin above the general surface of the vertebra. The diapophyses are 
short, and at the end tubercular, as in the next vertebra. They are directed 
somewhat downward and forward, with indications of a groove and pit in 
front, as on most of the preceding dorsals. The neural spine is higher 
than in the preceding vertebree. 

The following tables contain the dimensions of four examples of the 
twenty-second vertebra of Hesperornis regalis : : 


Measurements of Twenty-second Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Mength ofrcenthum; 22 ono oa ee aoa eae ee ae ee ee net 24,0™2 
east imansverse diameters oLecen tru rn yee see een ea eS 11.0 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,-_---_---_------- 17.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, __---.-----_----_--- 10.0-15.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum,----------------- 15.5-24.0 | 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -----------------+- 11.0-18.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .-.-.=.---------+-22---=2- 22.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, .-...------------------------- 27.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ....-_------------------- 22.0 
Diameters ompre-zyfapOphyses, eat eee eee ee 9.0— 9.0 
Drameters Ot spost-zy,Capop liySes, mesa este a ay ee en 9.0-10.0 
Hengthvot floorot neural can ales se as espe eae eee ee ete ore 25.5 
Benstioumoots oi memrale canal yee ee ye ere ea eer 21.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,-_--.--------------- 6.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,_------------------ 6.5 


Diametersiot articulation tors Nead ober basse ee eee eee eee 4.0— 7.5 


54 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Twenty-second Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


Wenothvoticentrum ee. sso eb lake fe aR ilu aD heise ee a ek aero 24.5™™ 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 18.0-27.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, _---_--------------- 10.0-14.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, --.------------- 15.0-28.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 12.0-18.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zy gapophyses, ape aS pe eee aS 21.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, --------------------- 50.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,---.------------ 21.0 
IDG TTECES OE TROLA YER) NO) OMNES Soe Seon cone sous Seon sce ocdsoaesbassausee 10.0— 9.0 
TATE TEL SLO tas OS b=ZivjO- 21] O | MiyiIS@ Sy emai pe ey a ne eee 10.0— 9.0 
ILemexiln oF thor Or mepmell CRIME oS oe eos oe ee ssadea asses aaueesascune 26.0 
Meno chkoterootwormmeuralixcamal as seps se =a) teed a ae ee a as tay eet 22.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,----------------- 9.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, --.----------------- 7.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ----------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, --..--------------- 7.5 
Diametersiotarilcul ation ors ead Oe riley nee eens seen steele yey yepelivare ae 8.0— 7.0 
ene inno fehy pa pop hy sisse sel kiseys ae wba cure teen Me alee pe ace ere nae ee 4.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,__-.-..----.----------- 38.0 
Antero-posterior diameters. of neural spine,.--..------------------------- 14.0-18.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


Wenethtotmcentruamys 2s ase Any Seats ken eek a eae eee Se aey she el ee tar re 26.02™ 
Weastioransversem diam epery.oficentrunrisye aes eae epteye ee ahead ye aera 11.4 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_---_------------ 17.0-24.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,__--_.-------------- 11.5-14.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 16.0—22.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 13.0-17.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 17.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses,-.-.-.-------------- 26.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---------------- 18.0 
Diametersiotepre-Zy cap OplySesya apy ae me yeep a eee nee a eee ye yey a eye 8.0-11.0 
Diameterslorspost-zygcapophy sess. 2.25 =) ean sane eee ee 9.5-10.0 
Wen'e-tnvorgt OOr ote ural aca all weeys ees spun mee een nts aN get yay eeliunap loa 26.0 
IL@MatiIN OF ROO! Gir mene GEMM Lee Bee ee a soos oases boseaeus 21.5 
ID enon Gere OE Creo eyaKornl inoye laveevel Cpr Tullo e Sou ko 6.8— 7.8 
Antero-posterior diameter of neural spine, at base,--.-------------------- 17.0 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


Idenathyohicentrumypaac te seis 54 Moe: Na Neen See Ean ee al a 26.05™ 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,__..__.-__-.-----_--- 10.5 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---.------------ 17.5-26.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ------------------- 13.0-19.0 


Diameters of pre-zygapophyses, 2 
DiaMetershor post-zyiSapoPhySeSjemane ee eee eee eee eee enero eee 8.5— 9.0 


DORSAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 55 


henge thvofstoorot neurale canals: = meen eee aa Baten RVG UCR ae Pies gs 26.02" 
ILANGTIN OF ROO? Or meul GEMM ooo ee ooo ocho See keeecatsonececcsesce 22.0 
Diameters ofarticulationsfor headloforib sya ae ne ae pea 6.5— 7.5 
ILGNHIN OF Lee NOW 5 -soske Goo e ees sao cocbaeenccscecnsmccesecece 5.0 


THE TWwENTY-THIRD VERTEBRA. (Plate V, figure 7.) 


The twenty-third, or last free dorsal, vertebra differs little from the 
twenty-second, except in the diapophyses. The centrum is stouter, and 
somewhat flattened below, with no hypapophysis. The articular faces are 
larger than in the twenty-second vertebra. The diapophyses are short, 
tubercular, and directed strongly forward. The capitular surface is not 
quite as high on the side of the vertebra, hardly reaching above the middle 
of the neural canal. The neural spine is slightly higher, but of less antero- 
posterior extent than in the twenty-second vertebra. It is flattened and 
roughened, before and. behind, for ligamentary attachment. The roughness 
extends much above the middle of the spime anteriorly, but not so far above 
posteriorly, where it is surmounted by a projecting angle in the outline. 
In its natural position, this vertebra is almost entirely included between 
the anterior projecting portions of the ilia. 

The following measurements are taken from three vertebrae of 
Hesperornis regalis, all in excellent preservation, from different skeletons, 
found in the same geological horizon: 


Measurements of Twenty-third Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Mength of centrum. 22-2 ke See Ee Spy ee aye SE see ees aay 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, ----------------- 18.5-25.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_---__--_----------- 11.0-15.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,----------------- 26.0 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, _-..-.------------- 12.0-17.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 18.0 
IDiame versio Pue-Zy cap Op by SCss eer ata meet ae ta arr ee 9.0-10.5 
Diameters ote post-zy Cap Op ly Ses yet ree a eee ee ara 10.0-12.0 
eng thot floor ofs neural ycan alee era eee eee ere 26.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------ 6.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.------------------- 6.5 
IDenictions Oe Crnnaillerqtorn sor Joveeyel Gxt Tullo) 25522 -ecoe soo eeeeese ee seeees 6.0— 6.0 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,__-.._..._-.----------- 35.0 
Antero-posterior, diameters/of neural spine)=-—- === = wa ee 15.0-17.0 


heashiransyerserdiameter of centrunene nee ne sees e eee eee eee 14.0 


56 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Twenty-third Vertebra. (No. 1207.) 


Meno thKotacen trum sane mews eae ete eee eee eee ae 
Transverse diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,----------------- 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -------------------- 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, _---...--------- 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, -----..------------ 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --..------------ 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, --------------------- 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ---------------- 
DiamMeters| ote pre-Ayeap Op Dy SeS meme eee a ee eee eee 
DiametersiolwpOst-zylapOphySeS;ees meee eee ae eee eee eee 
Men gthvotetloorsofemeurally cam al meen see ee ee eres ee ere : 
eno thyotmrootcotem eural Kean all seems pe eect ere 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.---------------- 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------- 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ----------------- 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,------------------ 
Miameters,omanticulation  onheaduoherlbyee sere sa ae ee ee ae 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,____.-_.--------------- 
Antero-posterior diameters of neural spine, -----=--25----+---------2---2- 


Measurements. (No. 1477. 


menothiofecenthumnyssas3 fe cee See ey ale oe ee eee nee Ses oe sec 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, -_---_-----------__- 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -.------------------ 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, -.---.------------- 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across parapophyses, ------------------- 
Wiametersiotspre-zycap op ly Sessa sae eee ee eee ee 
Heng tho ten oorco.feneurala canal yes sees me a eee en eae 
Miametersiorsarticulationyfonheadion Tilssse) eee sees ee eee eee ee see eee 
eastatransverse) diameterot centrum,==s2=--2-- eee. cee ees eae = ee 


94,.9mnu 


11.0-17.0 


11.0-17.5 
18.0-26.0 
13.5-18.5 


CHA RHR 1Ve 


THE SHOULDER GIRDLE AND RIBS OF HESPERORNIS. 
(Plates VI-IX and XX.) 


Tue scapular arch of Hesperornis presents several very interesting 
features, and shows a wide divergence from the normal type in existing 
aquatic birds. Viewed as a whole, it has but little functional importance, 
and indicates a degradation of structure before unknown in this group 
of birds. It throws much light, however, on the past and present forms of 
flightless birds, both the denizens of land and of water. Its contrast with 
the powerful pelvic arch is especially noteworthy. 

In its more important characters, the shoulder girdle of this genus 
shows an approach to that of the Ratite, or birds allied to the Ostrich. 
Some of these characters hint at reptilian affinities, while others are merely 
adaptive, and connected directly with the lack of wings. The most marked 
points of resemblance to Struthious birds, in this part of the skeleton, are 
the following : 

1. The sternum is devoid of a keel. 

2. The long axes of the adjacent parts of the scapula and coracoid 
are parallel, or identical. 

These two most striking features are especially characteristic of the 
Ratite, according to Huxley, in the memoir already cited. 


‘ Proceedings Zoological Society, 1867, p. 418. 
8 57 


58 ODONTORNITHES. 


The cut given below will make plain these points in the scapular arch. 


Fig. 14. 


Figure 14.—Scapular arch of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; side view; one-half natural size. s. scapula; 
h. humerus ;, 7. clavicle, or fureulum; c. coracoid; sf. sternum. 
THE ScAPuLa. 
(Plate VI, figure 7, and Plate VII, figures 5-7.) 


The scapula in Hesperornis is a small, slender bone, somewhat curved, 
and of nearly equal width throughout its entire length. It is thickened at 
its proximal end, and transversely truncated, the outline of the extremity 
being subtrihedral. This extremity shows two articular facets, a small 
inner one for union with the coracoid, and a larger triangular one, forming 
the scapular portion of the glenoidal fossa. There is no acromial process. 
The shaft is nearly of uniform width, and its outer surface is convex, 
both fore and aft and transversely. The inner surface is concave longitu- 
dinally. The distal half gradually expands, and the end is thin, and 
spatulate. In its natural position in the skeleton, the scapula was nearly 
horizontal, with its posterior extremity somewhat depressed, and incurved. 

The dimensions of the scapula in Hesperornis regalis are as follows : 


Measurements of Scapula. (No. 1476.) 


henge thuof| scapula yates aay ce ye ee ee De eee eee 135.0"™ 
Greatestidiameter of proxamalvend jee ers a eee eae ae 12.0 
IMRTORVCHSS GUERENA We OIE ROGAN GING See ee se ee see seeks 9.0 
Werticalydiameterot elenoidanticulation,=ees= =o seem eee eee a eee 8.0 


Least vertical diameter of shaft, 
Wardthtoirdistalvend! (approximate) seme eee ae earn ae en 10.0 


SHOULDER GIRDLE OF HESPERORNIS. 59 


THe Coracom. 
(Plate VI, figures 4-6, and Plate VII, figure 4.) 


The coracoid of Hesperornis is quite small, and somewhat resembles 
the same bone in certain of the Ratite. It is short, thin, and widely 
expanded at the lower end, the whole bone being somewhat triangular in 
outline, when viewed from the front. The superior extremity has an 
articular head, with a facet on the inner side for the scapula, and a 
larger one, looking backward, downward, and outward, for the head of the 
humerus. A small compressed process extends above the articulation on 
the immer side. There is a long decurved process extending forward, in- 
ward, and downward, to support the upper end of the clavicle (Plate VIII, 
figure 8). Below the clavicular process, the bone is very thin, and 
emarginate. There is a sub-clavicular foramen through the shaft of the 
bone, a short distance below the articular head. The posterior margin 
sends out a wide, thin process, the extremity of which forms an obtuse 
angle somewhat above the middle of the bone. 

The lower end of the coracoid has, along its whole border, an 
articular face for union with the sternum. This extremity is nearly 
straight, at right angles to the axis of the bone; but the anterior third is 
excavated, so that the outline here is concave. This portion of the lower 
border is much thinner than the posterior two-thirds. 

The following measurements give the size of the coracoid in two 
individuals of Hesperornis regalis : 


Measurements of Coracoid. (No. 1206.) 


Length, from scapular to sternal articulation, ......-..--./--.------------ 54,0™™ 
Greatest diameter of scapular and humeral articulation, -...-..--.--.----- 13.0 
Least diameter of scapular and humeral articulation,_....--..------------ 6.0 
Greatest diameter of ssternalend5 eo. 2 ae)2 = Se ae ie ee rae ee 49.0 
rans Verse) Alam Chere Oe SheTM Alien Cleat sears a eo 2.5 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


Length, from scapular to sternal articulation, .-.-_.-.-.------.----+----- DSOum 
Greatest diameter of scapular and humeral articulation, -.-....------------ 12.0 
Least diameter of scapular and humeral articulation, --...-------------.--- 3.4 


iPransverse diameter o1sternaliends sane meen eee ee eee eee see eee eee 3.0 


60 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tur Strernum. (Plates VI-VIIL) 


The sternum in Hesperornis somewhat resembles in general form the 
corresponding bone in the genus Uria, but in other respects is more like 
that in the Ratite. It is thin and weak, and entirely without a keel. It is 
expanded in front, especially between the costal processes, and has two 
deep grooves for the reception of the coracoids. These grooves are 
placed obliquely, converging anteriorly, and are widely separated from 
each other. The sternum has a rounded mesial projection in front, which 
is somewhat thickened, but there is no true manubrium. 

A comparison of the keelless sternum of Hesperornis, represented in 
Plate VIII, figure 6, with that of one of the Ratite, for example, the 
Emeu, as shown below, will make clear the resemblance in this part of 
the structure between these two types. 


Fig. 15. 


Figurr 15.—Sternum of Emeu (Dromeus Nove Hollandie, Latham); front view; one-half natural size. 
a. costal process; b. surface for articulation of sternal ribs; c. groove for left coracoid. 


The sides of the sternum in Hesperornis are concave in outline, and 
in Hesperornis regalis, there are four articular projections on each side for 
the attachment of sternal ribs. These processes are all on the anterior half 
of the sternum. Behind these, the lateral margins are nearly parallel. 
The posterior end of the sternum is quite thin, and had two shallow 
emarginations. In Hesperornis crassipes (Plate VII), the sternum repre- 
sented is nearly perfect, and in this species there are five articular faces on 
each side, for the sternal ribs. The posterior margin in the same species 
is less excavated than in Hesperornis regalis. 


SHOULDER GIRDLE OF HESPERORNIS. 61 


The measurements which follow are taken from the sternum of 
Hesperornis regalis (number 1206), and that of Hesperornis crassipes 
(number 1474). 


Measurements of Sternum (Hesperornis regalis. No. 1206.) 


Total lenstha (approximate) se seers ee oer era ae pee ene ea 200.07" 
IDeA Oe CRAMOTUENT OWS IOP THOS = oo aoc eno ee ae oocoenesauseueesesee 47.0 
(Diameter of irstarticul ativonel ory arb suet eee meats eee sean 13.0 
Diameter/or secondiarticulation for) airibyo2 ee) eee eee eee ne 13.0 
Miameteron thirdearticulationetorsalrl bse ee 13.0 
Diameferortourthrart cul ationghorsa crib seeps sea eet eee 9.0 


Measurements (Hesperornis crassipes. No. 1474.) 


Then oth ol Stermumste J =a 5 st Be Ve eee eae pics ee tome ed 196.07™ 
Greatest transyerse! diameter of sternumyae= = a eee 160.0 
Transverse diameter of sternum behind articulation for ribs,__--_--------- 86.0 
Least transverse diameter of sternum behind articulation for ribs, ---------- 77.0 
ISxaqKeinth he Ee Meu AONAS) SK0P TMS eee o eco keene a Seek ose esos osSoseoe 52.0 
iDiameterormirstarticulation tonasribsses ser ss eee s sean eee eee 13.0 
iDiametenotsecondeanticulation coreaeri bys eee ees eee eee eee eee 12.0 
Diametermor third tarhiculationstornay cil yee se ee 12.0 
Diametersof tounthearticulationstoraenl biases seer eee eee eee eee 12.0 
iDrametersorentthvarticulationerorari lye ee eee ae eae see eee 9.0 
Extent of lateral margin beyond last atticulation,..........-------------- 92.0 


Tue Cravictes. (Plates VII-VIII.) 


The clavicles of Hesperornis are separate, and are unlike those in any 
recent adult birds, although they strongly resemble the corresponding 
bones in some embryonic forms. The upper extremity is slender, and 
was united by ligament with the clavicular process of the coracoid. The 
shaft of the bone is much curved, and gradually expands below to the end, 
which is depressed, and transversely truncated. The extremity has an 
articular face for union with its fellow on the median line, and the two were 
evidently united by cartilage, and attached to the manubrial part of the 
sternum. ‘The position of the clavicles in the skeleton is shown in the cut 
on page 58 (figure 14), and also in Plate VIII, figure 8, cl. 

The measurements of two clayicles in Hesperornis regalis, (numbers 
1206 and 1207), and one also of Hesperornis crassipes, (number 1474), are 
as follows: 


62 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Clavicle. (No. 1206.) 


IDistanceanvdirect line between thejend sss see) see eee eee nee eae eee ee eee 78,.9™™ 
iitranswerse.diameterok wppel extremity, see ee eee ee ae eee eee eee 2.0 
Createstidiameterot) lower extremity yee ee esas ae ee en! eee eee eee eee eee ee 15.0 
Weastadiameteriol lower extremity, esse eee eee eee ee eee eae eee eee 5.0 


Measurements. (No. 1207.) 


GreatestidiameterotelowerextreMmityaeeee sees sean n eee ee ee SEO} 
WeastediamGtemote lowers extremity. e == sere: eee ee ee ee eee eee eee seen 5.5 


Measurements. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


Distance in direct line between the ends (approximate), --..__--...------------ 80.02" 
uiransverseidiameteroLauppewextremity, =e sans ses eee eee eer see eee ne aaa 3.0 
(Greatestediamecterotsl owen extremltyne == eee eee eee ene eee 12.0 
Measteaiame terol es Owe Me Xt CTT vis sree eee eae = ee eee 5.0 


Tue Humerus. (Plate VIII, figures 1-4.) 


The wings of Hesperornis were represented by the humerus alone, and 
this was rudimentary. The remaining bones of the anterior extremity had 
entirely disappeared, or, if minute remnants of them remained as ossicles, 
they were loosely attached to the extremity of the humerus by cartilage, 
and thus have left no trace of their union. In one specimen (number 
1206,) the humerus is preserved entire, with most of the scapular arch, and 
is shown in its natural position, in figure 14, at the beginning of the 
present chapter, as well as in Plate XX. 

The humerus of Hesperornis is long and very slender, and somewhat 
curved downward, especially in the distal half. The head is compressed, 
and has a convex ovate articulation for insertion into the shallow glenoidal 
cavity. The shaft is somewhat twisted, and of nearly equal width 
throughout its entire length. When the humerus is in position, the 
longer transverse axis of the middle of the shaft is horizontal, or at right 
angles to the same axis of the head. The shaft is nearly solid, having 
only a very small medullary cavity. There is no distinct radial or ulnar 
crest, and no trace of articular facets on the distal extremity. 


The principal measurements of the above humerus of Hesperornis 
regalis are as follows: 


VERTEBRAL RIBS OF HESPERORNIS. 63 


Measurements of Humerus. (No. 1206.) 


en pth So fs hum erussa- ro -soets of 2 oN! agian), comes way tty ha Deke RN Senn 152052 
Greatiestmdi ame tern fy shyt see pees ete ey 7.0 
eNransverseldiametiery ofys hat tee a pe oe eee oe aaa 2.2 
Greatestidiameter.ofsproximals enc sees ae eee aon pn 11.5 
Greatest diameter of proximal articulation, ._._____-_____--_---___---__- 10.5 
‘Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,_.._..........------------- 5.0 
Greatest diametercotads taller cl ssa aes ania yt naan ae open anne Ene 6.0 


THE VERTEBRAL Rips. (Plates [X and XX.) 


The ribs of Hesperornis present no marked features to distinguish 
them from those of modern birds. They are composed of dense bone, but 
some of them contain irregular cavities. The articulated vertebral ribs of 
Hesperornis regalis are nine in number, on each side. The first three of 
these were attached to the last three cervical vertebree, and had their distal 
ends free. The remaining six are all well developed ribs, which were 
connected by means of the sternal ribs with the sternum. 


Tue First Ris (Plate IX, figure 1) which is free in Hesperornis 
regalis was attached to the fifteenth vertebra, and is quite short. The head 
(capitulum) and tubercle (tuberculum) are both well developed, and the 
branches which support them stand nearly at right angles to each other, 
the neck of the rib being about twice the length of the tubercular support. 
The descending part of the rib below the tubercle tapers rapidly, and 
ends in a sharp point, scarcely below the body of the vertebra. 


Tue Second Rie in this species (Plate IX, figure 2) was supported by 
the sixteenth vertebra, and is very much larger than the first. The 
branches sustaining the head and tubercle meet at an angle less than a 
right angle, and both articular facets are well developed. The shaft of this 
rib is stout, somewhat curved, and, when in its natural position, it 
descended nearly perpendicularly, ending in an obtuse free extremity. 


Tue Tuirp Rip (Plate IX, figure 3) is the last free rib, and was sup- 
ported by the seventeenth, and last cervical, vertebra. It is longer than 
the preceding one, and, when in position, its shaft stood nearly vertical. 


64 ODONTORNITHES. 


The head and tubercle are very similar to those in the preceding rib, but 
the tubercular process is shorter and stouter, and more inclined toward the 
body of the vertebra. The shaft is slender, and tapers gradually below to 
the extremity, which is obtuse, and somewhat incurved. This rib hada 
small wncinate process (Plate IX, figure 10), articulated to the posterior 
margin of its lower third. This process was placed nearly at right angles 
to the rib, and overlapped the outer surface of the rib which followed. 


Tue Fourtn Ris (Plate IX, figure 4), which was attached to the 
eighteenth, or first dorsal, vertebra, is much larger than the preceding, 
although its upper portion is very similar. The tubercular facet is less 
convex, and its supporting process shorter than in the rib last described. 
The shaft of this rib is more twisted, and flattened. The distal extremity 
is expanded, and terminates with an articular facet for union with the first 
sternal rib. The uncinate process (Plate IX, figure 11) is larger and 
longer than the preceding one. It was directed upward, and backward, 
and joined the rib from above at an acute angle. 


Tue Fiera Rie (Plate UX, figure 5) is slightly longer than the fourth, 
and very similar to it. Unfortunately, the articular parts of the upper end 
of this rib are wanting in the most complete series (number 1206), but its 
general character is made evident from its position, and connection. The 
tubercle had a similar position to that of the preceding one, but was 
shorter, and nearly sessile. The uncinate process on this rib was large 
(Plate IX, figure 12), and, in position, extended upward and backward 
over the two following ribs. The distal extremity of this rib is very 
similar to that of the preceding one. 


Tue Srxta Ris (Plate IX, figure 6) is considerably larger than the 
fifth, and its shaft is flatter, more twisted, and considerably more curved. 
The tubercular facet is sessile, and raised but very little above the neck. 
The uncinate process is large, and spatulate (Plate IX, figure 13), and was 
directed upward and backward. It is somewhat constricted a short distance 
above its articular face. The distal end of this rib is expanded, and widest 
at the extremity, which is abruptly truncated. 


STERNAL RIBS OF HESPERORNIS. 65 


THe Srventa Rip (Plate IX, figure 7) has a prominent head, placed 
on a slender neck, and the tubercular facet is merely a flat articular tract 
on the upper surface of the bone. This rib is considerably longer than 
the preceding, and its upper half is more curved. The lower half is 
nearly straight, and is flattened transversely. It supported a large 
uncinate process, which had a rather slender neck, and an expanded distal 
half, bent upward at a slight angle with the general axis of the bone 
(Plate IX, figure 14). The distal extremity of this rib is wider than the 
shaft, and horizontally truncated. : 


Tue Ercura Rip (Plate IX, figure 8) is very similar to the last, but 
is somewhat longer. The neck is very slender, and the tubercular facet 
has almost entirely disappeared. At the end of the upper fourth of this 
rib, there is an abrupt inward curve, and from this point to the lower 
extremity, the shaft is nearly straight, in the specimen preserved, and in 
its proportions is very much like that last described. This rib bears a 
very small uncinate process (Plate IX, figure 15), which is considerably 
curved upward, and is the last of the series. 


Tue Nintx Ris (Plate IX, figure 9) is of about the same length as the 
preceding, but much more slender. It has no true tubercular face, and 
no uncinate process. Its shaft is nearly ef equal width throughout its 
whole extent, and the distal end is not expanded. Its lower extremity is 
truncated at right angles to the shaft, and roughened for cartilaginous 
attachment with a slender sternal rib. 


Tue StrernaL Rips. (Plates [IX and XX.) 


In Hesperornis regalis, there are four sternal ribs which articulated 
directly with each costal border of the sternum, and on this are four well 
developed processes for the union. Behind these true sternal ribs, were 
two others, which, as in many recent birds, united together at their lower 
attenuated extremities, and were thus attached to the preceding sternal 
rib by cartilage. In Hesperornis crassipes, there were five sternal ribs on 
each side articulating with the sternum. 

9 


66 ODONTORNITHES. 


The first sternal rib of Hesperornis regalis, uniting above by the inter- 
vention of the fourth vertebral rib with the eighteenth, or first true dorsal 
vertebra, is short and nearly straight (Plate IX, figure 16). It is 
obliquely truncated in front, and has an articular face for union with the 
sternum. ‘The posterior end is expanded, somewhat rounded, and has on its 
upper posterior angle an articular facet for the vertebral rib which joins it. 


The second sternal rib (Plate IX, figure 17) is longer and stouter than 
the first, and somewhat more curved downward. Its articular faces are 
similar, but the upper, or posterior, half of the shaft is much more 
compressed. 


The third sternal rib is longer than the second, and somewhat less 
curved (Plate IX, figure 18). Its distal end is more slender, and the 
articular face oblique. The proximal, or posterior, portion is much flat- 
tened transversely, and the lower margin of this end extends beyond the 
articulation. 


The fourth sternal rib, which united with the seventh vertebral rib, is 
long and slender, and considerably curved downward (Plate IX, figure 19). 
Its anterior articular face is oblique, and the adjoining portion of the shaft 
slender. The posterior extremity is expanded, and projects downward, 
and backward, below the articular face. 


The next sternal rib, the fifth, did not unite directly with the sternum 
in Hesperornis regalis, but with the preceding rib near its base, and hence 
its anterior extremity has no true articular face. It is long and slender, 
curved downward throughout its middle portion, and its posterior end is 
thin and expanded (Plate IX, figure 20). This rib united with the eighth 
vertebral rib, and, in Hesperornis crassipes, it united also independently 
with the sternum, by a well developed articular tubercle. 


The sixth sternal rib, in Hesperornis regalis, articulated with the 
ninth vertebral rib, and, in front, was attached lightly to the sternal rib 
last described. 


STERNAL RIBS OF HESPERORNIS. 67 


In the small number of sternal ribs articulating with the sternum, 
Hesperornis resembles the Struthious birds, rather than the Natatores. The 
persistent articulation of the uncinate processes with the vertebral ribs is 
usual in birds incapable of flight, and has been observed in a few others. 

The following measurements show the principal dimensions of the 
vertebral and sternal ribs, and uncinate processes in Hesperornis regalis. 
The length of the vertebral ribs is measured in a straight line, joining their 


extremities. 
Measurements of Vertebral Ribs. (No. 1206.) 
lets Ast, Bak 4th. 5th. 6th. 7th. 8th. 9th. 
Length, in a straight line,__-------- Be Bh ss Wy ce le OOS BOL a SE 
Distance from center of head to 
center of tubercle,_.-.__--__-- Dey 1, MGs POs se 2 OF 2 ieee 2a 238 
Elevation of tubercle,___-_______-- 1@, WO;  & (eee 4, il, Os se 
Distance from tubercle to end of rib, 32. 88. -. 141. -. 159. 177. 194. —- 
Distance of uncinate process from 
IonGe Quel Oe sy ke ee os Bil, Bey 405 BE Tee 
Measurements of Uncinate Processes. (No. 1206.) 
Ist. 2d. 3d. 4th. 5th. 6th. 
Length, a eft Re ee eS 25. 54. 52. 55. 50. 30 sum 
iDrameteroteanticularvend,.=see esse eae To 12. 10. 11. italy 8. 
Ieastebread (hv sere ts say eer 5. 11. 9. 8. 6. 5, 
Greatest ibreadthe -eamass eso ss een seo eee 12. 15. 14, 15. 13. 8. 
Measurements of Sternal Ribs. (No. 1206.) 
Ist. 2d. 3d. 4th. oth. 
IUGR 2 es ooeees eet eeaemebbecenustosancasues ae 110. oe Ee ae 
Diameter of proximal articulation,-------------- 9 11. 8. 4, 
Least antero-posterior diameter of shaft, .---__-- 3. 5. 4, ah 3. 
Diameter of distal articulation, ----------------- 6 8. 8. 8. Ue 


tH 
<1 


Diameter of distalken dye eseee eee eee eee 12° cea 15: 18. 


CECACE Tne 


THE PELVIC ARCH OF HESPERORNIS. 
(Plates X—XI and XX.) 


Tue pelvic arch of Hesperornis exhibits many features of interest, and 
characters more distinctly reptilian than that of any recent bird. In its 
general form, the pelvis of Hesperornis regalis resembles that of Podiceps. 
It is very long and narrow, as in that genus, and in other diving birds. 
The acetabulum differs from that in all known birds, in being closed 
internally by bone, except a foramen that perforates the inner wall, as in 
the Crocodiles. The ilium, ischium, and pubis, moreover, have their 
posterior extremities free and distinct. This reptilian character is seen, 
likewise, in the Emeu, as weli as in Tinamus, which in other respects also 
shows affinities with the Ostriches. 


Tue Inivm. (Plates X and XI.) 


The ilium is extremely long and narrow. Its superior outline is 
gently arcuate, and this border joins the dorsal margin of the other ilium 
on the median line, thus forming a roof-shaped covering over nearly all 
the sacrum. The pre-acetabular portion of the ilium is only about one- 
fourth of its entire extent. From the acetabulum forward, the ilia diverge, 
showing at first, between their upper margins, the neural spines of the 
vertebree below, and then, in front, the zygapophyses of the first of the 
sacral series. The anterior extremity of the ilium is thin, and rounded in 
outline, the ventral margin extending nearly to the bottom of the first 
sacral vertebra. 

69 


70 ODONTORNITHES. 


The post-acetabular part of the ilium is very elongate, and its lower 
border somewhat curved downward. The free extremity, behind the last 
codssified vertebra, is thin, and turned slightly upward, and outward. On 
the lower portion of the outer surface, there is a strong ridge, which arises 
behind the upper part of the anti-trochanter, and sweeps gently down- 
ward until it reaches the lower margin of the ilium; whence it rises 
gradually, and continues backward to nearly opposite the last sacral 
vertebra. This ridge is shown in Plate X, figure 1, and its prominence in 
this specimen (number 1206), may have been somewhat increased by 
pressure, before removal from the matrix. 

The acetabulum has a well-defined border, which is nearly circular. 
Above this, there is a large anti-trochanter, or articular surface to which 
was applied the neck of the femur. The internal face of the acetabulum 
was not closed merely by fibrous tissue, as in modern birds, but by bone, 
which is penetrated by a foramen of moderate size, (Plate XI, figure 1, a/). 
The acetabular region of the ilium is strongly codssified with the sacrum, 


while nearer its extremities the union is less perfect. 


Tue Iscurum. (Plates X and XI.) 


The ischium forms part of the acetabulum, and anti-trochanter, and 
then, contracting rapidly, is continued backward as a long slender bone, 
which is entirely free at its distal end. Viewed from the side, the upper 
margin curves downward, nearly parallel with the convex ventral margin 
of the ilium, while the lower border is very gently arcuate, with the 
convexity below. 

The distal extremity is obtusely pointed, and is somewhat turned 
upward and outward, terminating nearly opposite the posterior end of the 
ilium. The anterior half of the free portion is rod-like, and the distal 
half expands gradually, nearly to the extremity. The outer convex surface 
of the rod-like portion is continued over the distal half as an obtuse 
rounded ridge, which extends to the extremity. There are no processes 
on this bone extending upward toward the ilium, or downward to the pubis. 


-_ 


PELVIC ARCH OF HESPERORNIS. 71 


The following figures represent the pelvic bones of two recent birds, 
the Emeu and Grebe, which, in this part of the skeleton, also, repeat some 
of the characters seen in Hesperornis. 


Fig. 16. 


FIGURE 16.—Pelvis of Emeu (Dromeus Nove Hollandie, Latham); side view; one-fifth natural size. 


Fi@. 17. 


FIGURE 17.—Pelvis of Grebe (Podiceps occidentalis, Lawrence); side view; natural size. 


Figure 18.—The same pelvis (Podiceps occidentalis, Lawrence); seen from above. 
The signification of the letters is the same in all the above figures, viz: a. acetabulum; / ilio-sciatic 
foramen; 7/. ilium; 7s. ischium; p. pubis; p’. post-pubis; s. sacrum. 


=~] 
bo 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue Pusis. (Plates X and XI.) 


The bone usually called “pubis” in modern birds, which the writer 
has shown to be probably the post-pubis, forms, in Hesperornis, the lower 
posterior portion of the acetabulum, and then extends backward as a 
long, slender, rod-like bone, nearly parallel with the ischium. It is some- 
what longer than the ischium, and its distal extremity is truncated at right 
angles with the shaft. This bone is of nearly equal width throughout its 
entire length, and sends off no processes or projections toward the ischium, 
or from its own lower margin. 

Viewed from the inner side, the bone above described is seen to pass 
beneath the acetabular foramen in a strong ridge, and terminate in front 
of the acetabulum, in an obtusely rounded tuberosity. This process may 
be seen in some recent birds, more particularly in those that especially use 
their posterior limbs. It has been called the ilio-pectineal process of the 
ilium, and is considered an outgrowth of that bone. The writer has shown, 
however, by a comparison of the pelvic elements in Dinosaurian reptiles 
and in birds, that this prominence should be regarded rather as probably 
representing the pubic bone of reptiles.! 


The relation of the principal pelvic elements to each other in the 
pelvis of recent birds is illustrated in the figures given on page 71. In the 
pelves represented on page 73, the remnant of the reptilian pubis is still 
plainly to be seen, especially in Geococcyx. It is not improbable that the 
retention of this process may be due in part to the habits of certain species, 
as it seems to be best developed in running birds, and those that especially 
use the posterior limbs. A similar process is seen in some mammals, 


where it may serve a like purpose. 


The outer surface of the pelvis in Hesperornis, especially of the ilium, 
is marked by delicate vascular impressions, but the bones themselves are 
dense, and nearly solid. 


* American Journal of Science and Arts. Vol. xvi, p. 415, Nov.,.1878; and vol. 
XVii, p. 92, Jan., 1879. 


=I 
oo 


PELVIC ARCH OF HESPERORNIS. 


The three pelvic bones of Hesperornis are firmly codssified, as in 
existing birds, but the ilium is ankylosed to the sacrum in the acetabular 
region alone. The true pubic element, or ‘ilio-pectineal” process, is not 
larger than in many recent birds, and is much inferior in size to the 
corresponding protuberance in the pelvis of Geococcyx, and of Tinamus, 
shown below. 

In these two genera, moreover, another point of resemblance to 
Hesperornis appears in the acetabulum, the inner margin of which is 
materially narrowed by ossification, although a large perforation remains. 
In Hesperornis, the acetabular foramen is much smaller than in any 
known bird, and during life was doubtless closed by the round ligament. 
This reduction of the acetabular opening by ossification strengthens the 
pelvis at this point, and thus is of service where powerful action of the 
posterior limbs is required. 


Figure 20.—Pelvis of Tinamus robustus, Sclater and Salvin; seen from the left; natural size. 
a. acetabulum; Zé. ilium; ¢s. ischium; p. pubis; p’. postpubis. 


10 


74 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue Sacrum. (Plates X and XI.) 


The sacrum in Hesperornis regalis is very long and narrow, and the 
vertebree which compose it are usually well codssified. The number of 
vertebrae in the true sacrum cannot be accurately determined, but in the 
ankylosed series, illustrated in plates X and XI, there are fourteen. This 
series may be conveniently described as the sacrum, although some of the 
anterior vertebree are evidently sacro-dorsals, and some of the posterior 
should be regarded as urosacrals or caudals. 

The first vertebra of the series is the twenty-fourth in number, count- 
ing from the skull. It is the largest of the sacral series, and is entirely 
enclosed between the ilia. Its transverse processes bear no articulated rib, 
but are expanded at the distal end, and abut directly against the ilium. 
The line of union of this vertebra with the succeeding one is strongly 
marked, and in one specimen of this species (number 1477), the vertebra 
is free, and hence it is represented in the figures below, and its measure- 
ments are given separately. The junction between the twenty-fifth and 
twenty-sixth vertebra can be traced on the lower surface, but behind this 
the lines of union are obliterated, except two or three near the posterior 
end of the series. 

The figures below represent the twenty-fourth vertebra taken from 
the series in which it is distinct. 


FIGURE 21.—Twenty-fourth vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; (No. 1477) front view; natural size. 
FIGURE 22.—The same vertebra; posterior view. The neural spine in this specimen is not preserved. 
d. diapophysis; nc. neural canal; z. pre-zygapophysis. 


PELVIC ARCH OF HESPERORNIS. 75 


The neural spines of the sacral vertebree, and of the others codssified 
with them, are compressed transversely. With the exception of those of 
the two last, or urosacral, vertebrae, these spines do not extend above the 
upper margins of the ilia. These vertebree are the longest of the series, 
surpassing in extent even the anterior ones. 

Some of the principal dimensions of the pelvic arch of Hesperornis 
regalis are given in the measurements which follow: 


Measurements of Pelvic Arch. (No. 1206.) 


Teng thro filt urnye. Foo see ate Ren a er ca, Hy ee a ne EE 380.0™™ 
Wepthvotspelvassacrossiace pall ulus eee aye ee eae aunt yey earn enya 74.0 
Greatest depth of ilium, behind acetabulum,_..___.._...----------------- 52.0 
"Distance from anterior end of ilium to center of acetabulum,___.--..------ 104.0 
Mransyerseldtame ters of aGet aly ul tr steppe eae ect oe ae ee tpt 24.0 
otal extent of codssified sacral vertebre,.---) 22. = 22222522222 820.0 
Length of the first sacral, or twenty-fourth, vertebra, --.------------------ 21.0 
Transyerse(diameter of anterior articulationyees] o 426) 4404S eee eee 25.0 
Wertical diameterotanterior articulations = se ema aye ee eee eee 14.0 
Length of ischium from posterior border of acetabulum, ------------------ 260.0 
eno throtspubisrandspost-pul iste meee ess ae eee see er ae ae eres 330.0 
Extent of pubis in front of anterior border of acetabulum, ---------------- 15.0 
Extent of post-pubis behind posterior border of acetabulum, --------------- 291.0 
Vertical diameterof post-pubis; ati basen eee se sane ae se eae eae 12.0 
Greatest diameter of foramen im acetabulum, —!_— 42-2 _ 222-22 222 28s 12.0 
Least diameter of foramen in acetabulum, -~__2__-222__ =~ = 22-2 e222 ies 7.0 
Height of anti-trochanter above acetabulum,..........-.-.-------------- 25.0 
Antero-posterior extent of anti-trochanter,._......--..---.------------=- 22.0 
Greatest distance between upper margins of anti-trochanters,_.-....------- 54.0 


Measurements of Twenty-fourth Vertebra. (No. 1477.) 


Lenpth oficentrumsss 325 sees Sat oo Pe os eee es Wine 2 Senay le 22.0™™ 
Meastitransvierserdiamet ero teec extra pee ae aye eva pa epg pee peer 12.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_-- -------------- 31.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum, -------------------- 11.0-17.0 
Transverse diameters of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------- 20.5-24.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,.-..------.-------- 12.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .---..---------- 20.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, ---._---------------- 52.0 
Wrameters(Olspre-Zye Apo p hiyiS CRs meee ae ae area eee ate 7.5-10.5 


meng th otioorote neural canal yee re eee we era eee eee eee 20.5 


CHAPTER VI. 


THE CAUDAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 
(Plates XII and XX.) 


Tue tail of Hesperornis regalis presents some peculiarities of structure 
not before seen in birds. It was composed, apparently, of twelve vertebree, 
and all of these are preserved, with the exception of that portion of the 
last which formed the extreme end of the tail. The number of caudal 
vertebree in Hesperornis regalis exceeds those in any known recent bird, 
with the possible exception of the Great Auk (Alca impennis, Linn.), now 
nearly or quite extinct. The number falls far short, however, of that in 
the tail of <Archeopteryx, which also. differs essentially in its general 
structure from the caudal extremity of Hesperornis. . 

The anterior free caudals of Hesperornis are short, with high neural 
spines, and moderate transverse processes. They are opisthoccelian, as in 
the corresponding vertebrae of Pavo and Geococcyx. The middle and 
posterior caudals have very long, and horizontally expanded, transverse 
processes, which restricted lateral motion, and clearly indicate that the tail 
was mainly moved vertically, evidently as an aid in diving. The last three 
or four caudal vertebree are firmly codssified, forming a flat, horizontal, 
terminal mass, analogous to, but quite unlike, the plough-share bone of 
modern birds. 

The caudal vertebree of Hesperornis are composed of compact osseous 
tissue, without pneumatic openings. None of them possess zygapophyses. 

77 


78 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue First Caupat Vertesra. (Plate XII, figure 1.) 


The first free caudal vertebra, which is the thirty-eighth in number, 
counting from the skull, is much shorter than the preceding one in the 
coossified sacral series, but considerably longer than those which follow. 
In its natural position, it was entirely included between the posterior 
extremities of the ilia. 

The anterior articular face of the centrum is vertically elliptical in 
outline, and somewhat convex. Immediately behind this, the centrum is 
constricted, and then expands regularly to the posterior articular face, 
which is much larger than the one in front, and moderately concave. It is 
sub-circular in outline, but its transverse diameter exceeds its vertical, and 
the upper and lower margins are slightly notched on the median line. 

The transverse processes extend downward, and slightly outward, and 
their external surfaces, which are nearly in the same plane as the sides of 
the neural arch, were attached to the divergent iliac bones by cartilage. 

The neural spine was elevated, and much expanded in a fore and 
aft direction. The neural canal, at its anterior orifice, is much com- 
pressed transversely; its posterior outlet is triangular, and very large, 
indicating a marked expansion of the spinal cord in this region of the 
vertebral column. This feature was doubtless directly connected with the 
powerful movements of the tail. 

The principal dimensions of the first free caudal, or thirty-eighth 


vertebra, in Hesperornis regalis, are given below: 


Measurements of First Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


bene thyotecen trum: oa arwe Menus ts ogy eas as tue one Can Ae nen eam cee ae 19.0=™ 
Meas taransyersevdiametersoteCenturums seas seam sen eee arenas nn pene 6.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation, __._......_..----------.--- 6.5 
Nerticalidiameteromanterionsanticulationse ee see meets loam een ya ue ern 8.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, ._____--_---_--------------- 11.0 
WWertical' diameter/of posterior) articulation, <__----=-----#22--5-=--255-5-- 8.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ------------------------ 20.0 
Extent of transverse processes below centrum, ___------------------------ 7.0 
iiGen'aihvofetlO Or. far © Tall ere cs eee ee ea ee ee 17.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,---.--.------------- 4.5 


Vertical diameter of posterior opening of neural canal, --.-.-------------- 7.0 


CAUDAL VERTEBRA OF HESPERORNIS. 79 


THE Seconp CaupaL VerTeBRA. (Plate XII, figure 2.) 


The second free caudal vertebra is much shorter than the preceding, 
and its centrum is much more massive. The anterior articular face is 
somewhat convex, and has a depressed sub-circular outline, with the lower 
half of the margin excavated. The posterior articular face is nearly flat, 
but somewhat concave near the centre. 

The transverse processes are directed outward and slightly downward, 
terminating a little below the ventral surface of the centrum. They are 
longer than those of the preceding vertebra, but have less antero-posterior 
extent. 

The neural spine is stout and elevated, and has its superior extremity 
expanded into a round knob. The neural canal is large, and vertically 
oval in outline, and its lower margin cuts into the upper border of the 
anterior articular face. The posterior margin of the neural arch, when 
seen from the side, is parallel with that of the posterior articular face of 
the centrum, and slightly in advance of it. 


Measurements of Second Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1206.) 


Meng th of centrum isis 552 as sate cece eee Seal tie ele oR UM Sheed ea ete erp NOL 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,..._........_.--_.---------- 14.0 
iVierticalidiameter! of anterlorsarticulatvomss sees 22 es ieee eri un atin via rey 10.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation,._._..___._--------------=-- 13.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation,--22 2-2-2422 5542-2 - 22-522 - 11.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ------------------------ 29.0 
Length of transverse processes from centrum, ____-..--.--.-2--2--------- 8.0 
Beng thvomfoorioteneuralycartal] espe sere ye ere meee neta aye ee x 12.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neural canal, -.-._-.------------- 5.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior opening of neural canal,_-.....------------- 7.0 
Heicht/of nenralispinetaboye| centrum) 22 - ee ee eee ee eee een ee 21.0 


Tue Tarrp CaupaL Vertrpra. (Plate XII, figure 3.) 


The third caudal vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, or the fortieth in the 
column, is the shortest of the series, with the exception of those at the end 
of the tail. It is also the first caudal which is entirely behind the ends of 
the ilia, and its shortness is probably due to the fact that here the flexure 
of the tail essentially began. 


80 é 3 ODONTORNITHES. 


The anterior articular face of the centrum is convex, broadly ovate 
in outline, and slightly notched above, below the neural canal. The 
posterior articular face is similar in form, and slightly concave. 

‘The transverse processes are stouter than in the last vertebra, and their 
distal ends are thickened, and abruptly truncated. The axes of these 
processes, if continued to the axis of the neural spine, would meet in the 
neural canal, and form equal angles with it and with each other. The 
neural spine is elevated and massive, and its posterior margin is nearly 
vertical. Its apex is bent forward and expanded, and is cordiform in 
superior outline. The neural arch covers the whole of the centrum, and 
the canal is large, and vertically ovate in outline. 


Measurements of Third Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Uren othvo fxcervt urine nat be wel eel akye grepos yee ig Mas deeerelaapaep ey aet Teo Wiley ne Si 120nm 
Least. diameter, below transverse processes, _-__---------------------+---- 9.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,..__....-_-.---------------- 13.0 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation,__...._..._...__--------.----- 10.0-11.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, ....-..----.---------------- 12.5 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation, ...._..---------------------- 10.0-11.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse. processes, - - ---------------------- 82.0 
ILeayeidal ane aakeyoye ope volsumell Geb es ee a De ee oes 10.0 
ene chyoterootroteneumall carnal mesg emai aioe space eli anes a ape ote pane ae niece 8.5 
Vertieal diameter of anterior opening of neural camal,____-.-------------- 5.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior opening of neural canal,_____...----------- 5.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior opening of neural canal, ---.------------ 4.0 
Height of neural spine, above floor of neural canal,_--.-_----------------- 22.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft of neural spine, ---------------------------- 3.0 
Transverse diameter of head of neural spine,---------------------------- 6.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of diapophysis, at base, ----.------------------ 6.5 


Tue FourtH Caupat Vertesra. (Plate XII, figure 4.) 


The fourth caudal vertebra is similar in many respects to the one last 
described, but the centrum is materially longer. The anterior articular 
face is considerably smaller than in the third vertebra. It is somewhat 
coneave, and so deeply notched above for the neural canal as to be sub- 
cordate in outline. The posterior face is similar to that of the last 
vertebra, but the transverse processes are stouter, and extend more directly 
backward. The neural arch, when seen from the front, is very similar to 
that in the preceding vertebra, but its spine is shorter, and its cordiform 


apex is broader, and more turned forward. 


CAUDAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 81 


Measurements of Fourth Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


hength ot: centrum sy) 4 see ak eee ARP Ge eh ee a son 
Least diameter, below transverse processes,_..........------------------- 7.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,........_.......------------ 11.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation,.~.2...._.....2---.----_------ 9.2-11.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation,..........-.---.------------ 10.2 
Vertical diameters of posterior articulation,...._...____-.______-------- 9.5-10.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes,__________--_----------- 32.0 
Lenya OH iwor Gr mene CaNll = oo 3 Se oe ee se ane wasn eeskeeducskonsce 10.5 
eno Ghyoreno ofeo.tan eurall (cera espana ee pe nee ee 8.2 
Transverse diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,______.____-_____- 4.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior opening of neural canal,__________--_------- 5.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior opening of neural canal,_______-__--__--- 4.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior opening of neural canal,______-___--__-___- 4.5 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal,______..__---__-__-___- 19.0 
Least antero-posterior diameter of transverse processes,_------------------ 6.5 
Transverse diameter of shaft of neural spine,-_..___.___-_--------------- 3.0 
Transverse diameter of head of neural spine,__.--.---_£.------1-.------- 7.0 


THe Kirra Caupau VerTesra. (Plate XII, figure 5.) 


The fifth caudal vertebra of Hesperornis regalis is somewhat longer 
than the fourth, but its centrum is narrower, and its articular faces 
perceptibly smaller. The general form of the anterior articulation is 
sub-quadrate in outline, with the corners rounded. It is notched above for 
the neural canal, and has its lower border also indented on the median line. 
Both articular facets are somewhat concave. 

The transverse processes are much longer than in the last vertebra, 
and their distal ends are expanded horizontally. The axes of the descend- 
ing portion of these processes bear the same relation to the axis of the 
neural spine, as in the third vertebra, the three meeting in the neural canal, 
and including equal angles with each other. The lower surface of the 
transverse process extends somewhat below the ventral face of the centrum, 
and then turns abruptly upward and outward, nearly to the extremity, 
which is slightly deflected. Seen from above, the ends of these transverse 
processes appear rounded, and their posterior margins project behind the 
articulation of the centrum. The ventral surface of the body of this 


vertebra is concave in a fore and aft direction, and convex transversely. 
i 


82. ODONTORNITHES. 


A small free hypapophysis was articulated with the posterior lower 
margin of this vertebra, and also with the adjoining margin of the succeed- 
ing centrum. This bone resembles somewhat the corresponding part in the 
Loon, and is clearly homologous with the chevron bones in reptiles. The 
neural arch of the fifth caudal extends over nearly the whole centrum. 
The posterior margin of the spine curves backward above the neural canal, 
and the summit of the spine is directed forward. The neural canal is 
materially smaller than in the fourth vertebra, but is similar in outline. 


Measurements of Fifth Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Genta theotyce mrs pees aye Sek yeh eet hou ohs Ry I Ea a ney a aa ne ere ane 13,9™™ 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation, ___._..__.-.-----.__--------- 11.0 
Njerticalidiameters of anterior articulationy.--2 2242222 eae eee ee 9.0-10,2 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation,___-__--_-.-_--------------- 11.0 
Nexticalldiameters of posterior articulation, 222 -92- 942s 0422 522 ee 9.0- 9.5 
ILeMen Gre tikxorw ore saenumll Cen oo oe ee a 12.0 
JL Crave OME IROXORE ChE LVL CHM Ee a ee ed 9.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ------------------ 3.2 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,.---_--------------- 4.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ----------------- 4.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, ------------------- 4.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ------------------------ 39.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base,_.---------------- 7.0 


THE Sixto Caupau Vertesra. (Plate XII, figure 6.) 


This vertebra differs considerably from the fifth. Its centrum is longer, 
and much more slender. The transverse processes are much longer, and 
so expanded at their distal ends as to greatly restrict lateral motion; which 
was still further prevented by the same means in the succeeding vertebre. 
The under surfaces of the transverse processes have a marked prominence 
at the point where the outward bend occurs. These prominences extend 
below the ventral surface of the centrum. A free hypapophysis, very 
similar to the one already described, articulated with the posterior margin 
of this vertebra also. The neural arch is mainly upon the anterior half of 
the centrum. The neural canal is small, and triangular in outline, and the 
neural spine is of moderate height. 


CAUDAL VERTEBRZ OF HESPERORNIS. 835 


Measurements of Sixth Caudal Vertebra, (No. 1200.) 


henoth: ofvcen trum gecesi yal Cee enol ame oy. ee mentary ee ne eae ane en IB pee 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,.............----.-----1-=---- 11.0 
Transverse diameter*of posterior articulation, ............---------.----- 10.0 
Ienkeie@ribyor or men orm Loe kg 13.5 
Gengthyoferoo.fro. here urell can al eyes) ety ann aye fp epee a meer eT er 10.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,__-__--_---_------ 2.5 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, _---_----------__-- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening, __--_------------ 2.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at posterior opening,----_-------------- 3.8 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base,------------------ 8.0 


THe SeventH Caupat Vertesra. (Plate XII, figure 7.) 


In the seventh caudal vertebra, the centrum becomes still more slen- 
der, and the transverse processes reach their greatest lateral expansion. 
The articular faces of the centrum are concave, and broadly oval in out- 
lme. The transverse processes pass off from the posterior half of the 
centrum, and extend directly outward, and somewhat backward. They 
are broadly expanded horizontally, and their extremities are abruptly 
truncated. The hypapophysis, which articulates with the posterior lower 
margin of this vertebra, has become coéssified with the centrum of the suc- 
ceeding vertebra. The neural arch is placed well forward. The neural 
canal is much reduced, and the neural spine was weak, and short. 


Measurements of Seventh Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Dengthioft centrumyse aos 2 Nee © ciear tae Leni t Aan Te eco ig tan Se fel a ase ees 13207= 
ransverse diameter of anterior articulations es eee ene eee eee 10.2 
iWVexrticalidiameterotsanteriorianti culation ese eras ete ee eee ee 8.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, ........-------------------- 8.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior: articulation,-.222. 2222 -2--2 225-5. 222-2-2 2 =. 7.0 
Mength: of tloor, of meurally cama) ses Wan See eee se a ee eee 14.0 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening,---------------. é 3.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -------------------- 3.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ----------------------- 59.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base,------------------ 8.0 


THe Eieuta Caupat Vrertesra. (Plate XII, figure 8.) 


The eighth caudal vertebra of Hesperornis regalis has the centrum 
constricted medially, and shorter than that of the seventh. Its codssified 
hypapophysis was pointed in front, and projected beneath the posterior 


84 ODONTORNITHES. 


margin of the preceding vertebra. The transverse processes are elongate, 
and gradually expand after leaving the vertebra. Their posterior margins 
are at right angles to the axis of the centrum, and slightly in advance of 
its posterior articular face. The lower margin of this face was covered by 
the hypapophysis codssified with the centrum of the followmg vertebra, 
and, when in position, the anterior part of this process nearly reached the 
hypapophysis in front. The neural arch covers the greater part of the 
centrum, and the neural spine is short, and compressed. 


Measurements of Eighth Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


Nem OCHO RRCONtRTINs Eeearn sai be Py bsiNe. use cn neon oe eee aa ee eur ne area ipa 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,._._.__...._.--_------------- 8.0 
Mexticalydiameter, of antenoriarticulationys a= eee. = om aes ene eee 7.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation, with hypapophysis, ------------- 11.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, __--.---.------------------- 8.5 
Wertical‘diameter, of posterior) articulation, ©. --2- 22-2505 22 2522222 2422 6.0 
en'othnotetl oorgo ten eumall ace all eam sen e ee eye Seine ne ee ee eee ee er 14.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, ----------------- 2.0 
Vertical diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, -------------------- 3.0 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ------------------------ 57.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base, ------------------ ro 820 
diransyerseidiametersorhypapophiysisye see ae see = eee ae eee 8.5 
Weriicaladianreters ote hiya op bry Sis eae ae ate et aap eee 4.0 


Tue Ninta Caupat Vertesra. (Plate XII, figure 9.) 


The ninth caudal vertebra has a low depressed centrum, and enormous 
transverse processes. The articular faces are nearly plane. The anterior is 
crescent-shaped, with the angles rounded, and the convexity, which is 
above, is notched for the neural canal. The ventral surface has a large 
hypapophysis, codssified with its anterior half, and projecting beneath the 
preceding vertebra. The transverse processes pass off from the centrum 
nearly at right angles with the axis (figure 23, page 86), and they are 
much expanded horizontally. Their distal ends are truncated somewhat 
obliquely, and the outer posterior angles are on a line with the posterior 
articular face of the centrnm. The neural spine is low, and of considerable 
antero-posterior extent. 


CAUDAL VERTEBR2Z OF HESPERORNIS. 85 


Measurements of Ninth Caudal Vertebra. (No. 1200.) 


ene throt. cen trues sees ge eet aes Mes ew Sr ap et ade Seas Dea 16.0™™ 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,..........------------------ 10.0 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation,..-__...._---_-------------+--- 4.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation,...._........-...----------- 9.5 
IbcnyaWdn GH tiki Ge manpeall Gam) ooo ee oe eat eSemecmeunoe nee 15.5 
Transverse diameter of neural canal, at anterior opening, _---_----------- 2.6 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes,________---------------- 56.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base,__._-------------- 10.5 
Anterior extent of hypapophysis in front of centrum,_.-...-..------------ 8.0 
‘Rransverse diameterior hypapophysisss2- .Sa ee eee eee nen 6.5 
Vertical diameter of hypapophysis; 2-252 se) Ba) ese eee eye eee 2.0 


Tue Tentu, ELEveNTH, AnD TweLFTH CaupAL VERTEBRZ. 
(Plate XII, figure 10.) 


The remaining caudal vertebre of Hesperornis regalis are codssified 
into a broad, horizontal, terminal bone, homologous with the pygostyle, or 
plough-share bone, in existing birds. In this terminal mass, the tenth 
vertebra. retains the general form of the ninth, but its transverse processes 
are less elongate, and less expanded. Its centrum is depressed, and there 
is a small hypapophysis codssified with its anterior ventral surface. The 
neural arch remains distinct, and there is a short neural spine. The 
expanded transverse processes extend outward at right angles to the axis of 
the centrum, and project but slightly below its under surface. Their 
extremities are obliquely truncated by the removal of the outer posterior 


angie. 


The eleventh vertebra is much smaller than the tenth, and firmly 
codssified with it. Its transverse processes are slender, and are directed 
forward as well as outward. Its hypapophysis is codssified with the 
centrum, and in part with the posterior surface of the preceding vertebra. 


The neural spine is very low, but distinct. 


The twelfth vertebra, which apparently forms the termination of the 
tail, is firmly ankylosed with the eleventh, but the greater portion of its 
centrum has been broken off in the present specimen, and is lost. Its 
general form is indicated in the restoration of Hesperornis in Plate XX. 


86 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Terminal Caudal Vertebre. (No. 1200.) 


Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of tenth caudal vertebra, ___--- 
Werticalcdiameterion anterior articulations==—= =o" 95s eee eee ae 
Height of neural spine above floor of neural canal, -_-.__..--------------- 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, --_--------------------- 
Antero-posterior extent of neural spine,__---.--.--2-----2----------+--- 
Antero-posterior diameter of transverse process, at base,-_---.------------ 


Antero-posterior extent on median line of the parts preserved of tenth and 
following aventebrayerise sae ets si aS ee ctl eye Reta ae eee gee 
Diameter of the part preserved of eleventh vertebra, across transverse 
PROCESSES IPOS ec rz je ee AE ere Ds LES ea ae cea cee Sele 


10.0™™ 
3.5 
4,2 

48.0 

13.0 
8.0 


25.0 


27.0 


The last six or seven vertebre in the tail of Hesperornis regalis were 


so interlocked by the expanded transverse processes, as shown in figure 23, 


below, that very little lateral motion was possible. The hypapophyses, 


also, of the last two free caudals, would restrict vertical flexure materially, 


so that the end of the tail would move mainly as a whole. This would 


give great power, similar to that in the Beaver’s tail, or in the flexible 


blade of an oar. 


Figure 23.—Caudal vertebre of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; seen from above, in position; two-thirds natural 
size. a. anterior convex face of first caudal; b. transverse process of fifth caudal; c. transverse process 


of eleventh caudal, or middle vertebra of the pygostyle. 


CHAE HE Vell: 


THE LEGS AND FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 
(Plates XITI-XX.) 


The posterior limbs of Hesperornis regalis present an admirable 
example of adaptive structure. The means of locomotion were confined 
entirely to these extremities, and the life of Hesperornis was probably more 
completely aquatic than that of any known bird. It may fairly be ques- 
tioned whether it could even be said to walk on land, although some 
movement on shore was of course a necessity. Considering the posterior 
limb as a whole, it will be found a nearly perfect piece of machinery for 
propulsion through the water. Provision was made for a very powerful 
backward stroke, followed by a quick recovery, with little loss by 
resistance, a movement quite analogous to the strong stroke of an oar, 
feathered on its return. 

Among recent birds, we have, in the genus Podiceps, the nearest 
approach to the legs and feet of Hesperornis, and the osseous structure of 
these parts is essentially the same throughout in the two genera. The 
muscular system, also, of this member must have been very similar in 
both. In many respects, however, the bones of the posterior limbs of 
Hesperornis present evidences of a more primitive structure than is seen in 
any recent diving birds. 

BY 


88 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue Femur. (Plate XIII.) 


The femur of Hesperornis regalis is remarkably short and stout, more 
so than in any known bird, recent or fossil. In its general features, it 
resembles the femur of Podiceps, but the shaft is much stouter, and is flat- 
tened in an antero-posterior direction. The head is large, and well rounded, 
and is supported by a short and powerful neck. There is a deep pit on 
the inner superior surface of the head, for the insertion of the round 
ligament. The great trochanter is very large, and extends outward a 
considerable distance beyond the shaft. Its upper surface is below that of 
the head, and there is a concave depression seen between the two, when 
the femur is viewed from the front. The whole upper end of the femur, 
outside of the head, is covered by an articular surface, which plays against 
the anti-trochanter of the ilium. 

The shaft of the femur is somewhat curved, with the convexity 
forward, and is marked on the posterior, inner, and outer surfaces by 
strong prominences for the attachment of muscles. The shaft contains no 
pneumatic foramina, but there is a large medullary cavity, in the bone, as 
shown in the two sections represented below: 


Fig. 25. 


Figure 24.—Transverse section through shaft of femur of Hesperornis regalis; (No. 1472), top view; 
natural size. 
FIGURE 25.—Transverse section of same bone (No. 1489), just above distal articulation. m. medullary cavity. 


The distal end of the femur is much expanded transversely, and, of 
the two anterior condyles, the outer is much the larger. The groove 
between these condyles is shallow, and on a line with the axis of the shaft. 
On the posterior distal surface, there is a strong obtuse ridge which plays 
between the upper ends of the tibia and fibula. The ridge passes upward 
and outward, and ends nearly opposite the outer margin of the shaft. 


FEMUR OF HESPERORNIS. 


89 


The femur is one of the most characteristic bones in Hesperornis 


regalis, and to show its variation in the species, measurements are given 
below from five different individuals, the first, number 1200, being the type: 


Measurements of Femur. (No. 1200.) 


Left. Right. 
Tength of femurs secant hrs ay Stee ot Or ah take Sy ata er anaemia 99.0"™ 99.0™™ 
Antero-posterior diameter of head of femur,.______._.-.-------------- 18.5 18.5 
Greatestsproximalidiameter of ishatt.e spe eee esate eee ean 53.0 52.0 
Greatest distaludvame ter ofa shatter ane 53.0 54.0 
eastsiransverse diameter ofshaht. eee 22.5 22.0 
iLeastiantero-posterior diameter of shattass see o= ae eee eee eee 18.0 19.2 
Greatestidiameter,omdistal articulations =. see ee eee enna 53.0 53.0 
Greatestidiameterol tibiallanticulationsesee oe eee eee 40.0 40.0 
Transverse diameter of fibular articulation,-.-_.---.-----___-.-1---_4- 14.0 14.5 
Greatest diameter of annericon dy] eyes a= eye eae ere rn 21.0 21.0 
east diametertot immeracon diy lev mes nye ey rey ne eer yaya ne 14.0 14.5 
Length across the curve of ridge between tibia and fibula, __-____------- 27.0 25.0 

Measurements. (No. 1206.) 
Wen othvot Lette t emus eto ee fe ape scat em ON ars tee ee Nap ep Nee 96.07" 
Diameteriof head? ofeem ure tee ele eee ee es seyret al eel aera ne mtr 18.0 
inransversexdiameteriota proxamaliendses= sete eee ee eee eee 51.0 
Mransverserdiametenoteshate mearyrni cl ll eames aye yam a meyer ear een 22.0 
Rransverse: diam etercotencs tell aes clase ee ee ae eee etc er ar 49.0 
Greatestidiameterofadistalwanticulations === ees eeeaee eae ee ee eee 49.0 
Greatestdiam eter ofeiibralsartre mati onset ee 37.0 
Mransverse diameteroretpularrartye wl ator meen eae ene mera 14.0 
Greatest diameterorinner condyle sess sees see ase see eee ee eee ee 21.0 
east diameterofainnericon diye; sees eee se a eee re 13.0 
Hengthyof ridge between tibiayand) fibulaye=e eee n == ee eee eee eee ee 25.0 
Measurements. (No. 1207.) 

Left. Right. 
Ia OhE HSNO oe roca none oguenae aaae oaabas Se GosdnaonEd asus 98.5™™ 101.07" 
Antero-posterior diameter of head of femur,.__-_--.---.-------------- 19.0 18.5 
iransyerse diametersotsproximaliends === s=s= =e eee eee eee 52.0 52.0 
east transverse diameter, near middle;s 22 === ee see ee eae eee 22.0 92.0 
PPransversendiametercotma scaly cm Ceca ae eee ee ee eee 52.0 53.0 
Antero-posterion diameter, mear middle, = === sess eee 18.0 18.0 
Greatest-«diameter on distal articulation, seas ee se see se eee eee eee 53.0 53.0 
Greatest diameter. ompipialwarticulatlons 2 sees te eee ee eee ae ee 40.0 40.0 
Transverse diameter of fibular articulation, .-..--.-------------------- 15.0 16.0 
Greatest diameters Ors inn ercon diy) Cys sre ee ae eae eee eee 21.0 21.0 
east diameter ofemmner (com diy Cesar tae esa ee eat 13.0 13.0 


12 


90 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Femur. (No. 1476.) 


Menothvorernoht femur, <=. fa2 i) Se Mae eee oe ae eee lara ons aren ne 105.0"™ 
Miametersofuhead Of femury ss aetna so meee kere ye MUR yah ete re 19.2 
pirANsversey diam CterxO typ TO XU aly eT Cl yee eae eee ease eae ee eae ep 54.0 
iransyerse diameter Ole si adi cary mi Cl Cll eye ee eye eye ene on ay Eien 21.0 
Eran sversexdiam Evernote stall eer Clases ee eee a ear ee naan oe 53.0 
Werticalidiametermearkt he mid dll esses ase eee ere eee eee ee ee 19.0 
Greatest diameter of distal articulation) =2-2 552205555552 552 55 2s ane Sane 53.0 
Gureatestadiameternotetibialsanrticulatlonie = see ean see ae ee 38.0 
Transverse diameter of fibular articulation, --____ a OCS 2 EINE Rn ce 15.5 
Creates tala eterrOreInmeryc On iyil es mse ae nape ees ney een ee ee 20.0 
Meas traiameterso etn Cre COM Cay: Ces sae eae ere 13.0 
Length of ridge between tibia and fibula,-_..........---_--------------- 25.0 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


Men ethvotsd oh tet eMuUrss af isse a oer ee = pagers, Serer e ae ist ony ed 97.07" 
Antero-posterior diameter of head of femur, -_...--...------------1----- 19.0 
Greatest sproximalidiameter, of shafts. == masses sn ess = sae see 53.0 
Greatest distal diameter of shaft,.........-------/.----. Yaa ec saet 51.0 
Weastatransverse diame tenoteshaiteee eee == ae ee ee ae eee aac 23.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of shaft, near middle, _-..._-.--..---.--------- 20.0 
Greatestidiameter ot distallarticulation sess =e eee eee ea ar yee ees 52.0 
Greatestrdiametersotatilolall mearstt Cull atl on sence eee eee ys eee 38.0 
uRtransiverserdrameterior fibulararticulation, === s =o eee sae ae es eens 15.0 
Greatest<diameter, of amner, condyles sss 222 i 2 os ee ee eee eee 20.0 
meastidiametersof inners cond yleys sem see eee ene eee wee anes 12.5 


Measurements. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


Maximum diameter of distal end of right femur,___._.-...-.---.----.---- 51.072 
ANPING TGLSS GME R NARS Ol NPR soe pos coors seas crise Gane oSuaGoseoGEesesoAS 21.0 
Werticalidiametermoleshatt: eam nos 2a) Ses aeie aus Wee eee Bee ae ee 21.0 
Greatestidiametersoteshatt.yabjmnd dl eye m sere eee ean 25.2 


Tue Tipra. (Plates XIV and XX.) 


The tibia of Hesperornis regalis is very long and powerful, and much 
the largest bone in the skeleton. In its general features, it most resembles 
the tibia in the genus Podiceps. It is somewhat expanded at its proximal 
end, where it articulates with the femur, and the articular faces are placed 
obliquely, and inclined outwards. The inner articular face is much the 
larger, and is slightly concave. The outer face is somewhat convex, and is 
only partly separated from the other by a constriction of the articular 
surface. The outer articulation projects considerably beyond the external 


TIBIA OF HESPERORNIS. oil 


margin of the shaft, and is supported below by a strong rounded ridge, 
which, lower down, passes into the true fibular ridge. here is a strong 
epicnemial crest: on the anterior surface of the proximal end, which, above 
the articulation, rises into a powerful tuberosity, or cnemial process. To 
the outer posterior surface of this spine, the patella was attached (Plate XX). 

The shaft of the tibia is nearly straight, with its transverse, slightly 
greater than its fore and aft, diameter. Seen from in front, the outer margin 
appears slightly concave, and the inner margin convex. The fibular ridge 
is strongly developed, and can be traced along the proximal three-fourths 
of the bone. Just below the middle, it disappears for a short distance, 
being cut off by an oblique groove for the artery, which here passed 
between the tibia and fibula. In the type specimen, number 1200, the 
surface of the shaft is marked by delicate vascular impressions, which are 
imperfectly indicated in Plate XIV, figure 1. In the specimen itself, these 
impressions are as perfect as in life, and well illustrate the marvelous 
degree of preservation characteristic of the vertebrate fossils from this 
geological horizon. 

The surface of the tibia shows no pneumatic foramina, but there is a 
rather large medullary cavity in the shaft. The size of this cavity is 
shown in the accompanying cuts, which represent transverse sections of 
' the tibia near the middle, and near the distal end. 


Fig. 26. 


FIGURE 26.—Transverse section through middle part of tibia of Hesperornis regalis; (No. 1207), top view; 
natural size. 

FIGURE 27.—Transyerse section through same bone; (No. 1491), near distal end; same view; natural size. 
m. wnedullary cavity; f. fibular ridge. 


The distal end of the tibia resembles that of the same bone in Podiceps, — 
but the inner condyle is here much the larger, and the two are only moder- 
ately expanded. The inner condyle extends somewhat below the outer 
one, but its fore and aft diameter is much less. The transverse diameter of 


92 ODONTORNITHES. 


the two condyles, when seen from the front, is sub-equal, and the groove 
between them does not correspond with the axis of the bone, but is some- 
what inclined inward. There is no osseous bridge in front, over the canal 
through which passes the tendon of the tibialis anticus muscle. The 
absence of this osseous bridge is noteworthy also in Podiceps, as it is 
apparently present in all other known aquatic birds. The groove between 
the posterior projections of the two condyles is broad, and flat, but narrows 
rapidly above. 

In the tables below will be found detailed measurements of the tibia 
of Hesperornis regalis, in the type, and in one other specimen : 


Measurements of Tibia. (No. 1200.) 


Left. Right. 
fen‘ a two tation aye ees eat se rae ee eta en ee ee a Nene 320.0" 320.0™™ 
Hlevatlonyormcnenni al spr Cesssme tees atte ees een a 22.0 22.0 
Greatest diameter of proximal articular surfuce,..------------------- 35.0 38.0 
Transverse diameter of inner proximal articular surface,-------------- 18.0 20.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner proximal articular surface, --------. 26.0 
Transverse diameter of outer proximal articular surface,-------------- 18.0 19.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer proximal articular surface, --------- 14.0 15.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft below fibular ridge,_.-...---.---------- 23.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of shaft below fibular ridge, --..------------ 16.0 
Transverse diameter of distal articular surface,__..........---------- 26.0 32.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of external condyle,.-.-..---------------- 32.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of internal condyle, -----.----------------- 19.0 19.0 
Depthioferoovebetweenrcondyles;see ase eases eae see eee aa 9.0 8.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 
Left. Right. 


Merve THO Lat tale eters se Lyte ee cael LETRA ORES ey yeu ee ys is $35:0227325,0"™ 
ilevattonyofecnemiala processes ee sere eee ee nee ee eee ee ee 21.0 23.0 
Greatest diameter of proximal articulation, ._..-.----------.--------- 33.0 36.0 
Transverse diameter of inner proximal articulation, ..---------------- 17.0 18.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner proximal articulation, ------------- 23.0 22.0 
Transverse diameter of outer proximal articulation, -----.-.---------- 15.5 15.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer proximal articulation, ------------- 12.5 
Transverse diameter of shaft below fibular ridge,_-..---------------- 21.5 22.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of shaft below fibular ridge,_...--..------- 16.5 16.5 
Transverse diameter of distal articulation,.-.......---..---------- as5 GO 82.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of external condyle, ------.---------------- 32.5 30.5 


Antero-posterior diameter of internal condyle,..........-.----------- 20.0 


PATELLA OF HESPERORNIS. 93 


THE Patretia. (Plates XV and XX.) 

The patella in Hesperornis regalis is a large bone, and entirely distinct 
from the tibia. In its general proportions, it resembles the patella in 
Podiceps. It differs materially, however, in being perforated by a large 
foramen for the tendon of the ambiens muscle, agreeing in this respect 
with the patella of the Gannet (Sula bassana, Briss.). The patella is much 
compressed transversely. Seen from the side, it is triangular in outline, 
and the outer surface is concave. When in position, its longer axis was 
nearly parallel with the axis of the tibia. Its lower extremity bears a large 
twisted articular face for union with the femur, and the lower posterior half 
of the inner side is roughened for attachment to the cnemial spine. 

The position of the patella in the skeleton is shown in Plate XX. 
When at rest, it extended in front of the anterior margin of the ilium, and, 
by its muscular attachments, added greatly to the power of the posterior 
limbs in swimming. ‘The superior extremity is obtusely pointed, and the 
outer margin is arcuate. 


The following measurements are taken from the patella of three 
specimens of Hesperornis regalis, and one, number 1474, of Hesperornis 
CYAaSSipes : 


Measurements of Patella. (No. 1207.) 


Total length of patella;- 252252222. 225 os Sone ee ee ee oe Oe oes 98.0=™ 
length of posterior side, as 2/s- 3 eet see eis ner eee eel nee anes 87.0 
Greatest diameterotearticulationse =a see eee eee Eee eee eee ee 37.0 
eastidiametersofrarticulation = 2 sa scapes ae ete eee ee tee ae ry tee eee 25.0 
Distance: from foramen to upper end! of patella, <= 242552222522 2 ee eee eee 71.0 
Vertical diameter/Obtoramens) oi 25 Saye oye wes seer eee tee re ay oe 6.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


MotalWlengthyotgpatel la esas eat eae el ee ee ra er eee 100.0" 
jeri bly iae POS CETL OTIS Cy ear ee ean ae ta ee eee 84.0 
Greatest diameter of articulation (approximate), _...-___----_--------------- 35.0 
Least diameter of articulation (approximate), 2--2 39 2225 222222 eee 25.0 


Distance from foramen to upper end of patella,......-.-----+--------------- 75.0 


g4 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Patella. (No. 1477.) 


Rotalilencthvot patellass see oe Ys aes Ul el eS pee fai oe ae arenes 103.0™™ 
Meno thvo fyposterlorysl de, sees oat es She oe eh a Pee A alee eat eee ae 90.0 
Greavestya1amererco Learsb1c ull cyto raspae ee ete et ao ee pep nae a up 41.0 
east diam CheE ROL ATU LCUL cyt @ Ti eee set ate ee nN 27.0 
Distance from foramen to upper end of patella,_..-_.-.---.----------------- 75.0 


Measurements. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


Motalvlencthiokwpatelkare S80 Neo Le Os ie ay eer ae eae Spee eH Aa 109.0" 
Ihenig thyofiposterion, Sid escarse 225 Nise We MN LS Ph RIN tetera ae ee De 98.0 
Greatestidiamreterso teraror Cul atl reir arto se mer net ar eey o evenn fo ten ape pane Sees 38.0 
Least diameter of articulation (approximate), ._...._.---i------------------- 25.0 
Distance from foramen to upper end of patella,__......--------------------- 82.0 


Tue Fisuta. (Plates XV and XX.) 


The fibula of Hesperornis agrees essentially with that of Podiceps in 
its general characters. It is about three-fourths of the length of the tibia, 
and was united to the fibular ridge of that bone only by cartilage. The 
proximal end is sub-quadrilateral in outline, and presents two articular 
facets; a large outer one, which is slightly concave, for union with the 
outer facet of the femur, and a smaller, oblique face on its inner margin, 
which meets the outer part of the femoral ridge, separating the fibula from 
the tibia. The distal half of the fibula is slender, and gradually tapers to 
the pointed lower extremity. This bone appears to be solid throughout, 
with no cavities, except minute vascular foramina. 


The measurements which follow give the main dimensions of the 
fibula in Hesperornis regalis : 


Measurements of Fibula. (No. 1200.) 


MN ert LMR Feuer Ul cas meet ata ie U8) YA eM eee es LS a eye 240.0" 
Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end,_....-..-.----------------------- 22.0 
Mrangversey diameters) ofp rosin all cer Gl esyeysy eae paper yey a ay nen 13-15.0 
Greatest idiametersot aslattstc ney suis Au mele Utne Shel ay eee et 2 od 17.0: 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end of fibula,.._....-...-..------------ 23.0™™ 
Mransverse diameteror sproximal end, e922! So see ee ee eee 12.0 
Greatest diameter otvsh att, scale Herat e ils C08 /s ie ie ees Me tee ea lal ae aes ee 16.0 


Antero-posterior diameter of shaft, at same point,........--.----------------- 8.5 


TARSO-METATARSUS OF HESPERORNIS. 95 


Measurements. (No. 1477.) 


Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end of fibula,.....-_...._-._----_-_------ 21.0" 
‘Eransyerse diameter!ofs proximal ends ye ase naa nla eee aye aay eee seo 13.0 
Greatest® diameteriof: SHatt, iyi Ue Ce" SUA Sail ee SS Hsin ona ieee Pe a 16.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, at same pomt,.__---_- 2-5) sb ee 7.0 


Tue Tarso—Merratarsus. (Plates XVI and XVIL.) 


In the tarso-metatarsal bone of Hesperornis regalis, we have the 
extreme modification of a form characteristic of modern diving birds. 
There were four digits in the foot, the fifth being entirely absent, as in all 
known birds, recent and fossil. In the adult Hesperornis, the second, third, 
and fourth metatarsals are thoroughly codssified into a stout, transversely 
compressed bone of moderate length, but in most specimens traces of the 
sutures remain. The fourth metatarsal element so greatly exceeds the 
other two in size, that it forms by far the greatest part of the entire tarso- 
metatarsal bone. 

The plane of motion for the whole limb, which above was coincident 
with the axes of the femur and tibia, was continued below through this 
element of the tarso-metatarsal, and down through the fourth, or outer, 
digit, which it supported. In this structure of Hesperornis, so admirably 
adapted for swimming, we have an example of the same kind of specialized 
modification which has prepared the foot of the Ostrich, among recent 
birds, and the Horse among mammals, for extreme speed on the land. 


The proximal end of the tarso-metatarsal is covered by two articular 
faces for union with the condyles of the tibia. The outer one is about half 
the size of the inner, and the two are separated by a prominent obtuse 
ridge. There is no hypotarsus, and there are no canals, or even grooves, 
for tendons on the posterior face of the proximal end, as seen in the Divers, 
and most other birds. This part of the bone is occupied by a rugose 
triangular tract, covered in life by cartilage, over which the tendons 
passed. Below this, there is a broad shallow depression, extending rather 
more than half the way to the distal extremity. 

The outer surface of the tarso-metatarsus is slightly concave longi- 
tudinally, and convex transversely. On the anterior face, there is a 


96 ODONTORNITHES. 


deep groove between the third and fourth metatarsal elements. This 
groove begins above in the fossa, just beneath the superior articulation, 
and it becomes deeper throughout its lower half, and ends in the foramen 
between the third and fourth: metatarsals, just above the distal condyles, as 
in the corresponding bone in Podiceps, and many other recent birds. There 
is a shallow groove, also, between the second and third metatarsals, which 
commences aboye, in the fossa already mentioned. 

The fourth metatarsal terminates below in a prominent free articular 
end, somewhat resembling, in general form, the distal end of the tibia. 
This extremity is truncated, nearly at right angles with the axis of the 
bone, and it projects considerably below the adjoining articular end of the 
third metatarsal. The inner condyle is much more prominent than the 
outer, especially in front. 

The third metatarsal element is scarcely one-third the size of the 
fourth, and is placed somewhat behind, and back of it. The distal extremity 
is hence oblique, and the inner condyle is smaller than the outer. 

The second-metatarsal element is still smaller and shorter, but its 
distal free extremity is but little inferior in size to the third. When the 
tarso-metatarsal bone is seen from the front, the third element is almost 
entirely concealed. 

The first metatarsal is not codssified with the main shaft of the 
tarso-metatarsal bone, but is a mere remnant, united to the lower half of 
the second by cartilage. Its place of union is indicated by an elongated 
oval indentation, on the inner margin of the second metatarsal, above its 
articular extremity. 


In Hesperornis crassipes, the tarso-metatarsal bone presents some inter- 
esting points of difference from that of Hesperornis regalis. It is stouter 
and more massive, and on the inner side of the upper half there is a large 
tuberosity, somewhat similar to the ossified support of a rudimentary spur 
(Plate XVII). This tuberosity is of equal size on each of the two meta- 
tarsals of the type specimen, number 1474. The sutures uniting the three 
metatarsals are well marked in this species. The large rugosity on the 


TARSO-METATARSUS OF HESPERORNIS. 97 


tarso-metatarsal bone is a striking character, and may possibly be an 
indication of sex. 


The tarso-metatarsal of Hesperornis gracilis is similar in its general 
character to the corresponding bone in Hesperornis regalis, but is of more 
slender proportions. 


The measurement of the tarso-metatarsal bones of the three known 
species of Hesperornis are given below from the type specimens. 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsus. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 
Left. Right. 


Mength\ to endlof outer articulatiors cts on aye awk ge slee a denies aise ulepeeeeL 136.0 136.0™™ 


eneth to\end! of median articulations= = 255s see ne ee eet 131.0 181.0 
Gength to endlof innervarticulations see ese ee ene Se ae epee 116.0 116.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end,_.____-_-------------.----- 21.0 21.0 
Mransverse diameter of proximal end) <5) 2 sce. Seema ea yew een ee 34.0 34.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle, _-_------- 16.5 16.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, at the middle, -_--_----- 22.0 22.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, at the middle,__._.______.__.-_-__------- 14.0 14.0 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation,...........---------- 15.0 15.0 
Vertical diameters of outer distal articulation,.________________-___-- 12-20.0 12-20.0 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation, __-_._.._----------- 8.0 8.0 
Vertical diameter of median distal articulation,__.__.-___------------ 15.0 14.5 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,__________-._----_---_- 9.0 9.0 


Vertical diameters of inner distal articulation, 


Measurements. (No. 1206.) 


ength toend of outersanticulations] sos ss oases ese yeh ee yee eee 132.0™™ 
Meng thytovendsofemedianyar-ticul ations mse see peepee eee eee er asa ue 128.0 
Bength' tovendiof imneriarticulation, ess mete eee ee sale eee eens 117.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of proximal'end, 2222 225230242 Uis sees eee 21.0 
@ransyerse diameterot proximal end) sek sees seen ee ee eee 32.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle, ----__---.-------- 18.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, at the middle, -__.--..---------- 22.0 
ransyerse Giameteriofshatt-iat the; mid desu impos mice ae deepsea ee eemane 13.5 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation,___._________-__-------+---=-- 15.0 
Vertical diameters of outer distal articulation,___-..._..__.._-.-.------- 15-12-19.0 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation,_.________---------._------ 8.0 
Vertical diameter of median distal articulation, ~_—.---22--2 22-2222 22 15.0 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,._:_.......-._-__--_.---=..-2 9.0 
Vertical diameters of inner distal articulation,.....-......--..-._-----2-_! 12.5-14.0 


13 


98 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsus. (No. 1207.) 


Left. Right. 
ene thitolend of outer articulation, s1 9s separ ase eee mms GRO ue 
Length to end of median articulation, _-22.--22!222222-2-2222--5.--- 132.0 
henethitoendior innerarticulation sass sss seas aa as See eee 118.0 
(transverse diameter of, proximaliend, 224-24 sss ea sae ee 33.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle, -_____---- 17.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, at the middle, _---_-_-_- 21.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, at middle,__-_..-._.------+----------- 13.0 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation,___.__--__________--- 14.0 
Vertical diameters of outer distal articulation,._______________- 14-10-18 14-10-18.0 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation,._________________. 8.0 
Vertical diameter of median distal articulation, ---........-------.--- 15.0 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,___-_______________-- 8.5 8.5 
Vertical diameters of inner distal articulation,______--____-____=-- 13-15.0 13.5-15.0 

Measurements. (No. 1476.) 

Lett. Right. 
Weneth torendvof outer articulationy=292 se. = = sees ss we ee ee ee 136.0™™ 136.0™™ 
isength to:end of median articulation, ~.2- 2-2-2 222.2222-2-- 22-2 134.0 134.0 
Meno thitorend ofeinner, articulationyms aso ye me wie cae ume aye tye alee 120.0 121.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end,-_..-..i----=---.------ 21.0 21.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal end,.__._-_-----/2---2+--- ----: 31.0 31.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle, _---_-_- 15.5 15.5 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, at the middle, __------ 20.5 20.5 
uiransversecdiam eter) Ofeshattsathmn1d dil exmsutess eae saline eestel penny ene 12.5 12.5 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation,_______._---_-_----- 15.0 15.0 
Vertical diameters of outer distal articulation,_...____.-._--------- 18.0 13-10-18.0 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation, --__-__---------- 8.5 8.5 
Vertical diameter of median distal articulation,.-_________-__-__-_-- 16.0 16.0 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,.________---------- 8.0 
Vertical diameters of inner distal articulation,___-_--------------- 12.5-15.0 13-15.0 

Measurements of Tarso-metatarsus. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 

Left. Right. 
Wenothktorendsofsoutersarticulation, sess ee = ssa ee tee een 135,000 135.0™™ 
Dength' to end of median articulation,-...--_-..-2--22 222. -------- 129.0 
Geng thytovendtorjimnerarticulations (42922. e ne see a 116.0 116.0 
Antero-posterior diameter, at proximal end,-___--..-.---_--------- 21.0 21.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal end, _--_-.-._--_.--------_---+==- 31.0 32.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle, -__-_-_- 17.0 17.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, ______..-.----------- 22.0 22.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, at the middle,_________---__---_--_- 19.0 19.0 
Greatest diameter of shaft, at tuberculation,.._.._-_-.-___------_- 30.0 30.0 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation, _____-___-__--___- 15.0 15.0 
Vertical diameter of outer distal articulation,____..____---_------- 19.0 19.0 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation, ___-------------- 7.8 


aa 


FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 99 


Vertical diameter of median distal articulation,..........------------ Se ee 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,....__..____--------- 9.0 9.0 
Vertical diameter of inner distal articulation,_............__.-------- 11.5 11.5 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsus. (Hesperornis gracilis, No. 1478.) 


Left. Right. 
Menothytorend- of outersarti culations ae apm ee senses eRe 138.0"™ za 
engthitoxend) of median articulations oa 6 see = is shauna d neteeee Non 133.0 
hen xthiitozenduosannersanrticul ations sae enna een eee ne nea 117.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of proximal end,_____--__________---_----- 19.0 
Transverse: diameter\ot -proximal end, 292902. oes essen ne 31.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner metatarsal, at the middle,_________- 16.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer metatarsal, at the middle,________-- 18.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, at the middle,__-____9_.__1____-_.222_= 12.0 12.0 
Transverse diameter of outer distal articulation,_______.___-___--__-- 14.0 14.0 
Vertical diameters of outer distal articulation,.._.________.._-- 12-10-17.0 12-10-16.5 
Transverse diameter of median distal articulation,___________---_---- 7.5 7.5 
Vertical diameter of median distal articulation,___________________-_- 14.0 14.0 
Transverse diameter of inner distal articulation,_-____________________ 7.0 7.0 
Vertical diameters of inner distal articulation, ------_----- weceasees 10-12.0 10.5-13.0 


Measurements of First, or Hallux, Metatarsal. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1476.) 


Ibenothiok tirstametatarsalielem em tie ayer Gens yey ey they eee eae eee eee eee 20.07" 
Greatestidiameter’ ofidistal! er cs erates as spa ies See eon er epee eae 8.0 
Least; diameter;of distal) eds. yet weit iio aes hatha AINSI Ne cae pepe eS 3.0 
Greatestithickness of" Shafts oat OS eo ey Ser ly eA ee eget a ene 3.0 


Tue Fret or Hesperornis. (Plate XX.) 


The feet of Hesperornis resembled more closely those of the genus 
Podiceps than of any. other known birds. The number of digits is the 
same, the number of phalanges in each digit identical, but the proportions 
of the latter are different, and quite peculiar. In Podiceps, and the other 
Grebes, the outer toe is indeed the longest, but the middle one almost 
equals it in length and size, while the second is but slightly smaller. In 
Hesperornis, however, the fourth, or outer, toe is the dominant one, being 
three or four times as powerful as the adjoming middle one, or indeed, as 
the other three combined. Again, the phalanges in Podiceps are very 
elongate and slender, and the terminal ones spatulate, while, in Hesperornis, 
the phalanges are short and thick, with the terminal ones more or less 
pointed. The phalanges in Hesperornis are, in fact, shorter than in most 


100 ODONTORNITHES. 


swimming birds, and in their individual proportions remind one of the toe 
bones of the Penguins. 


Tur Outer, or Fourts, Dierr. (Plates XVIII and XX.) 


In describing the phalanges of the feet, it will be convenient to begin 
with the outer, or main, digit. This was supported by the large distal 
articulation of the tarso-metatarsal bone, and its general direction was 
forward, and somewhat outward, nearly in the same plane with the axes of 
this bone and the tibia. 


The first phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 1) is short and stout, and 
somewhat compressed transversely, at its proximal extremity. This end 
has two deeply concave articular facets for union with the condyles of the 
fourth metatarsal. Of these facets, the inner is larger than the outer, and 
the articular surface, as a whole, shows an approach to the peculiar joint 
structure seen in the more distal articulations of the foot. The shaft of 
this bone is rounded on its dorsal surface, somewhat flattened on the 
external side, and deeply excavated on the outer inferior margin, a 
character seen also in the succeeding phalanges. 

The distal end of this phalanx is sub-triangular in outline, and 
entirely covered by the articular surface. The latter consists of a semi- 
circular, slightly convex, articular facet, which occupies the inner two-thirds 
of the extremity, while the rest consists of a prominent rounded peg, or 
tubercle, projecting considerably beyond the remaining surface. This 
process fits into a corresponding cavity in the proximal end of the succeed- 
ing phalanx. The more flattened surface, which partially surrounds this 
peg, meets a similar surface on the inner side of the same phalanx. This 
peculiar articulation necessitates rotation (feathering) with flexion, and 
greatly increases the strength of the joints. This crescent-peg joint, more 
or less modified, is characteristic of all the principal phalanges of 
Hesperornis, and somewhat the same structure is seen in the genus Podiceps. 


The second phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 2) of the fourth digit 


resembles the first, but is smaller in all its proportions, and considerably 


FEET CF HESPERORNIS. 101 


more compressed transversely. The articulation of the proximal end is 
similar to that of the preceding phalanx, but the outer facet has encroached 
considerably on the inner, which is thus materially narrowed. The exca- 
vation on the outer inferior margin of the shaft is deep, and continues to 
the distal extremity. The tubercle on the distal end is prominent, and its 
apex is obliquely truncated. The remaining articular surface is less convex 
than in the phalanx last described. 


The third phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 3) of the fourth digit is almost 
precisely equal to the second in length, but is more slender in its remaining 
proportions. It is much more compressed transversely than the second, 
and the two articular faces of its proximal end are more nearly equal. 
The tubercle on the distal end is much like that in the preceding phalanx, 
but the remaining articular surface is smaller, and less convex. The 
outer inferior excavation of the shaft materially diminishes the weight 
of this bone. 


The fourth phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 4) of the outer digit is long 
and slender, and much compressed, especially at its distal end. The outer 
articular face of the proximal extremity is narrow, but much larger than 
the inner. The latter is vertically oval in outline, and confined to the 
superior half of the face. Seen from above, this bone gradually tapers 
from its proximal to its distal end, but the outer view shows that the sides 
of the shaft are nearly parallel. The outer inferior surface is slightly 
concave, and the distal extremity is truncated, nearly at right angles to the 
axis of the shaft. 

The articular face on the lower extremity has almost entirely lost the 
crescent and peg structure, and resembles the distal articulation of the | 
phalanges in ordinary birds and reptiles. The compression of this bone, 
and modification of its articulation, permit the partial rotation of the 
digit, so that when at rest, the flattened extremity was nearly horizontal. 
A similar structure is seen in the other digits. ‘The same relative position 
of the toes was maintained in the backward stroke, but in the recovery, 
the foot was turned edgewise, and the digits followed each other in the 
same vertical plane, the outer being in advance. 


102 ODONTORNITHES. 


The terminal bone of the fourth digit is wanting in all the specimens 
of Hesperornis yet discovered, but its general form may be conjectured 
from the corresponding joint of the second toe, which is in a state of good 
preservation. From this specimen, the outline of the terminal phalanx of 
the outer digit has been indicated in the restoration of Hesperornis regalis, 
Plate XX. 


Measurements of the phalanges preserved of the fourth digit in 
Hesperornis regalis, and Hesperornis crassipes will be found below : 


Measurements of First Phalanx of Fourth Digit. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


Men ot hyo ber hire t pial are e se Mey See BR NN iy ee Meany ee pay eee cpa se 44,9™™ 
Wexticalidiametersof iproximalvarticulation,;ss.s=) ss soe ee ee eres 19.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation, _-..-------.------------+------- 16.0 
Greatestwdiametersote shat jms os oe 21sec ener tay Menta ee ey dlis nya. Leo eu eae 22.0 
He astiminansversen diameter ote asia baer meee ae eee tare ca ale se puny agi nyuee nege= = )_ (ee ea mreee 13.0 
eastiventicaludiaimeterko fash atts weeps ase tee eee eto lay tn eae vey eyen meuniere 11.0 
Mransverse| diameter, of distal articulation, 22222 2-22) 22-2 2-22 2 eee 15.5 
Werticalydiameteritot idistalgarticul atoms eee ee ere ee et eel nee ee ere 15.5 
Diameternotcpeceanidistalvarticulation, = sae se =e so ee eee eee ea 7.5 


Measurements. (No. 1206.) 


Meng thyotmfirst phalanx: Mas uy Shiite Noa atone ceeea te Ma eee Lees aes mass 425mm 
Wrerticalydiameterofmproximalyarticulation,] a= =s- = eee eens 18.0 
Transverse diameter.of proximal articulation, ........_.---_-.------------=--- 16.0 
Greatestudiametertotyshiatste= £hae 2 Uh oye ey See ey cay ee gs a et eens 22.0 
Greatestatrausverse diameter ofesh atten see seers ene ee eee ne ye emo 17.0 
CAS TREATS VELSCR CAT CLCTAO Lars 112 fitspee eee ee aes | cere 13.0 
Weastiyerticallidiametergsotasharitsey esate se sae ear ane oe ee 10.5 
‘Rransverserdiameterotedistalearticulatioms seme eee ae Seen es een 15.0 
Vertical diameter of distal articulation,__-__________- Gee fare ec A se ga 15.5 
Diametersoreapeomanidistalvanticula biome see ee eee an ys nara ee 7.0 


Measurements of First Phalanx. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


iene throtpenrs ty plralarxsn ys Yee Ror. Sine a FEL yee as a mie Un api ea 42,9™m 
elticaladiameterj of proximallarticulation,s2 42259) se ees see ee eee 18.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation, __.._.--__------/.-------------- 16.0 
Greatestudiameterrofmshatt eee ne eee ea ek eer enon Ue yn aha ps aa nh aeepaeeeaete Dis 
ILC MIN GHaS Glee Oe SIA e ee A eS ee 12:5 
eastiverticalidiametersotishabt. a eset ns oe anne c epee ee Nei ve arlene ea aoe 12.0 
Wransverseldiameterofdistalbarticulativomsrss = =p ue ees earn gee eee teeteue 15.0 
Vertical diameter of distal articulation, -_____- ROARED RS ae id SEE ean ee 15.5 


Wiameveriol pes. inedistaltanticmlatvon. sss semen meee on ee eae ee eee enya Dini 


FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 


Measurements. (Hesperornis gracilis, No. 1478.) 


Tength-of ‘first phalanx, «22222 2-5 -= 
Vertical diameter of proximal articulation, 


Transverse diameter of proximal articulation, 


Greatest diameter of shaft,....__.._...__- 
Least transverse diameter of shaft, 
Least vertical diameter of shaft,_._....__-- 
Transverse diameter of distal articulation, 
Vertical diameter of distal articulation, -__- 
Diameter of “peg” in distal articulation, 


Measurements of Second Phalanx 


Length of second phalanx, -.---_---------- 
Greatest diameter. at proximal end, .-_-_----- 
Least diameter-at proximal end, ---_-------- 


Transverse diameter of proximal articular face, 


Vertical diameter of proximal articular face, 
east diameter of. shaft, 2.222 < 87 2S 22 
Greatest diameter at distal end,__-.______- 
Maximum diameter of distal articular face, - 


.. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


Transverse diameter. of “peg” in distal articular face,.........-..-----=------ 


Measurements. (No. 1206.) 


Length of second phalanx, _-...----------- 
Greatest diameter of proximal end, -------- 
Least diameter of proximal end,-_---_----_-- 


Transverse diameter of proximal articular face,...-_..._--.------------------ 


Vertical diameter of proximal articular face, 
east diameter or shattyer ass see ae 
Least fore and aft diameter of shaft, _------ 
Greatest diameter of distal end,---..------- 
Greatest diameter of distal articular face, - -- 
Diameter of “peg” in distal articular face, - 


Measurements of Second Phalanx. 


Length of second phalanx, --------------- 
Greatest diameter at proximal end,_------- 
Least diameter at proximal end,---_-_~----_-- 


(Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


Transverse diameter of proximal articular face,_-_..___---_.------+---------- 


Vertical diameter of proximal articular face, 
Least fore and aft diameter of shaft, ------- 
Least diameter of shaft, at distal end, ------ 


16.5 


17.0 


104 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Third Phalanx. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


ienathvorathird phalanx, == 22 skies ee se ee ee ee eee ee eee 40.0™™ 
Greatestidiameteroksproxim allen dye se sae eee Sear ee ats eee 18.0 
heastidiameterofsproximal er diyeeie a tee se ea co ene a 9.0 
Greatest diameter of proximal articular surface, -.....-.---------------------- 15.0 
east diameter of proximal articular surface,_...-.-...--.--2-22222 225222222 8.0 
iheast sore andeattrdiame ter Ocus Mat tae pa tees eee ea myname gee NL 11.0 
Gmreniiass chemnaiae on Chelkanhas os aes oe ae 1255 
iteastrdirameter OL distal send secise © aa aay Sa et eo enon es 5.5 
Greatest diameter of distal articular surface,_______- Gate Mess, ey sis Mt aL em re 10.0 
Diameteriofecspeo.? in distalvarticularnsurtace,= == asses — es eSse esa eee 4.8 


Measurements. (No. 1206.) 


Wena throtethindiphalan xt ves age aie ets Se ae ee ts SSeS cee 41,0™™ 
Grrdatest diame ters ot sproxaimall (erie eee ye eagles ss ers) epee ver ree 17.0 
Meastrdiameterjors proxi alyert dasa =e. separa lec ee tsteynre mpage nylte a oyna SD Nate eneae 10.0 
Greatest, diameter of proximal articular surface, _---.--.---------------------- 15.0 
Least diameter of proximal articular surface, ----___-__- YR SS oe epee See 10.0 
eastyhoreran dant diam eter o tas haat tsp tee ae eee epee) ee 11.0 
feastediam terror shad tseccao. oe sta ey age ton ee ge Ae NL ee pons debe eae 6.0 
Weastadiametervorydistalvertd! ove se.ea Wet korelue ee Neeley eis ye ence eGo ae MM eeu 6.5 
Diametewor “peo sin distal articular surtace,= os see seme e sane eyes 3.0 


Measurements of Fourth Phalanx. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


Greatestidiametentot sproximall jem dima. o esas meee a ae ee eye rer neler eee 14,0™™ 
easthdiametertonmoroximallsend ys = Sys senna eterna) pe nee ey eiclieyey = eal ena 7.5 
Greatestidiameterof proximal articulation, see a= sees eee ae os eee 12.0 
WWeastidiameter,of proximal articulations =e soe Bae see ae ee eee 6.5 


Tue Tutrp Drierr. (Plates XVIII and XX.) 


The third digit was very much smaller than the fourth, and was sup- 
ported by the small middle metatarsal element. It consisted of but four 
phalanges, and, when at rest, was directed forward and slightly inward. 


The first phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 5) is shorter than the first 
in the outer toe, and much more slender, the whole bone being greatly 
compressed transversely. The proximal extremity is triangular in outline, 
and its articular face is divided by a sharp vertical ridge. The shaft 
is somewhat sigmoid longitudinally, and the articulation of the distal 
end is divided into two sub-equal portions by a nearly vertical groove. 


FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 105 


This articulation shows an approach to the crescent and peg structure, but 


in its main features resembles the usual phalangeal joint in birds. 


The second phalanx in this digit (Plate XVIII, figure 6), is much 
shorter than the first, somewhat less compressed, but in other respects, 
very similar. The shaft is nearly straight, and but very slightly excavated 
on its outer inferior surface. 


The third phalanx (Plate XVIII, figure 7) is materially longer than 
the second, and much more slender. It shows the same tendency toward 
horizontal flattening, seen in the penultimate phalanx of the outer 
toe, the advantage of which has been explained above. The proximal 
articulation is subcircular in outline, and moderately concave. The distal 
extremity is much compressed. 


The fourth, or terminal, phalanx of this digit has not been recovered, 
but the articulation which supported it, and the shape of the ultimate 
phalanx of the second toe, indicate its form and general proportions, which 
are represented in Plate XX. 


The principal dimensions of the phalanges in the third digit of 
Hesperornis regalis and Hesperornis crassipes are as follows: 


Measurements of First Phalanz of Third Digit. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


Ten gth of firstsphalanxs§ 25-2 eee eer Seen se are eae aire ele ee aera 41.07" 
Greatest vertical diameters of proximal end,..._.._-.-----_2+------------- 18.-19.0 
WMeastaviertical aia chert p10 x11 Ke Cl yee eres eres are re ee ep 14.0 
Eiranisyerserdiam cherrotss OXI all er Cs prams eae ers aa eee yee 10.0 
Greatest vertical diameter of proximal articulation, ._.......-...------+-------- 14.0 
Least vertical diameter of proximal! articulation,-©*—-- 22-222 22222222522 12.0 
Mransverse diameter of proximal articulation === e/a aye ae) eee 8.5 
iIneastavertical<diam etierrolys hatte tee = re ee ae ne ee ey ee 8.0 
Meastriranis verse ndiarl Cher O cers ahha sre eee ann a ae ae ae ae 6.2 
Greatestidiameterioteshatt.atdistalien dyes ee ae ree ee 10.0 
iHeastidiameter OL siraltaraitycis tall ery see ams ee ne 8.0 
Greatest vertical diameters of distal articulation,_____-------------------- .. 8.10.0 
eastiverticals diametenotedistaliarticul atoms ss ee 4.5 
Transverse vertical diameter of distal articulation,___._-___------------------- fap 


14 


106 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of First Phalanx of Third Digit. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


en cihrot mins typ halen xs aye ae ae 1 ete es Sehr, Sy I A na 39.0™™ 
eiransverse diameter of proximal er cys ae ae ee ea 9.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation, --_-.....:..-..-_-.--.--_------- 9.0 
Least vertical diameters of distal articulation, __--____._--__.____-______-- 8.5-10.0 
iheast.verticalydiameter‘ot shafts.) ose - 2545-5 oes hoee eee se eee eee 8.0 
eas trtransverse diameter Otgs Mattes ae ae tee ee 7.0 
Greatestdiameteriof ‘shaft, /at distallend)=— 292292 ogee ee ee ee 10.0 
Least diameter, of shaft, at distal end,..--.--_--2.--.-1222222--2222-222--22--: 6.5 
Least vertical diameter of distal articulation,___-._--..--.-------------------- 4.5 
Transverse diameter of distal articulation, ----__------------._.-------------- 7.5 


Measurements of Second Phalanx. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


eno thyoresecond phalanxs sos Senha. oa ne ee ne eee See eon eee eee 30.0"™ 
Greatest vertical diameter of proximal end,..-------------------------------- 14.0 
gUransvierseydiameter, Of sprOximial\em see sees spe aes ree elee pe  eay oe 8.0 
Vertical diameter of proximal articulation, -...-..-.--.---------------------- 11.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,-_......-.-.---.---------------- 7.0 
eas teroreran dart (diane ter,O ces at tama epee ate tuners mages eye seen om 7.0 
easiiminimnumydiameterofeshatt.sees see eee eee ae ee ee ee eee 4.0 
Greatestidiametenriotudistal end) 222 2e = a. yan Ss a eee 8.0 
iWeastrdiametertot, distaltends ssc eit nee ee er ea iere yen wees 6.5 
Greatestidiameter:ot distal articulations. 9s eose eee eee tee eee ea eee 7.8 
Transverse diameter of distal articulation, ..-..---------.-----------------~-- 6.0 


Measurements of Third Phalanx. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1200.) 


Greatestidiameteriots proxiumalliendyes =e =e sea = aaa eee ae eee ee ee 10.0™™ 
Weastrdiam etersoraproxunal gen dey see a ee eet ee 5.5 
Greatest diameter of proximal articulation, --..---._.------------------------ 9.0 
Iheast (diameter of proximal)articulation, 22-22-2222 2-222-We 2-2-2 2-2 eee 5.0 


Tue Seconp Dicir. (Plates XIX and XX.) 


The second digit was much smaller than the third, and composed of 
three phalanges. It was supported by the short free extremity of the inner 
element of the tarso-metatarsal bone, and was directed inward and 
forward. 


The proximal end of the first phalanx (Plate XIX, figure 1) was 
raised above the general plane of the foot. Its proximal end is trihedral 
in outline, and the distal end also, although the shaft is twisted so that the 
boundary lines of the two are not parallel. The two extremities are 


FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 107 


truncated obliquely, making the outer margin of the bone considerably 
shorter than the inner. The shaft of the bone is depressed, and the outer 
and inner margins converge distally. 


The second phalanx of this digit (Plate XIX, figure 2) is somewhat 
similar to the first, but shorter, and much more slender. The extremities 
are less obliquely truncated, and the shaft and distal end are much more 
flattened. The articular faces of this phalanx, as well as of the others in 
this digit, admit of considerable rotation, but have the crescent and peg 
articulation only partially developed. 


The terminal phalanx of the second digit (Plate XIX, figure 3) is 
short, much depressed, and pointed at its distal end. Seen from above, it is 
wedge-shaped in outline, with the proximal articulation at right angles to 
the axis of the bone. In its natural position, this phalanx had its superior 
surface turned more or less outward, and during recovery after the back- 
ward stroke it was turned edgewise, so that this face looked entirely outward. 


The measurements of the phalanges of the second digit in Hesperornis 
regalis, and Hesperornis crassipes, are given in the tables below: 


Measurements of First Phalanx of Second Digit. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1206.) 


Greatest diameters ofsproxumalien dsp sree ts eee ae Ts 
Wiertical¥diameterso fe pro xm aller clipe eee eer aes areas nee pe 12.0 
Mransyverse diametersotsproxamall en climes eae ayer sleet area nen ee ape ra 13.0 
Wertical diameter of proximal articulation, = 232259822) ee eee 11.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation;=s-9- 5-2 -2-52- 2 sos. 2s) eee 11.0 


Measurements. (No. 1476.) 


Rengthrofifirst: phalanx, 5-45-2225 oe 2 eee ee eee ae reese 42,0™™ 
Greatestidiameter, of proxamiallen cl peste ae ee 15.0 
iVerticalidiameter\ofe proximal tem dye see eee 13.0 
Mransverse diameter of mproxamal gen cys eee ee ee 13.8 
Wertical diameteriof. proximal/articulation, sess —2 ae sae eee eee eee eee 11.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,.......-..-.-------------------- 10.2 
Meastivertical diameteriotishatte= — see se eee eee eee eee Cee ee ee 6.5 
Weastitrarisy.Crsey. 1a eherxO fae el ake ee 8.5 
Greatestvelticalsdiametberxo tds talixem cl siya peepee oe asa oe 9.0 
east vertical, diameterrormdistalitem camry pps ya eee a 8.0 


Pransyerse diameter OL distaleend jp ee a ee 9.0 


108 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of First Phalane of Second Digit. (Hesperornis crassipes, No. 1474.) 


ene Ghvoigitst sphal axle wm we aatee (eee) See aeye oc Sha eee pestis et sees a ee oop ae 40.5™™ 
Greates trolanne Ferg 0 fay 0 Xela eT sees ae eens ee mg 14.5 
Vaniioal clamor ©: jrodnoll ng Ses sac Sons sone sao teesoe so esaeeesces TOES 
eransviersediameterkor aprox alten Cees pee ees ae ee eee ean ee ee 13.0 
Merticalidiameteroreproximal varticulationss == 552 ee =e eee a seen 12.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation, ---_-_..______-_._-_---_---._--- 10.0 
Greatest  verticalidrameterson distalven deve as hee es eye Neen ete eye Sen ee 8.5 
Leng \Saikoall Cherenctiere Ont Ghiggnanch oe os ee ee ee ee 5 
Theron Chemie Ore Cbiggl Gl 8 3 ee ee ee en eco ceoe 8.0 


Measurements of Second Phalanx, (Hesperornis regulis, No. 1476.) 


cen'othvotasecomduphal ax, sa = 2 aoe SU eat eS Srey ee ee eee ee eae 41,07" 
Greatest (transverse) diameter of proximal end,_._._____.._...-..-----.------ 10.0 
Vierticalmarametercol proxam alleen dees eee een ee ee ee ee yg en 9.0 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,--..._-.______-____.-_.._.------ 9.0 
Werticalidiameter of proximallarticulation, ss sae see eee oe Sos een LP? 
Weastroransversen Giammebery Oly isl aitt yaa apse see tee ee ea en 6.2 
Werticalvdiameter of shatts <4 e cer te Se ea ipa ee NR Lee Spa Nays) eae 3.6 
(iri yas chemmcooce: Chill Giehee Ho aaa eee eo ee 7.2 
Wericall chamaise on Chis Gi@ho a. 8 ood ease Saas ce oe kaos ese eee Gewese ke 3.0 
Uranswerserdiame ters ote Gistallciryti Cul atom sey a ee eae ee eet Ne 6.5 
AVierticaladiameters OL distaleantiCul atl ors ae mee ee eee eee eee ee 2.5-3.0 


Measurements of Third Phalanx. (No. 1476.) 


ILeMeHN OE WR) MENS 5 Sas tood ses Seebs Shon Ss -Sba sans ses esosesaesesee 15.02" 
Eran sense lala eberiOn, spoT Ox ls eT Opes eer ee 7.0 
Wierticalmdiam eterno fa yox11m all ver eee ee a ae 3.3 


Tae First Dierr. (Plates XVIII, XIX and XX.) 


The metatarsal rudiment of the hallux, or first digit (Plate XIX, 
figure 4) has already been described. It supported below a first phalanx 
(Plate XIX, figure 5), much flattened, and of moderate length. The digit 
was completed by a short, pointed, terminal phalanx (Plate XIX, figure 6), 
very similar in its general form and proportions to the ungual phalanx of 
the second digit. The hallux was directed forward and inward, like the 
first digit of Colymbus, and not backward, as in most modern birds. The 
diminutive size of this digit in Hesperornis, and the rounded loose joints 
between the phalanges show that it was of little service in locomotion. 


FEET OF HESPERORNIS. 109 


The following are the principal dimensions of the phalanges of the 


hallux in Hesperornis regalis : 


Measurements of First Phalane of First Digit. (Hesperornis regalis, No. 1476.) 


beastitransversevdiameterco tatirstyp tall axes ease ae eso eae ee nnn 6:05" 
Mertical/diameter ofy shart ty sooty ses aee aap oy tea ae eee pan eg a Oly pee pe 3.0 
iransverse diameteriot- distal articul alors ae se ee ee ee ee 6.0 
Verticaladiameterofadistalvarticul ati oms seers see epee pepe anes eon 2.0 


Measurements of Second Phalanx. (No. 1476.) 


Tength of second yphiall ari.) S08 2 Wee ect ge a Ela amacnpe oes eg Ae ee ecg 14,.0== 
Wransverseidiameter.on sproximialller dlp eee aes ees ee ep eee 7.0 
Vertical diameteniofiproximalllien clases see ate eae att ae ae nn em 3.0 
Greatest. transverse diameter sos io2)2 5+ SOS oe ee een Se siege eae 7.6 


CHAPTER VIII. 


THE RESTORATION OF HESPERORNIS. (Plate XX.) 


Tue foregoing description of the individual bones of Hesperornis, 
together with the full illustrations given in the accompanying plates, will 
make clear to anatomists all the important points in the osseous structure 
of this ancient bird, in many respects the most interesting member of the 
class yet discovered. With the exception of one or two terminal 
toe-bones, and the extreme point of the tail, every part of the skeleton is 
preserved in one or more specimens, and this ample material has been 
used in the restoration represented in Plate XX. Nota few of the bones 
were nearly in their natural position, when discovered, and the remainder 
have been assigned to their appropriate places in the skeleton, after much 
careful comparison of the fossils with the nearest allied living forms. It is 
therefore confidently believed that the field of conjecture has been reduced 
to a minimum in the skeleton as restored. 


The restoration of Hesperornis regalis in Plate XX represents the 
skeleton one-half natural size, and in a position which the bird doubtless 
sometimes assumed when on land, although it is probably more erect than 
was habitual. On the water, the body was of course more nearly 
horizontal, the neck more bent, and the legs usually much farther behind. 

111 


a2 ODONTORNITHES. 


In the preceding Plates, I-XIX, the bones of Hesperornis regalis have 
been represented in natural size, and the magnitude of the whole bird may 
be judged from the fact that the skeleton, if extended, would measure 
about six feet (1.8") from the point of the bill to the end of the toes. 
Hesperornis crassipes was somewhat larger, and Hesperornis gracilis, so far 
as known, was apparently smaller, and of more delicate proportions. 
When on land in the position represented in Plate XX, Hesperornis regalis 
would be rather more than three feet in height. 


Hesperornis was a typical aquatic bird, and in habit was doubtless 
very similar to the Loon, although, flight being impossible, its life was 
probably passed entirely upon the water, except when visiting the shore 
for the purpose of breeding. The nearest land at that time was the suc- 
cession of low islands which marked the position of the present Rocky 
Mountains. In the shallow tropical sea, extending from this land five 
hundred miles or more to the eastward, and to unknown limits north and 
south, there was the greatest abundance and variety of fishes, and these 
doubtless constituted the main food of the present species. Hesperornis, as 
we have seen, was an admirable diver, while the long neck with its 
capabilities of rapid flexure, and the long slender jaws armed with sharp 
recurved teeth formed together a perfect instrument for the capture and 
retention of the most agile fish. As the lower jaws were united in front 
only by cartilage, as in Serpents, and had on each side a joint which 
admitted of some motion, the power of swallowing was doubtless equal to 
almost any emergency. 


Having thus shown what the skeleton of Hesperornis is, and what its 
mode of life must have been, it remains to consider the more important 
question of how the peculiar combination of general and _ specialized 
characters manifested in its structure originated. The two most striking 
features of Hesperornis are the teeth, and the limbs, and an inquiry in 
regard to them first suggests itself. 

The teeth of Hesperornis may be regarded as a character inherited 
from a reptilian ancestry. Their strong resemblance to the teeth of 


RESTORATION OF HESPERORNIS. 113 


reptiles, in form, structure, and succession, is evidence of this, and their 
method of implantation in a common alveolar groove (Holcodont), con- 
forms strictly to what we have in one well known group of reptiles, exem- 
plified by Ichthyosaurus. 'This method of insertion in the jaw is a primitive 
dental character, quite different from what we should naturally expect as 
an accompaniment of the modern style of vertebra, and is a much lower 
grade than the implantation of the teeth in distinct sockets (Thecodont), 
a feature characteristic, as we shall see, of another group of Odontornithes, 
of which Ichthyornis is the type. These teeth indicate unmistakably that 
Hesperornis was carnivorous in habit, and doubtless was descended from 
a long line of rapacious ancestors. 


In considering the limbs of Hesperornis, two explanations of their 
peculiar modifications naturally suggest themselves. The rudimentary 
wings, viewed in the light of modern science, clearly indicate that 
Hesperornis was in this respect a degraded type. The Struthious characters 
which we have noticed in various parts of the skeleton might be regarded, 
not as evidence of close relationship, but rather as general reptilian 
characters, common to the two groups through inheritance from a remote 
reptilian ancestry. According to this view, the wings may have been 
gradually lost by disuse, after the aquatic life was assumed. In proportion 
as the wings diminished, the legs and feet increased in size, for their 
work increased. This change would be strictly in accordance with the 
law of compensation, and the well known economy of nature. 

We may suppose, moreover, the ancestors of Hesperornis to have been 
at one time on an equality with the Loon, and later with the Penguin, in 
respect to means of flight and swimming. As the wings slowly diminished 
in size, first came the loss of flight, while the wings retained, doubtless for 
a long time, their power of propulsion through the water. As this too 
became gradually restricted, the legs and feet gained proportionally. The 
power derived from them, aided indirectly by the tail, in time so predom- 
inated, that the wings became entirely aborted, a remnant of the humerus 


alone remaining. 
15 


114 ODONTORNITHES. 


During the life-history as thus indicated, Hesperornis would exemplify 
in the waters of the Cretaceous period the evolution that has recently 
taken place in ocean navigation, in the gradual change of the side-wheel 


steamer into the modern propeller. 


Another explanation seems on the whole more reasonable, and more 
in accordance with the known facts. The Struthious characters, seen in 
Hesperornis, should probably be regarded as evidence of real affinity, and 
in this case Hesperornis would be essentially a carnivorous, swimming 
Ostrich. The diminutive wings and very large posterior extremities would 
then have been acquired on land, by the same means that have given 
similar characters to the Ratite, and subsequently have been adapted to an 
aquatic life. Against this view, the carnivorous character of Hesperornis 
would be no valid objection. The long neck and peculiar jaws and teeth 
would be equally effective in seizing prey on the land, and many of the 
herbivorous cotemporaries would doubtless haye been easy victims. This 
would be precisely analogous to what we have among the corresponding 
groups in the Dinosaurs. 

There is to-day no evidence that any of the Struthious birds, or their 
ancestors, ever possessed the power of flight, although this is generally 
assumed. The case is even stronger with Hesperornis, as this genus stands 
much nearer the ancestral type, both in structure and in time. The 
absence from the sternum of any trace of a keel is alone strong proof 
against flight; the peculiar Dinosauroid union of the scapula and coracoid, 
unlike that of any volant bird or reptile, confirms this; and other testimony 
bearing in the same direction is not wanting. 

All Carinate birds, moreover, so far as known, indicate by their 
embryology that they have passed through the Struthious, or lower stage ; 
and some of them, Zinamus, for instance, still retain one or more of its 
distinctive characters. There are, indeed, various flightless birds, recently 
extinct, which do not belong to the Ostrich group, but are truly Carinate 
in all their essential features. The Dodo (Didus), Solitaire (Pezophaps ), 
Cnemiornis, and Notornis are well known examples; but these all show in 
their shoulder-girdle unmistakable traces of the lost power of flight. The 


RESTORATION OF HESPERORNIS. aS 


characters necessary to volant movements, once attained, would appear 
never to be completely lost, and this alone seems to furnish a crucial test. 
When such suggestive indications are wanting in the skeleton, we may 
fairly challenge any assumption of previous flight. 

Although Hesperornis may thus, like its Reptilian ancestry, have 
always been incapable of flight, the anterior limbs may have long continued 
limited aids to locomotion. Whether used actively in the air, like the 
wings of the Ostrich, or of young swimming birds, or passively, like the 
sail-set pinions of a Swan, or later as imperfect paddles, the wings of 
Hesperornis were certainly not well fitted for diving, and hence they 
gradually became useless, and virtually disappeared. We may imagine 
among the reasons for the gradual loss of wings, the fact that they were 
too weak to be of much service under water, while from their position they 
added greatly to the resistance, especially during rapid diving. To diminish 
this resistance, they would naturally be applied closely to the side, and 
from such disuse, would gradually suffer atrophy. 


In this great swimming bird, as thus modified, we have presented to 
us an interesting problem in animal mechanics. The wings may be 
regarded as wanting, since the remnant of the humerus was attached 
closely to the side, as in the Apteryx, if not entirely concealed beneath the 
skin, like a scapula. The locomotion was therefore entirely performed by 
means of the posterior limbs, a specialization here seen for the first time in 
aquatic birds, recent or fossil. Those who have observed a Penguin or a 
Loon swimming beneath the water know what a vigorous use such birds 
then make of their wings, however useless these members may appear to 
be on land. Not only do the wings, in such a case, assist in the forward 
movement through the water, but they are of much service in steering. 
A Penguin, when in swift sub-aqueous flight, can turn around, by the aid 
of its wings, while moving twice its length. Hesperornis had no such aid, 
but the legs and feet were far superior, for swimming and diving, to those 
of the Penguins, not merely in power, but in the more perfect adaptive 
mechanism. This was doubtless the main reason why the posterior limbs 
of Hesperornis became so predominant. 


116 ODONTORNITHES. 


The tail of Hesperornis was clearly of great service in its aquatic life. 
In the number of vertebree and length, it exceeds nearly all known birds, 
and it is unique in its widely expanded transverse processes, and in its 
depressed, horizontal, plough-share bone. This broad horizontal tail 
reminds one of that of the beaver, and was undoubtedly of great 
assistance in steering, and in diving. Whether it was, like the beaver’s 
tail, destitute of feathers, or like the tail of Plotus was furnished with long 
stiff rectrices, so as to act as a rudder, cannot at present be determined 
with certainty, although the latter view seems more probable. That 
Hesperornis was provided with feathers of some kind, we can hardly doubt. 


The surrounding circumstances were evidently very favorable to 
Hesperornis for along period. There was apparently during this time an 
absence of enemies in the air above, and an abundance of food in the 
water. Hesperornis was more than a match for the gigantic toothless 
Pterodactyles, which hovered over the waters here in such great numbers, 
and the other inhabitants of the air all appear to have been small. The 
ocean in which Hesperornis swam teemed with fishes of many kinds, and 
thus a great variety of food was at hand, and obtained with little effort. 
In this aquatic paradise Hesperornis flourished, disturbed only by the 
serpentine Mosasaur, which, even without tradition, we may imagine, 


caused its banishment, if not its destruction. 


In the preceding description, the writer has compared Hesperornis with 
the Ratite, or Ostrich group, and also with the diving birds as exemplified 
by Colymbus and Podiceps, and the more noteworthy points of resemblance 
or difference have been stated. It will hardly be profitable to extend the 
comparison to other groups of modern birds, as the similarity in points of 
structure is mainly of a general nature. 

The genus Archeopteryx from the Jurassic of Europe, the only bird at 
present known more ancient than Hesperornis, presents some marked points 
of difference, for example, its elongated tail; as well as some peculiar resem- 
blances, which will be discussed in the concluding part of this volume. 


RESTORATION OF HESPERORNIS. HAUG 


The genera Ichthyornis and Apatornis, which are from the same 
geological formation as Hesperornis, and are very fully described in the 
following chapters, differ widely from that genus in having biconcave 
vertebree, as well as in other most important characters. 

Hesperornis really stands alone among all known birds, and the 
special characters which thus separate it will be stated in the table of 
classification at the end of the present memoir. 


OW OWN TE Oak IN Dalarieiics: 


levees AR) CIC, 


() IDO) IN| EO) WO IRR IW Ag. 


(Plates XXI-XXXIV.) 


CHAPTER IX. 


THE SKULL AND TEETH OF ICHTHYORNIS. 
(Plates XXI, XXVI, and XXXIV.) 


Tue birds included in the second order of Odontornithes, so far as now 
known, were all of small size, and possessed powerful wings, and very 
small legs and feet. They differed widely therefore in form and habit 
from those described in Part I, and, as we shall see, exhibited various 
significant characters, which distinguish them more strongly from the 
Odontolce than any existing birds are separated from each other. Some of 
these characters, as for instance their biconcave vertebrae, separate them 
widely from all birds recent and extinct, and point back unmistakably to 
a very lowly ancestry, even below the reptiles. 

The remains of this group preserved are more or less pneumatic, and 
this fact, in connection with their small size, is perhaps the main reason why 
so few have been discovered. As might naturally be expected, the hollow 
bones of flying birds, being filled with air, enable the carcass to float 
upon the water much longer than it otherwise would, and it is thus 
liable to be destroyed by fishes or other animals. Hence, the chances of 
the entombment of a complete skeleton are greatly diminished. Such 
delicate bones, moreover, even after their entombment, require a favorable 


combination of circumstances for their preservation in good condition. 
119 


120 ODONTORNITHES. 


Fortunately, the bottom of the Cretaceous ocean, in which the remains of 
these birds were embedded, left nothing to be desired in this respect, since 
in its fine caleareous sediments the most delicate vascular impressions of 
the bones were often preserved. 

A most careful search in these deposits, as they are now exposed on 
the Plains east of the Rocky Mountains, conducted by the writer in person, 
with the aid of other members of the various expeditions already men- 
tioned, has resulted in bringing to light various remains representing no less 
than seventy-seven different individuals of this group of the Odontornithes. 
These remains are all in the Yale College Museum, and form the material 
on which the following descriptions are based. An investigation of these 
fossils shows that they are included in two well marked genera, Ichthyornis 
and Apatornis, the former represented by several species, and the latter by 
only one. ‘These were all small birds, scarcely larger than a Pigeon. In 
their powerful wings and small legs and feet, they remind one of the Terns, 
and, according to present evidence, they were aquatic birds of similar life 
and habits. 


THe Sxutt. (Plate XXI.) 


In Ichthyornis dispar, the type of the genus Ichthyornis, and of the 
order Odontotorme, the skull was very large in proportion to the rest of 
the skeleton. This disproportion is shown in the restoration on Plate 
XXVI. The cranial portion of the skull is quite short, but the facial part 
is much produced. The occipital condyle is very small, and directed 
backward. Above the condyle, the occipital portion of the skull was 
nearly vertical. The lateral margin of this surface is bounded by a sharp 
ridge which separates it from the temporal fossa, and this ridge united 
with its tellow above was continued forward on the median line, as a 
sagittal crest, between the temporal fossze. The latter were large and 
deep, and were separated from the orbit by a moderate post-orbital 
process. The orbits were very large, and near together. The quadrate 
is well preserved in one species, and its articular head has only a single 
facet, as in Hesperornis, and the Ratite. 


SKULL OF ICHTHYORNIS. 121 


The quadrate of Ichthyornis victor is represented in the cuts below, 
figure 28. It is of large size, and in its general form does not differ 
essentially from the quadrate in some modern birds. The undivided 
articular head (figure 28, /) is its most important feature. 


Fie. 28. 


Figure 28.—Quadrate hone of Ichthyornts victor, Marsh; twice natural size. a. posterior view; b. front view; 

c. inner view; d. outer view; h. head; p. articulation for pterygoid; j. depression for jugal. 

The skull of Ichthyornis has deep glandular depressions along the 
roof of the orbits, similar to those on the cranium of Hesperornis, and some 
recent water birds. The premaxillary bones are separate throughout 
their posterior half, but were doubtless firmly united in front. The ante- 
rior part of these bones has not been recovered, but the lower jaws would 
seem to indicate that in some respects it resembled the beak of Hesperornis. 

In the type specimen (number 1450), the occipital condyle is sub- 
trihedral in outline, when seen from behind. In another specimen (num- 
ber 1459) this condyle is cordate in form, resembling the corresponding 
part in Hesperornis. In most of its features, the base of the skull is more 
like that of Hesperornis than of any modern birds. 


Tue Brain. 


The brain of Ichthyornis was remarkably small, and in its main 
features, strongly reptilian. In form and proportions, it resembled the 
brain of Hesperornis more nearly than that of any other known bird. The 
figure given below represents an outline of the skull of Ichthyornis victor, 
with a cast of the brain-cavity in position. A comparison of this figure with 
that of the skull and brain of Hesperornis, represented on page 9, will show 
the main points of resemblance. The most noticeable reptilian features 


in the two brain-casts are the elongated form, and prominent optic lobes. 
16 


122 ODONTORNITHES. 


The olfactory lobes of Jchthyornis (figure 29, ol) were large and 
prominent. They were separated in front by the inter-orbital septum, and 
their crura made their exit, apparently, through separate foramina. 

The cerebral hemispheres were of moderate size, and proportionally 
less elongate than in Hesperornis. Their form and proportions, in Ichthy- 
ornis victor, are well shown in figure 29, c, which represents a cast taken 
directly from a cranium with this portion well preserved. 

The optic lobes (figure 29, op) are very large, and the brain at this 
part was nearly as wide as across the hemispheres. ‘The cerebellum (cb) 
was large, and elongate. 

The general form and dimensions only of the posterior part of the 
brain of Ichthyornis are shown in figure 29, and hence are indicated by a 
uniform shading. The outline given was obtained from a comparison 
and measurements of two different specimens. 


Fig. 29. Fig. 30. 


n 


FIGURE 29.—Outline of the skull and brain-cavity of Ichthyornis victor, Marsh; seen from above; five-sixths 
natural size. 

Figure 30.—Outline of the skull and brain-cavity of Sterna cantiaca, Gmelin; same view; natural size. 
ol. olfactory lobes; c. cerebral hemispheres; op. optic lobes; cb. cerebellum. 


SKULL OF ICHTHYORNIS. 123 


Figure 30 represents the skull and cast of the brain-cavity of a Tern, 
and the figure of Ichthyornis, beside it, is made of the same absolute length 
for comparison. The Tern was chosen for this purpose because in size and 
structure of its skeleton it bore considerable resemblance to Ichthyornis. 
The mode of life, also, of the two birds was probably similar. 

In comparing the brain-cavity of Ichthyornis with that of Sterna, as 
shown in figures 29 and 30, the strong contrast in size is at once apparent, 
while the most marked difference is seen in the cerebral hemispheres. If 
the latter alone be compared, the hemispheres of Ichthyornis are less than 
one-fourth the size of those of Sterna. If, however, the bulk of the entire 
brain of each be compared, that of Ichthyornis would be less than one-third 
the size of that of the Tern. This would hold true after allowing a con- 
siderable reduction for any uncertainty in regard to the exact proportions 
of the posterior part of the brain-case of Ichthyornis. 

The result of this comparison between Ichthyornis and the Tern agrees 
very closely with that obtained in contrasting the size of the brain-cavities 
of Hesperornis and Colymbus, as given on page 10; and hence is of special 
interest, as in no other instances have the brain-cavities of Mesozoic birds 
been investigated. 


THe Lower Jaws. (Plates XXI and XXVI.) 


In the type specimen of Ichthyornis dispar (No. 1450), both lower 
jaws are preserved. The two rami are entirely separate, having been 
united in front only by cartilage. They are large and massive, nearly 
straight, and much compressed transversely, especially in the posterior 
portion. The upper margin. of the dentary bone is nearly straight. The 
anterior extremity is rounded, and without any distinct symphysial sur- 
face. The right ramus is well shown in Plate XXI, figures 2, 3, and 4. 
The sutures in this jaw are nearly all obsolete, with the exception of that 
between the splenial and angular bones. This suture is especially open on 
the inner surface of the jaw (figure 2, ¢), and, in life, doubtless admitted 
of some motion. There is no mandibular foramen, and, just behind the 
articular face for the quadrate, the extremity is abruptly truncated. 


124 ODONTORNITHES. 


The dentigerous portion of the lower jaw is so similar to that of 
some of the smaller Mosasauroid Reptiles, that, without other portions of 
the skeleton, the two could hardly be distinguished. 


Tue TrertH. (Plate XXI.) 


The teeth of Ichthyornis were implanted in distinct sockets, thus 
differing widely from those of Hesperornis. They are all sharp and pointed, 
more or less compressed, and strongly recurved. The crowns are coated 
with enamel, and the two fore and aft cutting edges are sharp and 
smooth, without serrations. 

The maxillary teeth appear to have been larger than those opposing 
them. Their alveolar cavities are crowded together, and yet distinctly 
separated from each other by a thin septum of bone. They are oval in 
outline, and quite shallow, owing to the small vertical extent of the 
maxillary (Plate XXI, figure 1, and 1a). Whether the premaxillary 
bones contained teeth is uncertain, but they were probably edentulous, 
‘as in Hesperornis. 

The dental cavities in the lower jaw are elliptical in outline, and vary 
in size according to position. They are in general deeper, and separated 
more widely from each other, than those in the maxillaries. In the right 
lower jaw of the type specimen of Ichthyornis dispar, there are twenty- 
one distinct sockets. The anterior one is very near the extremity, and 
contains a tooth of moderate size. The largest teeth in the lower jaw 
are just back of the middle of the dentary bone. From this region to 
the posterior end of the dentary, the teeth diminished gradually in size. 
The whole surface of each tooth exposed above the jaw is covered with 
smooth enamel. In the right lower jaw of the type specimen, there 
are eight teeth still in their sockets, and from these the others have been 
restored in outline, as shown in Plate XXI. 

In Jchthyornis anceps (number 1749), the lower jaws are more slender 
than in the type species, and the number of teeth greater. The anterior 
half of the dentary contained large teeth only. The posterior eleven teeth 
were all small, and nearly uniform in size. 


Ot 


SKULL OF ICHTHYORNIS. 12 


A specimen of Jchthyornis victor (number 1735) had much stouter and 
deeper lower jaws than J. dispar, but they appear to have contained the 
same number of teeth. 

In the lower teeth of IJchthyornis, the pulp-cavity passes well up into 
the base of the crown. The fang is compressed, and directed downward 
and forward. It is firmly set in a deep socket, which it nearly or quite 
fills. The dental succession took place vertically, as in Crocodiles and 
Dinosaurs; not laterally, as in Hesperornis, and the Mosasaurs, a fact of no 
little significance. The young teeth are much inclined when they first 
appear above the jaw, after the old teeth have been expelled. 

The following measurements of portions of the skull and jaws of 
Ichthyornis are from the specimens above described : 


Measurements of Skull. (No. 1459.) 


Mransyerse diameteror, occipitalycondyleysss= === ee == ae See em ee ob as 
Median vertical diameter of occipital condyle, ---.-.--------------------- ways 2.2 
Distance between upper margins of orbits, _..____-_---------:-------=-+-+--- 4.5 
Measurements of Jaws. (No. 1450.) 
Extentof three sockets: tor, maxillanyateet byes == 55 eae a see eel ee fi, ea 
engthiof entirejlowersjaws sates es pve tee oo het alt ie ae et ee at Ra 67. 
Hixtentiok alweolarsmar oir sais ete ye epee aes Sree eet mess My eens ese eee eevee 41. 
Uransyerse diameter, obwramusse.t s/s sgh a eh pakenitie al zemn eyes tere ayer ee me env ane Ee 2. 
Greatest; verticalidiamet er. sie tas acres, eee epee = oh nun ene e eeee e Soe Vag 
Mransverge diameterOh jawaatlarticul atloms sees aerate etsy eee 5.5 
Height of crown of tenth tooth, above’ jaw,--2=---2------ 2222-22-92 === 2.1 
Depthxoferamussybel ovvatirs bit oo.t lis ae eye es year eer ee arene rn 4,5 
Depthio£ ramus; belowalas tito thy seers se eee eee a ee me am ne 3. 
Measurements of Lower Jaw. (No. 1749.) 
Extent of ramus containing twenty-two teeth, _........._.---------+---.---- 36.55" 
Depth of sramms ibelows seconde toot lyse sess etal eee eee ree 2s 
Wepthyof ramus; below last toothy see ae eee eee ey eee 4.5 
Measurements of Lower Jaw. (No. 1735.) 
Extent of ramus containing the last eleven teeth, -_.__..-.....------=--------- OAD) 


Depthio£ ramus; belowstirstiot above) teeth se se === ye ae eae eee eee 4, 
Wepunroferamus; elowslastytOot lye assets eit asa eee eae 4,5 


CAP ADEA Et Xe 


THE PRESACRAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 
(Plates XXII, XXVI, XXVII, and XXXIV.) 


The presacral vertebrae of Ichthyornis present characters more remark- 
able than those of any other known birds, and hence those preserved are 
here described in detail, and fully illustrated. The series is not complete 
in any one skeleton yet discovered, but the large number of vertebree 
secured in various specimens make clear the more important features of 
this part of the structure. 

None of the vertebrae of Jchthyornis, in front of the sacrum, are 
ankylosed together, and a number of them contain cavities in the sides, 
which are apparently pneumatic. Among existing birds, the Terns appear 
to bear the nearest general resemblance to Jchthyornis, and hence their 
vertebree are here used for comparison with those of that genus. 


Tue Atuas. (Plate XXVII, figure 1.) 


Tue atlas of Ichthyornis, as in most living birds, is a ring of bone, 
very short antero-posteriorly, compared with the succeeding vertebrae. In 
Ichthyornis victor (number 1733), it is only about one-third as long as the 
axis, exclusive of the odontoid process, the proportion being nearly the 
same as in Sterna regia, Gambel. 

The centrum of the atlas in Ichthyornis is codssified with that of the 
axis, forming a true odontoid process, which is robust, and somewhat 


convex upon its upper surface. The hypapophysis presents a crescent 
127 


128 ODONTORNITHES. 


shaped articular surface in front, for articulation with the occipital condyle. 
The angles of this crescent are prominent en each side above the odontoid 
process, and during life doubtless gave attachment to a ligamentary bridge 
above that process, completing a nearly circular cup, adapted to the 
occipital condyle, as in existing birds. The hypapophysis is produced 
below into a somewhat wedge-shaped process, pointing slightly backward, 
and strengthened at the base behind by a low small tubercle on each side. 

The posterior articular face of the hypapophysis is imperfectly exposed 
in the specimen figured, but was evidently adapted to the anterior articular 
surface of the axis, in such a manner as to allow only a rotary movement 
about the odontoid process. This motion was, however, much limited 
by the strong zygapophyses, which are much better developed than in 
the Tern. They are strengthened by a ridge rising on the side of the 
vertebra, and running upward, backward, and somewhat outward, and 
ending, above the zygapophysis, in an obtusely pointed tubercle. A similar 
form of zygapophyses is seen in the Egyptian Stork, Ciconia alba, but 
in the Tern, these processes are rudimentary. The upper surface of the 
atlas is not well preserved in the specimen here described, but appears 


to have been destitute of a neural spine. 


Tue Axis. (Plate XXVII, figure 1-1 d.) 


The axis of Ichthyornis (number 1733) is proportionally a little longer 
than in the Tern. The centrum is firmly codssified in front with the 
centrum of the atlas, no trace of the suture remaining. Below the odon- 
toid process, is a large articular surface, not exposed in the present specimen, 
but evidently of a lunate form, somewhat concave, and permitting little 
motion except rotary. The lateral and inferior edges of this articular 
surface are distinct, and rather acute; and the articulation is borne upon 
an anterior expansion of the centrum, which attains its greatest diameter 
at the edges of the articular surface. These characters are well shown 
in number 1775. 

The ventral surface of the centrum is evenly rounded for nearly one- 
third of its length, then excavated on each side of a median carina, which 


PRESACRAL VERTEBRZ OF ICHTHYORNIS. 129 


thickens backward, and nearly acquires the character of a hypapophysis 
below the posterior articular surface. On each side of the centrum near 
the middle, is a rather acute salient tubercle, just behind which the trans- 
verse diameter of the centrum is at the minimum. Above and a little 
behind these tubercles, are large pneumatic foramina. 

The posterior articular face of the centrum is much smaller than the 
anterior, and is sub-quadrate in outline. It is distinctly concave vertically, 
and less so laterally; and begins to assume the peculiar character seen 
in the biconcave articulations of the following vertebre. 

The pre-zygapophyses are sessile facets on the anterior margin of the 
lateral walls of the neural canal. They project very slightly in front of 
the general contour lines, much less however than in Ciconia, while in the 
Tern these processes do not project at all. The post-zygapophyses are 
larger than the pre-zygapophyses, and in form are sub-triangular, with 
rounded angles. They are concave in a lateral direction, and strengthened 
above by a stout ridge running out, somewhat beyond the zygapophysis 
on each side, into a blunt point. This projection is much weaker than in 
the Tern, where the post-zygapophyses are surmounted by prominent, 
divergent processes. The neural spine was low, and stout, more elongate 
antero-posteriorly, but less robust, than in the Tern. 


The following measurements show the principal dimensions of the 
atlas and axis in one specimen of Ichthyornis victor: 


Measurements of Atlas and Axis. (No. 1733.) 


Wenpth tor iatlas; sores SS Fos. ies ee oak ee tal an een sre 25 (nm 
Thengthioficentrumvot (amiss os 22 ey 8 eee ha py men ee ree Ai ep ere 7.0 
Length of centrum of axis, including odontoid process, ---.-------------------- 9.0 
Mransverse diametersotecuplinyat] assem eee sen ee a ee oe 3.5 
Transverse diameter of atlas, across zygapophyses, ---.---..------------------ 7.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of axis,_._.__-------------------- 3.5 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of axis,_.......------------- Reueeee 2.7 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of axis,_-..--------------------- 1.8 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses (approximate), ---__- 9.0 


17 


130 ODONTORNITHES. 


THe Tuirp VERTEBRA. (Plate XXVII, figure 2.) 


The third cervical vertebra of Ichthyornis (number 1733) differs 
much from the second, and in several respects resembles the corresponding 
vertebra in the Tern. The centrum is deeply excavated in front, and the 
anterior articulation is much inclined to the axis of the vertebra. Behind 
this excavation, the centrum abruptly becomes wedge-shaped, but the 
lower edge thickens posteriorly, and, below the posterior articulation, is 
about half as broad as the articular surface itself. 

The plane of the anterior articulation is nearer horizontal than vertical, 
being inclined at an angle of nearly or quite 60°, with the axis of the 
centrum. In a vertical section, this articulation is moderately convex, 
while laterally it is strongly concave, thus presenting an approach to the 
characters of the ordinary avian vertebral articulation. The posterior 
articular surface of the axis, and of this vertebra also, fail to show this 
peculiarity. This specialized feature, occurring at the first bend of the 
neck, gives a direct hint as to the origin of the unique articulation in the 
vertebrae of modern birds. The full explanation of this articular structure 
will be given in a subsequent chapter. 

The posterior articulation is, like that of the axis, sub-quadrate in 
outline, but is more elongate vertically than in that vertebra. This face 
is concave vertically, and less so horizontally, except perhaps near the 
margins, which are rounded. On the sides of the centrum near the lower 
part of the anterior articular surface, rather strong parapophyses are 
developed, which are connected with the diapophyses above by a strong 
bridge of bone, or pleurapophysis. These together enclose on each side 
a small, vertically oval, lateral foramen. 

Immediately above, and a little external to the lateral foramina, are 
the strong and elongated pre-zygapophyses, which are directed somewhat 
obliquely downward, outward, and forward, and are about equally convex 
in both directions. They are proportionally longer than in the Tern, and 
look more directly upward and less inward than in that species. Below, 
they are strengthened by a ridge running up from the outer wall of the 
lateral foramen. The post-zygapophyses are shaped much as in the 


PRESACRAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 131 


preceding vertebra, being only about half as long as the pre-zygapophyses, 
and looking almost directly downward. They are surmounted on each 
side by a blunt tubercle pointing outward and backward, but much less 
salient than in the Tern. The neural spine was moderately strong, but is 
much broken in the specimen here described, number 1733. 


Full measurements of the third cervical vertebra of Ichthyornis victor 
are given below: 


Measurements of Third Vertebra. (No. 1733.) 


engthvolk centrum serene: ens SR Tate AE ich aly vay ES G:0nm 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,-_-------------------- 2.5 
Vertical diameters of anterior articulation of centrum,_-___-_--------------- 1.8-1.0 
, Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, ---.--..-------------- 2.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, -_---------------------- 2.7 
rans verserdiameterro im erally cam alsa eee inne anneal ia) mE eee 2.6 
Weniice! Giemcien of marl Gani, odosoboed Gees ones eee cedsecte neces seenes 2.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - - -- ----------------- 7.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, --.----.------------ 9.2 ° 
Mranswerse/ diameter ot lateralitoramenys 29s ssee = see eee ee eee ae ee 0.8 
Werticalidiameter oflateraleforamenss see ose ee eee eee ae eee eee eae 1.1 


Tue Trento VERTEBRA. (Plate XXVII, figure 3). 


A yertebra from the cervical series, in number 1733, appears to 
correspond best to the ninth cervical of Sterna regia, with which it may be 
compared. The inferior surface of the centrum is flattened laterally, but 
concave longitudinally. The anterior articulation is somewhat crushed 
below, but seems to have been concave in both directions, and of a sub- 
quadrate form. The posterior articulation is more rounded, but has a 
nearly straight upper margin. It is about equally concave in both direc- 
tions, and rounded.on the edges. 

From the antero-lateral regions of the inferior surface of the centrum, 
are two projecting processes, or catapophyses, extending downward and 
somewhat forward to a distance nearly equal to the vertical diameter of the 
anterior articulation of the centrum. 

Above and external to these, on each side, are the parapophyses, 
united to the diapophyses by the ankylosed pleurapophyses, which 


152 ODONTORNITHES. 


together enclose the lateral foramen of the centrum. ‘The posterior 
prolongations of the pleurapophyses are broken off. 

The pre-zygapophyses look upward and backward at an angle of 
nearly 45°, and a little inward. They are elongated, being fully twice as 
long as broad, and are semi-oval in form. At the sides of the vertebra, 
they are connected by a ridge with the bases of the post-zygapophyses. 
Above this ridge, on each side of the vertebra, is a deep foramen, appar- 
ently pneumatic. The post-zygapophyses are similar in shape to the pre- 
zygapophyses, but look nearly directly downward, and a little outward. 
They are each surmounted by a low tubercle, which does not project 
beyond the zygapophysis, but is placed nearly above the middle of it. 
The upper surface of this vertebra is flattened, and destitute of a neural | 
spine. It presents a shallow oval depression at the middle of the anterior 
margin, and, behind, shows a similar, but somewhat larger and deeper 


median pit for ligamentary attachment. 


The principal dimensions of the tenth vertebra of Jchthyornis victor 
are as follows: 


Measurements of Tenth Vertebra. (No. 1733.) 


eno thyo hacen tir eae see eat a ee Se a ea a ee Gs02= 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,___-------------------- 3.0 
Wierticallidiameteriot-anterior articulation of (centrum) = —2 2" -— 2 -- eeee Qall 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, -----_---------------- 2.8 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, ------.----------------- 2.8 
ptransvjenserdi ameter Lene ural can alae eae ene ae eens = ye Eo ei 
Wierticalgdtameterofeneutalle can a) pumps my sete mee seen epee ere ane yee Eau eS 2.2 
Transverse diameters of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, ---------------- 8.8-10.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -------------------- 8.5 
uiransenrserdiamesenotelateralelorame n= meee anal ee penny eye aaa 2.0 
Nienuicalgdiamre terol a bene leet OT ari Crise eee ee 1.8 


Tue TwetrrH VerTesra. (Plate XXII, figure 1.) 


A vertebra here regarded as the twelfth of the series (number 1450) 
resembles the eleventh cervical of Sterna regia. The centrum is much 
reduced in thickness near the middle, and is pierced on each side by a 
pneumatic foramen. A strong hypapophysis arises from the anterior part 


PRESACRAL VERTEBR& OF ICHTHYORNIS. 133 


of the lower surface, and extends downward, and a little forward. Its base 
is about two-thirds the antero-posterior extent of the centrum, and, below, 
it is broadly rounded. The anterior face of the centrum is slightly inclined 
to the axis of the bone, so as to look somewhat downward. It is sub- 
quadrate in outline, with rounded angles, and is slightly broader below 
than above. The margin, except below, is prominent, and the face is 
concave in both directions. The posterior face is more nearly circular, 
in outline, but flattened above, and is more concave than the anterior. 

Strong diapophyses arise on the lower part of the anterior end of the 
centrum, and are directed outward, backward, and downward. They are 
united with slender pleurapophyses, which complete the lateral foramina 
by union with the parapophyses above, just below and exterior to the pre- 
zygapophyses. The lateral foramina are larger in proportion to the size 
of the centrum than in the eleventh cervical of the Tern, as is also the 
neural canal. 

The pre-zygapophyses look strongly inward, and somewhat upward 
and backward, and are separated from the post-zygapophyses by a distance 
only about equal to their length. Between the pre-zygapophyses, the 
neural canal is broadly open above. The post-zygapophyses look almost 
directly downward, and somewhat outward. They are well elevated above 
the floor of the neural canal by its nearly perpendicular walls. The roof 
of the neural canal is short on the median line, excavated by a longitudin- 
ally oval pit below, and bears a rudimentary neural spine, less prominent 
than in corresponding vertebra of the Tern. Below the neural spine, 
behind, is a pit for ligamentary attachment. The neural canal is large. 


The following are the main measurements of this vertebra in the type 
specimen of Ichthyormis dispar: 


Measurements of Twelfth Vertebra. (No. i450.) 


IbGrYiads) Ge CEU SHN = pe oe ee aS eae boae shone sen Sco secosau esau seebeoanocbe Sioa 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,___-__--_---------------- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,----------------------- 2.8 
lbgigiln OF lingo li. 252 enes— 4 soos sos oes bes Sapeasac ase esaasssase 2.8 


Antero-posterior diameter of hypapophysis, at base,_..-.--------------------- 3.0 


134 ODONTORNITHES. 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, -------------------------- Toron= 
Transverse diameter, across pre-zygapophyses, ------------------------------- 7.6 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -------------------- 7.0 
Wenicall clemancse OF menell GAA — — 5525 pe See ose ees eee ys see ese sees see 9.4 
IMPEMENTOREe Chien Cie Te bERAl CANA, 5 ke oso a soe eee sooueboesease 2.6 
Greniasty chennai OF Ibyterll storm 2 oe ee eee 2.6 
Ibaasts chermenare Or lliomllatommnan os Soo5 bos oe eee dase abuEbe seoos eee cases 2.0 
Height. of. neural spine, above floor of neural canal,_-_.__.._--.--------------- 4.8 


Tue FourTEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate XXII, figure 2.) 


Another vertebra (number 1450) is probably the fourteenth of the 
series. The centrum is narrow at the middle, but is rounded below, and 
sends down anteriorly a strong hypapophysis, which is broad, and slightly 
bifid. The anterior face is sub-circular in outline, slightly flattened above, 
and concave. The posterior face is similar in shape, and a little more 
concave. ‘The lateral foramina are somewhat imperfect, but the diapophysis 
is strong, and the pleurapophysis projects well backward. The diapophysis 
projects below, and outside of the pre-zygapophysis. The neural canal 
is large. 

The pre-zygapophyses look somewhat backward, and strongly inward 
and upward, and are separated from the post-zygapophysis by an interval 
about equal to their length. The post-zygapophyses look downward and 
outward, and are each surmounted by a low tubercle. The roof of the 
neural canal is short on the median line, with a shallow pit in front. It 
has a barely perceptible rudiment of a spine, and a transversely oval 
pit behind, looking directly backward. There appear to be pneumatic 
foramina at the sides, and also below, on the sides of the centrum. 


This vertebra of the type specimen of Jchthyornis dispar measures 
as follows : 
Measurements of Fourteenth Vertebra. (No. 1450.) 


Jhen'ethvoticentrums s42 eee e 2 Sis eS PAS BE ne eh ee 6.0"" 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_-_--_-------------------- 2.4 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,___.___-_--___--_----_- 2.8 
Ihenothaofahypapophysisseeaaee an ace ne es eee seas eee eee 2.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,_----------------------- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,_---_----------------- 2.7 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across diapophyses, ......-------------------- 10.2 


PRESACRAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 135 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .--.--..------------- ep 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,----_--_------------ 7.0 
Vertical diametercofsnearal ycanal ss ssmmnpeneam taal arte eit re meena panne aEe 2.2 
Eiransyerse) diameterro tame urale canals aes epee sta ite a ent sae ae ae ere een 2.0 
Greatestidiametersotalateraleforarn cris eyes iy ain a anes nee aplina say piae ene ipunrnnae 2.5 
heastitiransy.erse diameteriofucentrun ais see aes see ee eee an npneie sae 1.5 


THe FIrreentH (?) Verresra. (Plate XXVII, figure 4.) 

A rather poorly preserved vertebra (number 1733) corresponds imper- 
fectly with the fifteenth vertebra of Sterna regia, with which it may be 
compared. The centrum is constricted medially, but expands at each end 
to support the articular faces, both of which are sub-circular, and very 
slightly concaye. The posterior face is rather deeper than the anterior, 
which is somewhat inclined, so as to look a little downward and forward. 
Beneath the anterior face, is a triangular area, with a small tubercle at each 
of the upper external angles. Below, the centrum is continued downward 
into a thin hypapophysis, the base of which does not extend backward on 
the centrum quite to the posterior end. Above, on each side-is a large oval 
pneumatic -foramen. The articular surface to receive the head of the rib 
is situated near the base of the lateral wall of the neural canal. The 
diapophysial articular surface for the tubercle of the rib is broken off. 

The pre-zygapophyses are elongate, and look nearly directly upward, 
and somewhat inward. They are considerably farther apart than the post- 
zy gapophyses, the difference being rather greater than in the corresponding 
vertebra of the Tern. The post-zygapophyses are imperfectly preserved 
in this specimen, but appear to be shorter than the pre-zygapophyses. 
The neural spine is absent, having been entirely broken away, so as to 
expose the neural canal. 


This vertebra of Ichthyornis victor has the following dimensions : 


Measurements of Fifteenth (?) Vertebra. (No. 1733.) 


Trem prtlyof (centrum erate eye te eso ese pa eta rar eyes ye ym Py eee eye Taree Rae 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,----------------------- 3.5 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum, _-----_------------------ 3.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, -------------~--------- 3.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, ----------------._------ 2.6 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --.------------------ 8.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -------------------- 6.2 


136 ODONTORNITHES. 


THE SIXTEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate XXII, figure 3.) 


A vertebra of the type specimen (number 1450) resembles both the 
sixteenth and seventeenth of the Tern. It belongs in the dorsal series. 
The centrum has its least transverse diameter at the middle, and sends 
perpendicularly downward from the anterior half a sub-conical hypa- 
pophysis, two-lobed at the apex. This process is wanting in the Tern. 
The articular faces of the centrum are sub-circular in outline, somewhat 
flattened above. Both are concave, and the posterior is more deeply so 
than the anterior. 

The centrum is very deeply excavated at the sides, above the 
middle, leaving only a thin wall on the median line. The articulation for 
the head of the rib is borne on the lateral wall of the neural canal, and is 
obliquely oval in outline. The diapophyses are broken away in this 
specimen, and the neural spine is very imperfect. The zygapophyses 
of the opposite sides are near together. The pre-zygapophyses project 
but little in front of the centrum, while the post-zygapophyses extend 
nearly their whole length behind it. 

Another vertebra (number 1733), somewhat posterior to that regarded 
as the fifteenth, has the centrum preserved, but is not figured. This cen- 
trum is rounded below, slightly carinate on the median line, and sends 
down three divergent tubercles near its anterior end. Two of these are 
lateral, and somewhat divergent. ‘The third is smaller, and more acute, 
and is median in position, thus representing a hypapophysis. The anterior 
face of the centrum is injured in this specimen, but appears to have been, 
like the posterior face, sub-circular, and somewhat concave. On each side 
above the middle, the body of the centrum is excavated, so as to leave only 
a thin longitudinal median wall to support the floor of the neural canal. 
The articular surface for the head of the rib is above this excavation, on 


the lateral wall of the neural canal. 


~l 


PRESACRAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 15 
The sixteenth vertebra of Jchthyornis dispar measures as follows: 


Measurements of Sixteenth Vertebra. (No. 1450.) 


Teno thiog «Gentrinay sae chose scan RECS TUN See eae eee 5.8mm 
east) diameter of: cen tr cris tt ai manele a oe me 1.2 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,__...-..-.-------------- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,_.._.._.-------------- 2.5 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,...__.._-------------_-- 2.4 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,_____---------------- 2.4 
Hben ats of eb yp apo play Sis ye ses ses sey se a gee gS a ee 1.8 
IDC Chemnaar @r Mew GAMA. ooo eee goa nee Seno bees Sesseese ese 1.8 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --------------------- 3.3 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -_..---.------------ 2.5 


THE SEVENTEENTH VERTEBRA. (Plate XXVII, figure 5.) 


A dorsal vertebra (number 1733) may be best compared with the 
seventeenth vertebra of the Tern, to which it bears some resemblance 
The centrum is but little contracted at the sides, and is almost evenly 
rounded below. It presents near its anterior end two unequal tubercles, 
the right one being the larger. The articular faces are slightly elongated 
vertically, and nearly equally concave. 

The sides of the centrum in this vertebra are deeply excavated above 
the middle for almost the entire length, so that only a thin layer of bone 
is left to support the floor of the neural canal. This structure is much 
like that in the corresponding vertebra of the Tern, and a little more 
pronounced than in what may have been the preceding vertebra. The 
articular surface for the head of the rib is situated above the anterior 
part of this excavation, and is supported by a ridge running upward 
and backward on the outer wall of the neural canal. 

The pre-zygapophyses are elongated, and approximate. The dia- 
pophyses are both broken off. The post-zygapophyses are a little nearer 
together than the pre-zygapophyses. The neural spine was strong, but is 
much fractured in the present specimen. 


This vertebra of Jchthyornis victor has its principal dimensions as 


follows: 
18 


138 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of the Seventeenth Vertebra. (No. 1733.) 


LOMA OF CaM, ee oS Hk ot Sono sean gt eee saausnesenao cond sseodasaSees Ca 
EAST RELANSVCLSClG 1am eter OL) Ce Mtr WIM yee a a a ee een 1.8 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,-_---__--_-------______ 2.5 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,____-__-___-_____________- 3.0 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, --.--.--.------------- 2.5 
Wertical diameterof postenionarticulation, ==2 996 sos eee eee aa eee 3.2 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, --------------------- 4.0 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, ....-...------------ 3.2 


Tur EIGHTEENTH VERTEBRA. 


Another vertebra (number 1733) not figured, evidently posterior to 
the one above described, has the under surface of the centrum somewhat 
hour-glass shaped, and nearly alike at each end, being destitute of tubercles 
or hypapophysis, and very evenly rounded throughout below. The artic- 
ular faces are sub-circular, and about equally concave.  Laterally, this 
centrum, like the one before it, is deeply excavated nearly to the middle 
on each side, leaving a thin wall of bone along the median line to support 
the floor of the neural canal. The articular face for the head of the rib 
is above the anterior part of this excavation, and is obliquely oval. The 
diapophyses, zygapophyses, and most of the neural spine, are broken 
away in this specimen. 


In one of the best preserved skeletons of Ichthyornis victor (number 
1732), several vertebree, apparently consecutive, lie near together in front 
of the sacrum. The first of these, or the eighteenth vertebra, has been 
thrown somewhat out of the line of the next two, and possibly may not 
have been consecutive with them. The centrum is badly crushed, but was 
evidently excavated at the sides above, as in the Tern, and had concave 
articular faces. The neural spine was about two-thirds as long antero- 
posteriorly as the centrum, and was proportionally higher than in the 
Tern. It does not appear to have been united to the adjoining spines by 
ossified tendons, as in that bird. The posterior zygapophyses are approxi- 
mate laterally, as in the succeeding vertebrae, and look outward as well 
as downward. The diapophyses were broad, and directed somewhat 
backward. 


PRESACRAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 139 


Tur NINETEENTH VERTEBRA. 


The succeeding vertebra in the above series (number 1732) is some- 
what crushed laterally, so that the centrum appears keeled, but it was 
probably rounded below. At the sides, it is excavated, leaving only a 
thin median wall. The diapophyses are strong, nearly horizontal, and 
directed somewhat backward. They are supported by a vertical ridge 
below, and bear at the end a small sub-circular articular face for the 
tubercle of the rib. Their upper surfaces are moderately broad. The 
neural spine is as extensive at its thickened upper end as the centrum. 


A yertebra not figured, which may be regarded as the nineteenth, is 
represented in one specimen (number 1733) by less than half of a centrum, 
apparently the posterior end, which has a nearly circular and slightly 
concave articular face. This centrum is broken near the middle, showing 
a transverse section very similar in form to that of a T rail inverted. 
A similar section might be made across the centra of the three preceding, 
vertebrae of this species (Ichthyornis victor.) 


Tue TWENTIETH VERTEBRA. 


Another more posterior vertebra not figured, belonging to this specimen 
(number 1733), has a shorter and stouter centrum than the preceding, and 
is less excavated at the sides. The articular surfaces are concave. The 
parapophysial surface for the head of the rib is small, and elevated. The 
neural canal is much crushed, and the zygapophyses, diapophyses, and 
neural spine, are broken away. 


The twentieth vertebra of number 1732 is broader below than the 
nineteenth, and rounded, without trace of hypapophysis, The sides of the 
centrum are excavated above the middle, and the articular faces are sub- 
circular, and moderately concave. 

The diapophyses are strong, and supported by a ridge below. They 
are directed somewhat backward, and terminated by a small face for the 
articulation of the tubercle of the rib. 


140 ODONTORNITHES. 


THe Twenty-First VERTEBRA. (Plate XXII, figure 4.) 


A vertebra in the type specimen (number 1450) may be compared 
with the twenty-first of Sterna regia. The centrum is somewhat crushed, 
but appears to have been moderately broad below, and destitute of any 
hypapophysis. It is deeply excavated at the sides, as are the other 
dorsals, at least those from the posterior part of the series. The articulation 
for the head of the rib is obliquely oval. The diapophyses as well as 
the neural spine are broken off; and the zygapophyses are crushed out of 
position, but were approximate laterally, as in the preceding vertebre. 


A vertebra (number 1732) adherent to the anterior end of the sacrum, 
and almost wholly in front of the ilia, thus corresponding with the twenty- 
first vertebra of the Tern, is also exposed in the matrix with that above 
described. The neural spine appears to have been developed much as in 
the Tern, but is here crushed. The diapophyses are broad, and at the 
end were united to those adjoining by flattened ossified tendons. The 
pre-zygapophyses look obliquely inward, and upward. 


The following measurements give the size of the twenty-first vertebra 
in the type specimen of Jchthyornis dispar : 


Measurements of Twenty-first Vertebra. (No. 1450.) 


Meno Chwo fe Cen trum yey he as tee, oer Ss Peete eyes ol = ACs ot eee ae GOL 
Meastidiameterkot. Centrum j= mci saya 2.38 Sie ha meee ate Ss nen em gE TOI 1.5 
Vertical diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,___._______________-___-- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation of centrum,___-_____---_--_.-___- 3.0 
Vertical diameter of posterior articulation of centrum,__---------------------- 2.4 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation of centrum, ---------------------- 2.5 
Transverse diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, - -------------------- 3.0 


Transverse diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses,.------------------- 2.5 


CHAT WER Xale 


SHOULDER-GIRDLE OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 
(Plates XXIII, XXIX, and XXXIV.) 


THE scapular arch of Ichthyornis, and its near ally Apatornis, conforms 
strictly to the type seen in living carinate birds. This part of the skeleton 
gives no hint of the peculiar reptilian features in other portions of the 
structure, and has none of the Struthious characters noticed in Hesperornis. 
There is apparently no part of the entire shoulder girdle of Ichthyornis, 
or the allied genus, that might not have been used by some existing birds 


with strong powers of flight. 


Tue Scapuna. (Plates XXIX, and XXXIV.) 


In the Odontotorme, the scapula presents two well marked types. In 
Ichthyornis (Plate XXIX, figures 9, 9a, 10-12), the bone is robust near 
its articular end, where it is moderately, but suddenly, expanded and 
thickened, much as in Ardea. Here, it presents two confluent articular 
surfaces. The larger of these forms a part of the glenoid fossa, and the 
smaller is for articulation with the coracoid. The scapular part of the 
glenoid fossa is flattened, slightly narrower below than above, and 
strongly inclined to the plane of the bone. In its largest dimension, it is 
slightly concaye in section, while transversely it is nearly flat, but rounded 


at the edges. he articular surface for union with the coracoid is nearly 
141 


142 ODONTORNITHES. 


hemispherical, and adapted to the subcircular pit in that bone. The 
acromial process of the scapula is conical, short and pointed, and does not 
project beyond the articular portion of the bone. The shaft is hollow at 
the lower end. 

In the genus Apatornis, the scapula (Plate X XIX, figures 1, 1a, 2-4) is 
elongate, and distally flattened. In a side view, the lower half is curved, 
while the upper or distal half is nearly straight. In a front view, the bone 
appears regularly curved throughout. The proximal end is moderately and 
gradually expanded transversely, and bears the two customary articular 
surfaces. The upper and larger of these, forming the scapular portion of 
the glenoid fossa, is very oblique to the plane of the bone, and is 
distinctly convex in both directions. It increases in transverse diameter 
toward the base, instead of becoming narrower in that region, as in 
Ichthyornis. The articular surface for the coracoid is much as in that 
genus, being sub-hemispherical, and adapted to the pit on the face of the 
coracoid. This articular face is bounded internally by a distinct ridge, as 
shown in figure 3. 

The principal difference, however, between this scapula and that of 
Ichthyornis is shown in the development of the acromial process, which in 
Apatornis is highly developed, and projects far beyond the articular 
surfaces of the bone, as in Graculus. Anteriorly, this process is obliquely 
truncated, so that at the end it is blunt, and somewhat wedge-shaped. Its 
general direction is inclined at an angle of forty-five degrees with the 
direction of the shaft of the bone at its origin. 

The shaft of the scapula is perfectly preserved in specimen number 
1734. It is here broadest just below the middle, where the upper 
edge becomes thin, and somewhat expanded. Beyond the middle, the 
bone tapers to near the distal end, and the extremity is rounded. The 
scapula decreases pretty regularly in thickness from near the proximal to 
the distal extremity, where it becomes thin and blade-like. 


The followmg measurements indicate the size of the scapula in 
Ichthyornis and Apatornis. 


SHOULDER-GIRDLE OF ICHTHYORNIS. 143 


Measurements of Scapula. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1718.) 


Greatest diameter, across humeral articulation,......_...-------------------- (eo 
iheastidiametersthroushvhumeralllarticulationses\-2e 2 sesee =e eee see eee eee 2.8 
Weneth-of acromialprocess, tromibase,=. =e seee ee eeee 0.6 


Measurements of Scapula, (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1452.) 


Greatest diameteracrossshumeralvarticulations ee eteee eee eee eee see eee eee 
iheast’ diameter, through humeralvarticulation;== 9222-25 sse> sess eee eee 3. 
Tene thiofacromialaprocess; fromsbaseysse esse tn eee eee en eee ae eee 0.8 


The various bones in the scapular arch of Ichthyornis are shown in 


position in the figure below. 


Fig. 31. 


FIGURE 31.—Scapular arch of Ichthyornis victor, Marsh; twice natural size. s. scapula; c. coracoid; cl. clavicle, 
st. sternum; &. keel of sternum; sr. costal border; q glenoid fossa. 


144 _ ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Scapula. (Apatornisceler, No. 1734.) 


Left. Right. 
When thy orn scapulayeias Suse ta eae eee ee ate eee set le yee eet ee og oun 
Greatest diameter, across humeral articulation, ------...------------ Deana 
Least diameter, through humeral articulation, --......--..---------- 2 
Geng throfsacromial process) trom) Dase, eae eee ae ees es 3.5 
Diameter of shaft, above humeral articulation,-_-.----.._._______-- 3 Be 


Tue Coracomw. (Plate XXIIE and XXIX.) 


In the genus Ichthyornis, the coracoid is a strong bone, much widened 
at the proximal end, where it articulates with the sternum in an elongated 
groove on each side. These grooves, and consequently the coracoids in 
their natural position, cross the median line in front in such a manner 
that the right coracoid is external to, or in front of, the left, as in the 
herons and their allies, and in some other birds. The proximal end is 
much expanded, as in Colymbus, but the bone is less robust than in that 
genus. The external part of the expanded portion is thin, and is short in 
the line of the axis of the bone. The inner angle of the expansion is 
produced and acute, as in Ardea. 

The shaft of the coracoid is flattened, nearly or quite as far as the 
articular surface for the humerus. This surface is nearly flat, suboval, and 
somewhat less than twice as long as broad. The articular surface for the 
scapula is a nearly hemispherical pit, or cup, in diameter about equal to 
the transverse diameter of the humeral articulation. It is placed just 
within the lower end of that articulation, instead of almost wholly below it, 
as in Apatornis. 

Just beneath the articular face for the scapula, is a foramen, per- 
forating the base of a strong sub-scapular process, which is crushed and 
broken away from most of the specimens preserved. This process is 
triangular in shape (Plate XXIX, fig. 16), and much like that seen in 
Ardea herodias, Linn. Below and beyond the articular faces, the 
coracoid is flattened vertically, and, at the end, it is expanded; but, as in 
Ardea, it presents no facet for articulation with the clavicle, which is 
unknown in Jchthyornis. The shaft of the bone is hollow, with thin walls. 


SHOULDER-GIRDLE OF ICHTHYORNIS. 145 


The coracoid. of Apatornis resembles in general that of Ichthyornis, but 
is less expanded at the lower or sternal end; and these ends overlapped 
much less extensively than in that genus, if indeed they overlapped at all. 
The articular surface for the scapula is, as in Ichthyornis, a hemispherical 
cup, but it is placed almost wholly below the articular surface for the 
humerus, or the coracoid part of the glenoid cavity. 

The articulation for the humerus is comparatively broader than in: 
Ichthyornis, and is excavated in the middle, instead of being nearly flat, 
as in that genus. Under and beyond these articular faces, the coracoid 
is flattened vertically, almost to an edge, below. The shaft of the bone 
is bent strongly inward beyond the glenoid cavity, instead of continuing 
nearly straight, and there is a pronounced terminal knob, but no distinct 
face for articulation with the clavicle. The glenoidal, or subscapular, pro- 
cess is perforated by a foramen at its base, as in Ichthyornis. The shaft 
of the coracoid is hollow. 


Measurements of the coracoids in the types and some other specimens 
of Ichthyornis and Apatornis are given below. 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


ienothvofusternalwarticull atiom ween wa see epee meme peat neg es NIE Lee epee pny, ao 1, 2 
Greatest antero-posterior diameter of proximal end,-------------------------- 1.7 
Antero-posterior diameter of shaft, where broken,-_____-_---___-------------- DD 
Mransverse.diameter of shatt, wheresbroker\ == aa ss een pe 4, 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1718.) 


eng Ghiois num eral janstr err at oa peepee reer ae pee et @, ae 
Greatest transverse diameter of humeral articulation,____._-_.__-------_------ 3.4 
Transverse diameter of shaft, below humeral articulation,___-_-_--_----------- 3.8 
Werticalidiameternoteclayicularsprocess.s= =e ees eae eee Be 
Mransyerseldiameter, ofc] aya culars process, meme apa nese ae ee ees ee 2.2 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1452.) 


bene thof humeral garticulationye ss 9a =m eee a eee ee _  6.52m 
Greatest transverse diameter of humeral articulation,------------------------- 4, 
Least transverse diameter of shaft, below articulation, -_-.--..---------------- 3.5 
WerticalsdiameterioteclaviculanspLocess\ sees = eee ee eee eee 5.2 
iDransyerse diameter or clayicular process; =a eae eee eee ee eee ee 2.8 


19 


146 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1727.) 


Selteneihtof humeralsarticulation).-°S< -= 222 = a eee eee oe eee 6.2™™ 
iransyverserdrameter, of humeral articulations s2s2 eee 422s eee eee eee eee 4, 
Wierticalxdianletenonrclayicularmimprocessyssee ee asec =e aen eens eee eee 5.5 
Transverse diameter; of clavicular process,.---.-:--22--22-252-2 22-22-2225 22 2. 3. 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1741.) 


Wen'xthvota hum eral iat Cul alone sess a eee eerste eer Gas 
Greatest transverse diameter of humeral articulation,___--_..----------------- 3.6 
Diametenonshattibelowehumerallarticulation, esos = seem ene eee see ee 4, 
Werticalediametensof iclayicular processy=— se 55-2 = seen eee ee ae eae ae eee 6. 
Transverse diameter of clavicular process,---...--.-------------------------- 8. 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1748.) 


Wenmothwofecora colds atc sey ast al may chars Bye eos epee iat ety Hav ea Sy, 
ILenatdn OF lapel ErANGWULNHMOI — He eases oeee aooS onto cose Gees Seea cose boeC 6. 
Wiialiin @2 Immmeral pranenbyavoys = 5 boa cee eae sens sete soe saoseoses assess 59) 
Miameterkorapititor scapula, Aaa. ss jee e ee a= Se Sees SE tee ieee eee 3. 
Depthrotuclayicularsprocess; set. scfm see ey teen aoe ca eee ee De 
Mransiverseidiameter,on clayicular prOCess;= 5 ses eases = 8s eee 3. 
eno thmota olen ord Sprocesss Scere sets ceyae etre Be eee eee Re eee ea er 4,24 
Firansyerse diam eter Ofasbattamir cso a. ayn ork ee apatite ci epee on 4, 
Vrerticalydiameteriot: shaft! esa Wes eae Satin nea, Wee etn thio eye pte Ae 2.5 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1745. 
y ; 


LOM GHIN O COMO. caonse soos eoecdaas sees oseeoosesennE Ge eee eee Soka 
ene thtotshumeraleanticul atlonyseese= sss =e ee eeee aera nee ease eens 6. 

NV Varcluheo tahun eral eaarst1 Cul oti @ raspy ye or 3.4 
Diametenolspitytonscapulavey 2) ue 20, 2 Tiley ieee yep elie eaes Wark Ne RGR open D 3.4 
Werticalydiametenotaclaviculan process) sss) = s=2 eee ee eee eee eee eee oe 5, 
Mransversewdiameterofclavicular, processes es sea e cee eee oe | nee eee 2.8 
HransversexdlameteriOnushatts cj. Sea: corse ais) oe ee tee oe a ee 4, 
PAT GerO=pOSsteri Ora dialn et era O fags 11a fits ae pe eee eee ese me 2.6 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1458.) 


Menor hyo tap mrarme rales art 1e il etree tee ee ere Qe 
Greatest transverse diameter of humeral articulation, ______________-___-___-- 3.2 
Least transverse diameter of shaft, below articulation,_________._______-___-_-- 3.8 
Werticaludiametersotxclayacul areprocessyseise eae se ee ae = nr ere raya i, 
Mransverse.aiameter or clayiculat Process) == seer e ee eee eee 2.5 
Diameterrotesca pul area ToL C Ul a tO see eye lpn ene EES 3.8 


Wenethiot. clenoid mprocessye sea ae a eee pee ae = ee ee 4, 


SHOULDER-GIRDLE OF ICHTHYORNIS. 147 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Ichthyornis validus, No. 1446.) 


Longest diameter of humeral articulation,..........------------------------- Chaat 
Transverse diameter of humeral articulation,..____-.------------------------- 4.2 
Least transverse diameter of shaft, below articulation,..____._________-_-___-_- 4.5 
Vertical diameter of clavicular process,....._..=-------------------- ee sees 5.5 
‘Transverse diameter of clavicular process,.____._______--___----_--_-=------- 3. 


Measurements of Coracoid. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


Left. Right. 

Length’ OF <COracoids sa sap ses sree feta cepa eg ene a ras Par ee 24, mm 
eno thvorahumeral@artic ul tio 11s eee ee 5.5 

Transverse diameter of humeral articulation,...__--..-------------- 3.8 

Diameter of shaft below humeral articulation, ___.._..-.--.--.--_--_- 3. 
Mertical diameteriotclayicular jprocess\seeee eee eee ee eee eee eee Be 5. 
Transverse diameter of clavicular process, ...---..._.--=------=----- 2.5 

Diameter. ofsternal vendse sae ey gel yen WO eines ee nmes es 14. 


Tue Cuavicte. (Plate XXIX, figure 7.) 


The only portion of the clavicle yet known among the Odontotorme is a 
fragment from the upper end of that bone, in Apatornis. This fragment is 
considerably flattened, probably in part by pressure. It presents no face 
for articulation with the coracoid, but tapers to a flattened point at the top, 
where it is adapted for attachment to the acromial process of the scapula. 


Tue Sternum. (Plates XXIII, XXIX, and XXXIV.) 


The sternum in the type species of Ichthyornis is deeply keeled, affording 
ample room for muscular attachment. The manubrium is broad, and some- 
what unsymmetrical. The coracoid grooves are elongated, and overlap 
widely across the median line, as in Ardea, and some birds of prey. As 
usually occurs in living birds with this peculiarity, the inner end of the 
left coracoid was above that of the right. These grooves become shallow 
near the middle, where the ridge of bone behind nearly disappears, but, 
toward the outer end, the ridge is again well developed, and acute. ‘The 
lateral margins and all the posterior part of the sternum are absent from 
the type specimen of Ichthyornis dispar. 

The specimen of Ichthyornis victor (number 1461) in which the sternum 
is preserved shows a strong and deep keel, robust and prominent in front. 


148 ODONTORNITHES. 


The manubrium closely resembles that of Ichthyornis dispar. The cora- 
coid grooves overlap widely on the median line, the left being above the 
right, as in Ichthyornis dispar. The costal processes and the posterior 


outline of the specimen are not preserved. 


In the genus Apatornis, the sternum was keeled, as in Ichthyornis, 
although the precise depth of the keel cannot be determined. The manu- 
brium was narrower than in Ichthyornis, and symmetrical, and ended in a 
blunt point. The coracoid grooves scarcely more than meet on the 
median line, and the left is but little depressed below the right, the asym- 
metry being only about as great as in Graculus dilophus, Gray. The costal 
process is triangular, and the costal border presents six articular faces for 
sternal ribs. The first of these is comparatively small and indistinct, and 
is well in advance of the five succeeding ones. The latter are separated 
by nearly equal intervals, each about two-thirds as long as the first. The 
posterior outline of the sternum is much broken, but appears to have been 


deeply emarginate. 


The following measurements are taken from the specimens mentioned 


above : 

Measurements of Sternum. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 
iiiranswerserdiametersnearkanteriormen sess a pe ems ently mek ns eee eee yi 32,5mm 
Wepthvorakeelivasiupresenvieds =f: e).w/= Pe, Spe eae Ore atu, opty ie Ra en 10. 

Measurements of Sternwm. (Ichthyornis victor, No, 1461.) 
ene Lhyormkeel spat mase, as). et sts a 0 nein 2 Scecye acer ee earns eA rey 2 vee eR 34, mm 
Maximumulenethvot keels =) Se Se Wei Maly E SO SSNs eer wt To she i cat aye ean ee Aix. 
Dep cnsineron terres cee tas oj ed ssn eels eee Sy eainny RRO fron le al hn ee pee 13.5 
Measurements of Sternum. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 
Gmreatestmbramsyersemc:larnle bets yee ya ary yee geen cerns ee ey OS SRN Re 33, mm 


SOAS LROLANS VCESC NCI ANVe COIs cape ieye cts ay raya oy ue tere etre at en 28. 


CHAPTER XII. 


THE WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 
(Plates XXIV-XXVI and XXX-XXXI.) 


THE wings in the two genera of Odontotorme clearly indicate very 
strong power of flight, thus differing as widely as possible from the corres- 
ponding parts in Hesperornis. In Ichthyornis, nearly all .the bones of the 
wings are well preserved, and these are all remarkably like those of some 
carinate birds living to-day. These remains give but slight indications 
of the reptilian features seen in the portions of the skeleton already 
described. 


Toe Humerus. (Plates XXIV and XXX.) 


The humerus in Ichthyornis is strong and well developed, thus differing 
widely from that of Hesperornis. The most striking feature of the bone 
is the enormous radial crest, surpassing in comparative size that of any 
living bird. It is well shown on Plate XXIV, figure 3, rc. This crest is, 
moreover, remarkable for its position, which is in a plane nearly parallel 
with the long axis of the head of the humerus, instead of considerably 
inclined to this axis, as in most birds. This fact is clearly shown by a 
number of well preserved examples, including the type specimen of 
Ichthyornis dispar (aumber 1450). In these two points, the humerus of 


Ichthyornis strongly resembles the corresponding bone in the Pterodactyles. 
149 


150 ODONTORNITHES. 


The nearest approach in size among modern birds to the radial 
crest of Ichthyornis is perhaps to be found among raptorial species, where 
its elongation along the shaft of the bone is considerable, but its height 
is still proportionally much less than in the present genus. In Sterna, 
this crest is even less than half the comparative size in Ichthyornis. The 
ulnar tuberosity is also well developed, and, like the radial crest, is 
nearly in the same plane with the head of the humerus. No pneumatic 
foramina are to be seen in the specimens preserved. 

The distal end of the humerus of Ichthyornis resembles that of the 
genus Ardea, rather than Sterna, the ectocondyloid process being repre- 
sented only by a low tubercle. The shaft of the bone is hollow, with 
moderately thin walls, and its length is about one-fifteenth less than that 
of the ulna. In the genus Sterna, the humerus is about one-fifth less in 
length than the ulna 


Dimensions of the humerus in the type specimen and in four other 
species of the Odontotorme are given below: 


Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


Wen cthrofsbumerus;=c5 23s sees. fees See ee ace sees e aa arise 58.0™™ 
GChramiast, Chemneuar Or jaro Gi ho oo eae oeeo soSd coSsadee ance 13.0 
Diameters ot proximaluarticulation; ease nen see eee eee se a eee eee 3.0-10.0 
Wiametersropr distal Wend, a.n sh oose so oe oe oe ee eee Sere coe eae See ee 9,6— 5.0 
iheastraiametersioLshatty- see os slant oes anaemia eet aoe es 3.0- 4.8 
Length from proximal end to rise of radial crest,--..----.--------------- 23.5 
diransyv.ersendiameter, across radial crest,sss- essen ss saee ee eee 12.0 


Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1730.) 


IL@MGIN OF INNATE So scesoo secs ssa essa oosS ages sasaessemanacssepeso505 62.50™ 
Greatestraiameferxo esp ro xim all eer Cl ee eee te ere er 5p 
Aransversexdlameversoneproxamal end ames me saan rsa eee 3.1 
MiamneternOiMesh atime see eee ewe ek ie ahd as Sree rete Sear Sarah er eee 5.2 
Greatestraiameter onmdistaliend 2s cise ares se ayaa nee Se eee eee 9. 
Antero-posterior diameter,of ulman-condyle,-22 =" 5-22 een nee = ee 5. 


Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1742.) 


sen othrotileftivhumerns;= Vamos. ee Sake 2 aoe ee nee ene ae ee sm eee ee 725.0m 
Greatesticiametens ofa, oxen all ier Clee a eee a arte a a ep pny ae 17. 
Diameterstotiproxmaltarticul ations ase e eee eee ee ae ee 13-4. 
WiamretersoLsdistal cer Meese wae ere yey eee era eee en a ae oe ee 12.5-5.5 


5 
Diameter of) shaft (approximate); =< << -- 2 cose pms has cao ita te inmyeiomae 6.5 


WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 151 


Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis victor, No.-1447.) 


ID ATEN Gye waka DNA se Cee eee ke ete ke oe ee (gaye 
Antero-posterior extent of proximal articulation, ._.__.---_.-_--------------- 17.6 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,_...__....--------------------- 4, 
Mransverseldiameter of distal) articulation sss sees te eee ean nearer 11.2 
Greatest: diameter of radialicondyless sa 8s= 222225202 see on eae memes 5.5 


Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1452.) 


Greatest diimeter ofsproximalvarticulationss= 9 ae ee) eee eee 16.36" 
Transverse diameter of proximal articulation,._______--_-_2-.-1._--._------- 3.9 
Greates teed rare tern. laetclis tllg ern cl sie eee erate eae erates en ene En nemo 12.1 
Greatestidiameteriof radially condyles mse eases eres ee ee 6. 
Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1457.) 
Greatest diameter ore distalkerm dye esse eae yore yee eee errno vee eee eae Hieam 
Anfero-posterior diameter of radiallcondyle;s= sss os eens asso sss e ese 5.2 
Werticalidiameter ofmradial condyles meas mae ers erste aa eer 6.5 
pPiameter of ‘shatty- Ua. Soh yt ok SS ee gale cer caton teeta Uarap ate 5.5 
Measurements of Humerus. (Ichthyornis tener, No. 1738.) 
Greatest diameter ofadistalyen dies 2 526 See eae Ne Oi ioe pei alee alias eal RE aire ie 
Antero-posterior diameter of radial condyle, .--- 02-22-22 --252 255222242222 - 3.3 
Viertiea) diameter ofmadialkcondyle ses) sas 525 ose 5s oe ee ee eee eee 4,5 


Tue Raprus. (Plates XXIV and XXX.) 


The radius like the other bones of the wing in Ichthyornis is strong 
and robust. The proximal end is of moderate size, and presents a 
sub-elliptic, slightly concave, articular face for the condyle of the humerus, 
and a slight lateral facet for the ulna. Nearly opposite this facet, the 
bone is distinctly tuberculated, and on the side toward the ulna at a short 
distance from the proximal end is a distinct elongate oval facet, raised on 
a tubercle above the general surface of the bone. This tubercle appears 
to give the shaft of the bone a short proximal bend toward the ulna. It 
then becomes nearly straight, until beyond the middle it curves again 
gradually toward the ulna, and at the end is moderately expanded and 
thickened. The distal articular surface for the ulna is indistinct, while 
that for the radial carpal is, as usual, elongate and convex in both 


directions. 


152 ODONTORNITHES. 


In the genus Apatornis, the face for articulation with the humerus is 
nearly flat, while the ulnar articular surface is more distinct, and extended 
upon the side of fhe bone, as in Graculus. The shaft of the radius is 
hollow in both genera of Odontotorme. 


The following measurements will show the principal dimensions of 
the radius in this group: 


Measurements of Radius. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


TD RAE Wa NEES CO fd aN ss el a i ae a ne eH el 2aQ ma 
Greatestrarameterkotedis tall sen clap ery revs eye ee re ye retry ere ee ee 5.5 
Weastrdiameteroradistal vend, sec) cys rts Soe eres ted at meee 1 A ere oa eee nr 3.0 


Measurements of Radius. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1741.) 


Henvthvot radius, == saben sass se se Sen tet ee eee eee eee ee Yile s 
Greatest) diamever:ofproximal end, 925-42 ss2 2255-2 S25 eee pane eee ee 5.2 
heast diameter: of :proximalend; 5. -25.222.555 22) 4225 5222ss252255225 25522 3.8 
BD ATM CLCTIO BH Aik hese een te aD te BA a Ser aye ane ln elie ae hoe fox nent lpn es 3. 
rans verserdlameter ol vis tals eric sys see ne eae aa Sn acer A <a utay Sea 7.8 
Meastidiametersotedistal end epee eee eee es ee sar oe es 4, 


Measurements of Radius. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1733.) 


Greatestidiameteron)proximalyem dyes sami ee eee stent ee eee 46n5 
meastydiametermoreproximalsen die seeps ere see cose ere 3.5 

DD Farm tele O Lm tra tt ee ee eee cece ety aa Nay Spa LPR IN RUB eet aN ACEO Ml iy a rae 2.8 
Greatestraiamet enol sais tally crc sect aa te yer eee leet Una nae opens eee Gil 
heastydiameterzorydistal end yee a sts Sai te ne Me eee Se eee eas See 3. 


Measurements of Radius. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


iGreatesordiam cterotusproxdm aleen years es eset re ee eee ate eee 4igmm 
Heeastadiametero fe pro xin aly er Capes spe a = es eee eee eee ls ee 3. 
ID FATN eC bE Le OLS LAL Cae e eevee od ep ti yal fat Neus NES ERS Soba) cp SL Sins No apap eg 2.9 


THe Uuna. (Plates XXIV and XXX.) 


The ulna in Ichthyornis is a strong moderately curved bone, some- 
what trihedral proximally, but becoming more nearly cylindrical toward 
the distal end, where it is also less curved than in the proximal half. The 
surface for articulation with the humerus is placed more obliquely to the 
shaft of the bone than in Sterna, and occupies a greater proportion of the 


{ 
. 
5 

. 
‘ 


oS 


i) 


WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 15: 


Q 


proximal end than in that genus, agreeing better in both these respects 
with the ulna of Ardea. The shaft of the bone is hollow, with thin 
walls, and presents faint but unmistakable evidence of the attachment 
of about a dozen secondary quill-feathers. The distal end of the ulna 
resembles that of Ardea, rather than that of Sterna. 


The dimensions of the ulna in three species of Ichthyornis are as 
follows : 


Measurements of Ulna. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 
Length of ulna, 


Fe a aR fy nee ea rel ae ne se Spe ee hee Rat kee ec pi one oe ey, wh 
Miameter:of: Shatty sees s coke seo. ham eee EAN HTN A AERO ie AR Eh PL nrg en a RC pe ey 2.6 
Greatest diameter of proximal articylation,._..........----------------------- 5.0 
Greatestidiameter/of distalvarticulations 2222 25562 sae e seen oa eee 5.7 
heastidiameterofadistalearticul ati ors aarp ne eee ae ae ea a een EE 5.0 

Measurements of Ulna. (Ichthyornis agilis, No. 1453.) 

Length oflektiuln a sve we Sy 0 eek is Wy cee ose ae Marae Tia ea ee ee Bo 
Diameter-ofsproxiumalvends sss oes eek ety aaa ie eee eeu ee mem ere 9. 
Diametersofidistal Temas. 22 Hawise he Mra wpa earache ae PED ay Ue Rb ete eet 8. 

Measurements of Una, (Ichthyornis validus, No. 1740.) 
Men orth of bina pee ee Fe ry ec rps ree 68.50™ 
Greatestidiam eter.otes proximal Kem clase eee ers ee ae 6.5 
Pransyerse diameter Or, proximal Cr cls meeps ee esters p eee a epee eerste eels 6. 
Diameter obs shrabtyee See ee ee Oye ae peed Pate ee aD ate ange Ue apa a ner Shil 
Diameter of proximal end, across curve, --------------------4 Ne Reape Uae eee 6. 
Greatesti diameter ofmproximalvend) psec sas ee eek ee eee ee 6.2 


THE CarpaL Bones. (Plate XXX.) 


The two bones of the carpus are preserved in the genus Apatornis, 
and resemble the same bones in existing Carinate. They may be com- 
pared with the corresponding bones in a Cormorant (Graculus dilophus.) 
The radial carpal has a proximal articular surface, somewhat broader than 
that of the Cormorant. The distal articulation, for the metacarpal, resem- 
bles considerably the same face in Graculus, but the inner face, articu- 
lating with the ulna, is proportionally more transverse, and shorter in the 


line of the length of the wing. 
20 


154 ODONTORNITHES. 


The ulnar carpal is less perfectly preserved, its surface being too 
much eroded to be certain of the limits of the articulations. The face for 
the ulna is, however, easily recognizable, and is comparatively large. 


Tue Meracarpats. (Plate XXXI.) 


The united metacarpal elements of IJchthyornis form a short and 
decidedly robust bone, somewhat resembling that of Sterna, but presenting 
more points of resemblance to the genus Graculus. It is, however, pro- 
portionally shorter and stouter than in that genus, and differs considerably 
in its proximal articular surface, which is plane transversely, and oblique 
throughout, with only one curvature. It is consequently destitute of the 
groove ordinarily seen at the ulnar side of this articulation, and the bone 
presents no trace of the depression in which this groove terminates in the 
genus Graculus. 

Of the three metacarpals, the first extends to the end of the proximal 
one-fourth part of the bone, and is moderately robust, and, proximally, 
well elevated. Its distal articular surface is oblique to the axis of the 
bone, looking forward, and toward the palmar surface of the wing. 

The second of the united metacarpals appears to form by far the 
greater part of the bone, as in most birds, and bears near the proximal 
end of its palmar surface, a distinct and well elevated tubercle. The distal 
half of the anconal surface of this bone bears a groove, running obliquely 
toward the ulnar side of the bone, passing, near its distal termination, 
close by the side of a distinct tubercle. A similar groove occurs in Sterna. 
At the distal end, the bone is rather suddenly expanded, and the articular 
surfaces, by which it is terminated, considerably resemble those of the 
same part in Graculus. 

The shaft of the outer or third metacarpal is comparatively slender, 


as in birds generally, and is nearly cylindrical medially. 


The united metacarpals in the genus Apatornis are much more slender 
than in Ichthyornis, but the bone is still of moderately robust proportions, 
when compared with the same part in modern birds of flight. Its proxi- 


WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 155 


mal articular surface bears a resemblance to that seen in Graculus, differing 
from that of Ichthyornis in being grooved along its ulnar side. The groove 
terminates in a distinct, though shallow, pit at the base of the ulnar, 
or third, metacarpal. 

Of the three united metacarpals, the first is shorter than in Ichthyornis, 
and hardly extends beyond the end of the upper one-fifth of the bone. 
Proximally, it is well elevated, extending to a height almost equal to its 
length. The articular face is nearly as in Ichthyornis. 

The middle metacarpal is less robust than in Ichthyornis, but is still 
short and strong, as compared with the same bone in many living birds of 
flight, but does not differ greatly from that seen in Sterna. The tubercle 
near the proximal end of the palmar surface is well developed. The 
groove seen along the distal half of the anconal surface in Ichthyornis is 
comparatively ill defined, and the tubercle near the distal end of this 
surface in that .genus is very rudimentary, or only faintly indicated. The 
distal end is much less expanded than in Ichthyornis, and the articular 
surface comparatively smaller. 

The outer or third metacarpal is more slender and flattened than in 
Ichthyornis, and bears, on its palmar surface, near the proximal end, a low 
but distinct tubercle for muscular attachment. 


The more important dimensions of the united metacarpal bones in 
Ichthyornis and Apatornis are given below: 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


Greatest diameter ofa is tallcem cheese eas eee a eee 5.5mm 
Trans verserGlamCbers7o lacs tale Tcl spear eee ee ee mane ean sean ee ene 4.0— 2.8 
Diameters of shaft of second metacarpal element,_____.._...-------------- 315— 222 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1730.) 


IG ead OE TIGER ea co tease sass sans ssoe dese atte cscuasposesseacecess 31.5™™ 
Greatestidiameter ots proxaraal erica sae ete ee nee ee rea 9.6 
Transverse diametercote pro xm all em papaya eye a 3.2 
Greatest) diameter ofa distalser dy ecg ae eye ae eee et eee ee eae eee ee ee 6. 
Transyerse diameter, of larger articulation, ==-- 222-052-2255 2-52 see eee 5. 


Length of first metacarpal element, -------------2_- 25-22-92 5.2 


156 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1724.) 


envthvote cht ymetacaipal sees ase see ace eee ase e ele ee 39.5™m 
Cannas Ghennaae Ot jorerainell Qn@b 5.8 65 coca eee cee es oeee see eeSeseadaceee MES 
sitransyerse diame terOlaproxiaial wen dsss= = peat gee a een sy ee 4,7 
Transverse diameter of shaft of second metacarpal element, ------------------- 4, 
Transverse diameter of shaft of third metacarpal element _---_--------------- 1.7 
Gureatestydiameterotmdistaliend a= een eae oe ten ee ea ne Deals 7.6 
Transverse diameter of larger articulation,..-.-___._..__--------- ee 3 eee 5.5 
Weng throtsirstemetacanpall gel er en tamer ae ee aes teen ae ea ee ea Ul 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Ichthyornis anceps, No. 1208.) 


Greatestiaiameterro te istaller Cases eee says ayers ernte ne ee ee eee wOsioam 
heastadiameterrotaaistalgen dieremerc ttt = sso ae tee eee a aioe ee ere 3.5 
Transverse diameter of outer articular face,._......._--_--------------------. 5. 
Werticalkdiameter-otsouteranti Cul ar eh ace sem memes a ete tener males iy ayes) ua ons /efupeerea ee 2.25 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Ichthyornis agilis, No. 1209.) 


Werticalidiameterofmproximalwarticulationsews sss see eee ss eae ee ees @, 3 
Transverse diameter of proximal articuiation,..........--------------------- 5, 
Pan SveErscualam Ethers Olen SL ali tse eee meee ee ere areas oe ao ye) ys ap 3.8 


Measurements of Metacarpal. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


eno thvoten o hitjeme ta.cary allie eee ye seep ee) peter pera tae eile aa, 
Createstpdiamet erro fae ro xm allgen Clearer ae yee ey tease eee 8.5 
PLransverserdiame ters Ote sro xa THA errs a peyton oy enya rep 4, 


Diameter of shaft of second metacarpal element, ............--.------------- 2 
Diameteriof shatt of third metacarpal element, :—-=--- 2222220222722 2-222 2 1 
Groniest clenmanar oe, Chisiall CNG see ase de onos adesboseeEseseeBaooues sseeasee 4, 
Tram Ene Chlamnaar OF Chl GNC oss soss choc coos Seas eses SeSS sees ooeeoaeas 3 


Tore Wine Paauances. (Plate XXXI, figures 5-8 and 16-19.) 


The first phalanx of the median or second digit of the wing (number 
1726) is in Ichthyornis a robust bone, but tapers rapidly in its shaft from 
the proximal toward the distal end. On the ulnar side, it is, however, 
considerably expanded, and the thin extension is in most of the specimens 
thoroughly ossified, and supported on its anconal surface by two oblique 
ridges. Of these ridges, the first arises near the proximal end of the bone, 
and is only faintly indicated, or is partly confluent with the oblique margin 
of the expansion. It ends in a prominent thickening at the margin of 
the bone. The second ridge arises near the middle of the bone, and passes 


WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 157 


obliquely across the expansion, to end in a thickening, near the middle of 
its margin. 

On each side of this ridge the bone becomes so thin as to be translu- 
cent, and in specimen number 1759, the ossification appears to have been 
incomplete, so that a minute foramen is left in the proximal thin portion, 
and a larger foramen in the distal part of the expansion. In number 1755, 
a small foramen exists in the distal part of the expansion only, and even 
this may possibly have been the result of partial crushing. The distal part 
of the expanded portion is thickened, and produced into a flattened hook- 
like process, beyond the end of the bone, but this is broken off from most 
of the specimens preserved. 

The proximal articular surface consists of a sub-circular shallow con- 
cavity on the ulnar and palmar side, and a somewhat crescent-shaped 
surface. This crescent is blunt at the ends, and extends through a little 
more than a quarter of a circle around the sub-circular face, so as to 
admit only of a slight rotary motion, the joint being somewhat like the 
peg-and-socket articulation seen in the toes of Hesperornis. The shaft 
of the bone is flattened on the radial side, and, on the anconal surface, 
just beyond the middle, is a distinct scar, extending obliquely across 
the shaft. A similar elongated scar is seen on the palmar surface of 
the bone, near the distal end of the ulnar expansion. 

The distal articular face is subquadrate in outline, broadest on the 
radial side, where it is flattened, while the ulnar portion of the face is 
smaller and convex, and is separated by a groove from the radial part. 
The palmar surface of the ulnar expansion of the bone is excavated proxi- 
mally, while distally the excavation is more pronounced on the anconal 


surface. 


The proximal phalanx of the median digit of the wing of Apatornis 
(number 1734) is comparatively much smaller than in JIchthyornis, and, as 
in that genus, the shaft tapers rapidly toward the distal end. The 
expanded portion on the ulnar side is about in the same proportion as in 
that genus, but it is less evidently strengthened by oblique ridges. It is 
also more nearly of uniform thickness, being barely translucent at any 


158 ODONTORNITHES. 


point, and only moderately thickened at the edge. An oblique ridge is, 
however, slightly indicated, passing across the expansion from near the 
middle of the shaft of the bone toward the outer margin, but low through- 
out, and indicated at the margin by only a very slight thickening. 
Beyond this thickening, the margin is suddenly excavated, and the ter- 
minal hook-like process, seen in Ichthyornis, is wanting. The articular 
faces resemble those of Ichthyornis, and there is the same distinct scar 
just beyond the middle of the anconal surface of the shaft, and also near 
the distal end of the ulnar expansion on the palmar side. 


The second phalanx of the same digit is slender, and tapers from the 
proximal end to a blunt point distally. The proximal articular face is 
nearly flat, or slightly concave, sub-triangular in outline, with a prominent 
lobe at the radio-palmar angle of the surface. From the base of this 
lobe, a groove is continued a short distance upon the bone. The front or 
radial side of this bone, like that of the phalanx supporting it, is nearly 
flat. ‘The exterior or anconal surface is excavated at the base. 


The first phalanx of the third digit is imperfectly preserved in Ichthy- 
ornis victor (number 1775), and somewhat resembles the corresponding 
bone in Graculus dilophus, Gray. It is, however, rather more flattened 
proximally than in Graculus, and the articular surface is sub-oval. The 
shaft expands slightly on the radial side near the proximal end, and much 
more decidedly on the ulnar side a little farther along, where it reaches its 
greatest diameter. It then tapers rapidly, and is broken off apparently a 
little beyond the middle of its length. 


The main dimensions of the different of phalanges described above 
are as follows: 


Measurements of First Phalanx of Second Digit. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1463.) 


ene thyotsha tt eemear = Sect te aten © eee eee sen ome ee See Dil, es 
Greatestidiametenrxo ten p rox acm Gee mem erase ae eer ee a ee 6.8 
diransvyerse diame terxo tsp ro xan aller Claes teers een pee ren eee 5.2 
Wrenticaltaiam etergo fa Toxin all (orn Cle pena erate estate sepa 4,2 
Meastdlameteriot ishattsser ans irs ei ane oe, bee eee nS eS = te eee 2.8 
Greatest diameter ofmshattvs ssaset ee ae a rae eee ee a Pe ee ae 7.6 


BANS VeLSeyd1ain Ct CTO far Cs tell Mer Cl panera te a 4,2 


WINGS OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 159 


Measurements of same bone. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1726.) 


eno thiotssharftya so tue ec eS AMAR ST Sls eae se Sete eo 20.8" 
Transverse diameter of shaft,__....---------- Bee eens ia 2m gamers 3.5 
Greatestaventicaludiameterro tersh atta sea eae ee ee 8. 
“transverse diameter ormproximally end sass ae eee 5. 
iVjerti call diameterio fay proxi aller Cys ae eee eee ee ee 4.6 
Ihe aRe Chamero ChitmllanGh (so pssesdeseeasbocosscceneosseesusesesse 5 
Greatest diameterlatydistalvem dias 5 seyret ee ae erate eer sare ene Up 


Measurements of First Phalanx of Third Digit. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1775.) 


Diameters ols proxi ale artic abl OTT sees ees sere ee een Petia eee 1.4-2,4m™m 
Greatest: diameter of shahtse cee ys ee le) Nath tere Mapu apreeee ey treats Saye een 4.2 
Thength) of; part preserved). See Go. ed Soe iE IS aa a eae epee 8.5 


Measurements of Wing Phalanges. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


Menothvocsnrstsphalanxsofimse Condy Gite eases nes ete alee nee eee ié), oe 
Greatest diameters o tay roxin all err fee mee eee ea 4.9 
Meastidiametersofe proxamal vend) sss = sa nee eee ee eee 3. 
east diameter: ofmshatt, oe =e oe see eter ek Se Se mn Nees ae oF 
Greatest expansion ‘ot shatt,< 22-2 e225) sace te ok Ses yoo eee Sa eee DED) 
Greatest diameteriotadistaltend) mea see see = ee eee eee a eee 4.2 
Mransyerse| diameter of distallend sss ss se2 sess eee ee eee eee eee 3 
Mencthiofsecondsphalanxiofesecondidigit sees sens pease aes eee eee eee 13. 


Greatest diameter of proximal end, 
eastidiameterrons proxamallyen Cypeeeee seafarers are ale eee raat Ds 


OseLeIeMe IOUS, OX ICILIC 


PELVIC ARCH OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 
(Plates XXII, XXVIII, and XXXII.) 


Tue pelvic arch in the two known genera of Odontotorme exhibits 
some interesting reptilian characters, one of which is seen also in 
Hesperornis. 'This portion of the skeleton is small in comparison with 
the pectoral arch, corresponding to the difference in size between the 
wings and the feet. 


THe Sacrum. (Plates XXII, and XXVIII.) 


The sacrum is well preserved in the type specimen of Ichthyornis 
dispar (number 1450), and appears to be composed of ten united verte- 
bre. The centra of these vertebre are thoroughly codssified, and in the 
anterior part of the sacrum they are also considerably reduced in diameter. 
The anterior articular face is slightly concave. The neural spines are 
moderately developed in the anterior part, and are united with ossified 
tendons, which diverge posteriorly, and form a flattened upper surface in 
the median part of the sacrum. The middle part of the sacrum is much 
crushed below, in the present specimen. The more posterior centra are of 
moderate size, and the articular face of the last is depressed, and distinctly 
concave. 

The transverse processes of the seventh sacral are well developed, 
and stand nearly at right angles to the axis of the sacrum. Those of 
the eighth and ninth are distant and divergent, those of the ninth vertebra 
being directed strongly backward. The anterior three pairs of transverse 

21 161 


162 ODONTORNITHES. 


processes have their faces for articulation with the ilium directed outward 
and upward, and are supported by a shaft of greater or less length. In 
the region of the next three vertebree, the sacrum has been crushed, but 
the processes appear to have been nearly sessile, and to have abutted 


almost vertically against the ilia. 


The sacrum of Ichthyornis differs from that of the Tern in having 
only ten vertebrze in the codssified sacral series, while there are thirteen 
in Sterna regia. The sacrum appears also to have been somewhat nar- 
rower in the dorsal region. The strong transverse bar of bone running 
across between the ilia, just behind the acetabula, and formed in the Tern 
by the transverse processes of the ninth sacral, is in Ichthyornis formed by 
the processes of the seventh vertebra. This is followed by only three 
more vertebrze, instead of four as in Sterna. The posterior portion of the 
sacrum is thus seen to be much shorter than in Hesperornis, and the 
whole structure is broader, and not so perfectly codssified, indicating a 
correspondingly less degree of strength in the pelvic region, and less use 
of the legs. 


In the type specimen of Apatornis (number 1451), the portion of the 
sacrum preserved is, unfortunately, crushed from a horizontal, instead of 
a vertical direction, as in Ichthyornis dispar, so that a comparison of the 
two is made difficult. The anterior end is, moreover, wanting, but there 
are clear indications of ten united vertebrae, and probably at least one 
more in front of those preserved. The neural spines are united with 
coéssified tendons, and the latter do not appear to expand posteriorly over 
as broad a region as in Ichthyornis. The transverse processes preserved 
in this region appear to correspond with the second and third of the 
Ichthyornis sacrum. ‘The portion of the united central column preserved 
presents, at its anterior end, faint indications of enlargement toward its 
anterior articular face, which was doubtless, as in Ichthyornis, consider- 
ably larger than the centra just behind it. 

Of the transverse processes, the second preserved is much more 
robust than the one in front of it, but the four following are lost. 


PELVIC ARCH OF ICHTHYORNIS. 165 


They correspond with only three such processes in the type of Ichthy- 
ornis. Behind these processes, the central portion of the sacrum is 
thickened below, and sends off a strong transverse process on each side, 
nearly at right angles with its axis. Behind this, are three pairs of trans- 
verse processes directed well backward. The second of these is preserved 
in the specimen, and formed a strong process for attachment with the 
ilium. The last pair of processes were short, and the independence of the 
vertebral centrum to which they were attached is indicated by a tuber- 
cular thickening at the point where the last sacral centrum has coalesced 
with the preceding. The posterior articular face of the last centrum is 
somewhat concave, and is nearly semi-oval in outline, being strongly 
flattened above for the neural canal. 


Measurements of Sacrum. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


Wenothvot \sacrumy-s a8 stones seh eas cute eB ark eal dies hints ete oh by ape Em 26.2" 
Vertical diameter of anterior end of first centrum,.__.__-.-------------------- 3.0 
Transverse diameter of anterior end of first centrum,...._..._.---_----------- 3.2 
Meastitransverseldiamererio ti Cent ras ye eee ele ee per Ly) 
Vertical diameter of posterior end of last centrum,_--.----------------------- 11,2) 
Transverse diameter of posterior end of last centrum,.......------------------ 2.0 
Greatest transyerseldiameteror  sacruri yes eye eee ys eee eee et ee een 10.5 


Measurements of Sacrum. (Apatornis celer, No. 1451.) 


jhengthrol portionypresenved, =. seat. © os see = ise en oe eens yee re eee a ar Di jy 
Transverse diameter of last centrum at articulation,...___._.-..-_------_------ One 
Vertical diameter of last centrum at articulation,__..___------ Tea era a tat Alt RO RO 1.8 
Vertical diameter of sacrum; near, proximal end)2=2- 228522 2222222 See eee 7.0 


Ture Prtvic Bones. (Plate XXXII.) 


The pelvic bones in Ichthyornis (Plate XXXII, figures 2 and 3) are 
strongly codssified with each other. The ilium is obtusely rounded in 
front, and its antero-superior border is separated a short distance from its 
fellow. The pre-acetabular part of the ilium is concave externally, and 
considerably longer than the posterior portion. The ischium is expanded 
medially, and extends further back than the ilium. It is not united with 
the ilium posteriorly, thus agreeing with the corresponding part in Hesper- 
ornis. The pubis has no distinct anterior process, but the post-pubic 
element is elongated, and its distal portion free. 


164 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Pelvic Bones. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


Distance across pelvis between upper margins of acetabula, -_.---.------------ AQ; as 
pent OL TM sn eLOTG LO fea Ce tel eur an eg ea 20. 
Greatest breadth of ilium, in front of acetabulum, .-_--_._-_--.-.-.----------- 8.5, 
eastabreadthyoraliumy mets ont Kote acetabulum seem eee mn nee eye ayn py nrarale 5, 
Sane OF ibm, Hoo KCeiO OWI, a eee psa coco sees sous SUES eae SSS eRe 4, 
xtentlotmaschiumassbehin dyace ta bul use aes Se ee ra 22.5 
Wierticaludiameterobas nancy) Chur spe ear 3.5 
Createstpyeuicaladiameterco ten Sc iver yi seers tartar me pene ee 5.8 
PRransversecdiame ter Olms hata tees CHT TLI1, pee ener ene eres epee 155 
IMG OF POW, lodninel Aes) yn, A oe eee aes esc coseeds esos eRe SSse 26. 
Wierticaladrameterioteshatteep me ce sepa ee 2 seen ep ye Y/N ata Ups en ites 
Werticaladiameterotmpubissatcdistaly er dsm se eee ee eres 2.5 


The pelvic bones of Apatornis (Plate XXXII, figure 1) are very 
similar in form and proportions to those of Ichthyornis. 'The pre-acetabular 
part of the ilium is much more extensive than the posterior portion. The 
acetabulum is perforate, but the foramen (af) is of moderate size. The 
ischium does not coalesce with the posterior part of the ilium, and its 
distal end was free, as in Jchthyornis and Hesperornis, and a few modern 
reptilian birds. The post-pubic element of the pelvis is longer than in 
Ichthyornis, and also much longer than the ischium. 


Measurements of Pelvic Bones. (Apatornis celer, No. 1732.) 


ben ot hvo rein ase cree ne Sees Ge ial ee ere Satu OEE a oat eine oe 505 am 
Distance from front of ilium to distal end of pubis,-....--------------------- 62. 
Distance from front of ilium to distal end of ischium (approximate, ----------- 57. 
HixCentzotapubissbehin dace talline ee eee seer 32. 


Extent of ischium, behind acetabulum (approximate),-.--.----.-.------------ 26.5 


Cin PMN des = OXI 


THE CAUDAL VERTEBRA OF ICHTHYORNIS. 
(Plates XXVIII and XXXIV.) 


Tue tail in Ichthyornis is notable mainly for being of the modern 
ornithie type, thus widely differing from that of both Archeopteryr and 
Hesperornis, the only other two Mesozoic birds in which this organ is pre- 
served. The tail in the genus Ichthyornis was comparatively short, and 
the terminal vertebrze were codssified. 

A series of seven caudal vertebree are preserved in one specimen of 
Ichthyornis victor (number 1732), and are figured on plate XXVIII. They 
pertain to the median and distal part of the tail, although not including 
the extreme end, a portion of the pygostyle, or the part formed by the 
united centra of the terminal vertebre, being lost. 


Of the vertebra preserved in this specimen, the first, probably from 
the middle region of the tail, has in front a slightly concave articular 
surface, transversely oval in outline, with the upper margin nearly 
straight. Back of the articular face, the centrum is moderately constricted 
below, to expand again for the posterior face, but at the sides the centrum 
expands immediately to form the transverse processes. The latter are 
directed nearly horizontally outward and backward, and only slightly 
downward. They are as broad at base as the side of the centrum, but 
are both crushed and broken, a short distance from their origin. 

165 


166 ODONTORNITHES. 


The neural canal is of moderate size in this vertebra, and from its 
walls a pair of well developed pre-zygapophyses project forward. They 
extend in front of the end of the centrum by nearly half their length, and 
bear at the end small subcircular facets for articulation with the preceding 
vertebrae, These facets look nearly downward as in Nyctea, and the 
small, sessile facets on the posterior walls of the neural canal, representing 
the post-zygapophyses, look upward and somewhat outward. This is an 
interesting exception to the well known rule of the position of zygapo- 
physes, and the attention of the writer was first called to it by his assistant 
in Paleontology, Mr. Oscar Harger. 

The neural spine in this specimen is broken off, but is seen in section 
to be hollow. The posterior articular face of the centrum is slightly more 


concave than the anterior, and its upper outline is nearly straight. 


The second caudal of the series preserved considerably resembles the 
preceding. As in that vertebra, the anterior articular surface is slightly 
concave. In outline, this surface is a nearly regular oval. On the under 
surface, the centrum is somewhat excavated, so as to appear hour-glass 
shaped, expanding posteriorly to the articulation. The bases of the 
transverse processes, as in the preceding vertebra, occupy the entire 
lateral surface of the centrum. These processes are directed strongly back- 
ward, outward, and somewhat more downward, than in the preceding 
vertebra. The neural canal is much as in that vertebra, or perhaps slightly 
smaller, and the pre-zygapophyses are well developed, and supported 
articular facets. They are smaller than in the vertebra in front, and post- 
zygapophyses are not to be distinctly seen, partly, however, it may be, 
from the imperfect condition of the specimen. The neural spine is broken 
away in this vertebra. The posterior face of the centrum is slightly con- 
cave, like the anterior, and is a little more transverse, with the upper 
outline nearly straight. 


The third caudal preserved in the present series is rather less perfect 
than the two preceding it, but has the transverse processes in fair preserva- 
tion. The centrum has been crushed from above downwards, but its 


CAUDAL VERTEBR OF ICHTHYORNIS. 167 


articular faces were both concave, and it is medially constricted below, like 
the other vertebra. The transverse processes have been flattened by pres- 
sure. Their bases occupy the whole lateral surface of the centrum. 
They are directed a little less strongly backward than in the preceding 
vertebra, and attain about the same length as in that specimen. The neural 
canal was of good size, but its walls are broken away just above their base. 


The fourth vertebra in this series of caudals is very imperfectly 
preserved. As in the preceding vertebre, the articular faces were both 
slightly concave, and the lower surface of the centrum presents the 
ordinary hour-glass form. The transverse processes are strong, and 
occupy the whole lateral part of the centrum. They stand a little less 
obliquely than in the preceding vertebree. The distal ends of both trans- 
verse processes are wanting. ‘The neural arch is almost entirely wanting, 
but the floor of the neural canal shows that it retained considerable size. 


The fifth of the series of caudals preserved has a slightly shorter 
centrum than those that precede it. The articular faces are nearly cir- 
cular. The anterior one is decidedly concave, the posterior very moder- 
ately so, or nearly flat. The inferior surface of the centrum is somewhat 
hour-glass shaped, as in the preceding vertebre. The transverse pro- 
cesses, as in the other vertebrae, have a large base, occupying nearly the 
whole of the lateral surface of the centrum, but they taper very rapidly. 
They are short, and directed outward, nearly at right angles with 
the axis of the centrum, and somewhat downward. The under surface of 
the centrum presents a faint median groove extending its whole length, 
and at each end of the groove a low tubercle is seen on each side. 


The last of this series of caudals of Ichthyornis consists of a portion 
of the united terminal vertebrze, or pygostyle. The part preserved consists 
of the first centrum and part of the second united with it; the correspond- 
ing neural arches and part of the neural spines, extending back probably 
to and including a part of the third spine, at which point it is broken off. 
The centrum preserved differs principally from those that precede it in 


168 ODONTORNITHES. 


the entire absence of transverse processes. The anterior articular face is 
nearly circular, but flattened in outline above, and is concave. Behind the 
articular face, the centrum tapers rapidly; and its entire upper surface is 
oecupied by the neural canal. The walls of the canal rise from each side 
of the centrum, enclose a triangular neural canal, and are surmounted 
with a very short or rudimentary neural spine. Only a small part of the 
centrum of the second vertebra of the pygostyle is preserved. This is 
closely united with the first centrum, without trace of suture, as are also 
the neural arch and spine to the corresponding parts of the first vertebra. 


The following measurements give the dimensions of the consecutive 
caudal vertebrze above described : 


Measurements of Anterior Median Caudal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


Meno thvotacen trum verses de eel se We ee sine SRN Weenie eevinie ih ipa Able eee Sr 
iransverseriame ter otanterloranticulati Ons ase eee ee ee 3. 
Wierticalidiameteriofeanterioriarticula tors ese eee eee eee 2.2 
Dransyerse(diameter/of posterior, articulation,---=-=-----—---- === 222s see see 3. 
Wrerticaladiameternon sposteriorsarti culations ees ere oe nee ens 2.5 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, -----_--------------------- 8. 
Diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses,.-..--_-------_--------=----=--- 3.6 
Diameter of vertebra, across post-zygapophyses, -.--------------------------- 2.8 
Wierticaladiameteriotme ural acai] see eee eae nn ee ee oe 


Measurements of Median Caudal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


eno Cho tae COM Gree serra are mm alias ee mR Se A eects ky PUSAN ae as =e Ie ee SEs 
itransverse diameter of anterior/articulation,. = 22-52-52 222-2) eee 3. 
iWerticalidiameterionrsanterior articulations ee see ae oe en ene 2.4 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, -..-.-2---.2------.---+-2-2-2- 3.2 
iVeriicalidiameterion.posteniorarticulationse === === ass] aoe = a eee 2.5 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, --------------------------- 9.5 
Diameter of vertebra, across pre-zygapophyses, .....------------------------- 3. 
iVieruicalgdiam eteroteneurallicariall yes see ae ea eee 1.6 
Measurements of Median Caudal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 

eno throracentrumy essays e acy ers yee ce eae eee eee 5 eae eee 3.6m" 
eiransverseidiameterotanterior articulation seme es eye eae 3. 
Transverse diameter of posterior, articulation,_--_.-.----2---=---=----------- 3. 


Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes,------------ -------------- 11.5 


CAUDAL VERTEBR.Z OF ICHTHYORNIS. 169 


Measurements of Posterior Caudal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


Tenothyof: centrum. carey s2.15' 52 50s Ae tls A Bains Sr ce an oe a Byes 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,.__._...__..---.---------------- 3. 
Merticaldiameterioflantertorarticulations ee. see eee eee eee 2.4 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation,........--.___---__+---=-=222-- 3.2 
iWerticalidiameterof sposterionanticulationssee = ee == as eee eee eee 2.8 
Measurements of Posterior Caudal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 

Meno thvot Cem tru mice nye ore eres atch toe cate ee ern, ONS aTey ee Hah oye oon ees 3c4nm 
Transverse diameter of anterior articulation, _-____-_.__-___--_-------=-----= 3. 
iVierticalidiametenotantenor articulation yas setae ee ae 2.6 
Transverse diameter of posterior articulation, ._.....------------------------ 3. 
Wierticall diameterorteposteriomarticulations ses s= =o see eee to 2.6 
Diameter of vertebra, across transverse processes, ------------------ Bean ssee 8.2 


Measurements of First Vertebra of Pygostyle. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


Transverse diameter of anterior articulation,__________-...-_-------------=-- 9) Bye 
Wierticalidiameteronanterion articulations= sey" eee oe eae eee eee eee 2.5 
Wenncal chamaice or name Camels. 255 oj oo ook abba secuseeeeusoadascosese 1.5 


Clete idles; CW. 


LEGS AND FEET OF ICHTHYORNIS AND APATORNIS. 
(Plates XXV, XXXIII and XXXIV.) 


Tue legs and feet in the two genera of Odontotorme are comparatively 
small, and present no peculiar features. The remains preserved agree 
most nearly with the corresponding parts in modern Carinate birds. 


THe Femur. (Plates XXV and XXXIII.) 


The femur in Jchthyornis is a short and comparatively small bone. 
The shaft is slender, and nearly smooth, being destitute of the rugosites 
seen on the femur of Hesperornis. Both the articular faces present the 
ordinary avian type of articulation, and the shaft of the bone is hollow, 
with thin walls. The ratio of the fibular face to that for the tibia is 
about the same as in the Tern, and the general proportions of the bone, as 
to length, diameter of shaft, and size of articular faces, are nearly the same 
as in that bird. The femur of Jchthyornis, however, is more than half the 
length of the humerus, while in Sterna the femur is less than half as long 


as the humerus. 


The femur of Apatornis is proportionally larger than in Ichthyornis. 
The shaft is hollow, with thin walls, and the whole bone is nearly smooth, 
as in most modern birds. There is, however, just behind the outer 
condyle, on the inferior surface of the bone, a well marked pit for the 
attachment of a ligament, and just behind the inner condyle, on the same 


surface, is a low tubercle. he lateral surfaces of both condyles are also 
wel 


172 ODONTORNITHES. 


slightly roughened, but not more so than in Colymbus. The precise length 
of the femur, and, of course, its length as compared with that of the tibia, 
cannot be determined; but the leg was evidently more strongly built than 
in Ichthyornis, while the wings appear to have been less powerful. 


The femur in the type specimen of Ichthyornis has the following 
dimensions : 


Measurements of Femur. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


There Cheotplena uns eeee cre cho ele Uy Sie Spe eee ere mene ee mene OS see oye 30.5™™ 
A iam Pere Ol Ce Cae er c= http a meen eet, 2 ON ARE yen tat ale l nn seen 2.8 
Greatestudiam eters ofaproxam alec seeps em rne aaa py eget eyes ene 6.0 
Diameters of shaft,...___..___-__ oy Yeh so Dae SIREN CC) Sel ate el 3.0-2.5 
TUMORS CHOMA Ge GHAI GN. aos poses cee dc meee eee ecesenneease 6.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner condyle,_-..-_-.--------------------- 4.0 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer condyle,-__.._---__------------------ 4.5 
Antero-posterior diameter at fibular articulation, __..__-.__-------------- 3.5 


- Tue Tipta. (Plates XXV and XXXIIT) 


The tibia of Ichthyornis dispar is a slender bone of moderate length. 
The cnemial process is but little developed, and only slightly elevated 
above the articular face of the bone. The shaft was hollow, with rather 
thin walls, and was gently curved inward toward its distal end, rather 
more strongly than in the Tern. In section, the shaft was transversely 
oval. The fibular ridge arises just below the outer articular face, and is 
continued downwards until broken off by a fracture of the shaft, as seen 
in plate XXV, figs. 5-8. It is probable, however, that the ridge continues 
but a short distance farther on the shaft. The distal portion of the shaft 
preserved shows no trace of a fibular ridge. It is gently curved inward, 
and expands gradually to the articulation. Toward the distal end, the 
shaft becomes more flattened, and is excavated in front for the passage of 
tendons, which were not, however, kept in place by an osseous supraten- 
dinal bridge. The articular face has been somewhat injured by compres- 
sion in the type specimen (number 1450), but seems to have resembled 
in general form that seen in the Tern, although of comparatively less 
antero-posterior diameter. 


LEGS AND FEET OF ICHTHYORNIS 173 


The tibia in Apatornis is somewhat larger and stronger than in 
Ichthyornis. The proximal end of the bone is unknown, and the upper 
part of the shaft is much crushed and mutilated in the specimen preserved. 
Distally, it is straighter than in Ichthyornis, and expands to about the same 
degree. As in that genus, there is no osseous supratendinal bridge, nor is 
there any apparent roughening for the attachment of the end of the fibula. 


The measurements given below indicate the size of the tibia in several 
specimens of the Odontotorme: 


Measurements of Tibia. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1450.) 


Greatestidiameterofsproximalwen dees spam ae ers saree one et years ety a RO 
Greatest antero-postenlonsdiamet ers see arse ce eee eet ee a nee 4.5 
Transverse diameter of shaft, including fibular ridge, ._-...--.----------------- 4.0 
Transverse diameter of shaft, below fibular ridge, _-.._-..-------------------- 2.8 
Antero-posterior diameter of shaft, below fibular ridge,...-...---.-.---------- 2.0 
Greatest diameteriofsdistalendie x =e = Sake eee es ee ee en ear 5.0 
Antero-posterior diameters) of idistallend,seees esse == asses eee eee 4.0-2.0-4.0 


Measurements of Tibia. (Ichthyornis dispar, No. 1723.) 


ength, of; tibiay ss "2759 oo Ss ee aes ee pe Biffy TE 
Transverse diameterxol shalt, 7s eye eee ee ee eS eee ees Te ee ae 35 
Trans verserdiameterrotacis baleen clam meee eee pene et a neta ane pape aye ee 5.3 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner, condyleys 244s see esos eee seen 4.7 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer condyle,--== 22225-22222. 25252 s eee ee 4.1 


Measurements of Tibia. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


Denipthiofitibiass s5-aesesee: oOo sess ewes Meee See as ae a Sennen ee Sy BN 
Diameter of (shatt 2252 =) os. ees see ee eee ee ee eee eee eee 3. 
ADTATISVELSe(GIAMeLOLRO Lan GLLS bel Me C11 Cl eee te pees re ee ae ee 6.1 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer condyle,____._.__-__-.-_-----_----------- 5. 


Measurements of Tibia. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


Mransyverse diameter omaistalvanticulation. se eee eee ae eee 65mm 
Least antero-posterior diameter of distal articulation, -_.-....---------------- 3 
Antero-posterior diameter of outer condyle, _.........----.----------------- Bab 
Antero-posterior diameter of inner condyle, -----..--.----------------------- 6 
STranisverse: diameters Oba lal tape ogee epee eee ee pe eae ne ee 4 


174 ODONTORNITHES. 


Tue Fisuta. (Plate X XXIII.) 


The fibula of Apatornis appears to have been as much reduced in size 
as in most existing birds. In one specimen (number 1734) it is a 
slender rod, moderately thickened above, and tapering to a poimt at the 
distal end, where its attachment to the tibia appears to have been as slight 


as in any living bird. 


The following are the main dimensions of the fibula in this specimen 
of Apatornis : 


Measurements of Fibula. (Apatornis celer, No. 1734.) 


ILE a NOH! WE Sess 25sec ee eben eee Se oEeA Oe p Sone coe SeEbebereedeboseace Gah, He 
Tima yORs® ChennGier Gt joorsniAll GiGl oS oe ee Sse soe sesbesoo aes soceaeseas 2.5 
Anteroposterior diameter of proxunalliendas sees see see eee = ne eee eee il; 
Greatestroransverserdlameterno tes in cut tapes ee re eee een ee ete 2.5 


Tue Tarso-metaTarsus. (Plate XX XIII.) 


The tarso-metatarsal bone of Ichthyornis appears to be composed of 
the same number of elements, united in the same degree, as in living birds, 
a condition similar to that prevailing in the wing. The resulting tarso- 
metatarsal bone may be compared with the same bone in the Tern, which 
it considerably resembles, although rather more robust in proportion to 
its length. On the proximal end, the articular faces are slightly less 
excavated than in that genus. The posterior part of the upper end is 


imperfectly preserved, but a “ 


calcaneal process” was present, though 
probably not as well developed as in Sterna. The anterior face of the 
shaft is excavated proximally, and perforated by a small foramen between 
the upper ends of the third and fourth united metatarsals. On the posterior 
surface of the bone, a shallow groove runs down from the foramen along 
the shaft, indicating the line of suture between these metatarsals, and a 
similar parallel groove behind shows the line of union of the second and 
third metatarsals. 

On the anterior aspect of the middle metatarsal, and just below its 
proximal end, is a prominent tubercle, evidently for the attachment of 
the tibialis anticus. The broad groove on the anterior face of the tarso- 


LEGS AND FEET OF ICHTHYORNIS. 175 


metatarsus, over the middle element, dies out rapidly downward, and the 
bone tapers somewhat to near the distal end. Where the diameter 
is least, the section is nearly oval, but the regularity of the oval is 
somewhat interrupted by the shaft of the fourth metatarsal, which is indi- 
cated by a ridge running the entire length of bone. Near its distal end, 
it is moreover separated from the adjoining third metatarsal by a foramen 
which is nearly as large as in the Tern, but is separated by a much weaker 
osseous bar from the interval between the two articular ends of the bones. 

Of the three distal articular faces, the middle is the largest, and most 
advanced. The outer or fourth stands but little back of the middle, and 
is directed well outward, bemg more oblique than in the Tern. The 
face of the second metatarsal is considerably behind the other two, and is 
more oblique than the fourth. It is also the smallest of the three faces. 
The three articulations are slightly more divergent and oblique than in the 
Tern, but they are more nearly in a transverse line than in that bird. 
They are also broader, with less extension vertically. 


The dimensions of the tarso-metatarsal bone in three individuals of 
Ichthyornis are as follows: 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1739.) 


Men otheofetarso-meta tarsal mesa =e Peete ete eae ra Be, Bs 
‘Transverse diametercof: shafts 5: 32525222 = ae eae cere ea ne ee eee 3.5 
Greatestsd lame berso recs t ale rn see ee te eee eee a eat ey a ee eee 9. 
iDransyerse diameternOfeimners arg1 Cul ation seer pene 3.6 
Werticalidiametersioiinner articulation =ese sees eee e ene ee eee eee 2.6-2.1-3. 
Transverse diame terotsmedian arti culatiomse eee a eee 2.6 
Wierticalidiametersiotemedianvarticulationy= seen e ease ee eee eee eee eee 3.8-3.1—4. 
MransverserdiametersOLOubery anol Cull ati Tse me eee ana ent meng ee a 2.6 
Werticalidiametersiomoutersarticul ations see eee eee 3.8-3.-3.4 
INE Ce ChomiciGe Ot jyoraiell GN ooo ec peas sso sbocuses Sosareescesden we 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsal. (Ichthyornis victor, No, 1464.) 


(Greece Chom On Glial Gite one cs se seca cose eens ne ee sone eked eeueeeeseoe 9g, mm 
Mransvierserdiameter.o heim ere Aalst CU) at1O1 same aie ene a 3 
Werticaludiametersiofinnenarticul 1t1o mss eee aera me 2.9-2.2-3.2 
Mransverse diameterormmedian articulation) == sees] geese ee eee eee eee eee 3. 
Wertical diameters ormediansarticulatroms see ee ree 4.=3,5—4., 

Mr ans verseldiame perro Olbers alt ltl a/b 10 1a see eee 2.9 


Werticaldiameters ofsoutemanticulationy= =e eee e sane eee eee 3.9-2.8-3.2 


176 ODONTORNITHES. 


Measurements of Tarso-metatarsal. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1456.) 


i=) 
3 


Greatestraiam eberyo faxcis tial ern cl) vee ease e eee en 
PRrAnsverserdiamn everxo faeimn © Tye ei1;b1 CU ati 01 steer aes en es aa ee 
Werticaludiametersiofsinnerarticulation==es= === =eee eee e ere ees eee eee 2.4-2.1- 


for) 


~T 


oo 

i 

ro 

(oa) 
f 


Wierticalidiametersiofsmedianvarticulations sels oe een Fi 
pRransversexdram cher.oPrOuLersakt1Culat1 Orisa saa ae enn ia en 
Weriicaladiameterssot outer articulation. sae =a ees eae sae 3.1-2.4- 3. 


to ow hm ow hw oO 


a a 


THe PHALANGES. 


A single phalanx, probably from the middle or perhaps from the outer 
toe, is preserved in specimen number 1732, and is figured on Plate 
XXXII, figure 8. The proximal articular face is divided by a median 
ridge, separating two not very unequal grooves. The shaft is slender and 
tapering, rounded above, and flattened below. It is terminated by a 
medially grooved distal articular face, as in ordinary birds, without any 
indication of the peg-and-socket articulation, seen in Hesperornis and some 
other swimming’ birds. 


Measurements of Phalanx. (Ichthyornis victor, No. 1732.) 


ILSAEAIN Cre (OIE) eae ata See kar Kena ne eae Sere metee Sue Meee oaer Nas sae Q, am 
Wierticalidiam et ertotep 10x10) I Cr Cl seers eer 2.4 
uitransverserdiameter of sproximalien dae sees ee eee 
AVierticaladiameterkotadistalyer classes are eee epee ae ae ere 1.4 
MILAN sVersemalameterro.ta dis tall yen lepers ee eee et 1.8 


CEPA PT Tie aye 


THE RESTORATION OF ICHTHYORNIS. 
(Plates XXVI and XXXIV.) 


Tue preceding description of the remains of Ichthyornis, in connection 
with the illustrations given in Plates XXI to XXXIV, will make known 
most of the more important characters which separate these remarkable 
Mesozoic birds from all others, recent or extinct. The material on which 
the present restoration of two species of this genus are made consists of 
portions of more than seventy different individuals. None of these various 
skeletons were as complete, when found, as were several of Hesperornis, 
from the same formation. This was no doubt mainly due to the smaller 
size, and more fragile .character, of the individual bones of Ichthyornis. 
The restoration of Apatornis, evidently a near ally of Ichthyornis, has not 
been attempted, as the specimens at present available for this purpose are 
not sufficiently numerous or complete. 

In the restoration of Ichthyornis dispar, as given on Plate XXVI, only 
the remains of the type specimen are figured, as it was deemed 
important to show the exact material on which the genus was based. 
These portions are shaded in the restoration, and are of the natural size. 
The bones represented in outline are taken in part from other specimens of 
the same species, but mostly from the skeleton of the Royal Tern (Sterna 
yegia, Gambel), which, after a careful comparison, seemed well adapted for 
completing, approximately, the restoration here presented. The position 
chosen is one which seemed on the whole to accord best with the remains 


at present known. 
23 177 


178 ODONTORNITHES. 


The restoration of Ichthyornis victor, on Plate XXXIV, is also of 
natural size, and is based on more complete material, including portions 
of several skeletons. The other species of the genus Ichthyornis did not 
differ widely from these in size, and this is true also of the known specimens 
of Apatornis. 


In considering the skeleton of Ichthyornis, the anatomist is at once 
confronted with a strange combination of characters. The wing-bones are 
conclusive proof that Ichthyornis was a highly specialized bird, with great 
powers of flight. The individual bones correspond closely with those of 
birds living to-day. The legs and feet, also, are much like those of some 
modern birds. With these portions alone before him, the comparative 
anatomist would unhesitatingly refer the remains to the class of Birds, and 
would naturally conclude that they belonged to the modern type. If, 
however, the skull should then be found with the wings and feet, very 
strong evidence would be required to convince him that they were parts of 
one and the same bird. The jaws and teeth present reptilian characters 
wholly unknown in modern birds, while the base of the skull and the small 
brain point strongly in the same direction. The biconcave vertebra lead 
Ichthyornis still farther away from all known birds, recent and extinct, and, 
if found alone with the jaws and teeth, would force any anatomist to the 
conclusion that he had before him the remains of a reptile. 

The skeleton of Ichthyornis, as we know it to-day, can be interpreted 
only, in the light of modern science, by supposing that certain parts have 
become highly specialized in the direction of recent birds, while others 
have been derived, with but little change, from a reptilian, or even a more 
lowly, ancestry. In the wings, the most characteristic modern feature is the 
codssification of the metacarpal bones, a character universal among existing 
birds. In reptiles, however, and in the only known Jurassic bird, 
Archeopteryx, these bones are separate. The sternum of Ichthyornis is 
very similar to that of modern carinate birds. In the feet of Ichthyornis, 
also, the compound tarso-metatarsal is another modern feature, especially 
characteristic of recent birds. 


4 


RESTORATION OF ICHTHYORNIS. AG) 


If, now, we consider the skull of Ichthyornis, we find the avian and 
the reptilian characters strangely blended. The teeth are evidently a 
strong reptilian feature, and, before the discovery of Ichthyornis, were 
entirely unknown in the class of Birds. Their method of implantation in 
distinct sockets is a specialized character in reptiles, and was not shared 
even by Hesperornis, the contemporary of Ichthyornis. 'The diminutive 
elongated brain, also, points back to the reptiles. Other features of 
the skull, for example, the single headed quadrate, are shared only by the 
most reptilian of birds. The union of the lower jaws in front, by ligament 
only, is characteristic of many reptiles, and is seen in Hesperornis, but is 
unknown in all other birds.! The form of the skull and the obliteration of 
most of the cranial sutures are points of resemblance to many modern birds. 


The locomotive organs of Ichthyornis are so similar to those of typical 
birds that they present no such interesting mechanical problems as were 
suggested by the skeleton of Hesperornis. In the vertebra, however, we 
find a primitive form retained, and also have the key to the origin of 
one remarkable character in recent birds, which has hitherto remained 
unexplained. 

While all existing birds, and all of the extinct forms so far as 
known, including Hesperornis, have the peculiar saddle-shaped vertebree, 
those of Ichthyornis, and its near ally Apatornis, are biconcave. This form 
is seen in a few recent and in many extinct Reptiles, and in the 
Amphibians; but it is especially characteristic of Fishes, from which class 
it was undoubtedly inherited by the superior groups. This character 
alone indicates unmistakably a great antiquity for the class of birds. 

The saddle-shaped vertebrae are certainly one of the most marked 
features in the skeleton of modern birds. This form is so peculiar and 
so constant that it has been considered by many anatomists as the best - 
distinctive character for the class. In no other group of animals known do 
we find the true saddle-shaped articulation of the centra seen in the 
vertebrae of birds.” 


‘In the Pelicans and Curlews, the rami unite late by ankylosis. 
* An approach to this form is shown in the cervical vertebrae of the Kangaroos. 


180 ODONTORNITHES. 


Not only do the presacral vertebree of all existing birds exhibit this 
structure, but the many extinct species now known from the whole series of 
Tertiary deposits have the same articulation. If we knew only these fossil 
forms, in addition to the existing species of birds, the origin of this peculiar 
vertebral articulation would perhaps remain a mystery. Most fortunately, 
however, one of the vertebrae of Ichthyornis throws much light on this 
point, and virtually explains the difficulty. 

We have seen that Hesperornis has the same kind of vertebre as 
modern birds, while those of Ichthyornis are biconcave. The marked 
contrast between the shape of the vertebral articulation in these two 
genera is seen in the figures below, which show a characteristic cervical 
vertebra in each form. In the vertebra of Jchthyornis shown in figures 32 
and 33, it will be seen that the articulation of the centrum is cup-shaped ; 
while, in the corresponding vertebra of Hesperornis, the ends of the centrum 
are saddle-shaped, as in ordinary birds. Thus the distinction between the 
two types in this part of the skeleton is as wide as between Ichthyornis and 


any living bird. 


Fig. 32. 


FIGURE 32.—Twelfth cervical vertebra of Ichthyornis dispar, Marsh; front view; twice natural size. 
FIGURE 33.—The same vertebra; seen from the left side. 
Figure 34,—Third cervical vertebra of Jchthyornis victor, Marsh; front view; twice natural size. 


IGS 35: Fic. 36. 


FIGURE 35.—Thirteenth cervical vertebra of Hesperornis regalis, Marsh; front view; natural size. 
FIGURE 36.—The same vertebra; posterior view. a. anterior articulation; d. diapophysis; p. parapophysis; 
J: lateral foramen; nc. neural canal: s. neural spine; z. pre-zygapophysis; 2’. post-zygapophysis. 


ie i 


RESTORATION OF ICHTHYORNIS. 181 


To the evolutionist, who believes that birds are all closely connected 
genetically, this difference in structure, at first sight, offers a most serious 
difficulty ; since hitherto we have had no hint of a transformation from the 
one form to the other. 

In the third cervical vertebra of Ichthyornis, however, we catch nature 
in the act, as it were, of forming a new type; by modifying one form of 
vertebra into another. Following this clew, the connection between these 
widely divergent types of structure soon becomes apparent; and the 
development of the modern style of avian vertebra from the fish-like, 
biconcave form finds a ready solution. In the anterior articulation of 
this vertebra of Ichthyornis (figure 34), the surface looks downward and 
forward, being inclined at an angle of nearly 60° with the axis of the 
centrum. In vertical section, it is moderately convex, while transversely 
it is strongly concave; thus presenting a near approach to the saddle-like 
articulation. None of the other known vertebree of Ichthyornis possess this 
character. 

This highly specialized feature occurs at the first bend of the neck, 
and greatly facilitates motion in a vertical plane. If, now, we consider for 
a moment that the dominant motion in the neck of a modern bird is in a 
vertical plane, we see at once that anything that tends to facilitate this 
motion would be an advantage, and that the motion itself would tend 
directly to produce this modification. With biconcave vertebrz, the 
flexure in any direction is dependent on the elasticity of the fibrous tissue 
that connects them, as the edges of the cups do not slide over each other. 
An increasing movement in the neck of Ichthyornis in a vertical plane 
would tend to deflect the upper and lower margins of the circular cup, 
and to produce a vertical constriction, and at the same time to leave the 
lateral margins projecting; and this is precisely what we have in the third 
vertebra of this genus. 

This modification of the vertebree would naturally appear first where 
the neck had most motion, viz: in the anterior cervicals, and gradually 
would be extended down the neck; and, on to the sacrum, if the same 
flexure were continued. 


182 ODONTORNITHES. | 


Behind the axis, or where the vertical motion prevails, we find in 
modern birds no exception to the saddle articulation of the vertebree in the 
whole cervical series. 

In the dorsal vertebrae, this cause would be less efficient, since the 
ribs and neural spines tend to restrict vertical motion, and hence to arrest 
this modification. This region, then, as might be expected, offers strong 
confirmatory evidence of the correctness of the above explanation; for 
here occur, among existing birds, the only true exceptions known in the 
presacral series to the characteristic saddle-shaped articulation. In Strigops 
and a few other land birds; in the Penguins, the Terns, and some other 
aquatic birds, one or more vertebra in the dorsal region are without the 
saddle-shaped articulation, and are either opisthoccelian, or imperfectly 
biconcave. In such instances, we can usually, if not always, detect 
evidence of an arrest of vertical flexure. This may lock together the 
posterior dorsals by their neural spines, as in Strigops, leaving the power 
of lateral flexure; or several vertebrae may be codssified, as in Accipiter, 
and some other Raptores, in which a stiff back is a positive advantage. 

In the codssified sacral series of many birds, one or more of the 
anterior vertebree have the saddle-shaped articulation. This, however, is 
no valid objection to the above explanation, since these vertebre are really 
dorsals, and have gradually coalesced with the true sacral vertebre. 

In the caudal vertebrze of recent birds we have, in a measure, the 
original biconcave structure preserved, for here the motion in every direc- 
tion was much restricted. The caudal vertebree of these birds, even in the 
most aberrant forms, are essentially the same, and in the fossil species the 
articulations at least appear to follow the general rule. In Pavo and 
Geoccocyx, the caudal vertebra exhibit a tendency to a proccelian union. 
Some other forms also show unimportant modifications of the normal type 
of caudal articulation, but nothing to suggest a real objection to the 
explanation now proposed of the origin of the saddle-shaped vertebre, 
characteristic of Birds. 

In bringing together the above facts, and others suggested by them, 
the classification and development of the various forms of vertebrae appear 
to be somewhat as follows: 


RESTORATION OF ICHTHYORNIS. 183 


(1.) Biconcave vertebre (Fishes and Amphibians); the primitive type; 
a weak articulation, admitting free, but limited motion. From this form, 
have been directly derived the other varieties, namely : 

(2.) Plane vertebre (Mammals); affording a stronger joint, with motion 
still restricted. 

(3.) Cup-and-ball vertebre (Reptiles) ; a strong and flexible joint, well 
fitted for general motion, and evidently produced by it. The vertebrze are 
proccelian when lateral motion is dominant (Serpents); opisthoccelian with 
varied motion (Dinosaur cervicals). 

(4.) Saddle vertebre (Birds); the highest type; a very strong and free 
articulation, especially adapted to motion in a vertical plane, and mainly 
due originally to its predominance. 


In considering the mode of life, and habits of Ichthyornis, many 
important suggestions may be derived from its structure, as well as from 
the localities where the remains are found. ‘The sharp cutting teeth 
of Ichthyornis prove, beyond a doubt, that it was carnivorous; its great 
powers of flight, long jaws, and its recurved teeth suggest, moreover, that 
it captured its prey alive. Its food was probably fishes, as their remains 
are found in great abundance mingled with those of Ichthyornis. These 
fossils occur in the bed of the old Cretaceous ocean in which Hesperornis 
swam. Both of these birds were clearly aquatic in habit, as shown by 
various points in their structure, already described, and the conditions 
under which their remains were deposited. In many respects, Ichthyornis 
probably resembled the modern Terns in its mode of life. The powerful 
wings and small feet suggest similar habits in flight, and rest. That 
Ichthyornis was provided with feathers is proved beyond question by the 
tubercles for the attachment of quills on the forearm. : 

Beside Ichthyornis and its allies, the only other denizens of the air at 
present known to have then inhabited the same region were the toothless 
Pterodactyles. Ichthyornis doubtless competed with these huge dragons 
for the fishes in the tropical ocean, about which they lived. 


CEU AS Aare Ve lee 


CONCLUSION. 

Havine now described the more important characters in the structure, 
so far as known, of the two groups of Cretaceous Odontornithes, or Birds 
with teeth, it remains to consider what relation these birds bear to each 
other, and to allied members of the class; and, also, to inquire if the 
facts presented throw any light on the profounder question as to the origin 
of Birds. Seer 

In comparing Hesperornis and Ichthyornis, as the types of their 
respective orders, the Odontolee and Odontotorme, the contrast in their 
principal characters is as striking as it is unexpected. Hesperornis had 
teeth implanted in a continuous groove, a low, generalized character; 
with, however, the strongly differentiated saddle-shaped vertebrae. Ichthy- 
ornis, on the other hand, had the primitive biconcave vertebrae, and 
yet the highly specialized feature of teeth in distinct sockets. Better 
examples than these could hardly be found to illustrate one fact brought 
out by modern science, that an animal may attain great development in 
one set of characters, and at the same time retain other low features of the 
ancestral type. This is a fundamental principle of evolution. 

The more superficial characters of the absence of wings and the 
strong swimming legs and feet of Hesperornis are in striking contrast, also, 
with the powerful wings and diminutive legs and feet of Ichthyornis. 
These and other characters, already mentioned, separate the two birds 
so widely that a more detailed comparison seems here unnecessary. 

24 185 


186 ODONTORNITHES, 


It would be highly desirable to carefully compare both Ichthyornis 
and Hesperornis with Archeopteryx, the still older Mesozoic bird. This 
unfortunately cannot be done at present, as the two skeletons of 
Archaeopteryx, now known, have not yet been fully described, nor even 
prepared for examination by removal of the matrix. That Archeopteryx 
belongs to the Odontornithes, the writer fully satisfied himself by a personal 
examination of the well known specimen in the British Museum. This 
examination was made in 1878, several years after the writer had become 
familiar with the American forms of toothed birds. The teeth seen on the 
same slab with this specimen of <Archeopteryx, and referred to it by 
Evans, although imperfectly preserved, agree so closely with the teeth of 
Hesperornis, that the writer identified them at once as those of Birds, and not 
of Fishes. It has since been announced that the specimen of Archeopteryz, 
more recently found in Germany, also possessed teeth, although only two 
of small size were detected. ‘The separate metacarpal bones, and especially 
the elongated tail, of Archeopteryx, moreover, remove it widely from the 
known American genera of Odontornithes. It will probably be found, 
however, that Archeopteryx possessed biconcave vertebrae, somewhat like 
those of Ichthyornis. 

The other Mesozoic birds now known from the deposits of this country, 
and the few discovered in Europe, may, some or all of them, have had 
teeth, but their remains are too fragmentary to determine this point, or 
even their near affinities. 

It is an interesting fact that the Cretaceous birds at present known, 
some twenty species or more, were all apparently aquatic forms, 
which are of course most likely to be preserved in marine deposits, 
while the Jurassic Archeopteryx, the only one from that formation, was a 
true land bird. 

The Birds found in more recent formations all belong apparently to 
modern types, and hence present few points for profitable comparison 
with the Odontornithes. The existing birds with reptilian characters are 
nearly all confined to the Ratite, or Ostrich tribe. These are evidently the 
remnants of a very numerous group, once widely extended over different 


CONCLUSION. 187 


parts of the earth; and it is to the fossil forms of these birds that we must 
look eventually for the intermediate types between them and the less 
specialized Mesozoic birds. 

For the present, at least, it seems advisable to regard the Odontornithes 
as a sub-class, and to separate them into three orders, according to the 
characters given below. These orders are all well marked, but evidently 
are not of equal rank. Archaeopteryx is clearly separated much more 
widely from both Ichthyornis and Hesperornis than are these two genera 
from each other. The free metacarpals and long tail of Archeopteryx are 
significant characters. Gegenbaur and Morse have shown, however, that 
young birds of existing species have the metacarpals separate, and this is 
true for all these birds up to a certain age. Hence this character is of 
less importance than the presence of true teeth, since in no recent birds, 
young or old, have these been found. The length of tail is perhaps a char- 
acter of more value, but even this is a variable feature in modern birds. 


Sub-class ODONTORNITHES (or Aves Dentatz), Marsh. 


Order Opontotc#, Marsh. | OponrotorM#, Marsh.| Saurur#, Haeckel. 
Genus Hesperornis, Marsh. | Ichthyornis, Marsh. Archeopteryx,von Meyer. 
Teeth in grooves. Teeth in sockets. Teeth in 2 
Lower jaws separate. Lower jaws separate. | Lower jaws ? 
Vertebree saddle-shaped. | Vertebree biconcave. | Vertebree 2 
Wings rudimentary. Wings large. Wings small. 
Metacarpals wanting. Metacarpals ankylosed| Metacarpals separate. 
Sternum without keel. Sternum with keel. |Sternum 2 

Tail short. Tail short. Tail longer than body. 


That the three oldest known birds should differ so widely from each 
other points unmistakably to a great antiquity for the class. Archeopteryzx, 
Hesperornis, and. Ichthyornis, are all true birds, but the reptilian characters 
they possess are convergent toward a more generalized type. No Triassic 
birds are known, and hence we have no light on this stage of the develop- 
ment of the class. They will doubtless be found, however, and, if we may 


188 ODONTORNITHES. 


judge from Jurassic Mammals and Reptiles, the next classes above and 
below Birds, the avian forms of that period would still be birds, although 
with even stronger reptilian features. For the prinial forms of the bird- 
type, we must evidently look to the Palzeozoic; and in the rich land fauna 
of our American Permian we may yet hope to find; the remains of both 
Birds and Mammals. fo! my 

The genera Archeopteryx, Hesperornis, and Ichthyornis, each possessed 
certain generalized characters not shared by the others. These characters - 
were undoubtedly united in some earlier form, and this fact gives us a hint 
as to. what the more primitive forms must have been, and suggests the 
prominent features of the ancestral type. 

In the generalized form to which we must look back for the ancestral 
type of the class of Birds, we should therefore expect to find the following 
characters : 

(1.) Teeth, in. grooves. 

(2.) Vertebrz biconcave. 

(3.) Metacarpal and carpal bones free. 

(4.) Sternum without a keel. - 

(5.) Sacrum composed of two vertebree. 

 (6.) Bones of the pelvis separate. 


@%,) 7 


-(8.) Metatarsal and tarsal bones free. 


Tail longer than the body. 


(9.) Four or more toes, directed forward. 
(10.) Feathers rudimentary or imperfect. 


These various characters may indeed have been combined in an 
animal that was more reptile than bird; but such a form would be on the 
road toward the Birds, rather than on the ancestral line of either Dinosaurs 
or Pterodactyles, as feathers were not a character of these groups. With 
this exception, all of the characters named «belong to the generalized 
Sauropsid, from which ‘both birds and the known Dinosaurs may well 
have descended. An essential character in this ancestral type would be a 
free quadrate bone, since this is a universal feature in Birds, and only 
partially retained in the Dinosaurs now known. 


CONCLUSION. 189 


The Birds would appear to have branched off by a single stem, which 
gradually lost its reptilian characters as it assumed the ornithic type, and 
in the existing Ratitze we have the survivors of this direct line. The lineal 
descendants of this primal stock doubtless early attained feathers and warm 
blood, but, as already shown (p.-114), never acquired the power of flight, 
The volant birds doubtless separated early from the main avian stem, 
probably in the Triassic, since, in the formation above, we have 
Archeopteryx, with imperfect powers of flight. 

This power of flight probably originated among the small arboreal 
forms of reptilian birds. How this may have commenced, we have an 
indication in the flight of Galeopithecus, the flying squirrels (Pteromys), 
the flying lizard (Draco), and in the flying tree-frog’ (Rhacophorus). In the 
early arboreal birds, which jumped from branch to branch, even rudi- 
mentary feathers on the fore limbs would be an advantage, as they would 
tend to lengthen a downward leap, er break the force of a fall. As the 
feathers increased, the body would become warmer, and the blood more 
active. With still more feathers, would come increased power of flight, 
as we see in young birds of to-day. A greater activity would result in 
a more perfect circulation. A true bird would doubtless require warm 
blood, but would not necessarily be hot-blooded, like the birds now living. 

The short wings and clumsy tail of Archaeopteryx were quite sufficient 
for short flights from tree to tree, and if the body were essentially naked, 
as now supposed, we have in this Jurassic form an interesting stage in 
the development of birds before full plumage was attained. Whether 
Archaeopteryx was on the true Carinate line cannot at present be determined, 
and this is also true of Ichthyornis ; but the biconcave vertebree of the latter 
evidently suggest that this form was an early offshoot. It is probable that 
Hesperornis came off from the main Struthious stem, and has left no 


descendants. 


These three ancient birds, so widely different from each other, and from 
all modern birds, prove beyond question the marvelous diversity of the 
avian type in Mesozoic time; and also give promise of a rich reward to 
the explorer who successfully works out the life-history of allied forms, 


recorded in ages more remote. 


APPENDIX. 


SYNOPSIS OF AMERICAN CRETACEOUS BIRDS. 


The present synopsis contains a list of all the species of birds now 
known from the Cretaceous deposits of this country. As so many of these 
are at present represented only by fragmentary remains, and their near 
affinities are thus more or less uncertain, it seems advisable to arrange the 
genera in alphabetical order, rather than to attempt a more systematic 
classification. The list contains nine genera, and twenty species. 

Most of the remains of American Cretaceous birds are from the Eastern 
slope of the Rocky Mountains. The beds in which they are found are of 
middle Cretaceous age, and have elsewhere been named by the writer the 
“ Pteranodon beds,” from the genus of toothless Pterodactyles (Pteranodon), 
which occurs in them. Nearly all the specimens discovered in this region 
were found in Western Kansas, and the remainder, in essentially the 
same strata, in Texas. 

The bird remains found in the green-sand deposits of New Jersey are 
from a higher horizon, representing a division of the upper Cretaceous. 
These remains appear to be all distinct from those in the lower strata 
of the West. Some of the specimens from this region possess characters 
more specialized than the earlier forms; and, as neither jaws nor teeth 
have yet been detected, it is at present impossible to say whether the 
eastern species belong to the Odontornithes. 'This point will doubtless be 
decided by future discoveries. 

All the beds in which bird remains have hitherto been found, in the 
American Cretaceous, are marine deposits, and the birds preserved in 
them appear to have been all aquatic species. 

191 


192 APPENDIX. 


APATORNIS,’ Marsh, 1873. 
Apatornis celer, Marsh. 


(Plates XXVIII-XXXIIL) 


Ichthyornis celer, Marsh.—American Journal of Science, Vol. V, p. 74, Jan., 1873. 
Apatornis celer, Marsh.—Vol. V, p. 162, Feb., 1873 ; Vol. V, p. 230, March, 1873; 
Vol. X, p. 404, Noy. Leia: 
American Naturalist, Vol. LX, p. 626, December, 1875. 
Geological Magazine, Vol. IL, p. 50, February, 1876. 
Woodward, Popular Science Review, October, 1875, p. 349. 


The type specimen of this genus (number 1451) was discovered by 


the writer in October, 1872, near the Smoky Hill River, in Western Kansas. 
The remains were imbedded in the yellow chalk of the Pteranodon beds, 
a well marked horizon in the middle Cretaceous. 

A more perfect specimen (number 1734) was found in 1877, by Mr. 


F. H. Williston, a member of the writer’s-party. The locality was near 


the same river, aml in the same geological horizon. 
Only: these two specimens of the present species are known, and both 
are deposited i in the Museum of Yale College. 


BAPTORNIS,’ Marsh, 1877. 


Baptornis advenus,. Marsh. 


Marsh, American Journal of Science, Vol. XIV, p. 86, Jolly LST. 
Journal de Zoologie, Tome VI, p. 387, 1877. 


The type specimen (number 1465) of the present species is a nearly 
perfect tarso-metatarsal bone. This specimen, although pertaining to a 
bird not fully adult, is in excellent preservation, and. is so characteristic 
that it may be readily distinguished from any forms already described. 

In general shape and proportions, this bone very nearly resembles 
the corresponding part in Hesperornis, but differs from it decidedly in the 
outer metatarsal, which at its lower end (figure 37, IV) scarcely equals 
the adjoining one in size and length. In Hesperornis, on the contrary, the 
outer metatarsal is more than double the size of the third. In the present 
specimen, the three trochlear articulations of the distal ends are nearly 
equal. The existence of a hallux is indicated by a small elongated depres- 
sion on the inner metatarsal, a short distance above the articulation. As 
in the same bone in Hesperoyiis, there are no canals or grooves for tendons 
on the posterior face of the proximal end. 


VManatac, to deceive, and opvzs, a bird. 
* Bantoo, to plunge, and dpvzs, a bird, ~ 


APPENDIX, 193 


This specimen of Baptornis is represented in the cuts given below: 


Vv ww 


Figure 37.—Right tarso-metatarsal of Baptornis advenus, Marsh; front view; natural size. 
FIGURE 38.—Side view of same bone. 
FiGguRE 39.—Posterior view; a. lower tarsal bone. 


The principal dimensions of this tarso-metatarsal are as follows :— 


Entirelenoth 22. Soe seb ese See eh ey MN SR NS etd er eee Gs 
ransverseldiameternoteproxam alien cys a= ae nee ee eer ey 17. 
Antero-posteriorvdiameter, 25): fete soi Sete hs ees Soe eee eee 8. 
Meno thvotisecondimetatarsal, samme ae seer pee ere ee 64.5 
Bene phito feet hind pve tates all emer en ee aE GP 
eng thyotetourthymetatarsal sae meses see eee ee ea ese eee TDs 
Antero-posterior diameter of distal articulation of second metatarsal, ---_------ 8.5 
Mransy erseGiameteryy sae = es fet coe oer ea rier Hae ea eat aye aah pm ate 5. 
Antero-posterior diameter of distal articulation of third metatarsal, ---_-_------ 9.2 
APTANSVELSe GLAM eters sept cho = eee mae we ee ee oS a ee ore ae 6. 
Antero-posterior diameter of distal articulation of fourth metatarsal,_-._------- 9. 
Transverse diameter! sea eee Fh Sis eee ye ray tes ir Jeo eps ary ee 5.5 


A second specimen of Baptornis advenus (number 1467) appears by a 
comparison of the corresponding bones in Hesperornis to have been not 
quite as large as the type specimen, probably about one-fifth less in size. 
It was evidently a young individual. The femur is less robust than in 
Hesperornis, but considerably resembled the same bone in that genus. 

26 


194 APPENDIX. 


Its head shows a broad surface for attachment of the round ligament. 
The shaft was hollow, and provided with strong rugosities for muscular 
attachment. The distal end was expanded, and the articular surfaces for 
the tibia and fibula were much as in Hesperornis. 

The tibia in this specimen of Baptornis (number 1467) was a strong 
bone with the shaft subtrihedral proximally, becoming nearly cylindrical 
toward the middle, and flattened from before backward toward the distal 
end. The suture between the tibia and the codssified tarsal bone is still 
distinct, but most of the articular face is broken away. ‘The fibular ridge 
is strongly developed, and was interrupted by the groove for the main 
tibial artery, as in Hesperornis. 'The ridge on the opposite, or inner, side 
of the tibia is more strongly developed than in Hesperornis. It also con 
tinues further downward, and remains sharp and distinct to near its 
termination. 


Measurements of Baptornis advenus. (No. 1467.) 


Right 
Least transverse diameter of shaft of femur,_...._.._..._------------------- @), fae 
PAM CEEO-pOsteriOrmdiameterse seit eee ee eee stent eer rsere ie ens = ye oer ae eel 8. 
Greatestidiameter:oradistal vend sepsis ae a= ar See ee, me ee 21.5 
Airansverserdiameteriot tibialvarticulations see oe ee ere 14, 
mtransverserdiameterot fibularanticulati ome spss pee =e eee error 6. 
LGA OF HIND, Gy OOOO) oo see aos Sooo sos Snes Hao ce be Spee eesSaass 125. 
iransverserdiameter|belowanbular rid pe; sass = ae ema sone nee a eee 9: 
Antero-posterior diameter below fibular ridge,.-...-.-------------.---------- 7. 


These specimens indicate a bird about as large as a Loon, and one 
apparently of similar aquatic habits. The locality of the only remains at 
present known is in Western Kansas, in the same Cretaceous beds that 
contain the Odontornithes and Pteranodontia. 

Both of the above specimens are preserved in the Yale Mungetch. 


GRACULAVUS;: Marsh, 1872. 


Graculavus velox, Marsh. 

Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. III, p. 363, May, 1872; VoL V, p. 229, March, 

1873. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 

The specimens representing this species at present were found by 
Mr. John G. Meirs, near Hornerstown, New Jersey, in the green-sand of 
the middle marl bed, or upper Cretaceous. 

The known remains (number 855) of this species belonged to a bird 
about two-thirds as large as a Cormorant. They are all in the Yale 
College Museum. 


* Graculus, a cormorant, and avus, a grandfather. 


APPENDIX, 195 


Graculavus agilis, see Ichthyornis agilis. 
Graculavus anceps, see Ichthyornis anceps. 


Graculavus lentus, see Ichthyornis lentus. 


Graculavus pumilus, Marsh. 


Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. II, p. 364, May, 1872; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1873. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 350, 1872. 

The specimens on which the present species was based (number 850) 
indicate a bird about one-third as large as the type of Graculavus veloz. 
They were found in the green-sand of the upper Cretaceous, near Horners- 
town, New Jersey. 

All the remains at present known are in the Museum of Yale College. 


HESPERORNIS,* Marsh, 1872. 
Hesperornis regalis, Marsh. 


(Plates I-XX.) 


Marsh, American Journal Science, (3) Vol. III, p. 56, January, 1872; Vol. III, p. 360, 
May, 1872; (8,) Vol. X, p. 403, Nov., 1875 ; Vol. XIV, p. 85, July, 1877, Pl. V. 
American Naturalist, Vol. IX, p. 625, Dec., 1875. 
Geological Magazine, Vol. III, p. 49, Pl. Il, February, 1876. 
Journal de Zoologie, Tome IV, p. 494, 1875, Pl. XV ; Tome VI, p. 385, 1877. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 350, 1872. 
Woodward, Popular Science Review, Oct., 1875, p. 337. 
Huxley, New York Lectures, Popular Science Monthly, 1876, Vol. X, pp. 215-218. 
American Addresses, pp. 50-57, London, 1877. (Restoration, from Plate XX.) 
Seeley, Journal Geological Society of London, Vol. XXXII, p. 510, 1876. 
Vogt, Revue Scientifique, Tome XVII, p. 247, 1879. 
Dana, Manual of Geology, Plate IV, 1880. (Figures from present volume.) 
Fraisse, Wiirzburg Physikalisch-Medizinischen Gesellschaft, 1880. 


The first remains of this species discovered (number 1205) were 
found by the writer in November, 1870, near the Smoky Hill River, in 
Kansas, about twelve miles east of Fort Wallace. The geological horizon 
was in the yellow chalk of the “ Pteranodon Beds.” 

The type specimen of Hesperornis regalis (umber 1200) was found 
by the writer, in July, 1871. The locality was on the south bank of the 
Smoky Hill River, about twenty miles east of Fort Wallace. This fossil 
was imbedded in the gray calcareous shale, nearly in the same horizon 


* €omepos, western, and opis, a bird, 


196 APPENDIX. 


as the one first found. The skull was wanting, but many other parts of 
the skeleton, including the vertebrae and the bones of the legs and feet, 
were well preserved. Portions of five other individuals were found by 
the writer on the same expedition. 

The most perfect specimen of this species yet discovered (number 
1206) was obtained by Mr. 'T. H. Russell and the writer in October, 1872. 
This skeleton was nearly complete when found, the skull, lower jaws, and 
pelvis being especially well preserved. 'The locality was near that of the 
type specimen. Another important skeleton (number 1207) was found 
in July, 1875, by Prof. B. F. Mudge, who was then in charge of one of 
the writer’s exploring’ parties. 

Other specimens of importance were obtained on subsequent expedi- 
tions by Messrs. B. F. Mudge, 8. W. Williston, E. W. Guild, G. P. 
Cooper and H. A. Brous. 

These specimens, representing some forty different individuals, were 
all found in essentially the same geological horizon of the middle Cretace- 
ous. The localities are all in Western Kansas, and most of them near 
the Smoky Hill River and its tributaries. 

The known remains of this species are all preserved in the Yale 
College Museum. 


Hesperornis ¢rassipes, Marsh. 
(Plates VII and XXVIL.) 


Lestornis crassipes, Marsh.—American Journal Science (3), Vol. XI, p. 509, June, 
1876. 

The type specimen of this species (number 1474) consists of a nearly 
complete skeleton, found in the yellow chalk of western Kansas, by Mr. 
G. P. Cooper, in April, 1876. ‘These remains indicate a bird considerably 
larger than the type of Hesperornis regalis, and one that may prove to be 
generically distinct. The characters already mentioned, especially those 
seen in the tarso-metatarsus, may possibly be merely sexual; although it 
would be strange indeed on this supposition, that no other specimens with 
these features should have been found. 

In the present specimen, number 1474, the atlas is preserved, and is 
represented in the cuts below. 


Fig. 40. 


Figure 40.—Atlas of Hesperornis crassipes, Marsh; natural size. a. front view; b. side view; c. bottom view ; 
d. back view; nc. neural canal. 


APPENDIX. 197 


The above named skeleton, the only one known with certainty to 
belong to the present species, is deposited in the Yale College Museum. 


Hesperornis gracilis, Marsh. 


Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. XI, p. 510, June, 1876. 
This volume, p. 99. 

The specimen on which this species was based (number 1473) was 
found in April, 1876, by Mr. G. P. Cooper. A nearly complete skeleton 
(number 1679) was found in 1879, by Mr. E. W. Guild. Both specimens 
are from the yellow chalk, near the Smoky Hill River, in western Kansas. 

The known remains of this species are in the Museum of Yale College. 


ICHTHYORNIS,’ Marsh, 1872. 


Ichthyornis dispar, Marsh. 


(Plates XXI-XXVL) 
Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. IV, p. 344, Oct., 1872; Vol. V, p. 161, Feb., 
1873 ; Vol. V, p. 230, March, 1873. 
American Naturalist, Vol. IX, p. 625, Dec., 1875. 
Geological Magazine, Vol. III, p. 49, 1876. 
Journal de Zoologie, Tome IV, p. 494, Plate XV, 1875 ; VI, p. 385, 1877. 
Colonosaurus Mudgei, American Journal Science, Vol. IV, p. 406, Nov., 1872. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 350, 1872. 
Owen, Journal Geological Society of London, Vol. XXIX, p. 520, 1873. 
Woodward, Popular Science Review, Oct., 1875, p. 348. 
Huxley, New York Lectures, Popular Science Monthly, 1876, Vol. X, pp. 215-218. 
American Addresses, p. 54-56, London, 1877. 


The type specimen of this species (aumber 1450) was found in 1872 
by Professor B. F. Mudge, near the Solomon River, in northwestern 
Kansas. The bones secured are represented in the restoration of this 
species, Plate XXVI. Hight other specimens were obtained during the 
explorations carried on by the writer in the same region. All are from 
the ‘“‘ Pteranodon beds” of the middle Cretaceous. 

All the remains of this species at present known are in the Museum 
of Yale College. 


Ichthyornis agilis, Marsh. 
Graculavus agilis, Marsh American Journal Science, Vol. V, p. 230, March, 1873. 


The type of this species (number 1209) was found by the writer in 
October, 1872, on Butte Creek, a tributary of the Smoky Hill River, in 
western Kansas. The locality was in the yellow chalk, of the middle 
Cretaceous. 

These remains are in the Museum of Yale College. 


*7ySus, a fish, and dprzs, a bird. 


198 APPENDIX. 


Ichthyornis anceps, Marsh. 


Graculavus anceps, Marsh.—American Journal Science, Vol. III, p. 364, May, 
1872; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1873. 

Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 350, 1872. 

Marsh, This volume, p. 124. 


The type specimen (number 1208) of Ichthyornis anceps was found 
by the writer in November, 1870, on the North Fork of the Smoky Hill 
River, about twelve miles east of Fort Wallace, Kansas. The geological 
horizon was in the gray shale of the middle Cretaceous. Other specimens 
referred to this species have since been secured from the same region. 

All the known specimens are in the Yale College Museum. 


Ichthyornis celer, see Apatornis celer. 


Ichthyornis lentus, Marsh. 


Graculavus lentus, Marsh.—American Journal Science and Arts, (3) Vol. XIV, 

p. 253, Sept., 1877. 

This species is based on the lower half of a tarso-metatarsal bone 
(number 1796), obtained by Prof. B. F. Mudge, near Fort McKinney, 
Texas, in 1876. The accompanying fossils indicate that the locality was 
in beds of middle Cretaceous age. : 

This specimen is in the Museum of Yale College. 


Ichthyornis tener, Marsh. 
(Plate XXX, figure 8.) 
The type specimen (number 1760) of the present species was found 
in 1879, by Mr. E. W. Guild, in Wallace County, Kansas. A second speci- 
men (number 1766) was secured about the same time, in the same region. 


The locality was in the Pteranodon beds, of the middle Cretaceous. 
The known remains of this species are in the Yale College Museum. 


Ichthyornis validus, Marsh. 

(Plate XXX, figures 11-14.) 
The type of Ichthyornis validus (aumber 1740) was discovered in 
Sevtember, 1877, by Mr. 8. W. Williston, near the Solomon River, in 
northwestern Kansas. The locality was in the yellow chalk of the middle 


Cretaceous. 
All the specimens known belonging to this species are in the Yale 


College Museum. 


APPENDIX. 199 


Ichthyornis victor, Marsh. 
(Plates XX VII-XXXIV.) 


Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. XI, p. 511, June, 1876. 
Dana, Manual of Geology, pp. 466-468, Pl. V, 1880 (Restoration of skeleton, from 
Plate XXXIV of present volume.) 


The remains on which this species was established (number 1452) were 
found in May, 1876, by Mr. H. A. Brous, in Wallace County, Kansas. 
A second specimen (number 1733) was found in 1877 by Mr. F. H. Wil- 
liston, on Hackberry Creek, in Gove County, near the Smoky Hill River. 
More than forty other specimens have since been obtained in the same 
region by Messrs. 8. W. Williston, E. W. Guild, and other members of 
the writer’s parties. All these specimens are apparently from the same 
geological horizon in the middle Cretaceous. 

All the specimens of this species at present known are preserved in 
the Museum of Yale College. 


LAORNIS,’* Marsh, 1870. 


Laornis Edvardsianus, Marsh. 


Marsh, Proceedings Philadelphia Academy, Jan., 1870, p. 5; American Journal Science, 
Vol. XLIX, p. 206, March, 1870; Vol. V, p. 230, March, 1873. 

A. Milne-Edwards, Recherches Oiseaux Fossiles, Tome II, pp. 540-541, 1869-71. 

Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 350, 1872. 


This species was nearly as large as a Swan. The remains (number 
820) were discovered in the middle marl bed, of upper Cretaceous age, at 
Birmingham, New Jersey, and are now in the Museum of Yale College. 


Lestornis crassipes, see Hesperornis crassipes. 


PALZOTRINGA,’ Marsh, 1870. 


Paleotringa littoralis, Marsh. 


Marsh, Proceedings Philadelphia Academy, Jan., 1870, p. 5. American Journal 
Science, Vol. XLIX, p. 208, March, 1870; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1873, 

A. Milne-Edwards, Recherches Oiseaux Fossiles, Tome II, pp. 540-541, 1869-71. 

Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 


° Aas, a stone, and oprzs, a bird. 
” raAaids, ancient, and Tpvy yas, a shore bird. 


200 APPENDIX. 


The specimens known indicate a bird about as large as a Curlew. 

The remains (number 830) were found in the upper Cretaceous green- 
sand, near Hornerstown, New Jersey, and are now preserved in the Yale 
College Museum. 


Paleotringa Vagans, Marsh. 


Marsh, American Journal Science, Vol. III, p. 365, May, 1872; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 
1873. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 


The specimens preserved (number 835) indicate a bird intermediate in 
size between the other two species of this genus. They were discovered 
in the same formation, near Hornerstown, New Jersey; and are now in 
the Museum of Yale College. 


Palexotringa vetus, Marsh. 


Morton, Scolopax, Synopsis of the Organic Remains of the Cretaceous of the U. S., 
p- 32, Philadelphia, 1834. 

Harlan, Medical and Physical Researches, p. 280, Philadelphia, 1835. 

Marsh, Proceedings Philadelphia Academy, Jan., 1870, p.5; American Journal Science, 
Vol. XLIX, p. 209, March, 1870; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1873. 

A. Milne-Edwards, Recherches Oiseaux Fossiles, Tome II, pp. 540-541, 1869-71. 

Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 


A smaller species, from the lower marl-bed of the same formation, 
found near Arneytown, New Jersey. ‘The known remains are in the 


Philadelphia Academy. 


TELMATORNIS,’ Marsh, 1870. 


Telmatornis priscus, Marsh. 


Marsh, Proceedings Philadelphia Academy, Jan., 1870, p. 5; American Journal Science, 
Vol. XLIX, p. 210, March, 1870; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1878. 

A, Milne-Edwards, Recherches Oiseaux Fossiles, Tome LI, p. 541, 1869-71. 

Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 


This species was about as large as the King Rail (Rallus elegans). 
The remains known (number 840) are from the middle marl-bed, of the 
upper Cretaceous. They were found near Hornerstown, New Jersey, 
and are preserved in the Yale College Museum. 


; » g 
*rélpa, a swamp, and opvzs, a bird. 


APPENDIX. 201 


Telmatornis affinis, Marsh. 


Marsh, Proceedings Philadelphia Academy, Jan., 1870, p. 5; American Journal Science, 
Vol. XLIX, p. 211, March, 1870; Vol. V, p. 229, March, 1873. 
A. Milne-Edwards, Recherches Oiseaux Fossiles, Tome II, p. 541, 1869-71. 
Coues, Key to North American Birds, p. 349, 1872. 
A somewhat smaller species than the one last mentioned, and from 
the same locality and formation. 
The known remains (number 845) are in the Museum of Yale College. 


JE OVS) 10s) © Jest Jean’ 


The plates of Part I of the present memoir, with their accompanying 
pages of explanation, were printed in 1877, and those of Part IJ, in April, 
1878. The text of Part I was nearly all printed in 1878, and that of 
Part II, in the following year, or early in 1880. This delay in printing 
will account for the fact, that some recent publications are referred to in 
the Appendix, rather than in the text; and that a few of the illustrations 
prepared for the present volume first appeared elsewhere. 


26 


a 


PLATE I. 


PLATE LI. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Skull and lower jaws of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


— All Figures Natural Size. Page. : 

Fic. 1.—Skull; lateral view, seen from the left. Top of cranium crushed,--.......---.------. 6 
pm —Premaxillary. ~ fi 
pms—Maxillo-premaxillary suture. a 
¢ —Tooth, in position in mayillary. 7 

_ an —Anterior nares. i 

nm —Nasal bone. : 
~ —tLachrymal bone. 
of —Inter-orbital fenestra, 
gj —Quadrato-jugal bone. 
gq —Quadrate bone. 
bo —Basi-occipital. : é Sale 

HiGu2—lettilowerjaw; laterall view ofexternalsurfaceys= 9--- en ------ == 2 2 ee se ee 11 
¢ —Teeth still in place. 

THe, Eyes Woe pps SSE ROL MON Cho ooaace ose cosd coos soce seme eeneeeSeEocouacscade aul a 
a —Groove for the teeth, with indications of sockets. er 
6 —Groove for the reception of the upper teeth when the jaws were closed. ry 
e —Angle of mandible. 

Te, A iiiaing Nouee pg mines GOW ie ose ooee cana nce cacao eseeSeneraeraseSeessacsscces Hl : 
dq —Sympbysial surface, showing that the rami were not codssified, but united as 

only by cartilage. 
e —Imperfect articulation between splenial and angular elements. 

4 - ff —Articular surface for quadrate. 

WiGaor—Skullemseen tromeabove, cranium) crushed)s2--— = seeeee meses oss sos eee nee ee ene 6 
o —Orbit. : 


tf —Temporal fossa. 


Note.—The dotted outlines in this and the following plates represent portions wanting in the specimens described. ae 
The surface covered by oblique bars (as in figures 2 and 4) indicates portions concealed by the adhering matrix, or aS 
otherwise obscured. 


PLAT! 


Fl 
H 


E.Crisand, lich New Haven, 
F Berger, dal 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS; Marsh. 


: . Og P 
gi : , © ae 7 ‘ 
% ‘ pase nih ive a = re 
“a . ‘a gd xs re i - 
t, ' 
Py : 
) 
oO 
es : 
; . 
i 
_ Y 
1 
4 
4 
. 
. 3 ; 
\ 
° 
' 
. 
, , 
£ ; | 
Ril hy: , p ‘ ~ + vend is be 
’ 1 oe : i °° ry 
Doiron! = ; ie * mi; : Site eal a bres 
he alia Ne ' sted 
iH yt a in Fodhinn i ny ry Beir nit ‘ 
f . r WTA YY f i oo * ¥ 


PLA WH PL. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Teeth and Skull of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


; All Figures Natural Size, except 2 and 3. Page. 
— 
Fic. 1.—Inferior surface of premaxillary and maxillary bones,.---. ....---.--..----.-.--.-- $8 
¢ —Tooth in maxillary. 


Fie. 2.—Tooth; from lower jaw, lateral view, seen from the left; magnified eight diameters,.. 13 


Fie. 3.—Tooth; from maxillary, lateral view, seen from the right ; magnified eight diameters,. 13 
a —Young tooth, showing mode of development. 


Fie. 4.—Base of skull; posterior view. Top of cranium broken away, -.--.--------------:- 6 . 
bp —Basi-pterygoid process. 
fm —Foramen magnum. 


HtGeam or bascolyekull)-eseenttrom belowss= sere) eee see eee ee ee ee eee eee EO i: 


Guano —Lettrquadrateibone)ssinnerayl Cwaeme emesis eet ee aes een a eee aera 6 
6a —Superior view, showing undivided articulation. 
66 —Posterior view. 
6c —Inferior view. 


Hie. %.—Posterior part of right pterygoid bone; inferior view, .......----.----+---+------- 6 
7a —Posterior view, showing concave articulation for quadrate. 
76 —Superior view. 


HT Cemmos high thv.omens sin ferioravie wa eee sete ee een ore ee eee eee eee nail 
8a —Superior view. N 


Fic. 9.—Right palatine bone; seen from above,_.__---.- --_----. Peed rs eee, i) t ; 
Er easlOr—Ineftplachnymall-mposterl or. vic ween aes ee eee eee eee eas ee ee 


Fic. 11.—Right lower jaw; anterior part, with inner wall of groove removed, showing rudi- 
mentary sockets for the teeth. (Compare Plate I, fig. 3,) -...-.---.-.--..-- 18 


Fie. 12.—Basi-hyal bone; lateral view, seen from the right. 
12a—Superior view. 
126—Posterior view. 


Pe Adib ie 


12 


oo ee 
eee 


MBH EMC tral ri 8 ce pact 


Reema ert 


HE OPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh. 


PLATE I. 


PLATE Itt. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Cervical Vertebre of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. Page. 
Fie. 1.—Second vertebra, or axis; lateral view, seen from the left. Neural spine restored, - - --- 18 
1a —Superior view. 
16 —Anterior view. 
le —Inferior view. 
Fic. 2.—Third cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,...........__-..-..---.---. 20 


2a —Superior view. 
26 —Anterior view. 
2c —Inferior view. 


Fic. 3.—Fonrth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left. Hypapophysis restored,... 22 
3a —Inferior view. Pleurapophyses restored. 
36 —Anterior view. Outer wall of foramina for vertebral artery restored. 
8c —Inferior view. 

Fic. 4.—Fifth cervical vertebra; Jateral view,.seen from the left,........_.-----.-____.--.---. 24. 
4a —Superior view. 
46 —Anterior view. 
4c —Inferior view. 

Fie. 5.—Sixth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ....---..-.--.------------- 25 
5a@ —Superior view. 
56 —Anterior view. 
5¢e —Inferior view. 

Fic. 6.—Seventh cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,....._....--.---.--- ---- 27 
6a —Superior view. 
66 —Anterior view. 
6c —Inferior view. 

Fic. 7.—Eighth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,....-.._-..---.-. ----.---- 29 
7a —Superior view. 
76 —Anterior view. 
7¢ —Inferior view. 

Fie, 8.—Ninth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,............---.----------. 30 


8a —Superior view. 
86 —Anterior view. 
8c —Inferior view. 


PLATE I, 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh 


PLATE ive es ro. 


eA) Ve 


ODONTORNITHES. 
Cervical Vertebre of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. ca 
& All Figures Natural Size. Page. 
; Fic. 1.—Tenth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,.........------------..---: 32 
1a@ —Superior view. 
16 —Anterior view. 
le —Inferior view. ; 
Fic. 2.—Eleventh cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ....---.---.------------ 33 
2a —Superior view. : 
2b —Anterior view. 5 re 
2¢e —Inferior view. “ My 
Fig. 3.—Twelfth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,..----.-.----.----------- 34 P 
3a —Superior view. 
385 —Anterior view. 
38¢e —Inferior view. 
Fig. 4.—Thirteenth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,.._-.--.---------------- 35 
4a —Superior view. 
46 —Anterior view. 
4c —Inferior view. 
Fic. 5.—Fourteenth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ....-.----+----------- 36 
; 5a —Superior view. 
56 —Anterior view. ; _ ae 
5¢ —Inferior view. x 
Fic. 6.—Fifteenth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, -.......-.------ .------- 38 


6a —Superior view. 
6 —Anterior view. 
6c —Inferior view. 


Fic. 7.—Sixteenth cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left. Hypapophysis e 
incompletey wt acam aes ce lessens se Sem ee eee See ee ae eae e eae ee eee 40 z 
7a —Superior view. 
76 —Anterior view. 
%e —Inferior view. 


PLATE IV 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh. 


ies | 


vege es A wv 
pelt : } t; a aaah 
7 aa rg “ , 
by ‘ \ . ‘ : : 
ue / 
. 
aN 13 ta z “ 
H 
’ S 5 . = 
. c : , 
. > : . 
, 
: 5 
. “f 
. rio 
; ' 
, 
\ 
nN ; 
Me dle i 
ee ; 
PNG ty - 
ptelt rie ee ee 
On an ¢ oy 7 
CVn eae . ue ety 
- 7 7 iC 
Para! Ok a: 
: i ; Me xy 
erty ‘ : 


Fic, 


Fic. 


Fie. 


Fic. 


Fic. 


Fie. 


JH ID ARID Wee 
ODONFORNITHES. 


Cervical and Dorsal Vertebre of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
All Figures Natural Size. 


1.—Seventeenth or last cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left. Hypapophysis 
IM pertectspaee ee aes eee = ee Sets ere eae are ate laia ays) sa epee ee 
la —Superior view. 
16 —Anterior view. 
1e —Inferior view. 


2.—Kighteenth vertebra; first dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left. Neural spine 
TCSLOTC Cte eae ee Ne = ot es arent ee iy ee eRe ee eC oe ne 
la —Superior view. Right diapophysis removed. 
26 —Anterior view. 
2¢e —Inferior view. Left diapophysis removed. 


3.—Nineteenth vertebra; second dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left,.....-..-__..-... 
3q@ —Superior view. 
36 —Anterior view. 
3c —Inferior view. 


4.—Twentieth vertebra; third dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left,.-.-. -..-___.___.. 
4a —Superior view. 
4h —Anterior view. 
4c —Inferior view. 


5.—Twenty-first vertebra; fourth dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left, --.-___.-______.. 
5a@ —Superior view. 
56 —Anterior view. 
5¢e —Inferior view. 


. 6.—Twenty-second vertebra; fifth dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left, _. ..--_.2.-222 


6a —Superior view. 
66 —Anterior view. 
6c —Inferior view. 


7.—Twenty-third vertebra; sixth dorsal, lateral view, seen from the left, -.-.-...__-.-..- 
7a —Superior view. 
76 —Anterior view. Neural spine somewhat too short. 
Te —Inferior view. 


Page. 


45 


47 


48 


50 


53 


55 


P Berger, del 


E Onsand, lith New Haven. 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh 


PLATE VI. 


ODONTORNITHES. 
Bones of Scapular Arch and Sternum of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
All Figures Natural Size. Page. 

1.—-Sternum ; lateral view, seen from the left. Outline restored in part from figures on 

TE tea V AL Re ca sete pet ae Sea oe Sn eR I = I a Ra ae 60 
2.—Sternum ; inferior view, .--- Se po EEE A ee ep aE ORR EEE Rr ape eed Hag 60 
3.—Left ‘clavicle; lateral view, seen from:the right, -.._.-2.... 2.-.--2----.------ at eee 61 

3a—Inferior end, showing face for cartilaginous union with its fellow. (Compare 

Plate VIII, Fig. 8.) 
A highticoracoidywexternal isumiace, yas acy = eee eee aes ee ee emo) 
5.—Right coracoid ; lateral view, seen from the right,--...-.---------.----.-- eee see = 59 
Gl Righticoracol dis sinnerysurtace sepia anya em eye eel va eee eee ata ee Iaetes OD, 


7,.—Left scapula; external surface. (See also Plate VII, Figs. 5, 6 and Ti) es Serer erate 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh: 


o " : b u en 
eS LS ar A 
ml ao ve Vv ‘ , 
i 
‘ a 
“ ' 
\ 
‘ 
i 
© 
» 
iis £ ‘ = 0 # amr 4 = pe) . 4 
PLATE Ville 
Ces i ; 
‘ \ 
ri 
r ‘ 
' 
' 
1 
i 
s 
at : M 
= eT } " 
i é eas OF : ogi 
“a uli ae ‘ " : te Vii Abe i R 
/ S _ . alt Awa) a , 
i te if * Faye nl aac r hi Lj 

nl Al , "09 he : i uM 4 : + , 

is } A iG i i ree 


Pea Weak 
. ODONTORNITHES. 


Sternum, Coracoid and Clavicle of HESPERORNIS CRASSIPES Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. 


i=Sternum\ lateral views seen from theiletts sae sees: aes Sa) Sees eee) 


2.—Sternum ; anterior view, 
3.—Sternum ; inferior view, showing entire absence of keel, 
4.—Right coracoid; inner surface, 


bhi chtrclavicle\s seen tromyabove,s= 4. .eoan sees cee eee eee eee eee 


PLATE VI. 


cf 


Sani 


8 
fel 


HESPERORNIS CRASSIPES, Marsh 


PLATE VIII. 


PLATE VIII. 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Humerus, Scapula and Shoulder-girdle of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. Page. 
Fic. 1.—Right humerus; inner surfaces! “(3 Soe) he eae Aart poet ee 62 | 
¢ Hicwo——hichtshumerusyradialiside@ye sansa nae eee een ee ite eleanor ee nee eee 62 
2a —Proximal end. _ 
ices hightihumerus;; ulnar side, 2 5--- = ..2 oe aoe na nee es A oe eevee CeCe em ; 


6 —Distal end, showing entire absence of articulation. 


ie, Aa MMOS Chatswhll GIMBIE Co- eee boo ekee cons sone obese cenSeoRoSeeocouSoses | (PY : 
resent ——Weriscapulas anterior Views. - 01. +5. - cee = one cte beam Sees a see ee ne ele eee 58 ee 
HrcesGl——lhetipscapularse inner SULA CC esr te mie) alae aoe ite eat eect tee area OS 


6a —Proximal end. 
Fic. 7.—Left scapula; posterior view,------- - safeties RNR re PIS Sa Al aS Met eS) 


Fie. 8.—Sternum and scapular arches, restored; front view,.--..--------------------------- 60 
sé —Sternum. 
cel —Clavicle. 

—Coracoid. 

—Scapula. 

—Humerus. 1 


I~ Oo 


Note.—In figure 8, portions of the scapular arch are diminished in size by the perspective. This is especially . 
noticeable in the humerus. 


PLATE. Vall: 


mean Tce meena 


aor 


Hoe PRORNIS® hE GANS. Mareine 


; ' ey 
A - * o 1 : 
- ‘ . i 
bd ’ 
F 
; y 
\ 
i 
5 
: t 
\ e 
Lv 
P 5 
, z 
? 
=e die = "F 
e 
i 
2 uate 
‘ = 
S : 
i } is . 
ae ie i ern PP ge Abe 
“ ’ . 7 + 
tt i i] : eo 7 
Fn ea i f I Set ea ae A 
j ad 7 i ' rye , 7 a : = os Px) a + late: 
: J y Ag y } a pa Sd ay : ‘ are 
_ ie tak i ! > iP Ja 
: “al 
’ 7 \ a7 4 ee 


JID VAN Ia JDC, 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Ribs and Uncinate processes of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. 
Fic. 1.—First articulated rib; from the left side, exterior view,_---------.----------------- 
‘Fic. 2.—Second articulated rib; “ bh ae SE RSS ee ee eS ete 6 oc ee 
Fie. 3.—Third articulated rib; “ & ¢ erode yi 2 Yr eA ae Oe 
u—Articular surface for first uncinate process. 
Fic. 4.—Fourth, or first true dorsal, rib; from the left side, exterior view, ------------------ 
Fie. 5.—Fifth rib; from the left side, exterior view,-------.. - Chae) abana en 
Fie. 6.—Sixth rib; “ i te Peal ert entra er eaten tenure aves Ora ee Se 
Fie. 7.—Seventh rib; “ O8 GS Cees ONO iO aS) RI Stet RECS cS 
Fie. 8.—Highth rib; “ ah “ Sle Sealey ey Sees erate Sines 2 ar tera a oat Oe aN 
_u—Articular surface for last uncinate process. 
Fic. 9.—Ninth rib; from the left side, exterior view, - -- 7 Seti sie sees oe Aye ey ED eaters No 
' Fie. 10.—First uncinate process; from left side, articulating with third rib at the point 
MATCH MCX FCLIOLAVAC Ws ets seo oor ete ear enter ke 
Fic. 11.—Second uncinate process; from left side, exterior view,-.-_------------- Peete 3s 
Fie. 12.—Third uncinate process ; ae & GF GS thro Se eines ey say 
Fig. 13.—Fourth uncinate process;  “ Ms DS eee aes ey ayes) 
Fie. 14.—Fifth uncinate process ; sh s by Seema ae late a aera Nae Aaa rae Fs 
Fie. 15.—Sixth uncinate process ; ts * ea eee Spel eouseie eens 
Fie. 16.—First sternal rib 3; articulating with first true dorsal rib, from left side, exterior view, - - 
Fie. 17.—Second sternal rib; from left side, external view, .------------- -.--------------- 
Fie. 18.—Third sternal rib; s a ss See an eR eer BN ee ee ee 
Fra. 19.—Fourth sternal rib; “ “ “ HE IDS ioe TH 


20.—Fifth sternal rib; “ ce ss Se YEN ue aga A 1 Luts ee aR Oa 


Page. 


PLATE 1X 


oer oe 


E Orisand, lith New Haver. 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh 


PRA SS 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Pelvis of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
Natural Size. Page. 


Fic. 1.—Lateral view, seen from the left; showing the small foramen in the acetabulum, and 
the free distal ends of the ilium, ischium and pubis.------- --------------~--- 69 


WIG Superionnviews Ol theisame specimens =aessene se seen eases aa ee eae eee 69 


PLATE X 


F Berger, del E .Orisand, lith New Haven. 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh. 


yey 


Pe AA eee 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Pelvis of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


Natural Size. Page. 
Fie. 1.—Left lateral view, with left pelvic bones removed; showing sacrum, and inner side of 
THA Tibi, Nei, Chel HOT oo ooo onan saOEDESsacH -eGocsesesns=oseco 69 
af —Foramen in acetabulum. 
i —Ilium. 
ts —Ischium. 
pb —Pubis. 


Fic. 2.—Inferior view ; showing sacrum, with fourteen vertebra in place, ----.---.-- 


--------- 69 


PLATE 2 


ee. 


rR RET YC 


ETE oe 


P Berger, del 


= Onsand, lith New Havun. 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS >» Marsh. 


betel hae 


bia 


‘ig 


PLAT) XE aia 


PLATE XII. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Caudal vertebre of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. Page. 
Fic. 1.—First free caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left. Neural spine restored, -. 78 
1a —Superior view. 
16 —Anterior view. 
16' —Posterior view. 
le —Inferior view. 
Fic. 2.—Second caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,........-.---.------------ 79 
— 2a@ —Superior view. 
26 —Anterior view. 
2c —Inferior view. 
Fie. 3.—Third caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,...-.-----.------------- are t) 
3a —Superior view. 
86 —Anterior view. 
8e —Inferior view. 
Fic. 4.—Fourth caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,.._.-.-.--.--.------.----- 80 
4a —Superior view. 
4b —Anterior view. 
4¢ —Inferior view. 
Fic. 5.—Fifth caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, _....._---.--------------- 81 


5a@ —Superior view. 
56 —Anterior view. 
5¢ —Inferior view. 


Fic. 6.—Sixth caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, _......-:--------:--------- 82 
6a —Superior view. Diapophysis restored. 
66 —Anterior view. 
6¢ —Inferior view. ; 


Fig. 7.—Seventh caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,.........-.----.--------- 83 ; 
7a —Superior view. Se 
76 —Anterior view. 
Ze —Inferior view. 


Fic. 8.—Eighth caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,-.-._..--. ---------------- 83 
8a —Superior view. Hypapophysis restored. 
86 —Anterior view. 
8¢ —Inferior view. 


Fic. 9.—Ninth caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,........-....--.-.----..--- 84 i 
_ 9a —Superior view. 
96 —Anterior view. 
9¢ —Inferior view. 


ray Ol—henthiandveleventhicaudalavertebrassasne sas eeee eee ese eee eee ee ee eee eee 85 
10a—Superior view. 

106—Anterior view. 

10c—Inferior view. 


PLATE XI 


HESPERORNIS REGALIS, Marsh 


(nts 
7S FY 


= 


LES DPA Dy OME, 


Fie. 


Fie. 
Fic. 


Fic. 


PALA Sore 
ODONTORNITHES. 
Femur of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
Natural Size. 


(b= MertuemurmantecriOr Ol SUpeliOr vie Wats mee see eet aa ra ee 


la—Distal articulation. 
Wet femur stibialisides sess. see =e > see eee See aE Oe Mees cGeab oes 


Se nertnemur an Oster Orion interior views yess ae ea nee a ae 
3a—Proximal end of femur. 


A hefemurenbulaT Sid eyes ae eee sees eeee ane eee eee nines os Seon te eee 


eter 


wid 


wre $ 


Mita 


ead Dad Dl a > DAVES 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Tibia of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
i 


Natural Size. 


Thre, Lote toes emnssleesnbig 45 docs ode6 eocease sees secu edb donsewede vee 


Fic. 2.—Left tibia; exterior surface, showing fibular ridge 
2a—Proximal end. 


9-7 


Fic. 3.—Left tibia; posterior view, -.--.---.---- 
3a—Distal end. 


PLATE 3 


HESPE! RNIS REGALIS, Mars] 


fos v 


4 Ye 


Fic. 
Fic. 
Fic. 
Fic. 
Fic. 
Fic. 


IEA IIa) DSO’. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Patella and Fibula of HEsPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. 


1.—Left patella; anterior view, --- 


2.—Left patella; lateral view, seen from the left, _._-. ---.-------.--.-- 
3.—Left patella; lateral view, seen from the right, 
Ap ett bulacwanterlonivieWs .<.jcic2ec. lee secs te eto noo eee OSE R ee a eee 
bio etteubulaysexterion VieWsy\o-s4.ssssese ce 6 cee a cece \ = seme ees are ae ae 


6.—Left fibula; posterior view, - 


6a—Proximal end. 


linn ERE 


Marsh. 


) 


Ss 


S REGAL 


Seahiqy ORUN( 


HE 


PLATE XVI. 


Fic. 


Fic. 
Fic. 
Fic. 


Pe AE) Seva. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Tarso-metatarsal of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


Naturai Size. _ 


-1.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; anterior view, -----.-- 
la—Proximal end. 


2,.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; exterior view, 
3.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; posterior view, 


4,—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; inner view, 
4a—Distal end, somewhat compressed. 


k 


Marg] 


REGALIS, 


4 


- 
5 
m 
3 
: 
= 
at 


PLATE XVII. 


ODONTORNITHES. — 
Tarso-metatarsal of HESPERORNIS CRASSIPES Marsh. 


sapere ea) a) Natural) Size, 


1.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone ; anterior view, 


1a—Proximal end. 
2.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; exterior view, 
3.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone; posterior view,- ------ 


4,.—Left tarso-metatarsal bone ; inner view, showing large tuberosity on inner side, -.-.-- 96 
4a—Distal end. 


PLATE XV 


x; 
U! 


by 


CRASSIP 


NIS 


4 
ams 


ian} 


15 


PEs 


ao 
Ww 


pe 
TLE, 


PLATH XVIII. . 
ODONTORNITHES. 
Phalanges of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


All Figures Natural Size. Page. 


Fie. 1.—First, or proximal, phalanx of outer, or fourth, toe; from left foot, seen from above,--. 100 


1a —Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
16 —Inner view. 

1e —Proximal end. 

1d —Inferior view. 

le —Exterior view. 


Fie. 2.—Second phalanx of fourth toe; left foot, superior view, .------------------------ ee 100 
2a —Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
2b —Inner view. 
2¢ —Proximal end. 
2d —Inferior view. 
2e —Exterior view. 
Fig. 3.—Third phalanx of fourth toe; left foot, superior view, ----.---.------------.------ - 101 
8a—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
36 —Inner view. 
8¢ —Proximal end. 
3d —Inferior view. 
8e —Exterior view. — 
Fie. 4.—Fourth phalanx of fourth toe; left foot, superior view,-------- Sobsceusse sees ee eee 101 
_ 4a—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
46 —Inner view. 
4¢ —Proximal end. 
4d —Inferior view. 
4e —Exterior view. . 
Fie. 5.—First phalanx of third toe; right foot, superior view,----------------------------- - 104 
5a—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
56 —Inner view. 
5¢ —Proximal end. 
5d—Inferior view. 
5¢ —Exterior view. : 
Fie, 6.—Second phalanx of third toe; left foot, superior view, . --------------------------- 105 
6a —Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
66 —Inner view. 
6c —Proximal end. 
6d —Inferior view. 
6e —Exterior view. 
Fie. 7.—Third phalanx of third toe; left foot, superior view, ---.----------------------na-- 105 


‘ja—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 


476 —Inner view. 

7¢ —Proximal end. 
4da—Inferior view. 
Te —Exterior view. 


7) Mamrisiiin 


REGALIS 


RORNIS 


HESPE 


PLATE XIX. 


PLATE XIX. 


ODONTORNITHES. ¥ 


Phalanges and first metatarsal of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 
All Figures Natural Size. Page. 


Fic. 1.—First phalanx of second toe; from left foot, superior view,--.---------------------- 106 
= 1a—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. ; 
16 —Inner view. 
le —Proximal end. 
1d—Inferior view. 
le —Exterior view. 


Fie. 2.—Second phalanx of second toe; left foot, superior view, -----.- Sobecoesed sean coHsesvE 107 
2a—Distal end, with outline of proximal end. 
2b—Inner view. 
2c —Proximal end. 
2d—Inferior view. 
2e —Exterior view. 


Fic. 3.—Third, or ungual, phalanx of second toe; left foot, superior view, -..------------- aes IK 
3a—Inner view. ; 
3b —Proximal end. 
3¢ —Inferior view. 


Fic. 4.—First left metatarsal; exterior view,---.---- Bi a ee ge Mee I Se, cs 1, 108 
4a—Distal end. 
4b —Superior view. 


4c —Inner view. “ 
Fic. 5.—First phalanx of first toe; left foot, superior view, proximal end wanting,-.---------.- 108 Rey 
5a—Distal end. is 


55 —Inner view. 
5¢ —Inferior view. ; 
5d—Exterior view. : . My 


Fic. 6.—Second, or ungual, phalanx of first toe; left foot, superior view, ------------------ .. 108 

6a—lInner view. 
66 —Proximal end. 
6c —Inferior view. 
6d—Exterior view. 


PATE aoe 


5a 


5b 


6b 


64 


E.Crisand, lith New Haven 


Bore RORNISS REGALIS) Marsin: 


PUA XX. 
ODONTORNITHES. © 


Restoration of HESPERORNIS REGALIS Marsh. 


One-Half Natural Size. Page. 


_ This restoration represents what is at present known of the skeleton of this species. The 


portions figured are taken mainly from a single individual (No. 1206, Yale College Museum). The 
only important parts wanting are the atlas, the extremity of the coccyx, and two terminal phalanges, 


Wihichwaremrestolredeimroutlinewestacwete sett eiccitieacste sic cfs. ics cisme Ce wseelene acre cite e eee 


Barger. del 


HESPERORNIS REGAULIS, Marsh. 1, 


PLATE XX 


E.Onsand, lith New Haver. 


PLATE. XX 


Fic. 


Fic. 


Fie. 


BGs 


IP ID ACID ay) SC oe< IE, 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Skull, Lower Jaw, and Teeth of IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 


All Figures twice Natural Size, except 2a and 20. Page. 


1.—Skull; lateral view, seen from the left, restored in part from skull of a Tern, (Sterna 
RAGA SEINE yo oeas oes seco esoseeas sacenoes Sacamdns poseaaoeSess sesbens 120 
bo—Occipital condyle. 
1la—Portion of maxillary, inferior view. 
16—Superior view. 


OF Rig tel owerg) dwisgil 0 Clava C Wap eee eee meee eee eee 123 
¢ —Teeth in position. : 
e —Suture between splenial and angular bones. 
2a—Tooth from lower jaw; lateral view, magnified eight diameters. 
2b—Anterior view, magnified eight diameters. 


3.—Right lower jaw; superior view, showing distinct sockets for the teeth, -------.--.... 123 
a —Socket for second tooth. 


4,—-Right lower jaw; reversed, showing exterior surface, ._...--.---------------------- 123 


[CPTEMVORNES lS PART Marsiv 


PLATES Soxa: 


E.Crisand, lith New Haven. 


PLATE XXIL | 


Fic. 


Fic. 


Fic. 


Fic. 


Fic. 
Fic. 


Fic. 


PLATE XNTT. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Vertebrze and Sacrum of ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. 


Page. 


1.—Cervical vertebra; from behind the middle of the series, lateral view, seen from the left, 132 


la—Superior view. 


16—Anterior view. 


1¢e —Inferior view. 


1d—Posterior view. 


2.—Posterior cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, -. -......-.....-_------ 134 
2a—Superior view. 
26—Anterior view. 
2c —Inferior view. 
2d—Posterior view. 
3.—Dorsal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,...-..--....-----.-------..------- 136 
3a—Superior view. 
36—Anterior view. 
3c —Inferior view. 
3d—Posterior view. 
4.—Dorsal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,......---. ----.--.----------.----- 140 
4a—Superior view. 
46—Anterior view. 
4e —Inferior view. 
4d—Posterior view. 
51 SACTUME MSUPCLIOLAVICW rele s cyac ie sictelo ete Seed = See ee ee eee Nee eee oie eee eee ee Gil 
Gi cactum-wlateralaviewa scenutromuetherlett, sesame eee ees sere eae eee 161 
6a—Anterior view. 
66—Posterior view. 
(G=—-SACLUMsminelriOravie Waseca caine se caer ceaie Sacco ase ace eee eon aoe eee eee 161 


PLATE XXIL 


LCA YVORNIS 


DISPAR, Marsh. % 


E.Crisand, lith New Heven. 


~ ¥ ye et Oe Petron. as + ee 


~ i 
‘ 


Ne 


PEAS, SOCx<OMm, 
ODONTORNITHES. 
Sternum and Coracoid of IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 
All Figures twice Natural Size. - Page. 


Fie. 1.—Sternum; anterior view, showing overlapping grooves for the coracoids, and the promi- 
nent keel, : 147 


Fic. 2.—Sternum; lateral view, seen from the left; outline of crest restored from a second 


specimen, 
Fic. 3.—Sternum; superior view, 
Fic. 4.—Sternum; inferior view, 


Fic. 5.—Left coracoid; anterior surface; upper end restored in outline from another specimen, - 144 
5a—Sternal end. : 


Fic. 6.—Left coracoid; posterior surface, .... ....------------------ 


ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR, Marsh.” 


PLATE XXII 


E.Crisand, lith New Haven. 


PLATH XXIV. 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Wing bones of IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. 
Fie. 1.—Left humerus; inner, or posterior, view,..------.-------------- Sawtuee oe eee 
HiGwaeo:——lheityhumerus'; radial side: soci-wt.- 2c im jo ce ere ee eee ene coe Ee ene eee 
Gano left syhumerussoutersor anterior, Views ===2 =e eee eee ee rnee eens ee eee eee 
ve —lRadial crest. 
8a —Proximal end. 
3b —Distal end. © 
IGE eitshumerus); winar side, cccis as econ nee one ie aa eee ae ee ae 
Hrcumno:—locit ulna); Outer; OMspostellor, Views sass esse eeae eee se eee ee eee eee eee eee 
lpr cumm Or Whertml nas) SUPCLlOM ViCWay. si) «see cics aeinioni se. Sone oes er toe eee 
6a@ —Proximal end. 
GNM letunulna) winner, or radial asurtace mass sl= ale se eee eee eee ee eee ee ae 
Hic ——leltgulnassinterlonwlewWa eee ses ace eae ene ee eee BS Heater eee soos 
8a —Distal end, 
Pica hichtiradius):) distal third, superior view,=--- -sesc se aieeee see ee eae oe eee ane eee 
HrewlO——hightmadiussmdistal third.inner view, sss esse es ese eee eeeee eee eee ee eee 
10a—Distal end. 
Bie. 1-—left metacarpal; distal portion, ulnar surface, _--...-..-.---.----=----- ---- ------= 
Hie. 12:—Left metacarpal’; distal end, exterior surface, ..-2----._-..:-+-------------------5 


@ —Distal end of third metacarpal codssified with second. 
126—Distal articular surface. 


Notr.—The positions assigned to the wing bones figured separately here and in Plates XXX and XXXT are those 
seen when the wing is at rest, as in Plate XXVI. 


SRT St SRE IRN ee ae 


E.Crisand, lith New 


Haven. 


ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR, Marsh. *A. 


ney 
ae aT 
ao Neo 


PLATE XXV. 


ODONTORNITHES. ae 


Femur and Tibia of IcHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. Page. 4 i 
Fig. 1.—Left femur; anterior, or superior, view, ---------------- ------ oo nene eee wee ct eee ee 171 — Bee : 

2 1a —Distal end. See saa 
iiras2!—Ieft femur’ inner, or tibial, surface, _.__-.+- 25 ----2--25--eeeseeee Ae ee jas 
ices leftdemur;: posterior view, 2-22 02s. acs. ss secs ses eee Teese wee eee seco iit eh 7 os 

3a —Proximal end. : 
Fic. 4.—Left femur; outer, or fibular, surface,._........-----.--------- ee Pee e elses 171 fe a 5 
Fic. 5.—Right tibia; proximal portion, anterior view, - ---. ---- BEER A ee ees rome ode ‘172 ne 3h 

5’ —Distal half; approximately in position, anterior view. REE Pie 

5a@—Proximal end. con 

Fic. 6.—Right tibia; proximal portion, exterior view, .---------------------.-------- ee UPL 

6’ —Distal half; approximately in position, exterior view. EY rn 
Fie. 7.—Right tibia; proximal portion, posterior view, ---- --- HooReeaaee osoossScceasoaessse 172 iH 

7’ —Distal half; approximately in position, posterior view. ; 

7'a—Distal end. : SN aes <° 
Fie. 8.—Right tibia; proximal portion, inner view, -.-.------~ Sr edesds alee ees 172 ie 


8’ —Distal half; approximately in position, inner view. 


by 


PLATE XXV. 


ta 


ot 
fo) 


ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR, Marsh.~A 


PLATE XXVL 


JEAN I DID PeOzOW IL, 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Restoration of ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR Marsh. 


Natural Size. 
Page. 


In this restoration, the shaded portions represent the parts preserved of the type specimen, 
(No. 1450, Yale College Museum). The portions in outline are taken in part from other specimens 
but mainly from the skeleton of a Tern, (Sterna regia Gambel.).--..--- -.-- --------------+----- 177 


td 
& 


ICHTHYORNIS DISPAR, Marsh. 


PLATE XOOVL 


E.Crisand, lith. New Haven. 


% 
. 


PIGAChH Xvi) 


PLATE XXVIII. 


ODONTORNITHES. > 


Cervical and dorsal Vertebre of IcHTHYORNIS VICTOR Marsh. 
All Figures twice Natural Size, Page. 


_Fia. 1.—Atlas and axis, or first and second cervical vertebra ; lateral view, seen from the left, 127 
la—Superior view. é 
16—Anterior view * 
le—Inferior view. ae 
1d—Posterior view. ae 


_ Fic. 2.—Third (?) cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ..........-------------- 130 
2a—Superior view. vi 
26—Anterior view. 
2e—Inferior views 9) = ake nes ove 
2d—Posterior view. ; : Js 


Fic. 3.—Posterior cervical vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,....---.-------------__- 131 
8a—Superior view. 
3b—Anterior view. 
38c—Inferior view. 
8d—Posterior view. 


‘Fic. 4.—Anterior dorsal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, _...-.-------------------- 135 
; -4a—Superior view. 

46—Anterior view. 

4c—Inferior view. 

4d—Posterior view. 


Fic. 5.—Posterior dorsal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ...-.--------- sonsee eee 137 
5a—Superior view. 
56—Anterior view. 
5c—Inferior view. 

5d—Posterior view. 


ICE VORINTS, Vice 


TOR, Marsh. 


PLATE X XVII 


E.Crisand, lith New Haven, 


PLATH XXVITI. 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Sacrum of APATORNIS, and Caudal Vertebre of IcHTHYORNIS. 
All Figures twice Natural Size. Page. 


Fie. 1.—Sacrum of Apatornis celer Marsh; lateral view, seen from the left, anterior end imperfect, 162 
la—Superior view. 
16 —Inferior view. 
1e—Posterior view. 


Fic. 2.—First of seven consecutive caudal vertebre of Jchthyornis victor Marsh; lateral view, 
seensromathe left, o2ce~ ian cases ose e aes et ees os= eee eee ee eee eee 165 
2a—Superior view. 
26—Anterior view. 
2e—Inferior view. 
2d—Posterior view. 


Fic. 3.—Median caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ....---------------------- 166 
38a—Superior view. 
3b—Anterior view. 
3¢e—Inferior view. 
38d—Posterior view. 


Fig. 4.—Median caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, ..--.--.- ---------------- 166 
4a—Superior view. 
46—Anterior view. 
4ce—Inferior view. 
4d—Posterior view. 


Fic. 5.—Posterior caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left,_..-. ....------.--------- 167 
5a—Superior view. 
56—Anterior view. 
5¢e —Inferior view. 
5d—Posterior view. 


Fig. 6.—Posterior caudal vertebra; lateral view, seen from the left, _-..-.....--.----------6- 167 
6a—Superior view. 
66—Anterior view. 
6c —Inferior view. 
6d—Posterior view. 


Fic. 7.—Posterior united caudal vertebre; lateral view, seen from the left, -...---.---.------ 167 
7a—Superior view. 
76—Anterior view. 
7¢—Inferior view. 
7d—Posterior view. 


Norz.—tThe caudal vertebre figured on Plate XXVIII are consecutive, and were found with the pelvis represented 
on Plate XXXII, figures 2 and 3. 


PLATE XXVIL 


1, APATO] 


RNIS. 


Zo, WORE VO IRNILS) 440 


E.Crisand, lith. New Haven. 


\\ 


a 
a 

a 
oe, 


* 
. 
1 
. ita 
a 
sae. \ pa 


PLATH XNIX. 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Sternum and Scapular Arch of APATORNIS and IcHTHYORNIS. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. Page. 
Fic. 1.—Left scapula of Apatornis celer Marsh; exterior view, ----.---------------.------- 142 
la —Proximal end. 
Fic. 2.—Left scapula of Apatornis celer; anterior, or superior, view, ----------------------- 142 
Hires: lett scapulalot-Apatornis celen, inneriview, ©--- = 2== == s=-\s2eeee eae eee eee AD 
Fic. 4.—Left scapula of Apatornis celer ; posterior, or inferior, view, ----------------------- 142 
Fic. 5.—Right coracoid of Apatornis celer ; anterior view, -------------------------------- 145 
5a —Sternal end. 
Hig) 6:—Right coracoid of Apatornzs celer; posterior view, --------------225..2----- 2 see 145 
Fic. 7.—Upper portion of clavicle of Apatornis celer ; exterior view, ..-----------.--------- 147 
7a— Posterior view. 
7b— Inner view. 
Yc— Anterior view. 
irc wee Sternumyoted patonn7s (Celery, minterl ONnvi C Wale =e =e aa eee ae eee 148 
Fic. 9.—Left scapula of Ichthyornis victor Marsh ; exterior view, ----.-----.----------------- 141 
9a—Proximal end. 
Fig. 10.—Left scapula of Ichthyornis victor; anterior, or exterior, view, ----------------.---- 141 
Fie. 11.—Left scapula of Ichthyornis victor ; inner view, . --. ------------------------------ 141 
Fic. 12.—Left scapula of Ichthyornis victor ; posterior, or inferior, view, -------------------- 141 
Fig. 13.—Left coracoid of Ichthyornis victor ; posterior view, ------------------------------ 144 
Fic. 14.—Left coracoid of Ichthyornis victor ; exterior view, ------------------------------- 144 
Fic. 15.—Left coracoid of Ichthyornis victor ; anterior view,.----.-.--.-------------------- 144 
15a—Scapular end. 
Fie. 16.—Left coracoid of Zchthyornis victor ; inner view, -..---~.-.----------- ------------ 144 


TASTE axa 


oa 


3 
re 
ee 
& 
a 
3 
fe) 


ie, AP MORN. SS Ten HYORNIS eA: 


va 
Pye at 


Fic. 


Fia. 


Fic. 
Fic. 


Fic. 
Fia. 


PLATE XXX. 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Wing bones of APATORNIS and IcHTHYORNIS. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. Page. 

1.—Left radius of Apatornis celer Marsh; proximal portion, inner view, ---.----.-------- 152 

2,—Left radius of Apatornis celer ; proximal portion, inferior view, -------------------- 152 

3.—Left radius of Apatornis celer ; proximal portion, exterior, or ulnar, surface, --_- .---- 152 
3a —Proximal articular surface. 

4.—Left radius of Apatornis celer ; proximal portion, superior view, -----.---.--------- 152 

5.—Left radial carpal of Apatornis celer ; anterior view, ----------------------------- 153 


5a —Inner view. 

56 —Posterior view. 
5¢e —Exterior view. 
5d —Superior view. 
5e —Inferior view. 


6.—Left ulnar carpal of Apatornis celer ; anterior view, ...---.----------------------- 154 
6a —Exterior view. 
6b —Posterior view 
6c —Inner view. 
6d —Inferior view. 
6e —Superior view. 


7.—Right humerus of Ichthyornis victor Marsh; inner, or posterior, view, ---.-..-..-... 149 


8.—Right humerus of Jchthyornis tener Marsh; distal portion. Inner, or posterior, view, 149 
8a —Ulnar surface. 
86 —Outer or anterior view. 
8e —Radial surface. 
8d —Distal end. 
9.—Left radius of Zchthyornis victor Marsh; proximal portion, inner view, ----.-------- 151 
9a —lInferior view. z 
96 —Exterior, or ulnar, surface. 
9¢ —Superior view. 
9@ —Proximal end. 


10.—Left radius of Ichthyornis victor ; distal portion, inner, or anterior, view,.------- -- 151 
10a—Inferior view. 
106—Exterior, or ulnar, surface. 
10e—Superior view. 
10d—Distal end. 


11.—Left ulna of Jchihyornis validus ; exterior view, ----------------------.---------- 152 

12.—Left ulna of Ichthyornis validus ; superior view------ .-----------.--- eee 152 
12a—Proximal end. 

13.—Left ulna of Ichthyornis validus ; inner, or radial, surface, ..............---------- 152 

14.—Left ulna of Ichthyornis validus ; inferior view,.---;------- siesele Seeetes =a eee 152 © 


14a—Distal end. 


PLATE XXX. 


iA) 

a 

ie) 

a 

2 

° 

iol 

é ss 
ao eee 
Ss a 
° 
iol 
+ 
a 
rt) 

a 5 ea © ce 2 
o Oo kes o ) 
nu aS Ss 
a s 


aus 


PS RAN asain 


£.Crisand, lith New Haven 


(1S OMe MBSISAONSCNWES) a2 


io, Ae OrNiS: 


* 
i, oes 


PLATE XX <i ae 


ree ASE Ox Xale 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Wing bones of APATORNIS and I[CHTHYORNIS. 


All Figures twice Natural Size, Page. 
Fic. 1.—Right metacarpal of Apatornis celer Marsh; exterior view,--.-.------------------- 154 
la —Distal end. 
Fic. 2.—Right metacarpal of Apatornis celer ; superior, or ulnar, surface, _-.....------------ 154 
Fie 3.—Right metacarpal of Apatornis celer ; inner view, -------------------------------- 154 
3a@ —Proximal end. 
Fic. 4.—Right metacarpal of Apatornis celer ; inferior, or radial, surface, .-....-.-------.--- 154 


Fic. 5.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer; from the right wing, inferior, 
onradial\surfuces, Soste nossa ee eon cea sees eee aa ee 157 
5a —Distal end. 


Fie. 6.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer ; exterior view,-------.------ - 157 


Fic. 7.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer ; superior view,---------.------- 157 
7a —Proximal end. 


Fig. 8.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer ; inner view, -.---------------- 157 


Fic. 9.—Second phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer; from the right wing, inner view, - 158 
9a —Distal end; with outline of proximal end. 


Fic. 10.—Second phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer ; inferior, or radial, surface, ------- 158 
- Fic. 11.—Second phalanx of second digit of Apatornis celer ; exterior view,------------------ 158 
11a—Proximal end, 
Fic. 12.—Right metacarpal of Jchthyornis victor Marsh; exterior view, ---------- ----------- 154 
12a—Distal end. 
Fic. 13.—Right metacarpal of Jchthyornis victor ; superior, or ulnar, surface,.--------------- 154 - 
Fic. 14.—Right metacarpal of Ichthyornis victor ; inner view,------.----------------------- 154 


14a—Proximal end. 
Fie. 15.—Right metacarpal of Ichthyornis victor ; inferior, or radial, surface, -.-------------- 154 


Fie. 16.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Ichthyornis victor ; from the right wing, inferior, 
Oriradial ssuTlaces sac eon Sas eases Sco ee noe ee ee ee eee eee eee eee 156 
16a—Distal end. 


Fie. 17.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Ichthyornis victor ; exterior view, ------------- 156 


Fic. 18.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Ichthyornis victor ; superior, or ulnar, surface, 156 
18a—Proximal end. 


Fic. 19.—Proximal phalanx of second digit of Ichthyornis victor ; inner view, ---.----------. 156 


PLATE 


(oie ul ON TS: 


IZ AO MGrnp ORNS v4 


E.Crisand, lith. New Haven 


ASO ANG 


ty 
- 


1 J 
} 
~ 4 
DF ¢ C v > 
: xy Sui tees S 2 ~ 
ay a ¥ 
Sikes nae 
J 
ia) 
wo *S _ 
rs Pra 
r 
ve 
‘ 
) 
- a 
at x 
. - 
: os 
> - , 
aN > ta 
a \ is eh 
ae vm i ‘ ’ 
he , F uP ie | ‘ 
; Du bal A iY 


= 


IPILvACINI Dd) Px OrOxCI DE, 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Pelvis of APATORNIS and IcHTHYORNIS. 


Twice Natural Size. Page. 


Fig. 1.—Pelvis of Apatornis celer Marsh; lateral view, seen from the right, ......----------.- 164 _ tae 
al —Ilium. re ; 
is —Ischium. 
pb—Pubis. _¢ ; 
af—Acetabular foramen. } ae 
a —Ischio-sciatic interval. ? 
6 —Obturator interval. i 
Fie. 2.—Pelvis of Ichthyornis victor Marsh; superior view, -..---..-------- twice sthd Lee OS 
il —Ilium. , ake 
_ ¢s —Ischium, Va ae 
pb—Pubis. : WS eclees 
s —Sacrum. 1 ese te 
Fig. 3.—Pelvis of Ichthyornis victor ; inferior view,-----.----- Bae Sek eee oe ee LOS 


s —Sacrum restored in part from sacrum of Jehthyornis dispar, (Pl. XXII, fig. 7.) Mad 


PLATE XXXIL 


q 
2 
is 
ipa 
: 
® 
Be 
9 
cS 
a 
QQ 
a=) 
o 
fe 


Ages (CHM AYORNIS:A 


1 APATORNIS, 


PLATE. x XXL 


Fic. 


Fic. 
Fic. 


Fie. 


PLATH XXNXITMII, 
ODONTORNITHES. 


Leg bones of APATORNIS and IcHTHYORNIS. 


All Figures twice Natural Size. Page. 
1.—Right tibia of Apatornis celer Marsh; anterior view. Proximal portion wanting, ---. 173 
2:—Right tibia of Apatornis celer > exterior View, --.------s2---=-2-> === = 2 === ee 173 
ei hicht tibia oteApatonns ccler posterior VieWs) s=se== == se eaeee = eens ene eee 173 
8a —Distal end. 
4-——Right tibia of Apatornis celer|s inner VieW,------ -------=-=5-=-9=> 2 e5= see ones 173 
5.—Right fibula of Apatornis celer ; posterior view,-~-------- SERIE CCE BSS sedsecosncSHes 174 
6.—Right tibia of Ichthyornis victor Marsh; anterior view, =.--=-+--=-<--+------------- 172 
7.—Right tibia of Ichthyornis victor; posterior View,--------------------------~----- 172 
8.—Phalanx of Ichthyornis victor» superior View, ------------=-- 2-2 ---- 22-+ 05 = 2oe= 176 
8a —Proximal end. 
86 —Lateral view. 
8¢ —Inferior view. 
8d —Lateral view. 
8e —Distal end; with outline of proximal end. 
9.—Right tarso-metatarsal of Ichthyornis victor ; anterior view,----.------------------ 174 
9a —Distal end. 
10.—Right tarso-metatarsal of Ichthyornis victor ; exterior view,----------------------. 174 
11.—Right tarso-metatarsal of Ichthyornis victor ; posterior view,---------------------- 174 
1Ja—Proximal end. 
12.—Right tarso-metatarsal of Ichthyornis victor ; inner View, --------------------.---- 174 


by 


11 


1S 6) AIO NSONUNS), Rule) IG MSN ORCINUS), SAL. 


PLATE XXXil 


E.Crisand, lith New Haven. 


IRI ANID ID, DOZORIDY 


ODONTORNITHES. 


Restoration of ICHTHYORNIS victor Marsh. 


Page. 
Watural Size. 


In the restoration of this species, the shaded portions represent the parts preserved of the type 
specimen, (No. 1452, Yale College Museum), as well as of other individuals from the same region, and 


the same geological horizon. The portions in outline are taken in part from the type of Zchthyornis 
dispar, (Plate XXVI), and completed from the skeleton of a Tern, (Sterna regia Gambel) ......... 177 


LOTTE ORNS VWiem@iRe Marein 


w 


oy 


a) 


. 


ne 


om 


. 


CaP Viieh Sahat 8 


SMITHSONIAN INSTITUTION LIBRARIES 


A 


| 
|
