[From  the  American  Jodhnal  of  Science,  Vol.  I,  June,  1896.] 

ON  THE  PITHECANTHROPUS  ERECTUS,  FROM 
THE  TERTIARY  OP  JAVA. 

By  O.  C.  Marsh. 


WITH  ONE  PLATE. 


J 


On  the  PiTHECANTHEOPU?  EiiECTUs',  fvom  the  Tertiary  of 
Java;  by  O.  C.  Marsh.*  (Wi'tli  Plate  XIII.) 

Near  the  beginning  of  last  year^  a  discovery  was  announced 
that  excited  great  interest  throughout  the  scientific  world,  espe- 
cially among  those  interested  in  the  origin  and  antiquity  of 
man.  The  announcement  first  made  was  that  remains  of  a 
veritable  missing  link  between  man  and  the  higher  apes  had 
been  found  in  Java,  in  strata  of  Pleistocene  age.  The  dis- 
covery was  made  by  Dr.  Eugene  Dubois,  a  surgeon  in  the 
Dutch  army,  who  had  been  stationed  in  Java  for  several  years, 
and  had  devoted  much  time  to  the  vertebrate  fossils  of  that 
island. 

The  first  definite  information  received  in  this  country  was  in 
December,  1894,  when  Dubois's  memoir  on  Pithecanthropus 
arrived.f  One  of  the  first  copies  reached  the  late  Professor 
Dana  just  as  he  was  printing  the  last  pages  of  his  great  work 
on  geology.  He  at  once  wrote  to  me  in  Washington,  asking  me 
to  look  up  the  memoir,  and  telegraph  my  opinion  of  the  dis- 
covery, so  that  he  could  refer  to  it  in  his  book.  On  inquiry,  I 
ascertained  that  this  memoir  had  not  then  been  received  at  any 
of  the  scientific  centers  in  "Washington,  and  that  the  discovery 
itself  was  not  known.  On  returning  to  New  Haven,  I  found  a 
copy  of  the  memoir  awaiting  me  (received  December  29, 1894), 
and  at  Professor  Dana's  request,  I  wrote  a  review  of  it,  which 
appeared,  with  illustrations,  in  this  Journal  for  February,  1895. :{: 

The  memoir  of  Dr.  Dubois  was  an  admirable  one,  and, 
although  written  in  Java,  with  only  limited  facilities  for  con- 
sulting the  literature  on  the  subject  aud  for  comparing  the 
remains  described  with  living  and  extinct  forms  to  which  they 
were  related,  the  author  showed  himself  to  be  an  anatomist  of 
more  than  usual  attainments,  and  fully  qualified  to  record  the 
important  discovery  he  had  made.  In  my  review,  therefore, 
of  this  important  memoir,  I  endeavored  to  state  fairly  the 
essential  facts  of  the  discovery,  as  well  as  the  main  results 
reached  by  Dr.  Dubois  after  a  careful  study  of  the  remains. 

*  Abstract  of  communication  made  to  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
Washington,  April  24,  1896. 

\  Pitliecanlhropm  erectus.  Eine  mpnschonaohnliche  Uebergangsform  aus  Java. 
Von  Eng.  Dubois,  Militairarzt  der  niederlaendiscii-indischeu  Arraee.  Mit  zwei 
Tafeln  und  drei  in  deu  Text  gcdriicl<ten  Figurcn.    4to,  Batavia,  189-1. 

X  The  Ogiiros  (lipn  irivon  in  Plate  11  nro  repeated  in  the  plate  accompanying  the 
present  article. 


47fi 

My  own  conclusions  in  regard  to  this  discovery,  briefly  stated 
in  my  review,  were  as  follows : — 

"It  is  only  justice  to  Dr.  Dubois  and  his  admirable  memoir 
to  say  here,  that  he  has  proved  to  science  the  existence  of  a 
new  prehistoric  anthropoid  form,  not  human  indeed,  but  in 
size,  brain  power,  and  erect  posture,  much  nearer  man  than  any 

animal  hitherto  discovered,  living  or  extinct  

Whatever  light  future  researches  may  throw  upon  the  affinities 
of  this  new  form  that  left  its  remains  in  the  volcanic  deposits 
of  Java  during  later  Tertiary  time,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that 
the  discovery  itself  is  an  event  equal  in  interest  to  that  of  the 
Neanderthal  skull. 

"  The  man  of  the  Neander  valley  remained  without  honor, 
even  in  his  own  counti'y,  for  more  than  a  quarter  of  a  century, 
and  was  still  doubted  and  reviled  when  his  kinsmen,  the  men 
of  Spy,  came  to  his  defense,  and  a  new  chapter  was  added  to 
the  early  history  of  the  human  race.  The  ape-man  of  Java 
comes  to  light  at  a  more  fortunate  time,  when  zeal  for  explora- 
tion is  so  great  that  the  discovery  of  additional  remains  may  be 
expected  at  no  distant  day.  That  still  other  intermediate 
forms  will  eventually  be  brought  to  light  no  one  familiar  with 
the  subject  can  doubt." 

In  most  scientific  quarters,  however,  both  in  this  country 
and  in  Europe,  Dr.  Dubois's  discovery  was  not  received  with 
great  favor,  and  the  facts  and  conclusions  stated  in  his 
memoir  were  much  criticised.  Among  a  score  or  more  of 
notices  of  this  elaborate  memoir  which  appeared  subsequent  to 
my  review,  I  do  not  recall  a  single  one  that,  in  attempting  to 
weigh  the  evidence  presented,  admitted  the  full  importance  of 
the  discovery  made  by  Dr.  Dubois.  The  early  conclusions 
seemed  to  be  that  the  various  remains  discovered  were  human, 
and  of  no  great  age;  that  they  did  not  belong  to  the  same 
individual ;  that  the  skull  apparently  pertained  to  an  idiot ; 
and  that  both  the  skull  and  femur  showed  pathological 
features.  In  fact,  the  old  story  of  the  distrust  ai'oused  by 
the  discovery  of  the  Neanderthal  skull,  nearly  forty  yeai-s 
before,  was  repeated,  although  in  a  milder  form.  Dr.  Dubois 
has  stated  in  a  late  memoir  that,  with  the  exception  of 
Professor  Manouvrier  of  Paris  and  myself,  no  one  else,  until 
very  recently,  regarded  the  remains  as  evidence  of  a  transi- 
tional form  between  man  and  the  apes. 

It  was  a  fortunate  thing  for  science  that  the  Dutch  govern- 
ment appreciated  the  importance  of  the  discovery  made  in  its 
Javanese  province  by  Dr.  Dubois,  and  last  summer  allowed 
him  to  return  to  Holland  and  bring  with  him  the  precious 
remains  he  had  found,  and  so  well  described.    Not  only  this, 


477 


but  he  was  also  permitted  to  bring  the  extensive  collections  of 
other  vertebrate  fossils  which  he  had  secured  from  the  same 
horizon  and  in  the  same  locality  where  the  PitheGantkropiis 
was  discovered.  All  these  were  shown  at  the  International 
Congress  of  Zoologists,  held  at  Leyden,  in  September  last,  and 
on  the  21st  of  that  month,  Dr.  Dubois  read  an  elaborate  paper 
on  his  original  discovery  and  on  his  later  explorations  in  the 
same  region.  This  communication  was  in  many  respects  the 
most  important  one  of  the  session,  and  its  presentation  with 
the  specimens  themselves  was  a  rare  treat  to  the  large  audience 
present,  especially  to  those  fitted  to  appreciate  the  evidence 
laid  before  them.* 

Professor  Virchow  of  Berlin  was  president  of  the  meeting 
on  that  day,  and  had  brought  many  specimens  to  illustrate  the 
remarks  he  was  to  make  in  the  discussion.  The  famous  Leyden 
museum  was  also  drawn  upon  for  an  extensive  series  of  speci- 
mens of  man  and  the  higher  apes,  so  that,  if  possible,  the  true 
position  of  Pithecanthropus  might  then  be  determined  once 
for  all.  Dr.  Dubois,  moreover,  kindly  invited  Professor 
Yirchow,  Sir  William  Flower,  and  myself,  to  come  an  hour 
before  the  meeting,  and  personally  examine  the  remains  he  was 
to  discuss,  and  this  invitation  was  most  gladly  accepted. 

The  first  sight  of  the  fossils  was  a  surprise,  as  they  were 
evidently  much  older  than  appeared  from  the  descriptions.  All 
were  dark  in  color,  thoroughly  petrified,  and  the  matrix  was 
solid  rock,  difiicult  to  remove.  The  skull-cap  of  Pithecanthro- 
'pxis  was  filled  with  the  hard  matrix,  firmly  cemented  to  it. 
The  roughness  of  the  superior  surface,  especially  in  the  frontal 
region,  was  apparently  due  to  corrosion  after  entombment,  and 
not  to  disease,  as  had  been  suggested  by  some  anatomists.  The 
femur  was  free  from  matrix,  but  very  heavy  in  consequence  of 
the  infiltration  of  mineral  matter.  The  exostosis  on  its  upper 
portion  is  a  conspicuous  feature,  but  of  course  is  pathological. 
This  feature  is  of  little  consequence,  as  very  similar  outgrowths 
occur  on  fossil  bones  of  even  Eocene  age.  The  two  teeth 
showed  no  characters  that  indicated  their  interment  under  cir- 
cumstances different  from  that  of  the  skull  or  femur.  All  the 
physical  characters  impressed  me  strongly  with  the  idea  that 
these  various  remains  were  of  Pliocene  age,  and  not  Post- 
Tertiary,  as  had  been  supposed.  The  description  of  the  local- 
ity and  the  account  of  the  series  of  strata  there  exposed,  as 
given  by  Dr.  Dubois  in  his  communication,  confirmed  this 
opinion,  and  a  later  examination  of  accompanying  vertebrate 
fossils  placed  the  Pliocene  age  of  all  beyond  reasonable  doubt. 

*  Gornpte-Rendii  des  Seances  du  Troisieme  Congres  Intornational  de  Zoologie, 
Leyden,  Seplenabor,  1895,  pp.  251-27 1,  1 896.  See  also  Transactions  Royal  Dublin 
Society,  vol.  vi,  pp.  1-18,  February,  1896;  and  Anatomischer  Anzeiger,  Bd.  xii, 
pp.  1-22,  189G. 


4Y8 


The  facts  relating  to  the  discovery  itself,  and  the  position  in 
which  the  remains  were  found,  as  stated  by  Dr.  Dubois  in  his 
paper,  together  with  some  additional  details  given  to  me  per- 
sonally, convinced  me  that,  in  all  probability,  the  various 
remains  attributed  to  Pithecaiithropus  pertained  to  one  indi- 
vidual. Under  the  circumstances,  no  paleontologist  who  has 
had  experience  in  collecting  vertebrate  fossils  would  hesitate 
to  place  them  together. 

In  figure  1,  below,  a  geological  section  is  given,  showing  the 
series  of  strata  exposed  in  the  bank  of  the  river  Bengavvan, 
near  Trinil,  in  central  Java,  where  all  the  remains  of  Pithe- 
canthropus were  found.  The  exact  positions  of  these  various 
specimens  when  discovered  are  also  indicated. 


1. 


Figure  1.— Section  of  the  bone  strata  at  Trinil.    (After  Dubois.) 

A,  vegetable  soil ;  B,  sand-rock  ;  C,  bed  of  lapilli-rock  ;  D,  level  in  which 
the  four  remains  were  found ;  E,  conglomerate  ;  F,  clay-rock  ;  G,  marine 
breccia ;  H,  rainy  season  level  of  river ;  I,  dry  season  level  of  river. 

The  above  section,  taken  from  Dr.  Dubois's  Dublin  paper, 
makes  clear  many  points  as  to  the  locality  where  the  discoveries 
were  made,  which  were  left  doubtful  in  the  original  memoir. 


479 


The  three  specimens  originally  described,  the  tooth,  the  skull, 
and  the  feuuir,  were  found  at  different  times  in  the  same 
horizon,  all  imbedded  in  the  same  volcanic  tufa,  as  indicated  in 
figure  1,  D.  The  tooth  was  found  first,  in  September,  1891, 
in  the  left  bank  of  the  river,  about  a  meter  below  the  water 
level  during  the  dry  season,  and  twelve  or  fifteen  meters  below 
the  plain  in  which  the  river  had  cut  its  bed.  A  month  later, 
the  skull  was  discovered,  only  a  meter  distant  from  the  place 
where  the  tooth  lay.  In  August,  1892,  the  femur  also  was 
found,  about  fifteen  meters  distant  from  the  locality  where  the 
other  specimens  were  imbedded.  Later,  in  October  of  the 
same  year,  a  second  molar  was  obtained  at  a  distance  of  not 
more  than  three  meters  from  where  the  skull-cap  was  found, 
and  in  the  direction  of  the  place  where  the  femur  was  dug  out. 

The  fossils  thus  secured  were  all  carefully  investigated  by 
Dr.  Dubois,  who  regards  them  as  representing  a  distinct  species 
and  genus,  and  also  a  new  family,  which  he  has  named  the 
PithecanthropidcB,  and  distinguished  mainly  by  the  following 
characters : 

Brain  cavity  absolutely  larger,  and,  in  proportion  to  the  size 
of  the  body,  much  more  capacious  than  in  t\ie  SimiidoByjet 
less  so  than  in  the  Hominidai.  Capacity  of  the  skull  about 
two-thirds  the  average  of  that  of  man.  Inclination  of  the 
nuchal  surface  of  the  occiput  considerably  greater  than  in  the 
SimiidcB.  Dentition,  although  retrogressive,  still  of  the  simian 
type.  Femur  equal  in  its  dimensions  to  that  of  man,  and  like 
that  adapted  for  walking  in  an  upright  position. 

Of  this  skull,  the  upper  portion  alone  is  preserved,  the  line 
of  fracture  extending  from  the  glabella  backward  irregularly 
to  the  occiput,  which  it  divides  somewhat  below  the  upper 
nuchal  line.  The  cranium  seen  from  above  is  an  elongated 
oval  in  outline,  dolichocephalic  ;  and  is  distinguished  from  that 
of  other  anthropoid  apes  by  its  large  size  and  its  higher  arching 
in  the  coronal  region,  as  shown  below  in  figure  3.  The  greatest 
length  from  the  glabella  to  the  posterior  projection  of  the 
occiput  is  185™'".  The  greatest  breadth  is  130""",  and  the 
smallest,  behind  the  orbit,  is  90""".  The  cranium  in  its  original 
condition  must  have  been  of  somewhat  larger  dimensions. 
The  upper  surface  of  the  skull  is  without  ridges,  and  the 
sutures  all  appear  to  be  obliterated. 

This  dolicocephalic  skull,  with  an  index  of  70°,  is  readily 
distinguislied  from  that  of  the  Orang-utan,  which  is  decidedly 
brachycephalic.  The  absence  of  the  characteristic  c.  anial  crests 
will  separate  it  from  the  skull  of  the  adult  Gorilla.  In  its 
smooth  upper  surface  and  general  form,  it  shows  a  resemblance 
to  the  skull  of  the  Chimpanzee,  and  still  closer  to  that  of  the 
Gibbons  {Ilylohates). 


480 


A  figure  of  the  present  specimen  and  the  skull  of  a  Gibbon 
for  comparison  are  shown  in  figure  2,  Plate  XIII.  These 
figures  and  those  that  follow  are  reproduced  from  illustrations 
in  Dr.  Dubois's  memoirs. 

In  comparing  the  cranium  of  Pithecanthropus  with  skulls 
most  nearly  allied,  both  human  and  simian,  the  outlines  given- 
in  figure  3,  below,  will  prove  especially  instructive.  The  basis 
of  this  cut  is  the  figure  given  by  Dr.  Dubois  in  his  Leyden 
paper.  Tliis  I  have  modified  by  omitting  the  outline  of  the 
microcephalic  idiot,  and  substituting  that  of  the  well-known 
Neanderthal  skull.* 

3. 


Figure  3. — Profile  outline  of  the  skull  of  Pithecanthropus  (Pe),  compared 
■with  those  of  a  Papuan  man,  the  man  of  Spy  No.  1,  Neanderthal  man 
(Nt),  man  of  Spy  No.  2,  and  Hijlobates  laiciscus  (HI)'  Sevmopilhecits 
maurus  (Sni),  and  Anthropopithecus  troglodytes  {At).  (Modified  from  a 
figure  by  Dubois.) 

Gl,  glabella ;  Op,  opisthion ;  Jn,  linea  michiw  superior  ;  Ln  i,  liuea 
nuchffi  inferior. 

Dr.  Dubois's  conception  of  the  skull  of  Pithecanthropus, 
when  entire,  is  indicated  by  his  attempted  restoration  shown  in 
figure  6,  on  page  481.  Future  discoveries  must  determine  the 
accuracy  of  this  restoration. 

*  In  presenting  the  present  paper  before  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
Washington,  I  was  fortunately  able  to  exhibit  a  cast  of  the  FUhecanthroprts  skull, 
recently  sent  to  me  by  Dr.  Dubois,  and  also  to  compare  this  with  a  cast  of  the 
Neanderthal  skull.    The  latter  was  not  available  during  the  discussion  at  Leyden. 


481 


The  tootli,  the  first  specimen  found,  is  represented  in  figure 
4,  below.  It  is  the  last  upper  molar  of  the  right  side,  and  is  in 
good  preservation.  It  indicates  a  fully  adult,  but  not  very  old, 
animal.  The  crown  is  subtriangular  in  form,  with  the  corners 
rounded,  and  the  narrowest  portion  behind.  The  antero- 
posterior diameter  of  the  crown  is  11*3™"',  and  the  transverse 
diameter  15"3"'".  The  grinding  surface  of  the  crown  is  con- 
cave, and  less  rugose  than  in  existing  anthropoid  apes.  The 
diverging  roots  are  a  simian  feature. 


4. 

a.  b. 


Figure  4. — Third  right  npxjer  molar  of  Pithecanthrojms  erectus.  Two-thirds 
natural  size.    (After  Dubois.) 
a,  back  view  ;  6,  top  view. 

6. 


c 


Figure  6. — Restoration  of  the  skull  of  Pithecanthropus  erectus.  Two-fifths 
natural  size.    (Reduced  from  a  figure  by  Diibois.) 

c,  sutura  coronalis  ;  l,  sutura  lamboidea  ;  o,  foramen  occipitale. 

The  femur,  which  is  from  the  left  side,  is  in  fair  preserva- 
tion, although  it  was  somewhat  injured  in  removing  it  from 
the  surrounding  rock.  It  belonged  to  a  fully  adult  individual. 
In  form  and  dimensions,  it  resembles  so  strongly  a  human 
femur  that  only  a  careful  comparison  would  distinguish  one 


482 


from  the  other.  Tlie  bone  is  very  long,  its  greatest  length 
being  455""",  The  shaft  is  slender  and  nearly  straight.  The 
general  form  and  proportions  of  this  femur  are  shown  in  figure 
5,  Plate  XIII,  with  a  human  femur  for  comparison. 

These  various  remains  of  Pithecanthroims  were  again 
described  in  detail  and  compared  with  allied  forms  by  Dr. 
Dujbois  in  his  paper  at  Leyden,  and  in  the  discussion  that  fol- 
lowed, the  whole  subject  was  once  more  gone  over  by  anthro- 
pologists, zoologists,  and  geologists,  in  a  most  thorough  and 
judicial  manner.  To  attempt  to  weigh  impartially  the  evidence 
as  to  the  nature  of  Pithecanthropus,  presented  by  Dr.  Dul)ois 
in  his  paper  and  by  those  who  took  part  in  the  critical  discus- 
sion that  followed  its  reading,  would  lead  far  beyond  the  limits 
of  the  present  communication.  I  can  only  say  that  this 
evidence  was  strongly  in  favor  of  the  view  that  the  skull  of 
Pithecanthropus  is  not  human,  as  the  orbital  and  nuchal 
regions  show,  while  at  the  same  time  it  indicates  an  animal  much 
above  any  anthropoid  ape  now  known,  living  or  extinct. 
Opinions  differed  as  to  whether  the  various  remains  pertained 
to  the  same  individual,  but  no  one  doubted  their  importance. 

The  varied  oj)inions  expressed  in  regard  to  the  anatomical 
characters  of  each  of  the  specimens  have  already  been  pub- 
lished, and  need  not  be  repeated  here.  Dr.  Dubois,  in  his 
papers  above  cited,  has  met  all  the  principal  objections  made 
to  his  views  since  he  announced  his  discovery.  lie  has  also 
given  full  references  to  the  literature,  which  promises  to  be 
voluminous  as  the  importance  of  the  subject  becomes  better 
known.  Among  the  authorities  thus  cited  may  be  mentioned 
Cunningham,  Iveith,  Lydekker,  Turner  ;  Manouvrier,  Pettit, 
Topinard,  Yerneau ;  Haeckel,  Krause,  Martin,  Ten  Kate,  and 
Virchow,  who  have  all  taken  part  in  the  discussion. 

After  a  careful  study  of  all  the  Pitliecanthropus  remains  and 
of  the  evidence  presented  as  to  the  original  discovery,  the 
position  in  which  the  remains  were  found,  and  the  associated 
fossils,  my  own  conclusions  may  be  briefly  stated,  as  follows : 

(1)  The  remains  of  Pithecanthropus  at  present  known  are 
of  Pliocene  age,  and  the  associated  vertebrate  fauna  resembles 
that  of  the  Siwalik  Hills  of  India. 

(2)  The  various  specimens  of  Pithecanthropus  apparently 
belonged  to  one  individual. 

(3)  This  individual  was  not  human,  but  represented  a  form 
intermediate  between  man  and  the  higher  apes. 

If  it  be  true,  as  some  have  contended,  that  the  different 
remains  had  no  connection  with  each  other,  this  simply  proves 
that  Dr.  Dubois  has  made  several  important  discoveries  instead 
of  one.  All  the  remains  are  certainly  anthropoid,  and  if  any 
of  them  are  human,  the  antiquity  of  man  extends  back  into  the 
Tertiary,  and  his  affinities  with  the  higher  apes  become  much 
nearer  than  has  hitherto  been  supposed.  One  thing  is  certain : 
the  discovery  of  Pithecanthropus  is  an  event  of  tlie  first 
importance  to  the  scientific  world. 


Figure  5. — P.  Left  femur  of  PithecanthropuB  erectus,  f . 
H.  Left  femur  of  man,  J.  (After  Dubois.) 

a,  front  view;  h,  exterior  view.
