================================================================================
Epigrams, Vol. II (Books 8-14)
Martial | With an English translation by Walter C. A. Ker (Loeb Classical Library, 1920)
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Internet Archive: Loeb Classical Library, Martial Epigrams vol. 2 (1920)
Source URL: https://archive.org/details/martialepigrams0000walt
Rights: Public Domain (U.S.)
Staged: 2026-10-09 | Tower of Babel Library, Batch 09a (classical-literature lane)
================================================================================

THE LOEB CLASSICAL LIBRARY


FOUNDED BY JAMES LOEB, LL.D.


EDITED BY
7 T. E. PAGH, o.8., LITT.p.
E. CAPPS, PH.D., LL.D. W. H. D. ROUSE, rrrvt.v.


L. A. POST, m.a. E. H. WARMINGTON,
M.A., F.R.HIST.SOC.


MARTIAL
EPIGRAMS
II


<a ©!


Sood


a
or
ae


é pa Ga a
iS ae


a ee


=


it oe Saag


€


=


=


A - ra 7
re C299 * it wigs


MARTIAL


EPIGRAMS


WITH AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION BY
WALTER C. A. KER, M.A.


SOMETIME SCHOLAR OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE
OF THE INNER TEMPLE, BARRISTER-AT-LAW


IN TWO VOLUMES
II


CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS
HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS
LONDON
WILLIAM HEINEMANN LTD
MOML


First printed 1920. Reprinted 1927, 1930, 1950


Printed in Great Britain


CONTENTS


PAGE


JAOOIS WRI | Ae Danae ie eres arPorn Gann) yr pere en Smear ih er i
OEM GEA sake cn eloclisv co Nea crop R ecole ae lebron erie 67
OMENS eesti seer Papas cur way en bipuen ren sts a lisl cased TPO
TROIS OF the oie "hy Re en tact ee me or a an ea a 19)
BROOKE here MF oe ey. ey s.. Sc nee: Se notte ew Le ye Pe OLD
OO RePkMeeean enor ct celstay oly giver, te isu se Soren ese lar OOe
eran ey ee eS es gag
EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL . .... +... O19
INDEX OF PROPER NAMES . «sw ee eee wees 535


PDEA OF FIRST LINES: sce gh ics cs ce vee een ote ae, (O40


THE
EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


M. VALERI MARTIALIS
EPIGRAMMATON


LIBER OCTAVUS


Imperatorr DomiTiANo Cagsart AuGusto GERMANICO
Dacico Vaterius Martiatis S.

Omnes quidem libelli mei, domine, quibus tu famam,
id est vitam, dedisti, tibi supplicant; et, puto propter
hoc legentur. hic tamen, qui operis nostri octavus in-
scribitur, occasione pietatis frequentius fruitur ; minus
itaque ingenio laborandum fuit, in cuius locum mate-
ria successerat: quam quidem subinde aliqua iocorum
mixtura variare temptavimus, ne caelesti verecundiae
tuae laudes suas, quae facilius te fatigare possint
quam nos satiare, omnis versus ingereret. quamvis
autem epigrammata a severissimis quoque et summae
fortunae viris ita scripta sint ut mimicam verborum
licentiam adfectasse videantur, ego tamen illis non
permisi tam lascive loqui quam solent. cum pars
libri et maior et melior ad maiestatem sacri nominis
tui alligata sit, meminerit non nisi religiosa pmrifica-
tione lustratos accedere ad templa debere. quod


1 This book appears by internal evidence to have been
published towards the end of a.p. 93. The epigrams are
not, however, in chronological order.


2


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL
BOOK VII 3


To tHe Emperor Domitianus, Carsar, Aucustus,
Conqueror oF Germany and Dacta, Vacertius
MartTIALIs SENDS GREETING


Or a truth all my little books, Sire, to which you
have given fame, that is, life, are your suppliants,
and I think will, for this reason, be read. This one,
however, which is marked the eighth of my works,
enjoys more frequently the opportunity of showing
loyalty. Accordingly I had less occasion for the
labour of invention, for which the subject-matter
formed a substitute; that, however, I have here and
there attempted to diversify by some intermixture
of pleasantry, so that every verse should not heap
upon your divine modesty its meed of praise which
would more easily weary you than satiate me. And
although epigrams have been written in such a style,
even by men the most austere and of the highest
position, as apparently to have aimed at the verbal
licence of mimes, yet I have not allowed these to
speak with their usual playfulness. As part of my
book—and that the greater and better—is attached
to the Majesty of your sacred name, it should re-
member that it is unfitting to approach the temple
save cleansed by religious purification. That readers

2 An allusion to the Emperor’s assumption of deity: of
VII. ii. 6.

3


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ut custoditurum me lecturi sciant, in ipso libelli
huius limine profiteri brevissimo placuit epigram-
mate.


I


Lauriceros domini, liber, intrature penates
disce verecundo sanctius ore loqui.

nuda recede Venus; non est tuus iste libellus:
tu mihi, tu Pallas Caesariana, veni.


II


FastoruM genitor parensque Janus

victorem modo cum videret Histri,

tot vultus sibi non satis putavit

optavitque oculos habere ptures,

et lingua pariter locutus omni 5
terrarum domino deoque rerum

promisit Pyliam quater senectam.

addas, Jane pater, tuam rogamus.


III


“ QuinguE satis fuerant: nam sex septemve libelli
est nimium: quid adhuc ludere, Musa, iuvat?

sit pudor et finis: iam plus nihil addere nobis
fama potest: teritur noster ubique liber ;

et cum rupta situ Messallae saxa iacebunt 5
altaque cum Licini marmora pulvis erunt,


1 Because of the Emperor’s recent victories on the Danube.

* The god Janus presided over the year and the publia
records. He was represented with two faces turned in op-
posite ways, 7.e. towards the past and the future; or with
four to represent the four seasons.


4


BOOK VIII. 1m


may know I shall regard this obligation, I have déter-
mined to make my profession on the very threshold
of this little book by a very brief epigram.


I


Tuov, my book, who art purposed to enter my
Master’s laurel-wreathed! abode, learn to speak more
reverently in modest speech. Undraped Venus, stand
back: this little book is not thine; do thou come
to me, thou, Pallas, patron of Caesar.


II


When Janus, begetter and parent of our annals,?
of late saw Hister’s conqueror, he deemed his many
faces were not enough for him, and wished to possess
more eyes; and, speaking alike with every tongue,
he promised the Lord of Earth and God of the
Universe a Pylian old age*® four times over. Add,
Father Janus, we entreat, your own.


III


“ Five were suficient; for six or seven books are
too much: why do you want, Muse, to frolic still?
Let there be some stint and an end: now nothing
more can Fame give me; my book is thumbed every-
where ; and when Messalla’s* pavements shall lie
shivered by decay, and Licinus’® towering marble


3 Nestor’s.

4M. Valerius Messalla Corvinus, the patron of Tibullus :
cf. X. ii. 9. He repaired the Via Latina: of. Tib. 1. vii. 57.
Or “‘ saxa”’ may perhaps refer to his tomb.

5 A rich freedman of Augustus (cf. Juv. i. 109), who had
a magnificent tomb,


5


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


me tamen ora legent et secum plurimus hospes
ad patrias sedes carmina nostra feret.”’
finieram, cum sic respondit nona sororum,
cui coma et unguento sordida vestis erat : 10
“Tune potes dulcis, ingrate, relinquere nugas ?
dic mihi, quid melius desidiosus ages ?
an iuvat ad tragicos soccum transferre coturnos
aspera vel paribus bella tonare modis,
praelegat ut tumidus rauca te voce magister, 15
oderit et grandis virgo bonusque puer?
scribant ista graves nimium nimiumque severi,
quos media miseros nocte lucerna videt.
at tu Romanos lepido sale tingue libellos:
adgnoscat mores vita legatque suos. 20
angusta cantare licet videaris avena,
dum tua multorum vincat avena tubas.””


IV


Quantus, io, Latias mundi conventus ad aras
suscipit et solvit pro duce vota suo!

non sunt haec hominum, Germanice, gaudia tantum,
sed faciunt ipsi nunc, puto, sacra dei.


Vv


Dum donas, Macer, anulos puellis,
desisti, Macer, anulos habere.


1 Thalia, the Muse of epigram. 2 Hexameters.
* For Jan. 3, the day when vows were publicly offered for
the Emperor (votorum nuncupatio: ¢f. Suet. Ner. xlvi.).


6


BOOK VIII. m-v


shall be dust, yet me shall lips read, and many
a sojourner shall carry my poems with him to his
fatherland.” I ended; when thus replied the ninth
of the Sisters,! her hair and vesture stained with
unguent: “Can you, ungrateful man, resign your
pleasant trifles? Tell me, what better thing when
idle will you do? Wish you to adapt your comic shoe
to the tragic buskin, or in even-footed measures? to
thunder of rough wars, that a pompous pedagogue
may dictate you in hoarse tones, and tall girl and
honest boy hate you? Let those themes be written
by men grave overmuch, and overmuch austere, whom
at midnight their lamp marks at their wretched toil.
But do you dip your little Roman books in sprightly
wit; let Life recognize and read of her own man-
ners. To a thin pipe you may appear to sing, if only
your pipe outblow the trump of many.”


IV


Ho! How great a concourse of the world at Latin
altars makes and pays their vows? for their Chief!
These are not the joys of men only, Germanicus:
nay, the very gods now, I ween, offer sacrifice.


Vv


Wuite you give rings to girls, Macer, you have
ceased, Macer, to possess rings yourself.*


4 7.e. you have lost your qualification as a knight: of.
Juv. xi. 43. The ius anulorum (right to wear a gold ring)
was possessed by senators, knights, and magistrates.


7


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


VI


Arcuetypis vetuli nihil est odiosius Aucti
(ficta Saguntino cymbia malo luto),
argenti furiosa sui cum stemmata narrat
garrulus et verbis mucida vina facit :
«‘Laomedonteae fuerant haec pocula mensae: 5
ferret ut haec, muros struxit Apollo lyra.
hoc cratere ferox commisit proelia Rhoetus
cum Lapithis: pugna debile cernis opus.
hi duo longaevo censentur Nestore fundi:
pollice de Pylio trita columba nitet. 10
hic scyphus est in quo misceri iussit amicis
largius Aeacides vividiusque merum.
hac propinavit Bitiae pulcherrima Dido
in patera, Phrygio cum data cena viro est.”
miratus fueris cum prisca toreumata multum, 15
in Priami calathis Astyanacta bibes.


Vil


Hoc agere est causas, hoc dicere, Cinna, diserte,
horis, Cinna, decem dicere verba novem ?

sed modo clepsydras ingenti voce petisti
quattuor. o quantum, Cinna, tacere potes!


Vill


Princirium des, Iane, licet velocibus annis
et renoves voltu saecula longa tuo,


1 In the battle between the Lapithae and the Centaurs.
? Achilles; ef Hom. Il. ix. 203.


8


BOOK VIII. vi-vin


VI


Tuan old Auctus’ antiques nothing is more odious—I
prefer drinking vessels moulded from Saguntine clay
—when he prates of the crazy pedigrees of his silver
plate, and by his chattering makes the wine vapid.
“These are cups that once belonged to Laomedon’s
table: towin these Apollo by his harp-playing built the
walls of Troy. With this mixing-bow]l fierce Rhoetus
joined battle with the Lapithae:! you see the work-
manship is dinted by the fight. These two goblets
are valuable because of aged Nestor: the dove is
burnished by the rubbing of the Pylian thumb, This
is the tankard in which the grandson of Aeacus?
ordered a fuller draught and stronger wine be mixed
for his friends. In this bowl most beautiful Dido
pledged Bitias when her banquet was given to the
Phrygian hero.”’? When you have much admired
these ancient chasings, in Priam’s cups you will
drink Astyanax.*


VII


Is this your pleading of causes, is this eloquence,
Cinna, in ten hours, Cinna, to say nine words? And
just now in loud tones you asked for four water-
clocks!’ Oh, what store of silence, Cinna, you
possess !


Vill


A.seiT thou, Janus, givest their beginning to the
flying years, and dost with thy visage renew the

3 Aeneas: cf. Verg. Aen. i. 738.

4 ¢.e. something very young and immature. Astyanax was
the grandson of Priam. PECi ee VIER XX Ven le


9


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


te primum pia tura rogent, te vota salutent,
purpura te felix, te colat omnis honos:
tu tamen hoc mavis, Latiae quod contigit urbi


mense tuo reducem, Iane, videre deum.


IX


SotverE dodrantem nuper tibi, Quinte, volebat
lippus Hylas, luscus vult dare dimidium.
accipe quam primum ; brevis est occasio lucri:


si fuerit caecus, nil tibi solvet Hylas.


x


Emit lacernas milibus decem Bassus
Tyrias coloris optimi. lucrifecit.
“ Adeo bene emit?”’ inquis. immo non solvet,


XI


PerveENnissé tuam iam te scit Rhenus in urbem:;
nam populi voces audit et ille tui:

Sarmaticas etiam gentes Histrumque Getasque
laetitiae clamor terruit ipse novae.

dum te longa sacro venerantur gaudia Circo,
nemo quater missos currere sensit equos.

nullum Roma ducem, nec te sic, Caesar, amavit :
te quoque iam non plus, ut velit ipsa, potest.

TO


BOOK VIII.: vii—x1


long ages, albeit pious incense invokes thee, prayers
salute thee first, to thee the consul’s joyous purple,
to thee every magistrate pays court, yet this thou
countest more—it has been thy fortune, Janus, in
thine own month to see our god! returning home!


IX


Hytas, when blear-eyed, Quintus, was willing lately
to pay you three-quarters of his debt; now he is one-
eyed he is willing to give half. Take it at once:
brief is the opportunity for gain; if he become
blind, Hylas won’t pay you a penny.


x
Bassus has bought a cloak for ten thousand ses-
terces, a Tyrian of the best colour. He has made


a bargain. “ Did he buy so cheap?”’ you ask. Aye,
he is not going to pay.


XI


Tuat thou hast come to thy city Rhine knows
already, for he too hears the voices of thy people:
Sarmatian tribes as well, and Hister and the Getae,
the very shout of our new-found gladness has af-
feared. While in the sacred Circus applause long
sustained revered thee, no man perceived the steeds
had four times been started. No chief has Rome
so loved, nor thee so much, Caesar, as now; thee
too, albeit she would, she cannot now love more.

1 The Emperor.
rl


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XII


Uxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim
quaeritis ? uxori nubere nolo meae.
inferior matrona suo sit, Prisce, marito:
non aliter fiunt femina virque pares.


XIII


Morto dictus erat: viginti milibus emi.
redde mihi nummos, Gargiliane: sapit.


XIV


Patuipa ne Cilicum timeant pomaria brumam,
mordeat et tenerum fortior aura nemus,

hibernis obiecta Notis specularia puros
admittunt soles et sine faece diem.

at mihi cella datur non tota clusa fenestra, 9)
in qua nec Boreas ipse manere velit.

sic habitare iubes veterem crudelis amicum ?
arboris ergo tuae tutior hospes ero.


XV


Dum nova Pannonici numeratur gloria belli,
omnis et ad reducem dum litat ara Iovem,
dat populus, dat gratus eques, dat tura senatus,

et ditant Latias tertia dona tribus,


1 Naturals or cretins were kept as curiosities: ¢f. 111.
Ixxxil, 24; x11. xciii. 3.


12


* BOOK VIII. xn—xv


XII


“ Wuy am | unwilling to marry a rich wife?” Do
you ask? I am unwilling to take my wife as husband.
Let the matron be subject to her husband, Priscus ;
in no other way do woman and man become equal.


XIII


He had been described as an idiot;! I bought him
for twenty thousand sesterces. Give me back my
money, Gargilianus ; he has his wits.


XIV


Tuat your orchard trees from Cilicia may not grow
wan and dread the winter, nor too keen an air nip
the tender boughs, glass casements facing the wintry
south winds admit the clear suns and daylight un-
defiled. But to me is assigned a garret, shut in by
an ill-fitting window, in which even Boreas himself
would not care to abide. Is it in such a lodging you
cruelly bid your old friend dwell? Then as the
guest of one of your trees I shall be more protected.?


XV


Wuat time from Pannonian war new glory is added
to the tale, and every altar makes fair offerings to -
greet returning Jove, while the people gives, the
grateful knights give, the Senate gives incense, and
a third largess makes rich the Latin tribes, Rome


2 of. a similar epigram, vu. lxviii.


13


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hos quoque secretos memoravit! Roma triumphos, 5
nec minor ista tuae laurea pacis erat,’ ‘
quod tibi de sancta credis pietate tuorum.
principis est virtus maxima nosse suos.


XVI


Pistor qui fueras diu, Cypere,

causas nunc agis et ducena quaeris:

sed consumis et usque mutuaris.

a pistore, Cypere, non recedis: -

et panem facis et facis farinam. 5


XVII


Ear, Sexte, tuam pactus duo milia causam.
misisti nummos quod mihi mille quid est?

“ Narrasti nihil’’ inquis “ et a te perdita causa est.”
tanto plus debes, Sexte, quod erubui.


XVIII


Sr tua, Cerrini, promas epigrammata vulgo,
vel mecum possis vel prior ipse legi :

sed tibi tantus inest veteris respectus amici,
carior ut mea sit quam tua fama tibi.


1 memorabit B. 2 erit B.


; 1 Domitian had waived a formal triumph, merely dedicat-
ing a laurel-wreath (iste laurea, 1. 6) to Jupiter Capitolinus ;
Suet. Dom. vi.; Stat. Sylv. 111. iii. 171,


14


BOOK VIII. xv—xvunr


has made memorablé this triumph also, though con-
cealed;1 nor was the laurel that marks the peace
thou bringest of less account, because touching thy
people’s reverent love thou dost trust thyself? A
Prince’s greatest virtue is to know his own.


XVI


You who were long a baker, Cyperus, now conduct
cases, and look to make two hundred thousand ses-
terces a year; but you squander them, and are
continually raising loans. You do not part from
your réle of baker, Cyperus; you make_your bread—
and make your dust fly too.®


XVI


I nave pleaded your case, Sextus, for an agreed
fee of two thousand sesterces. What is the reason
you have sent me one thousand? “You set out
none of the facts,’ you remark, “and by. you my
case was ruined.’’ You owe me all the more, Sextus;


I blushed.
XVIII


Were you, Cerrinius, to issue your epigrams to the
public, you might be read in rivalry with me, or even
as my superior; but so great is your regard for your
old friend that dearer to you is my fame than your


2 7.e. thou canst rely on the people understanding the
greatness of thy victory without a triumph.

3 7.e. you dissipate your earnings, as grain is reduced to
the dust of flour. Or perhaps the metaphor is taken from
flour falling through the meshes of a sieve: ¢f. Pers. iii. 112.


15


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


sic Maro nec Calabri temptavit carmina Flacci, 5
Pindaricos nosset cum superare modos,

et Vario cessit Romani laude coturni,
cum posset tragico fortius ore loqui.

aurum et opes et rura frequens donabit amicus:
qui velit ingenio cedere rarus erit. 10


XIX


Pauper videri Cinna vult ; et est pauper.


XX


Cum facias versus nulla non luce ducenos,
Vare, nihil recitas. non sapis, atque sapis.


XXI


Puospuore, redde diem: quid gaudia nostra moraris?
Caesare venturo, Phosphore, redde diem.

Roma rogat. placidi numquid te pigra Bootae
plaustra vehunt, lento quod nimis axe venis?

Ledaeo poteras abducere Cyllaron astro: 5
ipse suo cedet nunc tibi Castor equo.

quid cupidum Titana tenes? iam Xanthus et Aethon
frena volunt, vigilat Memnonis alma parens.

tarda tamen nitidae non cedunt sidera luci,
et cupit Ausonium luna videre ducem. 10

iam, Caesar, vel nocte veni: stent astra licebit,
non derit populo te veniente dies.


1 Horace.

2 It is fatal to appear poor: cf. v. lxxxi.

3 The Constellation of the Lesser Bear,
16


BOOK VIII. xvim—xx1


‘own. So Maro did not even attempt the lyrics of

Calabrian Flaccus,} although his skill might have

surpassed the measures of Pindar, and he gave place

to Varius in the renown of the Roman buskin, though

he might have spoken in tragic tone with stronger

voice. Gold and possessions and lands many a friend |
will bestow : he who is willing to yield in genius will

be rare.


XIX


Cinna wishes to appear poor, and he is poor.?


XX


ALTHouGH no day passes but you compose two
hundred verses, Varus, you recite none of them.
You have no wit—and yet are wise.


XXI ,


Puospuor, bring us back day; why puttest thou
off our joys? Now Caesar comes, Phosphor, bring
us back day, Rome begs thee. Doth the sluggish
wain of slow-twisting Bootes® bear thee, that thou
comest with too slow an axle? Thou mightest have
withdrawn Cyllarus* from Leda’s constellation ; freely
will Castor now yield his steed to thee. Why stayest
thou eager Titan? Already Xanthus and Aethon®
look for the reins; Memnon’s kindly Mother® wakes.
Yet the slow stars yield not to glowing light, and
the moon longs to see Ausonia’s Chief. Now, Caesar,
come thou, even by night; let the stars stand still ;
the people, when thou comest, shall not want for day.

4 The horse of Castor: cf. vill. xxviii. 8,


5 Horses of the Sun: ef. 111. lxvii. 5.
6 Aurora, goddess of the morning.


17


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXII


Invitas ad aprum, ponis mihi, Gallice, porcum.
hybrida sum, si das, Gallice, verba mihi.


XXII


Esse tibi videor saevus nimiumque gulosus,
qui propter cenam, Rustice, caedo cocum.
si levis ista tibi flagrorum causa videtur,
ex qua vis causa vapulet ergo cocus?


.


XXIV


S1 quid forte petam timido gracilique libello,
inproba non fuerit si mea charta, dato.
et si non dederis, Caesar, permitte rogari:
offendunt numquam tura precesque lovem.
qui-fingit sacros auro vel marmore vultus, 5
non facit ille deos: qui rogat, ille facit.


XXV
Vipist1 semel, Oppiane, tantum
aegrum me: male saepe te videbo.


XXVI


Non tot in Kois timuit Gangeticus arvis
raptor, in Hyrcano qui fugit albus equo,

quot tua Roma novas vidit, Germanice, tigres, .
delicias potuit nec numerare suas.


1 Hybrids were supposed to want sense. A hybrid pri-


marily meant the offspring of a sow and of a wild boar: ¢f.
Plin. WN. H. viii. 79, bis ee


18


BOOK VIII. xxu—xxvi


XXII


You invite me to a boar; you set before me, Gal-
licus, a pig. I ama hybrid! myself if you can deceive
me, Gallicus.


XXIII


I appear to you cruel and over gluttonous because,
on account of the dinner, Rusticus, I lash my cook.
If that seem to you a slight reason for a beating,
for what reason, then, do you wish a cook to be
flogged?


XXIV


Ir I may by chance ask for something in my bashful
and slender little volume, if my page be not overbold,
do thou grant it. And even if thou shalt not grant
it, Caesar, allow the asking: incense and prayers
never offend Jove. He who shapes sacred lineaments
in gold or marble does not make gods: he makes
them who prays. ;


XXV


You came to see me once only when I was ill. It
will go badly with me if I see you often.?


XXVI


Ticresses not so many has the robber® dreaded in
Eastern fields by Ganges’ side, as he flies with pale
face on his Hyrcanian steed, as but now thy Rome,
Germanicus, has seen, nor could she count what gave


RCI NE Tk
3 7.¢. of cubs,


19


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


vincit Erythraeos tua, Caesar, harena triumphos
et victoris opes divitiasque dei:

nam cum captivos ageret sub curribus Indos,
contentus gemina tigride Bacchus erat.


XXVII


Monera qui tibi dat locupleti, Gaure, senique,
si sapis et sentis, hoc tibi ait ‘‘ Morere.”


XXVIII


Dic, toga, facundi gratum mihi munus amici,
esse velis cuius fama decusque gregis?
Apula Ledaei tibi floruit herba Phalanthi,
qua saturat Calabris culta Galaesus aquis?
an Tartesiacus stabuli nutritor Hiberi
Baetis in Hesperia te quoque lavit ove?
an tua multifidum numeravit lana Timavum,
quem pius astrifero Cyllarus ore bibit?
te nec Amyclaeo decuit livere veneno
nec Miletos erat vellere digna tuo.
lilia tu vincis nec adhuc delapsa ligustra
et Tiburtino monte quod albet ebur ;
Spartanus tibi cedet olor Paphiaeque columbae,
cedet Erythraeis eruta gemma vadis:
sed licet haec primis nivibus sint aemula dona,
non sunt Parthenio candidiora suo.


10


15


1 Bacchus, according to myth, made an expedition into
the East, where he taught the conquered nations the use of


the vine, He was represented as drawn by tigers,
20


BOOK VIII. xxvi—-xxviu


her delight. Thy Arena, Caesar, has surpassed Indian

triumphs and the wealth and riches of the victor
god ;1 for Bacchus, while he drove beneath the yoke
the captive Indians, was content with two tigresses
alone.


“XXVIII


He who gives presents, Gaurus, to you, a rich man
and old, if you have wit and sense, says this to
you—* Die.”


XXVIII


Say, Toga, welcome gift to me of my eloquent
friend, of what flock wouldst thou be the fame and
glory? Did the Apulian herbage of Spartan Phalan-
thus flourish for thy sake, where Galaesus? floods the
tilth with Calabrian waters? or did Tartessian Baetis,
nurse of Hiberian flocks, wash thee too on the back
of a Spanish sheep? or has thy wool counted the
mouths of many-cleft Timavus, whereof trusty Cyl-
larus,t now amid the stars, once drank? Thee it
beseemed not to darken with Spartan dye, nor was
Miletus worthy to stain thy fleece. Lilies thou
dost outshine, and privet yet unfallen, and the ivory
that gleams white on Tibur’s mount; Sparta’s swan
shall yield to thee and Paphian doves, there shall
yield the pearl plucked out from Eastern shoals,
Yet, albeit this gift vies with new fallen snow, ’tis
not more dazzling white® than Parthenius its giver.


2 A river near Tarentum founded by the Spartan Phalan-
thus. The district was famed for the fine fleeces of its
sheep: cf. Hor. Od. 11. vi. 10. ;

3. of. V.. XXXvVii. 7. AC MIN XX Vie i0:

5 An allusion to the etymology of Parthenius’ name (zap-
0évios = virgin- white).

21


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


non ego praetulerim Babylonos picta superbae

texia Samiramia quae variantur acu ;
non Athamanteo potius me mirer in auro,

Aeolium dones si mihi, Phrixe, pecus. 20
o quantos risus pariter spectata movebit

cum Palatina nostra lacerna toga!


XXIX


Disticua qui scribit, puto, vult brevitate placere.
quid prodest brevitas, dic mihi, si liber est?


XXX


Qui nunc Caesareae lusus spectatur harenae,
temporibus Bruti gloria summa fuit.

aspicis ut teneat flammas poenaque fruatur,
fortis et attonito regnet in igne manus!

ipse sui spectator adest et nobile dextrae 5
funus amat: totis pascitur illa sacris ;

quod nisi rapta foret nolenti poena, parabat
saevior in lassos ire sinistra focos.

scire piget post tale decus quid fecerit ante :
quam vidi satis hance est mihi nosse manum. 10


XXXI


Nescio quid de te non belle, Dento, fateris,
coniuge qui ducta iura paterna petis.

sed iam supplicibus dominum lassare libellis
desine et in patriam serus ab urbe redi:


1 Phryxus’ ram with the golden fleece: cf. VI. iii. 6.
2 A hint for a new cloak.


22


BOOK VIII. xxvim-—xxx1


I could not more prize proud Babylon’s painted


tapestry embroidered by Semiramis’ needle; no
more should I admire myself in gold of Athamas, if
thou, Phryxus, wert to give me the ram of Aeolus’
son! Oh, what laughter will my worn cloak excite
seen together with this toga from the Palatine! 2


XXIX


He who writes distichs wishes, I imagine, to please
by brevity. What is the use of brevity, tell me, if
it constitute a book?


XXX


Wuat now entertains as a spectacle in Caesar’s
Arena was in Brutus’ days their chiefest glory.2 You
see how the hand grasps the flame and relishes its
punishment, and bravely lords it amid the astonished
fire! His own spectator is he, and he admires his


right hand’s noble death; in the full sacrifice that


hand delights. Had not, against its will, that
penalty been denied it, his left hand—fiercer still—
was ready to pass to the sated hearth. I care not, °
after such a feat, to learn what was its crime before:
enough for me to have known the prowess of the
hand I saw.


XXXI


’*Tis not a pretty sort of confession, Dento, you
make about yourself, who, after you have married a
wife, ask for paternal rights. Cease at last with
suppliant petitions to weary our Master, and, though
late, return from the city to your own country.

3 ef. x. xxv., where a different view is taken of Mucius’
heroism. 4 of. 11, xci. and xcii.


23


.


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nam dum tu longe deserta uxore diuque
tres quaeris natos, quattuor invenies.


XXXII


Arra per tacitum delapsa sedentis in ipsos
fluxit Aratullae blanda columba sinus.
luserat hoc casus, nisi inobservata maneret

permissaque sibi nollet abire fuga.
si meliora piae fas est sperare sorori
et dominum mundi flectere vota valent,
haec a Sardois tibi forsitan exulis oris,
fratre reversuro, nuntia venit avis.


XXXITI


De praetoricia folium mihi, Paule, corona
mittis et hoc phialae nomen habere iubes.

hac fuerat nuper nebula tibi pegma perunctum,
pallida quam rubri diluit unda croci.

an magis astuti derasa est ungue ministri
brattea, de fulero quam reor esse tuo ?

illa potest culicem longe sentire volantem
et minimi pinna papilionis agi;

exiguae volitat suspensa vapore lucernae
et leviter fuso rumpitur icta mero.

hoc linitur sputo Iani caryota Kalendis,
quam fert cum parco sordidus asse cliens.


10


1 Paulus (cf vit. lxxii.) had sent M. a cup of such thin
metal that it could hardly be called a cup. An epigram


against paltry gifts.
24


BOOK VIII. xxxi—-xxxm


_ Otherwise, after deserting your wife at such a dis-
_ tance and for so long, while you are seeking three
sons you will discover four!


XXXII


Guipina down through the still air, a winsome
dove fluttered into Aretulla’s very bosom as she sat.
Chance might have played the freak had not the
bird stayed, all unguarded, and refused to take the
flight permitted to it. If a loving sister may hope
for happier thifigs, and prayers avail to move the
Master of the World, belike from Sardinia’s shores;
this bird came to thee, the exile’s messenger, to
herald thy brother’s return.


XXXII


From your praetor’s crown, Paulus, you send me a
leaf and require this to be called a bowl! With this
film your platform? was lately coated, and the pale
stream of red saffron* washed it away. Or rather
was it a flake—I think, belonging to the leg of your
couch—scraped off by the nail of a cunning slave?
It can from a distance feel the fluttering of a gnat,
and be wafted by the wing of the very smallest but-
terfly ; it floats in air, kept up by the heat of a tiny
lamp, and, splashed with wine even lightly sprinkled,
it dissolves. With such a layer is coated on the
Kalends of January the nut* which a shabby client
brings as a gift together with small coin. Pliant

2 of. [rb. Spect. ii. 2. > of. Inb. Spect. iii. 8.

4 Symbolic gifts, like Easter eggs: ¢f. x11, xxvii: Ov. Ff.
i. 189.

VOL, Il, Be a5


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


lenta minus gracili crescunt colocasia filo,
plena magis nimio lilia sole cadunt ;
nec vaga tam tenui discurrit aranea tela, 15
tam leve nec bombyx pendulus urget opus.
crassior in facie vetulae stat creta Fabullae,
crassior offensae bulla tumescit aquae ;
fortior et tortos servat vesica capillos
et mutat Latias spuma Batava comas., 20
hac cute Ledaeo vestitur pullus in ovo,
talia lunata splenia fronte sedent.
quid tibi cum phiala, ligulam cum mittere possis,
mittere cum possis vel cocleare mihi,
(magna nimis loquimur), cocleam cum mittere possis,
denique cum possis mittere, Paule, nihil ? 26


XXXIV


ArcHETYPUM Myos argentum te dicis habere.
quod sine te factum est hoc magis archetypum est?


XXXV


Cum sitis similes paresque vita,
uxor pessima, pessimus maritus,
miror non bene convenire vobis.


XXXVI


Reoia pyramidum, Caesar, miracula ride;
iam tacet Koum barbara Memphis opus:


1 A kind of soap giving the hair a light hue: ¢f. xiv.
XXvi. 2 efi, ex xix)

* An ancient Greek artist, famous for working in silver:
ef. Iv. xcv. He was contemporary with Phidias.


26


BOOK VIII. xxxm-—xxxvi


Egyptian beans grow with a less slender filament,
of thicker mould are lily leaves that fall beneath the
overpowering sun; nor does the spider dart about
a web so slender, nor the pendulous silkworm ply
a work so light. Denser stands the chalk on old
Fabulla’s face, denser swells the bubble in tumbled
water, and stronger is the bladder-net that confines
knotted locks, and the Batavian pomade! that trans-
forms Latin tresses. With skin like this is clothed
the chick in a swan’s egg, such are the patches that
rest on a crescent-plastered ? brow. What use have
you for a bowl when you can send me a tablespoon,
when you can send me even a snail-pick—I am sug-
gesting too great things—when you can send me a
snail-shell: in a word, when you, Paulus, can send.
me nothing?


XXXIV
You say you have a piece of silver, a genuine


antique by Mys.’ Is that which was made without
your assistance any the more an antique ?*


XXXV


Serene that you are like one another, and a pair
in your habits, vilest of wives, vilest of husbands,
I wonder you don’t agree!


XXXVI


Laven, Caesar, at the regal wonders of the Pyra-
mids: now barbaric Memphis speaks not of her


4 Perhaps addressed to a silversmith who was in the habit
of ‘‘faking” his antiques. ‘‘ You may not have faked this,”
says M., ‘* but that does not prove it genuine.”


27


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


pars quota Parrhasiae labor est Mareoticus aulae!
clarins in toto nil videt orbe dies.

septenos pariter credas adsurgere montes ; 5
Thessalicum brevior Pelion Ossa tulit ;

aethera sic intrat nitidis ut conditus astris
inferiore tonet nube serenus apex

et prius arcano satietur numine Phoebi
nascentis Circe quam videt ora patris. 10

haec, Auguste, tamen, quae vertice sidera pulsat,
par domus est caelo sed minor est domino.


XXXVII


Quop Caietano reddis, Polycharme, tabellas,
milia te centum num tribuisse putas ?

‘‘Debuit haec”’ inquis. tibi habe, Polycharme, tabellas
et Caietano milia crede duo.


XXXVIII


Qui praestat pietate pertinaci

sensuro bona liberalitatis,

captet forsitan aut vicem reposcat.

at si quis dare nomini relicto

post manes tumulumque perseverat, 5
quaerit quid nisi parcius dolere ?

refert sis bonus an velis videri.

praestas hoc, Melior, sciente fama,

qui sollemnibus anxius sepulti

nomen non sinis interire Blaesi, 10


OE MOO Nal,

2 When the giants attempted to scale heaven in their war
with the gods, they piled Pelion upon Ossa, both mountains
in Thessaly.


28


’ BOOK VIII. xxxvi-xxxvint


Eastern work. How small a part of the Palatine
hall! would Egypt’s toil achieve! Nothing so grand
the eye of day sees in all the world. You would
believe the seven hills uprose all together; Ossa with
Thessalian Pelion atop was not so high;? Heaven it
so pierces that, hidden amid the lustrous stars, its
peak echoes sunlit to the thunder in the cloud below,
and is sated with Phoebus’ mystic power ere Circe?
views her sire’s springing face. And yet, Augustus,
this palace that with its pinnacle touches the stars,
though level with Heaven, is less than its lord.


XXXVII


Becausk, Polycharmus, you return to Caietanus his
bond, do you really imagine you have given him a
hundred thousand sesterces? ‘ He owed this sum,”
you say. Keep your bond, Polycharmus, and trust
Caietanus with two thousand.‘


XXXVIII


He who with constant devotion bestows gifts on
one who will feel the bounty’s good, fishes perhaps
or claims return. But if any man persist in giving
* to the name that survives death and the tomb, what
profit seeks he but assuagement of grief? Wide is
the difference ’twixt goodness and pretence. This
gift, as fame knows, you, Melior, make; who, in
your care, by solemn rites forbid to perish the name
of buried Blaesus, and that his birthday should be


3 Daughter of the Sun, which was said to strike first upon
her island. Here put for Circeii in Latium.
‘ of. a similar epigram, IX. cii.


#9


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et de munifica profusus arca

ad natalicium diem colendum

scribarum memori piaeque turbae

quod donas, facis ipse Blaesianum.

hoc longum tibi, vita dum manebit, 15
hoc et post cineres erit tributum.


XXXIX


Qu Palatinae caperet convivia mensae
ambrosiasque dapes non erat ante locus:

hic haurire decet sacrum, Germanice, nectar
et Ganymedea pocula mixta manu.

esse velis, oro, serus conviva Tonantis: 5
at tu si properas, Iuppiter, ipse veni.


XL


Non horti neque palmitis beati

sed rari nemoris, Priape, custos,

ex quo natus es et potes renasci,

furaces, moneo, manus repellas

et silvam domini focis reserves: 5
si defecerit haec, et ipse lignum es,


XLI


“ Tristis Athenagoras non misit munera nobis
quae medio brumae mittere mense solet.”

an sit Athenagoras tristis, Faustine, videbo:
me certe tristem fecit Athenagoras.


' He endows the guild of scribes with a fund out of which
30


BOOK VIII. xxxvni—xu


kept, in your lavish bounty out of a princely coffer
_ to the school of scribes—a company that remembers
him and loves—yourself celebrate a feast to Blaesus.}
This shall be your long-enduring tribute while life
shall last, this also after you are dust.


XXXIX


Larce enough to hold the revels of the Palatine
board and its ambrosial feasts, was no place hereto-
fore; here it beseems thee, Germanicus, to quaff
thy nectar divine, and cups blent by Ganymede’s
hand. May it be late, I beseech thee, that thou
dost consent to be the Thunderer’s guest; but do
thou, Jupiter, if thou art impatient, come hither
thyself.


XL


Priapus, guardian, not of parterre or blooming
vine, but of the thin wood wherefrom thou wert
born and canst be born again, keep off, I warn thee,
thievish hands, and preserve my copse for its master’s
hearth. If this copse fail, thou also art wood !2


XLI


« Aruenacoras regrets he did not send me the
presents he is used to send in the middle of winter's
month.”” Whether Athenagoras regrets, Faustinus,
I will consider; me, at any rate, Athenagoras made
regret.
to celebrate annually the birthday of B. ‘‘In effect,” says
M., ‘‘you do this yourself every year.”


2 1.e. and may be burned instead. Horace (Sat. 1. viil. 2)
with like flippancy treats Priapus as little better than wood.


31


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLII


Si te sportula maior ad beatos
non corruperit, ut solet, licebit
de nostro, Matho, centies laveris. -


XLII


Errert uxores Fabius, Chrestilla maritos,
funereamque toris quassat uterque facem.
victores committe, Venus: quos iste manebit

exitus, una duos ut Libitina ferat.


XLIV


TITULLE, moneo, vive: semper hoe serum est ;

sub paedagogo coeperis licet, serum est.

at tu, miser Titulle, nec senex vivis,

sed omne limen conteris salutator

et mane sudas urbis osculis udus, 5
foroque triplici sparsus ante equos omnis

aedemque Martis et colosson Augusti

curris per omnis tertiasque quintasque.

rape, congere, aufer, posside: relinquendum est.
superba densis arca palleat nummis, 10
centum explicentur paginae Kalendarum ;

iurabit heres te nihil reliquisse,

supraque pluteum te iacente vel saxum,

fartus papyro dum tibi torus crescit,

flentis superbus basiabit eunuchos ; 15
tuoque tristis filius, velis nolis,

cum concubino nocte dormiet prima.


1 A hundred farthings (quadrantes) was the client’s usual


allowangs (of. 11. vii. 1), and a quadrans was the price of a
ath,


32


BOOK VIII. xim—xuiv


XLII


- Ir greater dole has not, as is usual, bribed you to
court wealthy men, you may bathe, Matho, a hundred
tinres at my expense.!


XLII


Fasius buries his wives, Chrestilla her husbands,
and each of them waves the funeral torch over a
marriage-bed. Match the victors, Venus; this is the
end that will await them—one funeral to convey
the pair.


XLIV


Tituttus, I warn you, live your life: ever this
comes late; though you begin under a pedagogue,
‘tis late. But you, wretched Titullus, do not live
even in old age, but wear out every threshold at
levees, and sweat at daybreak beslavered with the
kisses of the town; and in the three Forums, mud-
bespattered in front of all the Equestrian statues, and
the Temple of Mars, and the Colossus? of Augustus,
you hurry ever from the third to the fifth hours.’
Plunder, hoard, rob, possess: you must resign it all.
Let your proud money-chest be yellow with crowded
coins, an hundred pages of debts due on the Kalends
be opened, your heir will swear you have left no-
thing. And even when you are laid out on bier
or stone, while, stuffed with papyrus, your pyre is
growing high, he will in insolence kiss the weeping
eunuchs; and your mourning son, whether you wish
it or not, will the first night sleep with your favourite.


2 A bronze statue of Augustus in the Forum that bore his


name.
8 4.e. during the business hours of the day : ¢f. Iv. viii. 2, 3.


33
BZ


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLV


Priscus ab Aetnaeis mihi, Flacce, Terentius oris
redditur: hanc lucem lactea gemma notet;

defluat et lento splendescat turbida lino
amphora centeno consule facta minor.

continget nox quando meis tam candida mensis? 5
tam iusto dabitur quando calere mero?

cum te, Flacce, mihi reddet Cythereia Cypros,
luxuriae fiet tam bona causa meae.


XLVI


Quanta tua est probitas tanta est infantia formae,
Ceste puer, puero castior Hippolyto.

te secum Diana velit doceatque natare,
te Cybele totum mallet habere Phryge ;1

tu Ganymedeo poteras succedere lecto, 5
sed durus domino basia sola dares.

felix, quae tenerum vexabit sponsa maritum
et quae te faciet prima puella virum!


XLVII


Pars maxillarum tonsa est tibi, pars tibi rasa est,
pars vulsa est. unum quis putet esse caput?


1 Phryge Brodaeus, phryga Codd. Housman suggests
molls mallet habere Phryge.


1 of. XIV. ciii. and civ.


34


BOOK VIII. xtv—xivu


XLV


Terentius Priscus is given back to me, Flaccus,
from Etna’s shore: this day let a milk-white pearl
mark! and let the wine-jar, shrunken through a
hundred consulships, be outpoured, and its dull-
ness grow bright, slowly strained through linen.}
When shall a night so fair again bless my board?
When shall I be allowed to warm with wine so justly
earned? When Cytherean Cyprus shall give thee,
Flaccus, back to me, as good a cause shall arise for
my revelry.


XLVI


Even as thy modesty is thy childish grace of form,
boy Cestus, than boy Hippolytus? more chaste.
Thee would Diana® wish, and teach, to swim with
her, thee, not unmanned, would Cybele prefer to the
Phrygian ;* thou mightest have succeeded to the bed
of Ganymede,’ but in thy hardness kisses only
wouldst thou have given thy lord. Happy the bride
that shall provoke her youthful spouse, the maid that
first shall make of thee a man!


XLVII


Part of your jaws are clipped, part is shaved, part
is plucked of hairs. Who would imagine this to be
a single head?

* Who rejected the solicitation of his stepmother Phaedra.

3 The. virgin goddess of chastity.

4 The emasculated Attis: cf. v. xli. 2,

Sof. t. vied.


35


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLVIII


Nescir cui dederit Tyriam Crispinus abollam,
dum mutat cultus induiturque togam.

quisquis habes, umeris sua munera redde, precamur :
non hoc Crispinus te sed abolla rogat.

non quicumque capit saturatas murice vestes 5
nec nisi deliciis convenit iste color.

si te praeda iuvat foedique insania lucri,
qua possis melius fallere, sume togam.


XLIX


FormosaM sane sed caecus diligit Asper.
plus ergo, ut res est, quam videt Asper amat.


L


Quanta Gigantei memoratur mensa triumphi
quantaque nox superis omnibus illa fuit,

qua bonus accubuit genitor cum plebe deorum
et licuit Faunis poscere vina Iovem,

tanta tuas celebrant, Caesar, convivia laurus 3 5
exhilarant ipsos gaudia nostra deos.

vescitur omnis eques tecum populusque patresque
et capit ambrosias cum duce Roma dapes.

grandia pollicitus quanto maiora dedisti !
yeh: est nobis sportula, recta data est. 10


+ A well-known fop: ¢f Cum verna Canopi | Crispinus,
Tyrias humero revocante lacernas: Juv. i. 27.


36


BOOK VIII. xtvui-1i


XLVIII


Crispinus! does not know to whom he gave his
Tyrian cloak while he was changing his dress and
putting on his toga. Whoever you are who have it,
restore to his shoulders their own endowment, we
beg you: Crispinus does not ask this of you, but the
cloak does. Not everyone sets off a robe steeped
in purple: only daintiness that colour suits. If
looting attract you, and a mad rage for disgraceful
gain, to escape notice the better, select a toga !?


XJ.TX


Asper loves a woman who is undoubtedly lovely,
but he is blind; so Asper, as the fact is, loves more
than he sees.’


L


Great as was the storied feast for triumph over
the Giants, and great as was to all the High gods
that night on which the good Sire reclined at table
with the common crowd of gods, and Fauns had
licence to call on Jove for wine; so great a banquet,
Caesar, celebrates thy laurels won: our joys make
glad the very gods themselves. Every knight feasts
along with thee, the people too, and the Fathers,
and Rome together with her Chief partakes am-
brosial fare. Large things didst thou promise: how
much greater hast thou given! A dole was promised
us, a banquet has been given.


3 As being universal wear.
5 Cf VaaxVe


37


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LI


Quis labor in phiala? docti Myos anne Myronos?


Mentoris haec manus est an, Polyclite, tua ?

livescit nulla caligine fusca nec odit
exploratores, nubila massa, focos.

vera minus flavo radiant electra metallo
et niveum felix pustula vincit ebur.

materiae non cedit opus: sic alligat orbem,
plurima cum tota lampade luna nitet.

stat caper Aeolio Thebani vellere Phrixi
cultus: ab hoc mallet vecta fuisse soror ;

hunc nec Cinyphius tonsor violaverit et tu
ipse tua pasci vite, Lyaee, velis.

terga premit pecudis geminis Amor aureus alis ;
Palladius tenero lotos ab ore sonat:

sic Methymnaeo gavisus Arione delphin
languida non tacitum per freta vexit onus.

imbuat egregium digno mihi nectare munus
non grege de domini sed tua, Ceste, manus ;

Ceste, decus mensae, misce Setina: videtur
ipse puer nobis, ipse sitire caper.

det numerum cyathis Istanti? littera Rufi:
auctor enim tanti muneris ille mihi:


1 Istantt Munro, instanti 8, instantis +.


10


15


20


a _—


* All Greek artists of past days, renowned for chasing or


sculpture.


* The golden fleece of the ram that bore Phryxus and
Helle over the sea: of. VII. xxviii. 20. 8 ef. vir. xev. 13.


38


BOOK VIII. u


LI


Whose fabour is in the bowl? was it of artist
Mys or of Myron? Is this Mentor’s hand, or, Poly-
clitus, thine?! No darkness gives it a dull leaden
hue, nor is.it a cloudy mass that shrinks from as-
saying fires. True amber is less radiant than its
yellow ore, and the fine frosted silver surpasses snow-
white ivory. The workmanship yields not to the
material: even so the moon rounds her orb when
she shines in fullness with all her light. There
stands a he-goat prankt in the Aeolian fleece of
Theban Phryxus?; by such his sister would more
gladly have been borne; such a goat no Cinyphian
barber? would deform, and thou thyself, Lyaeus,
wouldst consent to his cropping thine own vine.4 A
Love in gold, two-winged, loads the back of the beast;
the pipe of Pallas sounds from his tender lips; in
such wise the dolphin, blithe with the burden of
Methymnaean Arion,? bore him, no unmelodious
freight, o’er tranquil seas. Let no hand from the
master’s crowd of slaves, only thy hand, Cestus,
first fill this peerless gift for me with fitting nectar ;
Cestus, the banquet’s pride, mix thou the Setine:
the very boy, the very goat, methinks, is athirst. Let
the letters of Istantius Rufus’® name assign their
number to our measures of wine,’ for he was the
source to me of so proud a gift. If Telethusa come,


4 Juv. alludes to this: i. 76 (stantem extra pocula caprum).

5’ A celebrated harpist, who, to escape the crew of the
vessel carrying him to Corinth with his wealth, leaped, it is
said, into the sea after playing a last time on his harp: ef.
Herod. i. 23, 24.

© A friend of M.: ef. vil. Ixxiii. 1.

7 As to this practice, ¢f. 1x. xcili, 8; XI. xxxvi. 8.


39


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


si Telethusa venit promissaque gaudia portat,
servabor dominae, Rufe, triente tuo;

si dubia est, septunce trahar; si fallit amantem, 25
ut iugulem curas, nomen utrumque bibam.


LIT


TonsoreM puerum sed arte talem

qualis nec Thalamus fuit Neronis,

Drusorum cui contigere barbae,

aequandas semel ad genas rogatus

Rufo, Caediciane, commodavi. 5
dum iussus repetit pilos eosdem,

censura speculi manum regente,

expingitque cutem facitque longam

detonsis epaphaeresin capillis,

barbatus mihi tonsor est reversus. 10


LIT


Formosissima quae fuere vel sunt,
sed vilissima quae fuere vel sunt,

o quam te fieri, Catulla, vellem
formosam minus aut magis pudicam!


LIV


Maena licet totiens tribuas, maiora daturus
dona, ducum victor, victor et ipse tui,

diligeris populo non propter praemia, Caesar,
te propter populus praemia, Caesar, amat.


Da Chea evile

® M. intends to drink to the vocative, 7.e. Rufe, Istanti, ete.

* Probably the Emperors Claudius and Nero, who bore this
name before they became Emperors.


40


BOOK VIII. u-tiv


and bring her promised joys, I will keep myself for
my mistress, Rufus, by drinking your four measures ;!
if she be doubtful, I shall while away the time by
seven; if she fail her lover, then, to: throttle care, I
will drink both your names.”


LII


A BARBER, young, but such an artist as not even
was Nero’s Thalamus, to whom fell the beards of the
Drusi,? I lent, on his request, Caedicianus, to Rufus
to smooth his cheeks once. While at command he
was going over the same hairs, guiding his hand by
the judgment of the mirror, and rougeing the
skin, and making a second thorough clip of the
close-cut hair, my barber returned to me with a
beard.


LIII ;


Most beautiful of all women who have been or
are, but vilest of all who have been or are,® oh, how I
could wish, Catulla, you could become less beautiful
or more pure!


LIV


AvseEit thou givest so oft great gifts, and shalt
give greater, O thou victor over Captains and victor
withal over thyself,® thou art loved by the people,
Caesar, not because of thy boons; ’tis because of
thee, Caesar, the people loves thy boons.


4 of. vit. Ixxxiil.
5 An echo of the style of Catullus: cf. xxi. 2 and xxiv. 2.
6 i.e. whose virtues (or bounties) increase day by day.


41


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LV


AupiTur quantum Massyla per avia murmur,
innumero quotiens silva leone furit,

pallidus attonitos ad Poena mapalia pastor
cum revocat tauros et sine mente pecus,

tantus in Ausonia fremuit modo terror harena.
quis non esse gregem crederet ? unus erat ;

sed cuius tremerent ipsi quoque iura leones,
cui diadema daret marmore picta Nomas.


© quantum per colla decus, quem sparsit honorem


aurea lunatae, cum stetit, umbra iubae!
grandia quam decuit latum venabula pectus
quantaque de magna gaudia morte tulit!
unde tuis, Libye, tam felix gloria silvis ?
a Cybeles numquid venerat ille iugo?
an magis Herculeo, Germanice, misit ab astro
hanc tibi vel frater vel pater ipse feram?


®


LVI


TemporIBUs nostris aetas cum cedat avorum
creverit et maior cum duce Roma suo,

ingenium sacri miraris desse Maronis
nec quemquam tanta bella sonare tuba.

sint Maecenates, non derunt, Flacce, Marones
Vergiliumque tibi vel tua rura dabunt.

iugera perdiderat miserae vicina Cremonae
flebat et abductas Tityrus aeger oves:

risit Tuscus eques paupertatemque malignam
reppulit et celeri iussit abire fuga.


1 g.e. in the presence of the emperor.
2 A yoke of lions was the sign of Cybele,


42


10


15


10


BOOK VIII. tv—-tvi


LV


Loup as is heard the roar through Massylian wilds,
oft as the woodland riots with countless lion-hordes,
what time the pale shepherd recalls to his Punic
stead the startled bulls and flock dismayed, so great
a terror roared but now on Ausonia’s sand. Who
but would deem it a herd? "Twas a single beast, but
one whose laws even the very lions would tremble at,
to whom marble-dight Numidia would assign a crown.
Oh, what glory, what dignity did not the tawny
cloud of his curved mane, when it stood erect, shed
upon his neck! How that broad breast became
mighty spears, and how great joy he won by his
noble death!!_ Whence came, Libya, so blest an
honour to thy woods? Had he come down from
Cybele’s yoke?? » Or rather, did thy brother, Ger-
manicus, or thy sire himself, send down this beast
from Hercules’ star?


LVI


ALTHOUGH our grandsires’ age yields to our own
times, and Rome has waxed greater in company
with her chief, you wonder divine Maro’s genius
is seen no more, and that no man with such a
trump as his blows loud of war. Let there be
many a Maecenas, many a Maro, Flaccus, will not
fail, and even your fields will give you a Virgil.
Tityrus,* sick at heart, had lost his lands nigh
ill-starred Cremona, and was weeping for his plun-
dered sheep: the Tuscan knight smiled, and dis-
pelled malignant poverty, and bade it go in hurried

3 Had Titus or Vespasian, now gods, sent down the


Nemean lion slain by Hercules from the constellation Leo?
of. Iv. lvii. 5. “ Representing Virgil in the Bucolses.


43


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


“ Accipe divitias et vatum maximus esto;
tu licet et nostrum”’ dixit “ Alexin ames.”
adstabat domini mensis pulcherrimus ille
marniorea fundens nigra Falerna manu,
et libata dabat roseis carchesia labris 15
quae poterant ipsum sollicitare lovem.
excidit attonito pinguis Galatea poetae,
Thestylis et rubras messibus usta genas ;
protinus “ Italiam”’ concepit et “ Arma virumque,”
qui modo vix Culicem fleverat ore rudi. 20
quid Varios Marsosque loquar ditataque vatum
nomina, magnus erit quos numerare labor?
ergo ego Vergilius, si munera Maecenatis
des mihi? Vergilius non ero, Marsus ero.


LVII


Tres habuit dentes, pariter quos expuit omnes,
ad tumulum Picens dum sedet ipse suum ;
collegitque sinu fragmenta novissima laxi
oris et adgesta contumulavit humo.
ossa licet quondam defuncti non legat heres: 5
hoe sibi iam Picens praestitit officium.


LVIII


Cum tibi tam crassae sint, Artemidore, lacernae,
possim te Sagarim iure vocare meo.


LIX


Aspicis hune uno contentum Itmine, cuius
lippa sub adtrita fronte lacuna patet?


1 of. VY. xvi. 12.
2 Characters in the Bucolics,


44


BOOK VIII. tvi—urx


flight. ‘Take wealth, and be greatest of bards:
you,” he said, “may love even my Alexis.”1 That
boy most fair was standing by his master’s board,
pouring the dark Falernian with hand marble-fair,
and offered the beaker tasted first by his rosy lips,
lips that might tempt Jove himself. Plump Galatea 2
fell away from the inspired bard and Thestylis? with
her cheeks burnt red by harvest; at once “Italy”’
he conceived, and “Arms and the man,”’? he who
but now in song untrained had with effort wept for
a gnat.4 Why should I speak of Variuses and Mar-
suses, and tell the names of poets enriched, whom
’*twere a long task to number? Shall I then be a
Virgil if you give me the gifts of a Maecenas? I
shall not be a Virgil, a Marsus® shall I be.


LVII


Picens had three teeth, all of which he spat out
at once as he was sitting by his own tomb; and he
gathered up in his lap the latest fragments of his
loosened jaws, and entombed them in piled-up earth.
His heir some day need not gather up the dead
man’s bones: that office Picens has already per-
formed for himself. ‘

LVIII

Seeine that your cloaks, Artemidorus, are so thick,

I might rightly call you Sagaris.®


LIX


You see this fellow who puts up with one eye,
under whose shameless brow a sightless socket gapes?
3 Italy = Georgics, ‘‘ arms, etc.” = Aeneid.


4 Culex, an early poem. PROT IVs XXAS ES.
6 A play on words. Sagum was a thick military cloak.


45


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ne contemne caput, nihil est furacius illo ;
non fuit Autolyci tam piperata manus.
hune tu convivam cautus servare memento ; 5
tunc furit atque oculo luscus utroque videt.
pocula solliciti perdunt ligulasque ministri
et latet in tepido plurima mappa sinu ;
lapsa nec a cubito subducere pallia nescit
et tectus laenis saepe duabus abit ; 10
nec dormitantem vernam fraudare lucerna
erubuit fallax, ardeat illa licet.
si nihil invasit, puerum tunc arte dolosa
circuit et soleas subripit ipse suas.


LX


Summa Palatini poteras aequare Colossi,
si fieres brevior, Claudia, sesquipede.


LXI


Liver Charinus, rumpitur, furit, plorat

et quaerit altos unde pendeat ramos:

non iam quod orbe cantor et legor toto,

nec umbilicis quod decorus et cedro

spargor per omnes Roma quas tenet gentes, 5
sed quod sub urbe rus habemus aestivum
vehimurque mulis non ut ante conductis.

quid inprecabor, o Severe, liventi ?

hoe opto: mulas habeat et suburbanum.


* The son of Mercury, patron of thieves, and himself the
typical thief.


46


BOOK VIII. vrx—- xr


Don’t despise the man, he is thievishness itself; Auto-
lycus’! hand was not so sharp. When he is your
guest remember to watch him carefully: then he
runs amok and, though one-eyed, sees with either.
Cups and dessert-spoons the anxious servants lose,
and there lurks many a napkin in his warm bosom ;
nor is he ignorant how to withdraw by stealth even
the mantle slipt from your elbow, and often he goes
away clad in two cloaks; and the cunning thief
does not blush to rob a sleeping home-born slave of
his lamp, although it is alight. If he has seized
nothing, then with crafty skill he circumvents his
slave and filches his very own slippers!


LX


You might reach to the top of the Palatine
Colossus? if you, Claudia, were to grow shorter by
a foot and a half.


LXI


Cuarinus is green with envy, is bursting, raging,
weeping, and is looking out for high boughs to hang
himself from; not now because I am acclaimed and
read through the whole world, nor because, smart
with bosses and cedar oil, I am spread abroad over
all the nations Rome sways, but because I have in
the suburbs a summer country house, and am drawn
by mules no longer, as before, hired. What curse
shall I utter, Severus, on his green looks? I wish
him this: let him possess mules and a suburban

roperty ! 8
alata 2 of. Lib. Spect. ii. 1.
3 With all their worries.


47


Scripir in aversa Picens epigrammata charta,
et dolet averso quod facit illa deo.


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL:


LXII


LXIII


TuesTyLon Aulus amat sed nec minus ardet Alexin,


forsitan et nostrum nune Hyacinthon amat.


i nunc et dubita vates an diligat ipsos,


delicias vatum cum meus Aulus amet.


LXIV


Ur poscas, Clyte, munus exigasque,
uno nasceris octiens in anno

et solas, puto, tresve quattuorve
non natalicias habes Kalendas.

sit vultus tibi levior licebit

tritis litoris aridi lapillis,

sit moro coma nigrior caduco,
vincas mollitia tremente plumas
aut massam modo lactis alligati,

et talis tumor excitet papillas
qualis cruda viro puella servat,

tu nobis, Clyte, iam senex videris:
tam multos quis enim fuisse credat
natalis Priamive Nestorisve ?

sit tandem pudor et modus rapinis.
quod si ludis adhue semelque nasci
uno iam tibi non sat est in anno,
natum te, Clyte, nee semel putabo.


48


1 Phoebus, who inspires poets,


10


15


BOOK VIII. vxm— xiv


LXII


Picens writes epigrams on the backside of his
paper, and complains that when he does so the god!
turns his.


LXIII


Autus is fond of Thestylus, and has no less warmth
for Alexis; perhaps now he is fond of my Hya-
cinthus too. Go, now: doubt after that whether my
friend Aulus loves the poets themselves, seeing that
he loves poets’ favourites.


LXIV


Tuat you may demand, Clytus, and exact a present,
you are born eight times in a single year, and only
three or four Kalends, I think, you do not keep as
birthdays. Smoother though your face be than the
dry beach’s wave-worn pebbles, blacker your hair
than a mulberry ripe to fall, though you surpass
feathers in fluttering softness, or a lump of newly
curdled milk, and though such a rounded fullness
swells a breast as the virgin bride keeps for her
spouse, yet you seem to us, Clytus, already old; for
who would believe so many birthdays were Priam’s
or Nestor’s? Let there be at length some decent
limit and measure to your rapine. But if you still
play with us, and a single birth in one year is now
not sufficient for you, I shall regard you, Clytus,
as not having been born even once.?


3 ‘‘To regard a person as not born” was a common pbrase
to express that the person alluded to was a nobody: ef. rv.
Ixxxiii. 4; x. xxvii. 4; Petr. 58


49


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXV


Hic ubi Fortunae Reducis fulgentia late


templa nitent, felix area nuper erat :


hic stetit Arctoi formosus pulvere belli


purpureum fundens Caesar ab ore iubar:


hic lauru redimita comas et candida cultu


Roma salutavit voce manuque ducem.
grande loci meritum testantur et altera dona:
stat sacer et domitis gentibus arcus ovat.


hie gemini currus numerant elephanta frequentem,


sufficit inmensis aureus ipse iugis.
haec est digna tuis, Germanice, porta triumphis ;
hos aditus urbem Martis habere decet.


LXVI


AveusTo pia tura victimasque
pro vestro date Silio, Camenae.
bis senos iubet en redire fasces,
nato consule, nobilique virga
vatis Castaliam domum sonare
rerum prima salus et una Caesar.
gaudenti superest adhuc quod optet,
felix purpura tertiusque consul.
Pompeio dederit licet senatus

et Caesar genero sacros honores,
quorum pacificus ter ampliavit
Ianus nomina, Silius frequentes
mavult sic numerare consulatus.


10


10


1 A temple was built to Fortuna Redux in honour of
Domitian’s Sarmatian campaign.


* The temple of Fortuna Redux being the other.


’ The lictor, escorting the consul to his house, struck on
the door with his staff: Liv. vi. 34.


50


BOOK VIII. txv—ixvi


LXV


Heng, where far-gleaming shines the fane of For-
tune that gives return,! was of late, happy in its lot,
an open space ; here, graced by the dust of Northern
war, stood Caesar, shedding from his face effulgent
light ; here, her locks wreathed with bay, and white
of vesture, Rome with voice and hand greeted her
Chief. A second gift, too,? attests the high merit
of the spot: a consecrated arch stands in triumph
over the conquered nations; here stand two chariots
and many an elephant; he himself in gold is
master of the mighty cars. This gate, Germanicus,
is worthy of thy triumphs: such an approach it
beseems the City of Mars to possess,


LXVI


To Augustus bring, ye Camenae, pious incense and
victims on behalf of your Silius. Lo! by a son’s
consulship Caesar, our chief and only ward, bids the
twice six axes return, and the door of the poet sire
resound to the lictor’s noble staff? Yet this re-
mains for his joy to wish for, the blessed purple
of a third consul.4 Though to Pompeius the senate,
to his son-in-law ® Caesar, gave sacred honours, and
peaceful Janus thrice enrolled their names,° yet
thus would Silius rather reckon repeated consul-
ships.

“M. hopes that Silius’ second son (who, however, died
shortly afterwards) may become consul, three consulships
thus falling to one house. The father was consul a.p. 68 ;
vit. Ixiii. 9.

5 Agrippa, who married Julia, Augustus’ daughter.

8 The consular Fasti were kept in the Temple of Janus.


51


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXVII


Horas quinque puer nondum tibi nuntiat, et tu
iam conviva mihi, Caeciliane, venis,

cum modo distulerint raucae vadimonia quartae
et Floralicias lasset harena feras.

curre, age, et inlotos revoca, Calliste, ministros; 5
sternantur lecti: Caeciliane, sede.

caldam poscis aquam: nondum mihi frigida venit ;
alget adhuc nudo clusa culina foco.

mane veni potius; nam cur te quinta moretur?
ut iantes, sero, Caeciliane, venis. 10


LXVIII


Qui Corcyraei vidit pomaria regis,
rus, Entelle, tuae praeferet ille domus.
invida purpureos urat ne bruma racemos
et gelidum Bacchi munera frigus edat,
condita perspicua vivit vindemia gemma 5
et tegitur felix nec tamen uva latet:
femineum lucet sic per bombycina corpus,
calculus in nitida sic numeratur aqua.
quid non ingenio voluit natura licere ?
autumnum sterilis ferre iubetur hiemps. 10


1 of. IV. vili. 2:
2 4.e. adjourned the court. Vadimonia were bonds re-
quired of the parties to a suit to ensure their appearance.


52


BOOK VIII. txvin-_xvin


LXVII


eTue boy does not yet announce to you the fifth
hour, and yet you, Caecilianus, come already as my
guest, although the fourth hour, hoarse with plead-
ing,! has only just enlarged the bail-bonds,? and the
arena still wearies the wild beasts at Flora’s games.3
Come, run, Callistus, and call back the unwashed
servants; let the couches be spread: Caecilianus, sit
down. You ask for warm water: my cold has not
yet arrived ;* my kitchen is closed and chill, its fire
unlaid. Come rather at daybreak; for why should
the fifth hour keep you waiting? For a breakfast
you come late, Caecilianus. :


LXVIII


He who has seen the orchards of Corcyra’s king 5
will prefer, Entellus, the country your house con-
tains. That jealous winter may not sear the purple
clusters, and chill frost consume the gifts of Bacchus,
your vineyard, blooms shut in transparent glass, and
the fortunate grape is roofed and yet unhid. So
shine a woman’s limbs through silk, so is the pebble
counted in pellucid water. What power has not
Nature wished for mind? Barren winter is bidden
to bear autumn’s fruits.®


3 Hares and goats were hunted in the arena at the Ludi


Florales.
4 M. had no water laid on to his house: cf. 1x. xix.


5 Alcinous: cf. vil. xlii. 6.
8 cf. a similar epigram, VIII. xiv.


33


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXIX


Miranris veteres, Vacerra, solos
nec laudas nisi mortuos poetas.
ignoscas petimus, Vacerra: tanti
non est, ut placeam tibi, perire.


LXX


QuanTa quies placidi tantast facundia Nervae,
sed cohibet vires ingeniumque pudor.

cum siccare sacram largo Permessida posset
ore, verecundam maluit esse sitim,

Pieriam tenui frontem redimire corona 5
contentus, famae nec dare vela suae.

sed tamen hunc nostri scit temporis esse Tibullum,
carmina qui docti nota Neronis habet.


LXXI


QuarTTvor argenti libras mihi tempore brumae
misisti ante annos, Postumiane, decem ;

speranti plures (nam stare aut crescere debent
munera) venerunt plusve minusve duae ;

tertius et quartus multo inferiora tulerunt ; 5
libra fuit quinto Septiciana quidem ;

besalem ad scutulam sexto pervenimus anno;
post hunc in cotula rasa selibra data est ;


! Afterwards emperor. His poetical ability is also alluded
to in IX. xxvi.


54


BOOK VIII. cx1x—ixx:


LXIX


You admire, Vacerra, the ancients alone, and praise
none but dead poets. Your pardon, pray, Vacerra:
it is not worth my while, merely to please you, to
die.


LXX


Great as is the restraint, so great is the eloquence
of placid Nerva,! but modesty restrains his power
and genius. Though he might have drained sacred
Permessis? in full draughts, he chose to slake his
thirst with diffidence, content to wreathe his poet’s
brow with a slender crown, and to leave his sail
unspread to the breeze of his own fame. Yet that
he is the Tibullus of our time each man knows who
keeps in mind the lays of learned Nero.’


LXXI


Four pounds of silver plate in winter’s season you
sent me, Postumianus, ten years ago. While I hoped
for a greater weight—for gifts should stand fixed or
grow—there arrived two pounds more or less. The
third and the fourth year brought much inferior
presents: in the fifth was one pound, Septicius’+
work to boot. I came down to an eight-ounce
oblong dish in the sixth year; the next was given
me a bare half-pound in the shape of a small cup.


2 A fountain (also called Aganippe) sacred to the Muses,
and arising in Mt. Helicon.

3 Nero is said to have called Nerva his Tibullus,

4 ¢.¢. inferior: of. Iv. lxxxviii. 3.


55


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


octavus ligulam misit sextante minorem ;
nonus acu levius vix cocleare tulit. ~ 10
quod mittat nobis decumus iam non habet annus:
quattuor ad libras, Postumiane, redi.


LXXII


NonpumM murice cultus asperoque

morsu pumicis aridi politus

Arcanum properas sequi, libelle,

quem pulcherrima iam redire Narbo,

docti Narbo Paterna Votieni, 5
ad leges iubet annuosque fasces:

votis quod paribus tibi petendum est,
continget locus ille et hic amicus,

quam vellem fieri meus libellus!


LXXIII :


IsTaNTI, quo nec sincerior alter habetur
pectore nec nivea simplicitate prior,
si dare vis nostrae vires animosque Thaliae
et victura petis carmina, da quod amem.
Cynthia te vatem fecit, lascive Properti ; 5
ingenium Galli pulchra Lycoris erat ;
fama est arguti Nemesis formosa Tibulli;
Lesbia dictavit, docte Catulle, tibi:
non me Paeligni nec spernet Mantua vatem,
si qua Corinna mihi, si quis Alexis erit. 10


1 The full name appears to have been Colonia Julia Paterna
Narbo Marcia, now Narbonne. It was the capital of Gallia
Narbonensis.,


56


BOOK VIII. txxi-txxm

The eighth sent me a dessert-spoon less than two
ounces weight: the ninth produced—with difficulty
—a snail-pick lighter than a needle. The tenth
year now has nothing to send me: to your four
pounds, Postumianus, return.


LXXII


TuHouGH you are not yet smart with purple and
smoothed by the rough bite of dry pumice, you
haste, little book, to follow Arcanus, whom most
lovely Narbo—Narbo Paterna! of the learned Vo-
tienus—now bids return to declare the laws and to
yearly office. “Twill be your lot—to be sued for with
equal prayers—to see that spot and to have this
friend. How I wish I could become my own little
book!


LXXIII


Israntius,? than whom none other is held more
true of heart, before whom is none in pure sin-
cerity, if thou wouldst give strength and spirit to
my Muse, and lookest for poems that shall live, give
me something to love. ’Twas Cynthia made thee a
poet, wanton Propertius; of Gallus the inspiration
was fair Lycoris; tuneful Tibullus’ renown sprang
from lovely Nemesis; Lesbia prompted thee, learned
Catullus. The Pelignians® will not spurn me, nor
Mantua,‘ as a bard, if some Corinna, if some Alexis
be my own.


2 Istantius Rufus: cf. vii. li. 21.
3 Countrymen of Ovid,
4 Birthplace of Virgil.


VOL. U. Cc 54%


- THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXIV


Op.tomacuus nunc es, fueras opthalmicus ante.
fecisti medicus quod facis oplomachus.


LXXV


Dom repetit sera conductos nocte penates
Lingonus a Tecta Flaminiaque recens,
expulit offenso vitiatum pollice talum
et iacuit toto corpore fusus humi.
quid faceret Gallus, qua se ratione moveret ? 5
ingenti domino servulus unus erat,
tam macer ut minimam posset vix ferre lucernam :
succurrit misero casus opemque tulit.
quattuor inscripti portabant vile cadaver,
accipit infelix qualia mille rogus ; 10
hos comes invalidus summissa voce precatur,
ut quocumque velint corpus inane ferant:
permutatur onus stipataque tollitur alte
grandis in angusta sarcina sandapila.
hic mihi de multis unus, Lucane, videtur 15
cui merito dici “ mortue Galle” potest.


LXXVI


“Dic verum mihi, Marce, dic amabo;
nil est quod magis audiam libenter.”’
sic et cum recitas tuos libellos,

et causam quotiens agis clientis,


ah similar opigranns, I. xxx. and xlvii,
of IL. Veo:


58


BOOK VIII. uxxrv-ixxvi


LXXIV


You are now a gladiator: you were an eye-special-
ist before. You did as doctor what you do now as
gladiator.!


LXXV


Wuie late at night a Lingonian—just returning
_ from the Covered? and Flaminian Ways—was making
for his hired lodging, catching his big toe, he put
out his ankle, and lay upset all his length on the
ground. What should the Gaul do? how could he
move? The huge master had a single tiny slave, so
thin that he could barely carry the smallest lantern :
chance came to the rescue of the wretched man,
and brought aid. Four branded slaves were carrying
& common corpse—the pauper’s burying-ground re-
ceives a thousand such—these slaves the weak at-
tendant besought in a low voice to shift the lifeless
body wherever they wished. The load is changed
and the cargo is lifted high and crammed in—a huge
cargo in a narrow bier. This fellow seems to me,
Lucanus, to be the one of many to whom can justly
be said, “ Oh dead Gaul.’


LXXVI


“Trett me the truth, Marcus, tell me, please:
there is nothing I would more gladly hear.’’ Such,
Gallicus, both when you recite your poems and
whenever you plead a client’s cause is your prayer

3 ** Mortue Galle” was the refrain of the verses with


which the retiarius (net-caster) used to provoke his oppo-
nent, the mirmillo (who wore a Gaulish helmet).
59


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


oras, Gallice, me rogasque semper. 5
durum est me tibi quod petis negare.

vero verius ergo quid sit audi:

verum, Gallice, non libenter audis.


LXXVII


LisEr, amicorum dulcissima cura tuorum,
Liber, in aeterna vivere digne rosa,
si sapis, Assyrio semper tibi crinis amomo
splendeat et cingant florea serta caput ;
candida nigrescant vetulo crystalla Falerno 5
et caleat blando mollis amore torus.
qui sic vel medio finitus vixit in aevo,
longior huic facta est quam data vita fuit.


LXXVIII


Quos cuperet Phlegraea suos victoria ludos,
Indica quos cuperet pompa, Lyaee, tuos,
fecit Hyperborei celebrator Stella triumphi,
o pudor! o pietas! et putat esse parum.
non illi satis est turbato sordidus auro 5
Hermus et Hesperio qui sonat orbe Tagus.
omnis habet sua dona dies: nec linea dives
cessat et in populum multa rapina cadit ;
nunc veniunt subitis lasciva nomismata nimbis,
nunc dat spectatas tessera larga feras, 10
nunc implere sinus securos gaudet et absens
sortitur dominos, ne laceretur, avis.


1 of. a very similar epigram, v. xiii.

2 For a similar sentiment, ¢f xX. xxili. 7, 8.

3 The victory of the gods over the giants in the Phlegraean
Plains in Campania: cf. vii, 1. 1.


60


BOOK VIII. txxvi-_xxvini


and request to me continually. It is hard for me
to refuse what you want. Hear, then, what is truer
than truth; truth, Gallicus, you do not willingly
hear.!


LXXVII


Liner, of thy friends the care most sweet, Liber,
worthy to live amid deathless roses, if thou art wise,
let thy locks glisten alway with Assyrian balm and
chaplets of flowers encircle thy head; let thy clear
erystal darken with old Falernian, and thy soft couch
warm with love’s endearments. Whoever has so
lived, to him, even did the end come in middle age,
life has been made longer than was appointed.?


LXXVIII


Sports which a Phlegraean victory? might have
craved for its own, which thy Indian pageant, Lyaeus,!
might have craved to be thine, Stella, honouring the
Northern triumph, has given; and yet—what modesty
is his, what loyalty !—he holds them too small. Not
for him suffices the wealth of Hermus, dark with
tumbled gold, and of Tagus echoing in the Western
world. Each day provides its own gifts; the cord’s
rich burden 5 fails not, and full-laden spoil falls upon
the people; now come in sudden showers sportive
tokens;® now the bounteous ticket assigns the beasts
of the arena; now the bird is glad to fill a lap that
gives it safety, and—that it be not torn asunder—


4 ChoviMl. XXxvis 7.
5 A cord hung with gifts for the populace.
¢ ntitling the holder to receive presents,


61


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quid numerem currus ter denaque praemia palmae,
quae dare non semper consul uterque solet?

omnia sed, Caesar, tanto superantur honore, 15
quod spectatorem te tua laurus habet.


LXXIX


Omnis aut vetulas habes amicas

aut turpis vetulisque foediores.

has ducis comites trahisque tecum

per convivia porticus theatra.

sic formosa, Fabulla, sic puella es. 5


LXXX
SaNcToruM nobis miracula reddis avorum
nec pateris, Caesar, saecula cana mori,
cum veteres Latiae ritus renovantur harenae
et pugnat virtus simpliciore manu.
sic priscis servatur honos te praeside templis 5
et casa tam culto sub Iove numen habet ;
sic nova dum condis, revocas, Auguste, priora:
debentur quae sunt quaeque fuere tibi.


1 Birds are, instead of being scrambled for and so torn to
pieces, assigned by lot. Statius (Sylv. 1. vi. 75 seq.) describes
one of Domitian’s Saturnalian shows, where huge clouds of
birds descend ‘‘swhito volatu” among the people, birds sup-
posed by Verrall (Lit. Hssays, 82) to have been toy ones with
tickets for presents attached.


62


BOOK VIII. txxvin—-_xxx


_wins, while apart, by lot its owner.!_ Why should I
count the chariots, and victory’s thrice ten prizes,
which both consuls are not always wont to give? ?
But all, Caesar, is surpassed by this great glory, that
thy triumph hath thee a spectator.


LXXIX


Aut the female friends you have are either old
crones or ugly, and fouler than old crones. These, as
your companions, you conduct and drag about with
you through parties, colonnades, theatres. In this
way, Fabulla, you are lovely, in this way young.


LXXxX


Tuov restorest to us, Caesar, the wonders of our
honoured grandsires’ age, and lettest not the times
of old die, now that the ancient fashions of the
Latin arena are renewed and valour fights with
more natural hand.® So also for the old-world fanes
is kept their honour while thou art Governor, and
the Cot’ under a Jove so worshipped keeps its
sanctity ;° so, while thou dost found the new, thou
bringest back, Augustus, the former things: what is,
and what was, are owed to thee!


2 There were thirty races. The consuls exhibited games
on their entrance into office.

3 Domitian had restored pugilism in the amphitheatre.

4 The Cot (Casa Romult) was a straw-thatched cottage on
the Palatine, and was revered as the legendary dwelling of
the Founder of Rome: ¢f. Virg. Aen. vill. 654.

5 Jove is magnificently honoured, yet the humble Cot is


hallowed.
63


ri


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXI


Non per mystica sacra Dindymenes

nec per Niliacae bovem iuvencae,

nullos denique per deos deasque

iurat Gellia, sed per uniones.

hos amplectitur, hos perosculatur, 5
hos fratres vocat, hos vocat sorores,

hos natis amat acrius duobus.

his si quo careat misella casu,

victuram negat esse se nec horam.

eheu, quam bene nunc, Papiriane, 10
Annaei faceret manus Sereni!


LXXXII


DanTE tibi turba querulos, Auguste, libellos
nos quoque quod domino carmina parva damus,
posse deum rebus pariter Musisque vacare
scimus et haec etiam serta placere tibi.
fer vates, Auguste, tuos: nos gloria dulcis, 5
nos tua cura prior deliciaeque sumus.
non quercus te sola decet nec laurea Phoebi:
fiat et ex hedera civica nostra tibi.


1 Apis, the sacred Egyptian bull, representing Osiris, the
husband of Isis, who was represented as a heifer: cf. 11. xiv. 8.

2 An obscure allusion. Perhaps S. was notoriously a
wearer of pearls. Some commentators take him for a noted
thief. But M. would then hardly have mentioned his name.

3 Domitian had himself written poetry before he became
emperor.


64


BOOK VIII. wxxxi-_xxx1


LXXXI


Nor by the mystic rites of Dindymene, nor by
the bull,! the spouse of Nile’s heifer, in a word by
no gods and goddesses does Gellia swear, but by her
pearls. These she hugs, these she kisses passion-
ately, these she calls her brothers, these she calls
her sisters, these she loves more ardently than her
two sons. If by any chance the unhappy woman
should lose them, she says she would not live even
an hour. Ah, how usefully now, Papirianus, would
the hand of Annaeus Serenus be employed ! ?


LXXXII


Wuite the throng offers to you, Augustus, its
querulous petitions, the reason why we too offer to
our Master a few poems, is because we know that a
god can have leisure at once for business and for the
Muses, and that even this wreath of song pleases
you. Bear with your bards, Augustus: we are your
treasured pride, we are your earlier® care, and your
delight. Not alone does the oak‘ beseem you, or
Phoebus’ laurel ;® let there be made a civic crown
for you of ivy® as well!

4 The corona civica of oak-leaves given to one who had
preserved the life of a citizen, afterwards given to the
emperor as the general preserver.


5 The crown of victory in war. ;
6 The distinction of a poet: cf. Virg. Hel. viii. 12.


65


= sitesee td =
tad AS ood ami eeu:
rene a SEN ne


ve See Patt oe ‘sole Savin aie pel ore,
22 ib Aaa) ara ite ld Ad adie
Bs fez Get ORY ,to ewe = ae ris esehing | FIé2h eho oe
nature: eamehin CHS. 2aae aie Ste Sead T <a
tina pale onthr erert ion sob ltiges ycke' oasdt. viel
sod coal Priests 9H 2crok site saad ervieig 53th
pues netnileeh ars Soar ae eS iL ate:
Byrn 208 iieod ali aren gee raortt gaol filtre
2Stheas v wee qieod pant ah seed
& Sow eae St abe owe ee me Bnece


ee eg


eth een & 9% a! aii ncaa pike aa

} tix oth ay Tass oT Aseaeyy eikh-secittbery,-
* swilt-wood om ables SPO ae fyptenl 5
ihe 88 ea ari na 4 asl BEAD emternebat, ;
paienonhty ie be ‘eo ASR ike eres easy ‘baw.
Tkigrata, ww .etde sa, isd ihe ro | tie a aious


—
ise Tyee qraus Ban | Tey a oe!


eon} uaT, isa e's ¥ dis? ae 4 at rola th


two Mi re ‘ rp tial ft. 4a Poets et gas by eh


AY


bal ator ou ol mig, ‘marent, shots 9! saith ences.
GD Gk: Say aber wea Ae ne A Tes. ‘wet


Rut PEE


LIBER NONUS


Have, mi Torani, frater carissime. epigramma,
quod extra ordinem paginarum est, ad Stertinium
clarissimum virum scripsimus, qui imaginem meam
ponere in bybliotheca sua voluit. de quo scribendum
tibi putavi, ne ignorares Avitus iste quis vocaretur.
vale et para hospitium.


Note, licet nolis, sublimi pectore vates,
cui referet serus praemia digna cinis,

hoc tibi sub nostra breve carmen imagine vivat,
quam non obscuris iungis, Avite, viris :

“Tle ego sum nulli nugarum laude secundus, 5
quem non miraris sed puto, lector, amas.

maiores maiora sonent: mihi parva locuto
sufficit in vestras saepe redire manus.”


I


Dom Ianus hiemes, Domitianus autumnos,
Augustus annis commodabit aestates,
dum grande famuli nomen adseret Rheni
Germanicarum magna lux Kalendarum,


1 Addressed as Avitus also in I. xvi.
2 7.e a Senator. §. was consul a.p. 92,


68


BOOK IX


Greetinc, my Toranius, dearest brother. The
epigram which is supernumerary to my pages I have
written to Stertinius,} a most illustrious man,? who
wished to place my bust in his library. Concerning
whom I thought I ought to write to you, that you
might not be ignorant who was the Avitus there
addressed. Farewell, and get ready your hospitality.


Famed, though against thy will, as a bard of sub-
lime invention, to whom death long hence shall
pay thy fitting meed, let this short stanza abide,
I pray thee, beneath that bust of me, which thou
addest, Avitus, to those of not ignoble men:


“Lo! he am I whose light verse yields to none;
Reader, thy love, not awe, methinks I’ve won.
Let greater men strike greater notes: I earn
Enough if my small themes oft to thy hands return.”


I


Wuie Janus shall lend winters to the year, Do-
mitianus autumns, Augustus summers; while the
great day of the Germanic Kalends shall claim a
mighty name from the subservient Rhine;? while


Domitian, copying Augustus, who named August, gave
the names Germanicus and Domitianus to September and
October respectively, because he was made emperor in the
one and was born in the other: Suet, Dom. 13.

69


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Tarpeia summi saxa dum patris stabunt, 5
dum voce supplex dumque ture placabit
matrona divae dulce Iuliae numen,

manebit altum Flaviae decus gentis

cum sole et astris cumque luce Romana.

invicta quidquid condidit manus, caeliest. 10


II


Pauper amicitiae cum sis, Lupe, non es amicae
et queritur de te mentula sola nihil.
illa siligineis pinguescit adultera cunnis,
convivam pascit nigra farina tuum.
incensura nives dominae Setina liquantur, 5
nos bibimus Corsi pulla venena cadi;
empta tibi nox est fundis non tota paternis,
non sua desertus rura sodalis arat ;
splendet Erythraeis perlucida moecha lapillis,
ducitur addictus, te futuente, cliens ; 10
octo Syris suffulta datur lectica puellae,
nudum sandapilae pondus amicus erit.
i nunc et miseros, Cybele, praecide cinaedos:
haec erat, haec cultris mentula digna tuis.


Ill


Quantum iam superis, Caesar, caeloque dedisti
si repetas et si creditor esse velis,


4 of. vi. iii. 6 5 VI. xiii.
* The temple built by Domitian in honour of the gens
Flavia: of. 1. iii. 12,


y Ke)


BOOK IX. tm


the Tarpeian rock of the Sire Supreme shall stand ;
while, suppliant with prayer, and with incense, the
matron shall propitiate the fair deity of Julia! now
divine: the towering glory of the Flavian race?
shall endure, coeternal with sun and stars, and with
the light that shines on Rome. Whatever an un-
conquered arm has founded, that is of Heaven!


I


ALTHOUGH you are a poor man to your friends,
Lupus, you are not so to your mistress, and onl
your virility has no grievance against you. She, the
adulteress, fattens on lewdly shaped loaves :? black
meal feeds your guest. Setine wines are strained
to inflame your lady’s snow;‘ we drink the black
poison of a Corsican jar. Her favours—not un-
shared—are bought at the price of your paternal
estate ; your comrade, neglected, ploughs fields that
are not his own: the adulteress is bright and shining
with Eastern jewels; your client is ‘committed and
dragged off to prison while you enjoy amours: a
litter poised on eight Syrian slaves is given to your
girl; your friend—a naked corpse—will be the
burden of a pauper’s bier. Go now, Cybele! and
castrate wretched paederasts: here, here is matter
long since worthy of your knife!


III


Wene you, Caesar, to reclaim, and did you wish to
be creditor for all you have already given to the


Sef. XIV lXix:
§ of. v. Ixiv. 2; XIV. exvii.


71


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


grandis in aetherio licet auctio fiat Olympo
coganturque dei vendere quidquid habent,

conturbabit Atlans et non erit uncia tota 5
decidat tecum qua pater ipse deum.

pro Capitolinis quid enim tibi solvere templis,
quid pro Tarpeiae frondis honore potest?

quid pro culminibus geminis matrona Tonantis ?
Pallada praetereo: res agit illa tuas. 10

quid loquar Alciden Phoebumque piosque Laconas ?
addita quid Latio Flavia templa polo?

expectes et sustineas, Auguste, necesse est:
nam tibi quod solvat non habet arca Iovis.


EN
Aureouts futui cum possit Galla duobus
et plus quam futui, si totidem addideris,
aureolos a te cur accipit, Aeschyle, denos?
non fellat tanti Galla. quid ergo? tacet.


V
Nupserg vis Prisco: non miror, Paula ; sapisti.
ducere te non vult Priscus: et ille sapit.


VI
Tisr, summe Rheni domitor et parens orbis,
pudice princeps, gratias agunt urbes :


1 An wnceia for every as, %.e. a penny in the shilling.
BT CheclVicl Gr LVanlhVenle


5 Domitian regarded himself as being peculiarly under the
protection, and in fact the son, of Pallas.


72


BOOK IX. m-vi


high gods and to heaven, then, though a great
auction were held on skyey Olympus and gods were
forced to sell whatever they possess, Atlas will go
bankrupt, and there will not be a full twelfth!
wherewith the Sire of the gods himself may settle
with you. For what can he pay you in return for
Capitoline temples, what for the glory of the Tarpeian
oak crown?? What can the Thunderer’s dame pay
for her two temples? Pallas I pass by: she is your
partner.2 Why should I speak of Alcides and Phoe-
bus, and the loving Spartan twins?* Why of the
Flavian fane, a new gift to the Latin heaven?® You
must wait and endure, Augustus; for to pay you
Jove’s money-chest has not the wherewithal.


IV
ALTHOUGH Galla’s favours may be secured for two
gold pieces, and special favours if you add as much
again, why does she receive ten pieces from you,
Aeschylus? Galla’s evil practices are not so dear as
that. What is, then? Her silence.


V
You wish to marry Priscus; I don’t wonder, Paula;
you are wise. Priscus does not wish to marry you :
he, too, is wise.
VI
To thee, Conqueror supreme of Rhine, and parent
of the world, O modest Prince, the cities give their


4 Castor and Pollux. ;
5 i.e. to the Roman Pantheon, the deified emperors: cf.


1X. xxxiv. 2.


73


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


populos habebunt; parere iam scelus non est.
non puer avari sectus arte mangonis

virilitatis damna maeret ereptae, 5
nec quam superbus conputet stipem leno

dat prostituto misera mater infanti.

qui nec cubili fuerat ante te quondam,

pudor esse per te coepit et lupanari.


vil


Dicer de Libycis redu7i tibi gentibus, Afer,
continuis volui quinque diebus “ Have ”:
“Non vacat”’ aut “Dormit” dictum est bis terque
reverso.
iam satis est. non vis, Afer, havere: vale.


VIll


Tamguam parva foret sexus iniuria nostri
foedandos populo prostit isse mares,
iam cunae lenonis erant, ut ab ubere raptus
sordida vagitu posceret aera puer:
inmatura dabant infandas corpora poenas. 5
non tulit Ausonius talia monstra pater,
idem qui teneris nuper succurrit ephebis,
ne faceret steriles saeva libido viros.
dilexere prius pueri iuvenesque senesque,
at nunc infantes te quoque, Caesar, amant. 10


AS Chroellul ds syle yi
a“ Vale” was said when the survivors took leave of the


74


BOOK IX. vi-vm


_ thanks: population shall they have; to bring forth
is at last no crime.1 The boy, mutilated by the
grasping slave-dealer’s art, does not lament the loss
of his ravished manhood, nor does a needy mother
give her prostituted infant the pittance which the
haughty pander is to count out. The modesty which
erewhile before thee not even the marriage-bed
possessed, now by thy means even a brothel begins
to show.


VII


Wuen you had returned from the tribes of Libya,
Afer, five days running I wanted to say “Good day!”
“He is engaged,” or “ He is taking a siesta,” was
the message when I had returned twice and three
times. Enough! Afer, you don’t want a “Good
day”: “Good bye.” ?


VIII


As if it were small injury to our sex to prostitute
our males to pollution by the people, the cradle was
but now so the pander’s own that a boy snatched
from his mother’s breast begged with infant wail for
sordid coin; bodies immature suffered unutterable
outrage.2 The Father of Italy could not endure
such enormities, even he who of late succoured 4
tender youths, that cruel lust might not make
barren men. Boys loved thee before, and young
men, and aged sires ; but now infants, too, love thee,
Caesar.


corpse at a funeral: ¢f. v. Ixvi. 2. ‘‘I shall look upon you
as dead in future,” says M.

3 Domitian revived the Lew Scantinia against unnatural
crimes: Suet. Dom. viii.

4 of. Ix. vi. 4.


75


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


IX


Nix tibi legavit Fabius, Bithynice, cui tu


annua, si memini, milia sena dabas.


plus nulli dedit ille: queri, Bithynice, noli:


annua legavit milia sena tibi.


x


Cenes, Canthare, cum foris libenter,
clamas et maledicis et minaris.
deponas animos truces monemus :
liber non potes et gulosus esse.


XI


NomeEN cum violis rosisque natum,
quo pars optima nominatur anni,
Hyblam quod sapit Atticosque flores,
quod nidos olet alitis superbae ;
nomen nectare dulcius beato,

quo mallet Cybeles puer vocari

et qui pocula temperat Tonanti,
quod si Parrhasia sones in aula,
respondent Veneres Cupidinesque ;
nomen nobile molle delicatum

versu dicere non rudi volebam :

sed tu, syllaba contumax, repugnas.
dicunt Eiarinon tamen poetie,

sed Graeci quibus est nihil negatum
et quos “Apes “Apes decet sonare :
nobis non licet esse tam disertis

qui Musas colimus severiores.


1 ** You now save the sum you spent on him.”
* The honey of Hybla, in Sicily, and of Hymettus respeo-
tively : ef. v. xxxix. 3; vil. Ixxxviii. 8.


76


10


15


BOOK IX. 1x-x1


IX


Fasrus has bequeathed you nothing, Bithynicus,
he to whom, if I remember, you used to give six
thousand sesterces a year. More he gave to no man;
don’t complain, Bithynicus: he has bequeathed you
six thousand sesterces a year.!


x


ALTHouGH you gladly dine abroad, Cantharus, you
bawl and abuse and threaten people. Discard such
truculent spirits, I warn you; you can’t be both
independent and a glutton.


XI


A NaME born with the violets and the roses, after
which the year’s best part is called, that savours of
Hybla and Attic flowers,? that smells of the nest of
the lordly fowl;* a name, sweeter than nectar divine,
by which Cybele’s loved boy 4 and he who blends his
draught for the Thunderer, would fain be called;
whereto, shouldst thou sound it in the Palatine hall,
Venuses and Cupids make answer; a name noble,
soft, delicate—this I wished to utter in no rugged
verse: but you, an obstinate syllable, rebel. Yet
poets speak of Eiarinos; but they were Greeks, to
whom nothing is denied, and whom it becomes to
sound Ares short as Ares long.6 We cannot be so
versatile, who court Muses more unbending.


3 The phoenix: cf. vi. lv. 2.
4 Attis: cf v. xli. 2.
§ The four short syllables in Karinos will not go into M.’s
metre.
8 Homer (Ji. v. 31) uses both quantities.in one line : *Apes,
“Apes BporoAorye, pratpdve, TeryeoimATTa|.
77


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XII


Sr: daret autumnus mihi nomen, Oporinos essem,
horrida si brumae sidera, Chimerinos ;

dictus ab aestivo Therinos tibi mense vocarer:
tempora cui nomen verna dedere, quis est?


XIII


Nomen habes teneri quod tempora nuncupat anni,
cum breve Cecropiae ver populantur apes:

nomen Acidalia meruit quod harundine pingi,
quod Cytherea sua scribere gaudet acu ;

nomen Erythraeis quod littera facta lapillis, 5
gemma quod Heliadum pollice trita notet ;

quod pinna scribente grues ad sidera tollant ;
quod decet in sola Caesaris esse domo,


XIV


Hunec quem mensa tibi, quem cena paravit amicum
esse putas fidae pectus amicitiae?

aprum amat et mullos et sumen et ostrea, non te.
tam bene si cenem, noster amicus erit.


1 The Greek adjectives expressing autumn, winter, and
summer are respectively ‘Omwpivds, Xetmepivds, and @epevds.
“Of spring ” is similarly ’Eapivds.

* Acidalia was a name of Venus from a fountain in
Boeotia. She was also called Cytherea from Cythera, an
island off the coast of Laconia.


18


BOOK IX. xn-xiv


XII


Were Autumn to give me my name, Oporinus
should I be, or if rough winter’s sky, Chimerinos ;
named after summer’s month, to you I should be
called Therinos: who is he to whom spring’s season
has given his name?!


XIIt


Tuov hast a name that bespeaks the season of the
budding year, when Attic bees lay waste the brief-
lived spring; a name meet to be writ in colour by
Acidalia’s? pen, which Cytherea joys to embroider
with her own needle; a name which letters strung
of Indian pearls, which a jewel of the Heliades
rubbed by the fingers, should mark; which cranes
with wings that write upon the skies‘ should lift
to heaven; which it beseems to be in Caesar’s house
alone.


XIV


Tuis man, whom your table, whom your dinner
has made your friend—think you his heart one of
loyal friendship? ’Tis boar he loves, and mullet,
and sow’s paps, and oysters, not you. Were I to
dine so well, he will be my friend.


3 By amber, into which the tears of the H. for the death
of their brother Phaethon were turned. It became fragrant
by rubbing: of. m1. lxv. 5; x1. viii. 6.

4 Palamedes was said to have invented the Greek Y¥ (the
Latin V) by observing the formation of cranes in flight.
V begins ver (spring), and represents Earinos: of. xutI.
xxv.


79


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XV


InscripsiT tumulis septem scelerata virorum
“Se fecisse”’ Chloe. quid pote simplicius ?


XVI


ConsiLium formae speculum dulcisque capillos
Pergameo posuit dona sacrata deo

ille puer tota domino gratissimus aula,
nomine qui signat tempora verna suo.

felix quae tali censetur munere tellus! 5
nec Ganymedeas mallet habere comas.


XVII


LaTonarE venerande nepos, qui mitibus herbis
Parcarum exoras pensa brevesque colos,

hos tibi laudatos domino, rata vota,! capillos
ille tuus Latia misit ab urbe puer ;

addidit et nitidum sacratis crinibus orbem, 5
quo felix facies iudice tuta fuit.

tu iuvenale decus serva, ne pulchrior ille
in longa fuerit quam breviore coma.


XVIII


Esr mihi (sitque precor longum te praeside, Caesar)
rus minimum, parvi sunt et in urbe lares.


1 sua vota B, rata voce +».


1 The words are ambiguous. ‘‘ Chloe fecit” was intended
to mean “‘C. built this tomb.” M. suggests ‘‘ wrought the
death of her husbands.”


80


BOOK IX. xv—xvur


XV


AccursEp Chloe inscribed the monuments of her
seven husbands with ‘Chloe wrought this.” What
could be plainer? 1?


XVI


His mirror, beauty’s counsellor, and his darling
locks—gifts dedicated to the god of Pergamus?—
that boy® has offered, who, in all the palace most
dear to his master, by his name denotes the time
of spring. Happy the land whose worth is gauged
by such a gift! It would not choose instead even
the tresses of Ganymede.


XVII

Reverep grandson of Latona, who with the magic
of thy gentle herbs dost win over‘ the threads
and brief distaffs of the Fates, these locks by his
master praised thy® boy has sent, his vow’s fulfil-
ment, from Latium’s city; and to his consecrated
hair has he added the bright disk, by whose judg-
ment his happy beauty was assured. Do thou pre-
serve his youthful bloom, that he be no fairer with
long curls than with shortened locks!


XVIII


I nave—and I pray I may have it long, Caesar,
beneath thy guardianship—a tiny country house, and


2 Aesculapius, the god of healing, who had a temple at
Pergamus in Asia Minor.

3 Earinos, Domitian’s cupbearer, mentioned in Epp. xi.—xiii.

4 4.e, who dost prolong human life.

5 Perhaps Earinos came from Pergamus,


81


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


sed de valle brevi quas det sitientibus hortis
curva laboratas antlia tollit aquas :

sicca domus queritur nullo se rore foveri, 5
cum mihi vicino Marcia fonte sonet.

quam dederis nostris, Auguste, penatibus undam,
Castalis haec nobis aut lovis imber erit.


XIX


Laupas balnea versibus trecentis
cenantis bene Pontici, Sabelle.
vis cenare, Sabelle, non lavari.


XX


Haec, quae tota patet tegiturque et marmore et auro,
infantis domini conscia terra fuit.
felix 0, quantis sonuit vagitibus et quas
vidit reptantis sustinuitque manus !
hic steterat veneranda domus quae praestitit orbi 5
quod Rhodos astrifero, quod pia Creta, polo.
Curetes texere lovem crepitantibus armis,
semiviri poterant qualia ferre Phryges:
at te protexit superum pater et tibi, Caesar,
pro iaculo et parma fulmen et aegis erat. 10


1 The Agua Marcia was one of the great aqueducts.
According to Strabo (v. 3) almost every house in Rome
had water laid on; see also Hor. Hp. 1. x. 20. M.’s was an
exception: ¢f. vil. Ixvii. 7.

2 An epigram on the building of the Flavian Temple on
os site of the house in which Domitian was born: Suet.

om. i.


82


BOOK IX. xvi—xx


I have, too, a small dwelling in the city. But my
curved pole and bucket lift with labour from a
shallow valley water to bestow on the thirsty garden;
the arid house complains that it is freshened by
no moisture, though Marcia babbles in my ears with
neighbouring fount.!. The water thou shalt give,
Augustus, to my household gods will be to me a
spring of Castaly or a shower of Jove.


XIX


You extol in infinite verse the baths of Ponticus
who gives good dinners, Sabellus. You wish to dine,
Sabellus, not to wash!


XX


Tuis spot of earth, which now lies wholly open,
and is being covered with marble and with gold,
knew our lord’s infant years.?, O blessed spot! With
wailings of how great a babe it echoed, and what
hands it saw and upbore as they crept! Here
had stood the house august that made real to the
world what Rhodes, what duteous Crete? made real
to the starry heaven. Cybele’s priests guarded Jove
with their rattling arms, such arms as Phrygians,
but half men, could wield ;4 but thee the Sire of the
gods safeguarded, and for thee, Caesar, thunderbolt
and aegis stood for spear and buckler.


3 7.e. the birth of a god. Pallas (Pind. Ol. vii. 35) was
said to have sprung from the head of Zeus at Rhodes. But
some commentators think Poseidon is referred to. Zeus or
Jupiter was born in Crete.

« The Curetes (demi-gods) clashed their arms to drown
the infant’s cries, lest his father Cronos should hear and
eat him,


83


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXI


Artemiporus habet puerum sed vendidit agrum ;
agrum pro puero Calliodorus habet.

dic uter ex istis melius rem gesserit, Aucte:
Artemidorus amat, Calliodorus arat.


XXII


Crepis ob haec me, Pastor, opes fortasse rogare
propter quae populus crassaque turba rogat,
ut Setina meos consumat gleba ligones
et sonet innumera compede Tuscus ager ;
ut Mauri Libycis centum stent dentibus orbes 5
et crepet in nostris aurea lamna toris,
nec labris nisi magna meis crystalla terantur
et faciant nigras nostra Falerna nives ;
ut canusinatus nostro Syrus assere sudet
et mea sit culto sella cliente frequens ; 10
aestuet ut nostro madidus conviva ministro,
quem permutatum nec Ganymede velis ;
ut lutulenta linat Tyrias mihi mula lacernas
et Massyla meum virga gubernet equum.
est nihil ex istis: superos ac sidera testor. 15
ergo quid? ut donem, Pastor, et aedificem.


XXIII


O cul virgineo flavescere contigit auro,
dic ubi Palladium sit tibi, Care, decus.


1 Wine was strained through snow: cf. v. Ixiv. 23; xrv.
Cxvii. 2 of. XIV. cxxvil. and cxxix. er Ch Xa, Slane,

* Possibly Pastor (like Gellius in rx. xlvi.) made ‘‘building”
an excuse for never ‘“‘ giving.” Friedlander explains ‘‘carry
out public works for the general good”; but this is not in
the Latin.


84


BOOK IX. xxi—xxur


XXI


ARTEMIDORUS possesses a young slave, but has
sold his land; the land Calliodorus possesses in ex-
change for the slave. Say, which of those two
made the better bargain, Auctus? Artemidorus has
his pleasure, Calliodorus his plough.


XXII


You believe, Pastor, I perhaps ask for riches for
the same reasons as the vulgar and the dense-witted
crowd ask, in order that Setia’s glebe may wear away
my hoes, and Tuscan fields clank with countless fet-
tered slaves; that a hundred round Moorish tables
may stand on Libyan tusks, and golden plating
tinkle on my couches; that none but large crystal
cups be rubbed by my lips, and that my Falernian
darken the cooling snow;! that Syrian slaves in
Canusian 2 wool may sweat beneath my litter-pole,
and my chair be crowded by full-dressed clients ;
that the tipsy guest may be hot for page of mine,
whom you would not barter even for a Ganymede;
that a mud-bespattered mule may soil my ‘Tyrian
cloak, and the rod of a Massylian*® guide my horse.
’Tis none of those things—I call to witness the high
gods and heaven! Then what? To make presents,
Pastor, and to build.#


XXIII


O tHou whose lot has been to gleam with the
Virgin’s gold,® say, Carus, where is the prize Pallas


5 ©. had won the golden olive-wreath, the prize for poetry,
at the annual contest in honour of Minerva at Domitian’s
Alban villa: cf. tv. i. 5. This he had transferred to the
Emperor’s bust.

85


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


“ Aspicis en domini fulgentes marmore vultus ?
venit ad has ultro nostra corona comas.”

Albanae livere potest pia quercus olivae,
cinxerit invictum quod prior illa caput.


XXIV


Quis Palatinos imitatus imagine vultus
Phidiacum Latio marmore vicit ebur?

haec mundi facies, haec sunt Iovis ora sereni ;
sic tonat ille deus cum sine nube tonat.

non solam tribuit Pallas tibi, Care, coronam 3;
effigiem domini, quam colis, illa dedit.


XXV


DanTEM vina tuum quotiens aspeximus Hyllum,
lumine nos, Afer, turbidiore notas.


quod, rogo, quod scelus est mollem spectare minis-


trum ?
aspicimus solem sidera templa deos.
avertam vultus, tamquam mihi pocula Gorgon
porrigat atque oculos oraque nostra petat }?
trux erat Alcides, et Hylan spectare licebat ;
ludere Mercurio cum Ganymede licet.
si non vis teneros spectet conviva ministros,
Phineas invites, Afer, et Oedipodas.


1 tegam B, petat.


10


BOOK IX. xxmi—xxv


gave thee? ‘“Seest thou there our master’s face
bright in marble? My crown unprompted passed
to those locks.” The patriot oak! may envy Alba’s
olive for that it first wreathed that unconquered
brow.


XXIV


Who, portraying in a bust Imperial features, has
in Latin marble surpassed Phidian ivory? This is
the aspect of a world, this the countenance of Jove
in calm: so thunders that god when he thunders
in cloudless skies. Not a crown alone has Pallas
granted thee, Carus; our master’s effigy which thou
dost worship has she given.


XXV


As often as we have glanced at your Hyllus while
he is serving wine, ’tis with a somewhat troubled eye
you regard us, Afer. What, what offence, I ask you,
is it to gaze on a gentle cup-bearer? We look upon
the sun, stars, temples, gods. Am I to turn away
my face as if a Gorgon offered me the cup, and were
assaulting my eyes and my face? Fierce was Al-
cides, and ’twas allowed to gaze on Hylas: Mercury
is allowed to sport along with Ganymede. If you
do not wish your guest to gaze on your youthful
servants, Afer, you should invite Phineuses and
Oedipuses.?


1 The golden oak-leaf crown, the prize of the quinquennial
oes in music, etc., in honour of Jup. Capitolinus: ef,


IV
2 Both Phineus and Oedipus were blind.
87


\
‘THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXVI


Auprt facundo qui carmina mittere Nervae,
pallida donabit glaucina, Cosme, tibi,

Paestano violas et cana ligustra colono,
Hyblaeis apibus Corsica mella dabit.

sed tamen et parvae nonnulla est gratia Musac; 5
appetitur posito vilis oliva lupo.

nec tibi sit mirum modici quod conscia vatis
iudicium metuit nostra Thalia tuum :

ipse tuas etiam veritus Nero dicitur aures,
lascivum iuvenis cum tibi lusit opus. 10


XXVII


Cum depilatos, Chreste, coleos portes

et vulturino mentulam parem collo

et prostitutis levius caput culis,

nec vivat ullus in tuo pilus crure,

purgentque saevae cana labra volsellae, 5
Curios Camillos Quintios Numas Ancos

et quidquid usquam legimus pilosorum

loqueris sonasque grandibus minax verbis,

et cum theatris saeculoque rixaris.

occurrit aliquis inter ista si draucus, 10
iam paedagogo liberatus et cuius

refibulavit turgidum faber penem,

nutu vocatum ducis, et pudet fari

Catoniana, Chreste, quod facis lingua.


1 The future emperor: cf. vit. xx.

2 The celebrated perfumer: cf. 11. lv. 1. Glaucina seems
to have been an unguent made from the plant glauctwm
(? celandine).

3 ze. will send things —and inferior things—where they
are not wanted. Corsican honey was bitter from the
abundance of yews in the island: ¢f. Verg. cl. ix. 30.


88


BOOK IX. xxvi—-xxvu


XXVI


He who ventures to send poetry to eloquent Nerva!
will present you, Cosmus,? with pale glaucine unguent,
will give to a Paestan gardener violets and white
privets, to bees of Hybla Corsican honey.8 Yet
even a humble Muse possesses some charm; a cheap
olive gives relish to a bass upon the board. And do
not wonder that, conscious of the slender powers of
her bard, my Thalia shrinks from your judgment;
even Nero himself‘ is said to have feared your critic
ears when in youth he lightly touched for you some
wanton theme.


XXVII


ALTHOUGH you carry about one part of your person,
Chrestus, plucked of hair, and another matching a
vulture’s neck, and a head smoother than _prosti-
tuted , and not a single bristle sprouts on your
shanks, and pitiless pluckings clear your bloodless
lips, you prate of Curii, Camilli, Quinctii, Numas,
Ancuses, and of all the bristly philosophers we
read of anywhere,® and you vociferate in loud and
threatening words, and quarrel with the theatres
and the age. But if, in the midst of that pother
of yours, there meet you, now freed from his
pedagogue, some sodomite di cui turgido membro
abbia il fabro sfibbiato, tu lo conduci chiamato con
un segno; e mi vergogno dire, O Chresto, cid che
fai colla tua lingua da Catone.


4° Who made verses easily : Suet. Wer. lii.
5 M. constantly reviles the hypocrisy of dissolute scoun-
drels assuming the guise of philosophers: cf I. xxiv.; IX.
_ xiviii.; and Juy. ii. 3 seqq.
Sate O
VOL. ITI. D 9


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXVIII


Dutce decus scaenae, ludorum fama, Latinus
ille ego sum, plausus deliciaeque tuae,

qui spectatorem potui fecisse Catonem,
solvere qui Curios Fabriciosque graves.

sed nihil a nostro sumpsit mea vita theatro
et sola tantum scaenicus arte feror:

nec poteram gratus domino sine moribus esse:
interius mentes inspicit ille deus.

vos me laurigeri parasitum dicite Phoebi,
Roma sui famulum dum sciat esse Iovis.


XXIX


Saecuta Nestoreae permensa, Philaeni, senectae
rapta es ad infernas tam cito Ditis aquas?

Euboicae nondum numerabas longa Sibyllae
tempora: maior erat mensibus illa tribus.

heu quae lingua silet! non illam mille catastae
vincebant, nee quae turba Sarapin amat,

nec matutini cirrata caterva magistri,
nec quae Strymonio de grege ripa sonat.

quae nune Thessalico lunam deducere rhombo,
quae sciet hos illos vendere lena toros ?


10


10


1 A celebrated mime or comic actor: cf. 11. lxxii. 3.


was also a delator, or informer.


He


2 Ben Jonson has evidently copied these lines in his tribute
to Shakespeare, ‘‘ Th’ applause, delight, the wonder of our


stage.” 3 of. 1. Intr’ Epist.
4 My art is that of a mime, not my morals.


5 There appears to have been a fellowship of mim? (comic
actors), called the ‘* Parasites of Phoebus.” At any rate mimi
were so called: gf. Grut. Corp. Inscr. ccexxix. and cecexxx,


90


BOOK IX. xxvui-xx1x


XXVIII


Tue darling pride of the stage, the glory of the
games, that Latinus! am I, the favourite of your
applause,? who could have made a spectator of
Cato,? who could have dissolved in laughter the
- stern Curii and Fabricii. But nought from Rome’s
theatre did my life assume; and only through my
art am I accounted of the stage ;‘* nor could I have
been dear to my master had I not character: that
God looks into the heart within. Call me, if ye
will, the parasite of laurelled Phoebus,5 so Rome
but know that I am the servant of her Jove.®


XXIX


Puivaenis, who hast measured to the full the ages
of Nestor’s long life, hast thou been hurried so swiftly
to the nether waters of Dis? Not as yet wert thou
reckoning the long years of Euboea’s Sibyl:’ older
by three months was she. Alas, what a tongue is
silent! That tongue not a thousand slave-marts used
to drown, nor the throng that worships Serapis, nor
the curly-headed troop of the schoo master at morn,
nor the river bank that echoes to Strymon’s flock of
cranes. Who now will be cunning with Thessalian
wheel to draw earthward the moon,’ what bawd
to sell this or that marriage bed? May upon thee

6 The emperor.

7 The Sibyl of Cumae in Campania, a colony from Chalcis
in Euboea. Sibyls were women inspired with prophetic
power. The Cumaean Sibyl was said to have been 700 years
old when Aeneas landed, centuries before Martial.

8 Witches were supposed to have this power: ef. xu.
lvii. 17.


gI


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


sit tibi terra levis mollique tegaris harena,
ne tua non possint eruere ossa canes,


XXX


Cappapocum saevis Antistius occidit oris
Rusticus. o tristi crimine terra nocens!

rettulit ossa sinu cari Nigrina mariti
et.questa est longas non satis esse vias ;

cumque daret sanctam tumulis, quibus invidet, urnam,
visa sibi est rapto bis viduata viro., 6


XXXI


Cum comes Arctois haereret Caesaris armis
Velius, hane Marti pro duce vovit avem.

luna quater binos non tota peregerat orbes,
debita poscebat iam sibi vota deus:

ipse suas anser properavit laetus ad aras 5
et cecidit sanctis hostia parva focis.

octo vides patulo pendere nomismata rostro
alitis? haec extis condita nuper erant.

quae litat argento pro te, non sanguine, Caesar,
victima iam ferro non opus esse docet. 10


XXXII


Hanc volo quae facilis, quae palliolata vagatur,
hanc volo quae puero iam dedit ante meo,


1 The last two lines are found in a Greek epigram (Anth.
Pal. xi, 226) by Ammianus, a contemporary of M.

2 Velius Paullus, who went with Domitian to the Sarma-
tian war.


g2


BOOK IX. xxrx—xxxi


earth be light, and thou be covered with crumbling
sand, that thy bones dogs may not—be unable to
root up!}


XXX


Antistius Rusticus has died on Cappadocia’s cruel
shores: O land guilty of a dolorous crime! Nigrina
brought back in her bosom her dear husband’s bones,
and sighed that the way was all too short; and
when to the tomb she envies she was giving that
sacred urn, she deemed herself twice widowed of
her ravished spouse.


XXXI


Vetius,? what time he looked to join Caesar’s
Arctic war, for his general’s sake vowed this bird
to Mars. The moon had not rounded full her orb
twice four times over* when the god was claiming
the vow already due. Of its own accord® the goose
gladly hasted to the altar, and fell, a humble victim,
on the sacred hearth. See you eight coins hang-
ing from the fowl’s open beak? These were but
now hid in its entrails. The victim, Caesar, that for
thee gives fair omens with silver, not with blood,
teaches us there is now no need for steel.


XXXII


Her I wish for who is willing, who gads about in
a mantilla, her I wish for who has already granted


3 A goose was representative of the safety of Rome.

4 The Sarmatian war did not last eight months.

5 It was a good omen when the victim went willingly to
the sacrifice,


93


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hane volo quam redimit totam denarius alter,
hanc volo quae pariter sufficit una tribus.
poscentem nummos et grandia verba sonantem 5
possideat crassae mentula Burdigalae.


XXXII


Aupieris in quo, Flacce, balneo plausum,
Maronis illic esse mentulam scito.


XXXIV


lupritEer Idaei risit mendacia busti,


-


dum videt Augusti Flavia templa poli,
atque inter mensas largo iam nectare fusus,
pocula cum Marti traderet ipse suo,
respiciens Phoebum pariter Phoebique sororem, 5
cum quibus Alcides et pius Arcas erat,
inquit “nobis monumenta dedistis :
cernite quam plus sit Caesaris esse patrem.”


“ Gnosia vos’


XXXV


Artisus his semper cenam, Philomuse, mereris,
plurima dum fingis, sed quasi vera refers.

scis quid in Arsacia Pacorus deliberet aula,
Rhenanam numeras Sarmaticamque manum,


1 Such women were called dzobolares (worth two obols) :
Plaut. Poen. 1. ii 58; and associated with slaves. Plaut.
(ibid, 53) thus calls them servilicolas sordidas,


94


BOOK IX. xxxn—xxxv


her favours to my slave; her I wish for whom a
second sixpence purchases altogether; her I wish
for whose single self suffices three lovers at once.
One who demands moneys, and who talks in a big
style, the stupid Gascon may possess.


XXXII


In whatever bath, Flaceus, you hear sounds re-
sembling applause, know that there Maron’s yard is
to be found.


XXXIV


Jupiter laughed at the lying tale of his tomb on
Ida as he looked on the Flavian temple of the
Augustan heaven ;? and amid the feast when now
full steeped in nectar, as with his own hand he
passed to Mars his son the beaker, looking back to
Phoebus and Phoebus ' sister side by side, with whom
were Alcides and the leal Arcadian god,* he said:
“Ye have given me a monument at Gnossos: ye
see how much more it is to be Caesar’s sire!”


XXXV


By such arts as these, Philomusus, you always
earn your dinner: you invent much and retail it
as truth. You know what counsel Pacorus‘ takes
in his Arsacian palace; you estimate the Rhenish


2 efit 12:
3 Hercules and Mercury respectively.
4 King of Parthia, Rome’s great rival in the East.


95


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


verba ducis Daci chartis mandata resignas, 5
victricem laurum quam venit ante vides,
scis quotiens Phario madeat love fusca Syene,
scis quota de Libyco litore puppis eat,
cuius Iuleae capiti nascantur olivae,
destinet aetherius cui sua serta pater. 10
tolle tuas artes; hodie cenabis apud me
hac lege, ut narres nil, Philomuse, novi.


XXXVI


VinveraTt Ausonium posito modo crine ministrum
Phryx puer, alterius gaudia nota lovis:

“Quod tuus ecce suo Caesar permisit ephebo
tu permitte tuo, maxime rector”’ ait.

“jam mihi prima latet longis lanugo capillis, 5.
iam tua me ridet Iuno vocatque virum.”

cui pater aetherius “ Puer o dulcissime,” dixit
“non ego quod poscis, res negat ipsa tibi:

Caesar habet noster similis tibi mille ministros
tantaque sidereos vix capit aula mares ; 10

at tibi si dederit vultus coma tonsa viriles,
quis mihi qui nectar misceat alter erit?”


XXXVIT


Cum sis ipsa domi mediaque ornere Subura,
fiant absentes et tibi, Galla, comae,


1 ¥.e. you know whether corn, which comes from Egypt
and Libya, is likely to be plentiful.
TiS oO 90 IE, ® of. IX. xxill. 5,


96


BOOK IX. xxxy—xxxvu


and Sarmatian armies; the orders of Dacia’s com-
mander, committed to despatches, you unseal; vic-
tory’s laurel ere it’ arrives you see; you know how
often dusky Syene is drenched by Egypt’s showers ;
you know how many ships set sail from Libya's
shore ;} for whose brow are growing Julian olives,”
for whom Heaven’s father designs his chaplets.2 A
truce to your arts! To-day you shall dine at my
house on this condition, Philomusus, that you tell
me no news! 4


XXXVI


Tue Phrygian boy,> famed darling of the other
Jove, had seen Ausonia’s cupbearer ® with locks
lately shorn, and said: “ What thy Caesar, behold,
has allowed his young attendant, that do thou, al-
mighty ruler, allow thy own. Already early down
lies hid by my long hair, already thy Juno laughs at
me and calls me man.” To whom Heaven’s sire:
“O sweetest boy,” he, said, “’tis not I refuse thy
asking: ’tis very need refuses thee. My Caesar hath
a thousand servants like to thee, and his hall, mighty
as it is, scarce holds his youths divinely fair. But if
shorn hair shall give thee face of man, what other
shall there be to mix nectar for me?”


XXXVII


AtrHouaH, yourself at home, you are arrayed in
the middle of the Subura, and your tresses, Galla,


4 cf. a similar description of a woman in Juv. vi. 398-412,


5 Ganymede.
§ Earinos: cf. 1x. xi. to xiii.; and, as to the cutting of the


hair, 1x. xvi. and xvii,


97
D2


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nec dentes aliter quam Serica nocte reponas,
et iaceas centum condita pyxidibus,
nec tecum facies tua dormiat, innuis illo 5
quod tibi prolatum est mane supercilio,
et te nulla movet cani reverentia cunni,
quem potes inter avos iam numerare tuos.
promittis sescenta tamen ; sed mentula surda est,
et sit lusca licet, te tamen illa videt. 10


XXXVITI


Summa licet velox, Agathine, pericula ludas,
non tamen efficies ut tibi parma cadat.
nolentem sequitur tenuisque reversa per auras
vel pede vel tergo, crine vel ungue sedet ;
lubrica Corycio quamvis sint pulpita nimbo 5
et rapiant celeres vela negata Noti,
securos pueri neglecta perambulat artus,
et nocet artifici ventus et unda nihil.
ut peccare velis, cum feceris omnia, falli
non potes: arte opus est ut tibi parma cadat. 10


XXXIX


Prima Palatino lux est haec orta Tonanti,
optasset Cybele qua peperisse lovem ;
hac et sancta mei genita est Caesonia Rufi:

plus debet matri nulla puella suae.


1 An epigram on a juggler tossing a shield. A puke
says M., is impossible, unless intended.


98


BOOK 1X. xxxviI—xxxIx


are manufactured far away, and you lay aside your
teeth at night, just as you do your silk dresses, and
you lie stored away in a hundred caskets, and your face
does not sleep with you—yet you wink with that
eyebrow which has been brought out for you in the
morning, and no respect moves you for your outworn
carcass—which you may now count as one of your
ancestors. Nevertheless you offer me an infinity
of delights. But Nature is deaf, and although she
may be one-eyed, she sees you anyhow.


XXXVITI


A.tuoucn, Agathinus, you deftly play a game of
highest risk, yet you will not achieve the falling of
your buckler.!. Though you avoid it, it follows you,
and, returning through the yielding air, settles on
foot or back, on hair or finger-tip. However
slippery is the stage with a Corycian saffron-shower,
and although rushing winds tear at the awning that
cannot be spread, the buckler, though disregarded,
pervades the boy’s careless limbs, and wind and
shower baffle the artist no whit. Although you try
to miss, do what you will, you cannot be foiled:
art is needed to make your buckler fall.


XXXIX


Tuis day was the first that dawned upon the
Thunderer of the Palatine,? a day whereon Cybele
would have chosen to bring forth Jove; on this day,
too, was born Caesonia, my Rutus’® wife revered:
no maid owes to her mother more than she. Her


-§ Domitian, born Oct. 24.
3 Canius Rufus, the poet of Gades: ¢f. 1. lxi. 9; mT. xx.


99


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


laetatur gemina votorum sorte maritus, 5
contigit hunc illi quod bis amare diem.


XL


Tarperas Diodorus ad coronas

Romam cum peteret Pharo relicta,

vovit pro reditu viri Philaenis

illam lingeret, ut puella simplex,

quam castae quoque diligunt Sabinae. 5
dispersa rate tristibus procellis

mersus fluctibus obrutusque ponto

ad votum Diodorus enatavit.

o tardus nimis et p'ger maritus !

hoc in litore si puella votum 10
fecisset mea, protinus redissem.


&


XLI


PonTicE, quod numquam futuis, sed paelice laeva
uteris et Veneri servit amica manus,

hoc nihil esse putas? scelus est, mihi crede, sed ingens,
quantum vix animo concipis ipse tuo.

nempe semel futuit, generaret Horatius ut tres; 5
Mars semel, ut geminos Ilia casta daret.

omnia perdiderat si masturbatus uterque
mandasset manibus gaudia foeda suis.

ipsam crede tibi naturam dicere rerum
“Istud quod digitis, Pontice, perdis, homo est.” 10


bole)


BOOK IX. xxxIx—x.L


spouse rejoices in a twofold granting of prayer:
this day it has fallen to him to cherish with a
double love.


XL


Wuen Diodorus, leaving Egypt, was travelling to
Rome to receive the Tarpeian crown,! Philaenis made
a vow for the return of her husband that, as an
innocent girl, she would put her lips to what 2 even
chaste Sabine women love. His ship shattered by
grim tempests, though plunged in the waves, and
o’erwhelined by the deep, Diodorus, to claim the
vow, swam safe to land. Oh, what a very tardy and
sluggish husband! If girl of mine had made this
vow on the shore, I should have returned at once! 2


XLI


O Pontico, il perche tu mai immembri, ma usi
Vadultera tua sinistra, e l’‘amica mano serve a Ve-
nere, pensi tu che cid sia niente? E una scele-
ragine, credimi, ma si grande e tale, che appena tu
stesso la concepisci nell’animo tuo, In fatti Orazio
immembrod una volta sola perche generasse tre fig-
liuoli; Marte una volta perche la casta Ilia dasse i
gemelli. L’uno e l’altro avrebbe distrutto ogni cosa
se quel masturbatore avesse abbandonato i sozzi
piaceri alle sue mani. Credi che la natura stessa
delle cose ti dice: “cid che, O Pontico, distruggi
colle dita é un uomo.”


1 of. 1X. xxiii. 5. 2 7.¢e. mentulam,
8 Without embarking from Egypt at all.


Io!


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLII


Campis dives Apollo sic Myrinis,

sic semper senibus fruare cycnis,

doctae sic tibi serviant sorores

nec Delphis tua mentiatur ulli,

sic Palatia te colant amentque: 5
bis senos cito te rogante fasces

det Stellae bonus adnuatque Caesar.

felix tune ego debitorque voti

casurum tibi rusticas ad aras
ducam cornibus aureis iuvencum. 10
nata est hostia, Phoebe; quid moraris ?


XLII


Hic qui dura sedens porrecto saxa leone
mitigat, exiguo magnus in aere deus,
quaeque tulit spectat resupino sidera vultu,
cuius laeva calet robore, dextra mero,
non est fama recens nec nostri gloria caeli ; 5
nobile Lysippi munus opusque vides.
hoe habuit numen Pellaei mensa tyranni,
qui cito perdomito victor in orbe iacet ;
hune puer ad Libycas iuraverat Hannibal aras ;
iusserat hic Sullam ponere regna trucem. 10
offensus variae tumidis terroribus aulae
privatos gaudet nunc habitare lares,


1 A town in Mysia, in Asia Minor. In the neighbourhood
was Grynium with a temple of Apollo.

2 2.e. in vocal swans. Swans were supposed to sing just
before death : cf. xum1. Ixxvii. 3 The Muses.

4 The insignia of the consul: ¢f virt. Ixvi. 3.

° Hercules for a time took the place of Atlas in upholding
the sky : of. vil. lxxiv. 6.


102


BOOK IX. x~i—xvi


XLII


So mayst thou, Apollo, be rich in plains of My-
rina,! so mayst thou alway delight in hoary swans,?
so may thy learned Sisters* serve thee, and thy
Delphic priestess speak not falsely to any man; so
may the Palace court and love thee, if, at thy asking,
our kindly Caesar’s nod give quickly to Stella the
twice six axes.* Then I, happy, and a debtor for my
vow, will bring thee a victim to thy rustic: altar, a
steer with gold-gilt horns. The offering is born,
Phoebus: why dost thou delay ?


XLII


He who seated makes softer the hard stones by a
stretched lion’s skin, a huge god in small shape of
bronze, and who, with face upturned, regards the
stars he shouldered,’ whose left hand is aglow with
strength, his right with wine®-no recent work of
fame is he, nor the glory of Roman chisel: Lysip-
_ pus’ noble gift and handiwork you see.’ This deity
the board of Pella’s tyrant displayed, he who lies
in a world he swiftly subdued ;* by him Hannibal
then a boy, swore at Libyan altars;° he bade fierce
Sulla resign his power. Vexed by the boastful threats
of fickle courts, he is glad now to dwell beneath a


6 He has a club in one hand, a wine-cup in the other.

7 This and the following epigram are on a statue by Lysip-
pus, a contemporary of Alexander the Great, of Hercules
rec ining at the banquet of the gods ‘epitrapezius). Statius
(Sylv. Iv. vi.) has a poem on the same subject.

8 Alexander the Great.

9 H. when a boy swore undying hatred to Rome.


103


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


utque fuit quondam placidi conviva Molorchi,
sic voluit docti Vindicis esse deus.


XLIV


Atcipes modo Vindicem rogabam

esset cuius opus laborque felix.

risit, nam solet hoc, levique nutu

“ Graece numquid”’ ait “ poeta nescis ?
inscripta est basis indicatque nomen.” 5
Avoirmov lego, Phidiae putavi.


XLV


Mites Hyperboreos modo, Marcelline, triones
et Getici tuleras sidera pigra poli:

ecce Promethei rupes et fabula montis
quam prope sunt oculis nunc adeunda tuis!

videris inmensis cum conclamata querellis 5
saxa senis, dices “ Durior ipse fuit.”’

et licet haec addas: “ Potuit qui talia ferre,
humanum merito finxerat ille genus.”


XLVI


Ge .tius aedificat semper: modo limina ponit,
nunc foribus claves aptat emitque seras,

nunc has, nunc illas reficit mutatque fenestras :
dum tantum aedificet, quidlibet ille facit,

oranti nummos ut dicere possit amico 5
unum illud verbum Gellius “ Aedifico.”


1 The shepherd who entertained him unawares: ¢f. Iv,
lxiv. 30.

2 Prometheus, according to myth, moulded man out of
clay (qf. X. xxxix. 4), giving them the qualities of various


104


BOOK IX. xiui—xtivi


private roof; and, as he was of old the guest of
gentle Molorchus,! so has he now chosen to be the
god of learned Vindex.


XLIV


I askep Vindex lately whose art and happy toil
fashioned Alcides. He laughed—for this is his way
—and slightly nodding, said: “Don’t you, a poet,
know your Greek? The base has an inscription and


shows the name.” I read “of Lysippus”: I thought
it was of Phidias!


XLV


A sotpier, Marcellinus, you had endured of late
the cold of the Northern Wain, and the slow-circling
stars of Getic skies: behold, how near the compass
of your eyes are now Prometheus’ crag, and the
fabled mount! When you shall have seen the rocks
that echoed with the old man’s groans, you will say,
“ He himself was harder still.” And this you may
add: ‘‘He who could endure such things was fit to
mould the race of man.” 2


XLVI


Gettius is always building: now he lays down
thresholds, now he fits keys to doors and buys bolts,
now these, now those windows he repairs and alters ;
provided only he be building,®? Gellius does anything
whatever, that to a friend who asks for money he
may be able to say that one word: “ Building.”


animals: cf. Hor. Od. 1. xvi. 13. Credulity in later times
saw in stones at Panope in Phocis (still smelling of human
flesh !) the remnants of P. clay: Paus. x. iv. 3.

3 Friedlander punctuates “‘ fenestras,... aedificet. Quid-


tibet. . . facit,” 105


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLVII


Democriros, Zenonas inexplicitosque Platonas
quidquid et hirsutis squalet imaginibus,

sic quasi Pythagorae loqueris successor et heres ;
praependet sane nec tibi barba minor:

sed, quod et hircosis serum est et turpe pilosis, 5
in molli rigidam clune libenter habes.

tu, qui sectarum causas et pondera nosti,
dic mihi, percidi, Pannyche, dogma quod est?


XLVIII


HerrepEM cum me partis tibi, Garrice, quartae
per tua iurares sacra caputque tuum,
credidimus (quis enim damnet sua vota libenter ?)
et spem muneribus fovimus usque datis ;
inter quae rari Laurentem ponderis aprum 5
misimus: Aetola de Calydone putes.
at tu continuo populumque patresque vocasti;
ructat adhuc aprum pallida! Roma meum:
ipse ego (quis credat?) conviva nec ultimus haesi,
sed nec costa data est caudave missa mihi. 10
de quadrante tuo quid sperem, Garrice? nulla
de nostro nobis uncia venit apro.


XLIX


Hacc est illa meis multum cantata libellis,
quam meus edidicit lector amatque togam.


1 pallida Dousa, callida codd,
106


BOOK IX, xivu-xuix


XLVII


Or Democrituses, Zenos, and enigmatic Platos, and
of every philosopher shown, dirty and hirsute, on a
bust, you prate as if you were successor and heir of
Pythagoras ; and before your chin hangs a beard cer-
tainly no less than theirs. Ma cid che tardi si senti
agli ircosi, e turpemente ai pelosi, tu volontieri lo
comporti rigido nelle effeminate-coscie. You, who
know the origins of the schools and their argu-
ments, tell me this: what dogma, Pannychus, is it
to be a pathic?


XLVIII


SEEING that you swore, Garricus, by your sacred
rites and by your head, that I was heir to a quarter
of your estate, I believed you—for who would
willingly damn his own wishes?—and I kept warm
my hope by continual presents, among which I
sent you a Laurentian boar of unusual weight: you

_would imagine it came from Aetolian Calydon.!
But you at once invited both people and Senate; a
bilious Rome is still belching my boar. I myself—
who could believe it ?—was not added even as your
last guest, aye, and not even a rib was given me or

_ tail sent me. Concerning that quarter-estate of yours,
what should I expect, Garricus? Not a twelfth of
my own boar came to me!


XLIX


Tuis is that toga much sung of in my poems, which
my reader has heard of to the full, and loves.?
1 i.e. it was as huge as the boar slain by Meleager: ef.

VII. XXvii. 2. 2 of, VIII. XXViili. :
107


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Partheniana fuit quondam, memorabile vatis
munus: in hac ibam conspiciendus eques,
dum nova, dum nitida fulgebat splendida lana, 5
dumque erat auctoris nomine digna sui:
nunc anus et tremulo vix accipienda tribuli,
quam possis niveam dicere iure tuo.
quid non longa dies, quid non consumitis anni?
haec toga iam non est Partheniana, mea est. 10


L


Incenium mihi, Gaure, probas sic esse pusillum,
carmina quod faciam quae brevitate placent.

confiteor. sed tu bis senis grandia libris
qui scribis Priami proelia, magnus homo es?

nos facimus Bruti puerum, nos Langona vivum: 5
tu magnus luteum, Gaure, Giganta facis.


LI


Quop semper superos invito fratre rogasti,
hoc, Lucane, tibi contigit, ante mori.

invidet ille tibi; Stygias nam Tullus ad umbras
optabat, quamvis sit minor, ire prior.

tu colis Elysios nemorisque habitator amoeni 5
esse tuo primum nunc sine fratre cupis ;

et si iam nitidis alternus venit ab astris
pro Polluce, mones Castora ne. redeat.


1 Parthenius (himself a poet: cf. x1. i.) was Domitian’s
secretary, his name being derived from map@évos (virgin), on
which M plays. The cloak was once young and unspotted :
now it is old.

2 i.e. threadbare, and therefore chill: ¢f. Iv. xxxiy. 2.

3 It befits my poverty.


108


BOOK IX. xurx-11


Parthenian was it once, a bard’s memorable gift:} in
this I went conspicuous as a knight, while it was new,
while it brightly shone with glossy wool, and while
it was worthy of its giver’s name. Now it is an old
crone, and one scarcely to be accepted by a dodder-
ing pauper, which you may without contradiction
call “snowy.” ? What does not length of days, what
do ye not consume, ye years? This toga is no longer
Parthenian: it is mine.®


L


You prove to me, Gaurus, that my genius is in this
way a puny one, because I make poems that please
by their brevity. I confess it. But you, who in
twice six books write of Priam’s wars in grand style,
are you a great man? I make Brutus’ boy, I make
Langon live: you, great man as you are, Gaurus,
make a giant of clay.


LI


Wuart thou didst alway crave of the High Gods,
though thy brother said nay, this has fallen to thee,
Lucanus—the earlier death. He envies thee; for
Tullus longed, though younger than thou, to go
before thee to the Stygian shades. Thou dwellest
in Elysian fields, and, denizen of that pleasant grove,
now for the first time desirest to be without thy
brother; and, if Castor® has now come alternate
from the lustrous stars in Pollux’ stead, thou dost
counsel him not to return again.®

4 A statuette admired by Brutus, the assassin of Caesar :
of. U. xxvii. 4. Of Langon nothing is known.

5 of, I. XXxvVi. 2 .

§ Another punctuation is a comma after astris and none
after Polluce. Alternus would then refer to Pollux, and not


Castor.
109


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LII


Sr credis mihi, Quinte, quod mereris,

natalis, Ovidi, tuas Aprilis

ut nostras amo Martias Kalendas.

felix utraque lux diesque nobis

signandi melioribus lapillis! 5
hic vitam tribuit sed hic amicum.

plus dant, Quinte, mihi tuae Kalendae,


LIT


Narati tibi, Quinte, tuo dare parva volebam
munera; tu prohibes: inperiosus homo es.

parendum est monitis, fiat quod uterque volemus
et quod utrumque iuvat: tu mihi, Quinte, dato.


LIV


Si mihi Picena turdus palleret oliva,
tenderet aut nostras silva Sabina plagas,

aut crescente levis traheretur harundine praeda,
pinguis et inplicitas virga teneret avis,

Care, daret sollemne tibi cognatio munus 5
nec frater nobis nec prior esset avus.

nunc sturnos inopes fringillorumque querellas
audit et arguto passere vernat ager ;

inde salutatus picae respondet arator,
hine prope summa rapax milvus ad astra volat. 10


1 M.’s friend and neighbour at Nomentum: cf. vit. xciii
He addresses to him vu. xliv. and xlv., and the following
epigram. >

2 A cane smeared with birdlime, which could be elongated
like a fishing-rod: ¢f. xIv. ccxviii,


TQ


BOOK IX. ui-uiv


Lit


Ir you believe me, Quintus Ovidius,! the kalends
of your natal April I love—’tis your desert—as much
as my own of March. Happy is either morn! and
days are they to be marked by us with fairer stones.
One gave me life, but the other a friend. Your
kalends, Quintus, give me the more.


LIT


On your birthday, Quintus, I was wishing to give
you a small present; you forbid me; you are an
imperious person! I must obey your monition, Let
be done what both of us wish, and what pleases
both. Do you, Quintus, make me a present!


LIV


Ir fieldfares were fattened for me on Picenian
olives, or Sabine woodland saw my gins stretched
out, or a fluttering prey were drawn down by the
lengthening reed,? and a limed rod held fast the
entangled birds, Carus, my kinship* would give you
the customary offering, and neither brother nor
grandsire would come before you. As it is, my fields
listen only to useless starlings and the plaint of
chaffinches, and are vernal with the shrill sparrow;
on that side the ploughman answers the magpie’s
call; on this, hard by, the ravening kite towers to

3 On Feb. 22 was held the festival of the Caristia, when
relations met and interchanged presents and arranged differ-
ences. It was a kind of family love-feast: cf. Ov. Fast.


ii. 617 ; Val. Max. 1. i. 8.
Ill


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


mittimus ergo tibi parvae munuscula chortis,
qualia si recipis, saepe propinquus eris.


LY


Luce propinquorum, qua plurima mittitur ales,
dum Stellae turdos, dum tibi, Flacce, paro,
succurrit nobis ingens onerosaque turba,
in qua se primum quisque meumque putat.
demeruisse duos votum est; offendere plures
vix tutum; multis mittere dona grave est.
qua possum sola veniam ratione merebor :
nec Stellae turdos nec tibi, Flacce, dabo.


LVI


Spenpopuoros Libycas domini petit armiger urbis:
quae puero dones tela, Cupido, para,
illa quibus iuvenes figis mollesque puellas :
sit tamen in tenera levis et hasta manu.
loricam clipeumque tibi galeamque remitto ;
tutus ut invadat proelia, nudus eat :
non iaculo, non ense fuit laesusve sagitta,
casside dum liber Parthenopaeus erat.
quisquis ab hoc fuerit fixus morietur amore.
o felix, si quem tam bona fata manent !
dum puer es, redeas, dum vultu lubricus, et te
non Libye faciat, sed tua Roma virum.


1 See note to preceding epigram.


? Stella, the poet mentioned int. vii. and other epigrams,
and (perhaps) Valerius Flaccus, the author of the epic poem,


the Argonautica.
112


BOOK IX. trv-tvi


the lofty stars. So I send you the small tributes of
my scanty poultry-yard; if you accept such things,
you shall often be my kinsman.


LV


- On Kinsmen’s Day,! when many a fowl is de-
spatched, while I was preparing to send fieldfares
to Stella, while also to you, Flaccus,? there came
to my mind a big and burdensome crowd, of which
each one thinks himself the chief, and my particular
friend. To oblige two is my wish; to offend more
is hardly safe; to despatch gifts to many is a heavy
charge. In the only way I can I will earn their
pardon: neither to Stella, nor to you, Flaccus, will
I give fieldfares.


LVI


SpENDoPHORUs goes, his master’s armour-bearer, to
Libyan cities: get ready the shafts, Cupid, to give
the boy—those wherewith thou dost pierce youths
and soft girls; yet in his tender hand let there be a
smooth spear too. Cuirass and shield and helm I
leave to thee; that he may plunge amid the. war
unscathed let him go bare; by no javelin, by no
sword or arrow was Parthenopaeus? hurt when he
was not disguised by a casque. Whoever shall be
pierced by this boy shall perish of love—oh, happy
he, over whoever so fair a fate impends! While thou
art boy, return, while thy face is perilously bright ; 4
and thee let not Libya, but thy Rome, make man!


8 A young and handsome Greek warrior, one of the ‘‘ Seven


against Thebes”: ¢f. vi. Ixxvii. 2; x. iv. 3 << %
4 A reminiscence of Hor. Od. 1. xix. 8: et vultus nimium


lubricus aspict.


113


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LVII


Nix est tritius Hedyli lacernis:

non ansae veterum Corinthiorum,

nec crus compede lubricum decenni,

nec ruptae recutita colla mulae,

nec quae Flaminiam secant salebrae, 5
nec qui litoribus nitent lapilli,

nec Tusca ligo vinea politus,

nec pallens toga mortui tribulis,

nec pigri rota quassa mulionis,

nec rasum cavea latus visontis, 10
nec dens iam senior ferocis apri.

res una est tamen (ipse non negabit)

culus tritior Hedyli lacernis.


LVIII


Nympua sacri regina lacus, cui grata Sabinus
et mansura pio munere templa dedit,

sic montana tuos semper colat Umbria fontes
nec tua Baianas Sassina malit aquas,

excipe sollicitos placide, mea dona, libellos ; 5
tu fueris Musis Pegasis unda meis.

“Nympharum templis quisquis sua carmina donat,
quid fieri libris debeat, ipse docet.”


LIX


In Saeptis Mamurra diu multumque vagatus,
hic ubi Roma suas aurea vexat opes,


1 The slower the progress, the greater would be the friction
of the wheel, and its polish

2 Caesius Sabinus, of Sassina, in Umbria, to whom M,
presented his seventh book: ¢f. vil. xcvii. In rx. lx. he
sends him a wreath of roses,


114


BOOK IX. tvi—Lrx


LVII


Noruine is worn smoother than Hedylus’ mantles:
not the handles of antique Corinthian vases, nor a
shank polished by a ten-years-worn fetter, nor the
scarred neck of a broken-winded mule, nor the ruts
that intersect the Flaminian Way, nor the pebbles
that shine on the sea beach, nor a hoe polished by a
Tuscan vineyard, nor the shiny toga of a defunct
pauper, nor the ramshackle wheel of a lazy? carrier,
nor a bison’s flank scraped by its cage, nor the tusk,
now aged, of a fierce boar. Yet there is one thing—
he himself will not deny it: Hedylus’ rump is worn
smoother than his mantle.


LVIII


Nympu, Queen of the sacred mere, to whom Sa-
binus? by pious gift has given a temple, welcome to
thee and destined to endure—so may hilly Umbria
eves honour thy fount, and thy Sassina prize not
more the waters of Baiae—receive with placid brow
my gift, these anxious® verses; then shalt thou be
to my Muse her spring of Pegasus.‘ “ Whoever gives
his poems to temples of the Nymphs, himself declares
what should be done with his books.” ®


LIX


Mamourra, long and often wandering in the Saepta,
here where Golden Rome flings about her wealth,


3 i.e. as to its reception by the Nymph, or by Sabinus,

4 Hippocrene, the fountain of the Muses, created by the
stroke of the hoof of Pegasus.

5 4.¢. to be thrown into the water. The supposed reply of
the Nymph. For the same idea, cf. 1. v.; Il. ¢. 4; Iv. x. 6,


115


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


inspexit molles pueros oculisque comedit,
non hos quos primae prostituere casae,
sed quos arcanae servant tabulata catastae
et quos non populus nec mea turba videt.
inde satur mensas et opertos exuit orbes
expositumque alte pingue poposcit ebur,
et testudineum mensus quater hexaclinon
ingemuit citro non satis esse suo.
consuluit nares an olerent aera Corinthon,
culpavit statuas et, Polyclite, tuas,
et, turbata brevi questus crystallina vitro,
murtrina signavit seposuitque decem.
expendit veteres calathos et si qua fuerunt
pocula Mentorea nobilitata manu,
et viridis picto gemmas numeravit in auro,
quidquid et a nivea grandius aure sonat.
sardonychas veros mensa quaesivit in omni
et pretium magnis fecit iaspidibus.
undecima lassus cum iam discederet hora,
asse duos calices emit et ipse tulit.


LX


Sev tu Paestanis genita es seu Tiburis arvis,
seu rubuit tellus Tuscula flore tuo,

seu Praenestino te vilica legit in horto,
seu modo Campani gloria ruris eras,


10


15


, 20


Aref) Dee cline 9%


2 Connoisseurs professed to detect an odour in genuine


Corinthian bronze: Petr. 50.


8 Of Sicyon, a celebrated sculptor of the fifth century B.o.


116


BOOK IX, ux-1x


inspected and devoured with his eyes dainty boys,
not those the outer stalls made public, but those who
are guarded by the platforms of a secret stand, and
whom the people do not see, nor the crowd of such as
I. Then, sated with the view, he had tables and
round covered table-tops! laid bare, and must needs
have their high-hung glistening ivorysupports brought
down; and, after four measurements of a tortoise-shell
couch for six, he said with a sigh that it was too small
for his citrus-wood table. He took counsel of his
nose whether the bronzes smelt of Corinth,? and
condemned even your statuary, Polyclitus;? and,
complaining that the crystal vases were disfigured
by a small piece of glass, he put his seal on ten
murrine‘ articles, and set them aside. He weighed
antique tankards, and any cups made precious by
Mentor’s® handiwork, and counted the emeralds set
in chased gold, and every larger pearl that tinkles
from a snow-white ear. Genuine sardonyxes he
looked for on every table, and offered a price for
some big jaspers. When at the eleventh hour,
fagged out, he was at last departing, for a penny he
bought two cups—and bore them off himself!


LX


Wuetuer thou wert born in fields of Paestum or
of Tibur, or the soil of Tusculum blushed with thy
flower; or a farmer’s wife culled thee in a garden
at Praeneste, or thou wert erewhile the glory of

4 Perhaps porcelain: cf. XIV. exiii.

5 A celebrated worker in embossed metal of the fourth


century B.C.: cf. 111. xli. 1; Iv. xxxix. 5.
¢ He had not even a slave of his own.


117


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


pulchrior ut nostro videare corona Sabino,
de Nomentano te putet esse meo.


LXI


In Tartesiacis domus est notissima terris,
qua dives placidum Corduba Baetin amat,
vellera nativo pallent ubi flava metallo
et linit Hesperium brattea viva pecus.
aedibus in mediis totos amplexa penates
stat platanus densis Caesariana comis,
hospitis invicti posuit quam dextera felix,
coepit et ex illa crescere virga manu.
auctorem dominumque suum sentire videtur :
sic viret et ramis sidera celsa petit.
saepe sub hac madidi luserunt arbore Fauni
terruit et tacitam fistula sera domum:
dumque fugit solos nocturnum Pana per agros,
saepe sub hac latuit rustica fronde Dryas.
atque oluere lares comissatore Lyaeo,
crevit et effuso laetior umbra mero;
hesternisque rubens deiecta est herba coronis
atque suas potuit dicere nemo rosas.
o dilecta deis, o magni Caesaris arbor,
ne metuas ferrum sacrilegosque focos.
perpetuos sperare licet tibi frondis honores:
non Pompeianae te posuere manus.


10


15


20


1 Which produced nothing: ¢f. vil. xxxi. 8,
2 The Guadalquiver.
Bef. Vis KXXVILE [Ge VITDE SSVI EOS


118


BOOK IX. cx-.xr


Campanian meads; that thou mayst seem to my
Sabinus a chaplet the more fair, let him think thou
art from my Nomentan! farm.


LXI


A HOUSE renowned stands in the land of Tartessus
where rich Corduba woos tranquil Baetis,’ where
fleeces are yellow-pale with native ore, and living
gold o’erlays the Western flock.2 In the middle of
the house, shadowing all the abode, stands with
dense leafage Caesar’s* plane, which an unconquered
Guest’s propitious hand planted, and which—then
but a shoot—began from that hand to grow. It
seems to feel who was its creator and lord; so
green it is, and with its boughs it climbs high
heaven. Ofttimes under this tree sported Fauns®
flown with wine, and a late-blown pipe startled the
still house; and, while o’er lonely fields she fled by
night from Pan, oft under these leaves the rustic
Dryad ® nestled hid. And fragrant has the dwelling
been when Lyaeus held revel, and more luxuriant
grown the tree’s shade from spilth of wine, and the
blushing flower has been scattered down from last
night’s wreath, and none could claim his own roses.
O thou dear to the gods! O tree of mighty Caesar!
fear not the steel and sacrilegious fires. Thou mayst
hope thy leafy honours shall endure for ever: it was
not Pompey’s hands’ set thee there!


“ Julius Caesar.

5 Rustic deities, half goat, half in human shape.
6 The Dryads were nymphs of the woods.

7 But those of his conqueror.


119


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXIlI


Tinctis murice vestibus quod omni
et nocte utitur et die Philaenis,
non est ambitiosa nec superba :
delectatur odore, non colore.


LXIll


Ap cenam invitant omnes te, Phoebe, cinaedi.
mentula quem pascit, non, puto, purus homo est.


LXIV


Hercuuis in magni voltus descendere Caesar
dignatus Latiae dat nova templa viae,

qua Triviae nemorosa petit dum regna, viator
octavum domina marmor ab urbe legit.

ante colebatur votis et sanguine largo, 5
maiorem Alciden nunc minor ipse colit.

hunc magnas rogat alter opes, rogat alter honores ;
illi securus vota minora facit.


LXV


AvcipE, Latio nune agnoscende Tonanti,
postquam pulchra dei Caesaris ora geris,

si tibi tune isti vultus habitusque fuissent,
cesserunt manibus cum fera monstra tuis,


1 She wishes to drown her own peculiar odour. Tyrian-
dyed garments had a rank smell: cf. Iv. iv. 6.

® Domitian dedicated a temple to Hercules with a statue
bearing the features of the emperor.


120


BOOK IX. vxi—Lxv


LXII


Because Philaenis night and day wears garments
dipped in every kind of purple, she is not ambitious
or proud. She is pleased with the smell, not with
the hue.}


LXII


Att the dissolute rascals invite you to dinner,
Phoebus. He whom impurity feeds is not, I opine,
a spotless person.


LXIV


Carsar, deigning to descend to the features of
great Hercules,? gives a new temple to the Latin
Way, where the traveller, on his journey to Trivia’s
woody realm,’ reads the eighth milestone from the
Queen City. Aforetime was Alcides worshipped with
prayer and full blood of victims; now he, the lesser,
himself worships a greater? Alcides. Of him, the
greater, one man begs large wealth, another begs
honours; to him, the lesser, carelessly he makes his
more trifling prayers.


LXV


AtcipEs, worthy now to be owned by the Latin
Thunderer,® after that thou wearest the features fair
of Caesar our god, if thine had been then that
face and guise when savage monsters yielded to thy
arms, the nations had not seen thee the serf of the

3 To the temple and grove of Diana of the Crossways
(Trivia) at Aricia.

4 The emperor. 5 Jupiter of the Capitol.


VOL. Il. E


.


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Argolico famulum non te servire tyranno 5
vidissent gentes saevaque regna pati;
sed tu iussisses Eurysthea: nec tibi fallax
portasset Nessi perfida dona Lichas ;
Oetaei sine lege rogi securus adisses
astra patris summi, quae tibi poena dedit; 10
Lydia nec dominae traxisses pensa superbae
nec Styga vidisses Tartareumque canem.
nunc tibi Iuno favet, nunc te tua diligit Hebe;
nunc te si videat Nympha, remittet Hylan.


LXVI i


Uxor cum tibi sit formosa, pudica, puella,
quo tibi natorum iura, Fabulle, trium ?

quod petis a nostro supplex dominoque deoque,
tu dabis ipse tibi, si potes arrigere.


LXVII


Lascivam tota possedi nocte puellam,
cuius nequitias vincere nulla potest.

fessus mille modis illud puerile poposci:
ante preces totas primaque verba dedit.


1 Hercules was the serf of Eurystheus until he had ac-
complished his twelve labours.

2 Lichas, the servant of Hercules, at the bidding of
Deianeira, his wife, gave him the shirt of Nessus steeped in
the poison of the hydra slain by H. It clung to him, and he
burnt himself on a pyre on Mt. Oeta.


122


BOOK IX. ctxv—-ixvi


despot of Argos,! and enduring a cruel thrall, but
thou wouldst have commanded Eurystheus; nor
would false Lichas? have brought to thee the guile-
ful gift of Nessus; without the ordeal of Oeta’s
pyre wouldst thou unvexed have won that heaven
of thy Sire supreme which thy penance gave thee;
nor wouldst thou have drawn out the wool of a
haughty mistress,’ nor have viewed Styx and the
Tartarean hound. Now to thee is Juno kind, now
thy Hebe loves thee ; now, should she see thee, the
nymph will send Hylas® back.


LXVI


Wuen you have a wife beautiful, modest, young,
what is the use to you, Fabullus, of the rights three
sons bestow? What you suppliantly ask of our Lord
and God you will yourself supply—if you can play
the man.


LXVII


PossepeE! per tutta la notte una lasciva ragazza, le
di cui malizie nessuna puod sorpassare. Sazio in mille
maniere, dimandai quel non so che alla fanciullesca :
me lo accordé avanti d’esserne pregata, ed alle prime


3 Omphale, queen of Lydia, who wore H.’s lion-skin while


he spun her wool. ;
4 It was one of the labours of Hercules to fetch Cerberus


from the shades.
5 A beautitul youth, the attendant of Hercules, carried off


by the enamoured Nymphs: cf. v. xlviii. 5.
6 Often given, as a compliment, even to childless persons:


cf. II. xct. 6.
123


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


inprobius quiddam ridensque rubensque rogavi: 5
pollicitast nulla luxuriosa mora,

sed mihi pura fuit; tibi non erit, Aeschyle, si vis
accipere hoc munus condicione mala.


LXVIII


Quip tibi nobiscum est, ludi scelerate magister,
invisum pueris virginibusque caput?

nondum cristati rupere silentia galli:
murmure iam saevo verberibusque tonas.

tam grave percussis incudibus aera resultant, 5
causidicum medio cum faber aptat equo:

mitior in magno clamor furit amphitheatro,
vincenti parmae cum sua turba favet.

vicini somnum non tota nocte rogamus:
nam vigilare leve est, pervigilare grave est. 10

discipulos dimitte tuos. vis, garrule, quantum
accipis ut clames, accipere ut taceas?


LXIX


Cum futuis, Polycharme, soles in fine cacare.
cum pedicaris, quid, Polycharme, facis?


LXX
Dixerat “O mores! o tempora!”’ Tullius olim,
sacrilegum strueret cum Catilina nefas,


1 Some disgraceful complaisance was required in return,
which M. says he refused, but which Aeschylus would not.

2 Successful lawyers were in the habit of erecting eques-
trian statues of themselves in their vestibules: cf. Juv. vii.
124. ;


124


BOOK IX. txvm—Lxx


-riechieste. Fra’] riso e la vergogna dimandai qualche
cosa d’assai nefando: me lo promise senza la me-
noma interessata dilazione. Ma fd da me lasciata
pura; non lo sara da te, O Eschilo, se vuoi prendere

_ questo dono ma a mala condizione.!


LXVIII


Wuart have you to do with us, accursed pedagogue,
a fellow odious to boys and girls? Not yet have
crested cocks broken the hush of night, already with
menacing voice and with thwacks you raise an up-
roar. So heavily re-echoes brass on smitten anvils
when a smith is fitting a pleader’s statue astride
a steed;? milder in the huge amphitheatre riots
the shout when its own faction acclaims the
small shield. We neighbours don’t ask for sleep
all the night ;* for some wakefulness is a trifle, to
wake all night is no joke. Dismiss your pupils. Are
you willing, you blatant fellow, to accept for holding
your tongue as much as you accept for bawling?


LXIX


Quanpvo immembri, O Policarmo, suoli dopo sgra-
varti. Quando sei sodomizato, che fai, O Policarmo?


LXX


“QO manners! O times!” cried Tully once when
Catiline was planning his sacrilegious crime,’ when


3 Parma, carried by gladiators called Thracians. Domi-
tian favoured the scutarzi, the carriers of the large shield.
Hence a victory of the parmularius would be more unex-
pected. 4 As to the noises of Rome, ¢f. xu. lvii.

8 Cic. Cat. 1. i. 2.


125


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


cum gener atque socer diris concurreret armis
maestaque civili caede maderet humus.


cur nune “O mores!” cur nune “O tempora!”’ dicis?


quod tibi non placeat, Caeciliane, quid est?
nulla ducum feritas, nulla est insania ferri;
pace frui certa laetitiaque licet.
non nostri faciunt tibi quod tua tempora sordent,
sed faciunt mores, Caeciliane, tui.


LXXI


Massy. leo fama iugi pecorisque marit.s
lanigeri mirum qua coiere fide.

ipse licet videas, cavea stabulantur in una
et pariter socias carpit uterque dapes:

_nec fetu nemorum gaudent nec mitibus herbis,

concordem satiat sed rudis agna famem.

quid meruit terror Nemees, quid portitor Helles,
ut niteant celsi lucida signa poli?

sidera si possent pecudesque feraeque mereri,
hic aries astris, hic leo dignus erat.


LXXII


Liser, Amyclaea frontem vittate corona,
qui quatis Ausonia verbera Graia manu,
clusa mihi texto cum prandia vimine mittas,
cur comitata dapes nulla lagona venit?

atqui digna tuo si nomine munera ferres,
scis, puto, debuerint quae mihi dona dari.


6


10


10


1 Pompey married Caesar’s daughter Julia.


2 The lion slain by Hercules and the ram that carried
Helle respectively, afterwards two of the signs of the Zodiac.


126


BOOK TX. txx—Lxxn


son-in-law and father-in-law! were clashing in dread-
ful war, and the weeping earth was drenched with
civil carnage. Why do you now cry “O manners!”
why now “O times!” What is it displeases you,
Caecilianus? No savagery of captains is here, no
frenzy of the sword: we may enjoy unbroken peace
and pleasure. “Tis not our “manners” that make
your “times” despicable to you, but your own .
manners, Caecilianus, make them so.


LXXI


A ution, the renown of Massylian hills, and the
husband of the fleecy flock, have allied themselves in
wondrous confidence. You may yourself see them:
they are stalled in one pen, and each with the other
takes his social meal; they relish not the breed of
the woods, nor harmless herbs, but a young lamb
sates their friendly hunger. What was the merit of
the terror of Nemea, what of the carrier of Helle,?
that they should glow, the tall sky’s lustrous signs?
If both sheep and wild beasts could win by merit to
heaven, this.ram, this lion were worthy to become
stars.


LXXII


Liser,? whose brow is wreathed with an Amy-
claean* crown, who level with an Italian arm the
Grecian boxer’s blows, as you are sending me a
lunch shut in a wicker basket, why does no flagon
come attendant on the feast? And yet, if you were
to produce a gift to match your name,® you know, |
think, what present should have been given me!

3To whom also viii. Ixxvii. is addressed.


47.e. Spartan. Pollux, the son of Spartan Leda, invented
boxing. 5 Liber was also a synonym of Bacchus.


127


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXIIl


Dentisus antiquas solitus producere pelles
et mordere luto putre vetusque solum,
Praenestina tenes defuncti rura! patroni,
in quibus indignor si tibi cella fuit ;
rumpis et ardenti madidus crystalla Falerno 5
et pruris domini cum Ganymede tui.
at me litterulas stulti docuere parentes:
quid cum grammaticis rhetoribusque mihi ?
frange leves calamos et scinde, Thalia, libellos,
si dare sutori calceus ista potest. 10


LXXIV


Errigiem tantum pueri pictura Camoni
servat, et infantis parva figura manet.

florentes nulla signavit imagine voltus,
dum timet ora pius muta videre pater.


LXXV


Non silice duro structilive caemento

nec latere cocto, quo Samiramis longam
Babylona cinxit, Tucca balneum fecit,

sed strage nemorum pineaque conpage,

ut navigare Tucca balneo possit.

idem beatas lautus extruit thermas

de marmore omni, quod Carystos invenit, -

quod Phrygia Synnas, Afra quod Nomas misit
et quod virenti fonte lavit Eurotas.

sed ligna desunt: subice balneum thermis. 10


1 decepti regna B.
128


BOOK IX. txxti—_xxv


LXXITI


Wont with your teeth to stretch out ancient hides,
and to gnaw a shoe-sole rotten with mud and worn
out, you possess the Praenestan fields of your dead
patron, in which I think it shame if you ever had a
garret ; and drunk, you fill to bursting your crystal
with hot Falernian, and lewdly trifle with the cup-
bearer of your master. But me foolish parents taught
paltry letters: what is the use of teachers of grammar
and rhetoric to me? Break your worthless pens,
Thalia, and tear up your books, if a shoe can give a
cobbler a gift like that.


LXXIV


Camonius’ picture preserves but the image of a
child, and only an infant’s tiny form survives. On
the face of manhood’s bloom! a father stamped
no semblance: his love feared to see the lips that
spake no more.


LXXV


Nor of hard flint or laid rubble, nor of burnt brick,
wherewith Semiramis girt the long walls of Babylon,
has Tucca made his. bath; but of the havoc of the
woods and of balks of pine, so that Tucca may go to
sea in his bath! He also, luxurious man that he is!
builds costly warm baths of every kind of marble that
Carystos discovers, that Phrygian Synnas, that African
Numidia has sent him, and of that which Eurotas
has washed green? with his spring. But firewood
is lacking. Put the bath under the warm bath !3

1 of. 1x. Ixxvi. 3-5.

2 cf. vi. xlii. 11. Laconian marble was green.

3 The wooden bath might have made a boat (1. 5), but is
now to make a fire. 129


E2


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXVI


Haec sunt illa mei quae cernitis ora Camoni,
haec pueri facies primaque forma fuit.

creverat hic vultus bis denis fortior annis
gaudebatque suas pingere barba genas,

et libata semel summos modo purpura cultros
sparserat. invidit de tribus una soror

et festinatis incidit stamina pensis,
apsentemque patri rettulit urna rogum.

sed ne sola tamen puerum pictura loquatur,
haec erit in chartis maior imago meis.


LXXVII


Quop optimum sit disputat convivium
facunda Prisci pagina,

et multa dulci, multa sublimi refert,
sed cuncta docto pectore.

quod optimum sit quaeritis convivium ?
in quo choraules non erit.


LXXVIII


Funera post septem nupsit tibi Galla virorum,
Picentine: sequi vult, puto, Galla viros.


LXXIX


OperatT ante ducum famulos turbamque priorem


et Palatinum Roma supercilium:


1 The Fates.
* C. died in Cappadocia: ¢f, vi. Ixxxv. 3.


130


10


BOOK IX. .txxvi-Lxx1x


LXXVI


Tuts face you see is that of my Camonius: this
was his childish face and infant form. These features
had grown manlier in twice ten years, and his beard
gladly was tinging its native cheek, and darkening
down, shaved but once, had newly besprent the
scissors’ tip. Jealous was one Sister of the Three,!
and she cut the thread from the wool too quickly
spun, and an urn gave back to the sire the ashes
from afar. Yet, that not alone be the picture that
bespeaks a boy, in my lay shall this, a nobler likeness,
be found.


LXXVII


Priscus’ pages fluently discuss what is the best
kind of entertainment, and he puts forward many
views in a pleasant, many in a lofty style, and all
with learning. Do you ask what is the best en-
tertainment? One where there will be no flute-
player with his chorus.’


LXXVITI


Arter burying seven husbands, Galla has married
you, Picentinus; Galla wants, I imagine, to follow
her husbands.4


LXXIX


Once Rome abhorred the henchmen and the old
‘retinue of her chiefs, and the haughtiness of the


8 To drown conversation. The choraules accompanied a
chorus, as distinguished from the azwletes or the crtharoedus,
a single player on flute or harp: cf. v. lvi. 8.

4 Both G. and P. were poisoners: ¢f. vul. xliii.


131


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


at nunc tantus amor cunctis, Auguste, tuorum est
ut sit cuique suae cura secunda domus.

tam placidae mentes, tanta est reverentia nostri,
tam pacata quies, tantus in ore pudor.

nemo suos (haec est aulae natura potentis)
sed domini mores Caesarianus habet.


LXXX


Douxerat esuriens locupletem pauper anumque:
uxorem pascit Gellius et futuit.


LXXXI


LecTor et auditor nostros probat, Aule, libellos,
sed quidam exactos esse poeta negat.

non nimium curo: nam cenae fercula nostrae
malim convivis quam placuisse cocis.


LXXXII


Drixerat astrologus periturum te cito, Munna,
nec, puto, mentitus dixerat ille tibi.

nam tu dum metuis ne quid post fata relinquas,
hausisti patrias luxuriosus opes,

bisque tuum deciens non toto tabuit anno.
dic mihi, non hoc est, Munna, perire cito?


LXXXIII


INTER tanta tuae miracula, Caesar, harenae,
quae vincit veterum munera clara ducum,

multum oculi sed plus aures debere fatentur
se tibi, quod spectant qui recitare solent.


132


BOOK IX. wxxix—Lxxxul


Palatine; but now, Augustus, all men so love those
that belong to you that to each his own household
is but a second care. So gentle are their tempers,
so great is their respect for us, so unruffled is their
calm, such modesty is in their faces! No servant of
Caesar—such is the mood of an imperial hall—
displays his own manners, but those only of his


master.
LXxXxX


Honery, and a pauper, Gellius married a rich and
old woman. He now feeds and tickles his wife.


LXXXI


Reaper and hearer approve of my works, Aulus,
but a certain poet says they are not polished. [
don’t care much, for I should prefer the courses of
my dinner to please guests rather than cooks,


LXXXII


An astrologer said that you would quickly come to
an end, Munna, and he did not lie, I think, when he
said it to you. For you, in your fear of leaving
anything after your death, have in extravagance ex-
hausted your father’s wealth, and your two millions
have melted away in less than a year. Tell me, is
not this, Munna, quickly coming to an end?


LXXXIII


Amp the mighty wonders ot your arena, Caesar,
which surpasses the grand spectacles of former chiefs,
there is much our eyes admit they owe you, but
our ears still more, for the usual reciters are now
spectators,

1 And cannot bore us: ¢f. Juv. i, 7-14.
133


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXIV


Cum tua sacrilegos contra, Norbane, furores
staret pro domino Caesare sancta fides,
haec ego Pieria ludebam tutus in umbra,
ille tuae cultor notus amicitiae.
me tibi Vindelicis Raetus narrabat in oris, 9)
nescia nec nostri nominis Arctos erat:
0 quotiens veterem non infitiatus amicum
dixisti “ Meus est iste poeta, meus !”’
omne tibi nostrum quod bis trieteride iuncta
ante dabat lector, nunc dabit auctor opus. 10


LXXXV


Lanaurpior noster si quando est Paulus, Atili,
non se, convivas abstinet ille suos.

tu languore quidem subito fictoque laboras,
sed mea porrexit sportula, Paule, pedes.


LXXXVI


FesTINATA Sui gemeret quod fata Severi
Silius, Ausonio non semel ore potens,

cum grege Pierio maestus Phoeboque querebar.
«“Tpse meum flevi” dixit Apollo “ Linon”:

respexitque suam quae stabat proxima fratri 5
Calliopen et ait “Tu quoque vulnus habes.


1 Appius Norbanus had been sent in a.p. 88 to crush the
revolt of Saturninus against Domitian: ¢f Iv. xi. He was
absent six years, and M.’s works would be Books IV.-VIII.

* i.e. is lost to me. Porvigere pedes was said of a corpse
when laid out with the feet pointing to the outer door:
Pers, iii. 105; Hom. JU. xix. 212.


134


BOOK. IX. txxxiv—_xxxvi


LXXXIV


Wuen your inviolate loyalty, Norbanus, in defence
of your master Caesar was withstanding impious
frenzy, I, secure in the Pierian shade, the wooer, as
men know, of your friendship, threw off these books.
Me the Rhaetian quoted to you on Vindelicia’s
shores, and the North was not unknowing of my
name. Oh, how often, not denying your old friend,
you exclaimed: ‘‘ My own is that poet, my own!”
All work of mine, which during three years twice
counted! your reader gave you before, its author
will give you now.


LXXXV


Ir at any time, Atilius, our acquaintance Paulus is
unwell, he practises abstinence, not on himself but
on his guests. You are suffering no doubt, Paulus,
from a sudden—and fictitious—illness: all the same
my dinner has turned up its toes.?


LXXXVI


BecauseE Silius, the twofold master of the Latin
tongue,®? was lamenting the early death of his Se-
verus,‘ I complained sadly to the Pierian band and
to Phoebus. “I, too,” said Apollo, “wept for my
Linus.” And he looked back to Calliope his sister,
who stood next her brother, and said: “ You, too,®

3 7.e. as orator and poet: cf. vil. Ixiii.


4 §.’s younger son, for whom M. solicited the consulship
(vu. lxvi.), which, however, he never attained: Plin. Hp.


Tile) Vil.
5 Calliope was the mother of Orpheus. So, too, Jupiter
had lost Sarpedon, and Domitian a son; cf. Iv. iii.


135


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


aspice Tarpeium Palatinumque Tonantem :

ausa nefas Lachesis laesit utrumque Iovem.
numina cum videas duris obnoxia fatis,

invidia possis exonerare deos.” 10


LXXXVII


Septem post calices Opimiani

denso cum iaceam triente blaesus,

adfers nescio quas mihi tabellas

et dicis “ Modo liberum esse iussi

Nastam (servolus est mihi paternus) : 5
signa.” cras melius, Luperce, fiet:

nunc signat meus anulus lagonam.


LXXXVIII


Cum me captares, mittebas munera nobis:
postquam cepisti, das mihi, Rufe, nihil.

ut captum teneas, capto quoque munera mitte,
de cavea fugiat ne male pastus aper.


LXXXIX


LeceE nimis dura convivam scribere versus
cogis, Stella? “Licet scribere nempe malos,”


XC


Sic in gramine florido reclinis,
qua gemmantibus hinc et inde rivis


1 d.e. as a witness. But M. hints that Lupercus wishes
him to sign a document which he would not sign when sober.


136


BOOK IX. txxxvi-xc


have your wound. Mark the Thunderer of the Tar-
peian and him of the Palatine: Lachesis, daring a
crime, has hurt either Jove. Forasmuch as you see
that deities are subject to the inflexible Fates, of
jealousy you may acquit the gods.”


LXXXVII


When, after seven cups of Opimian, I lie lisping
amid my frequent potations, you bring me some
document or other and say: “I have just bade
Nasta to go free—he was my father’s slave—put
your seal.’’! Better to-morrow, Lupercus: just now
my ring only seals up? flagons.


LXXXVIII


WHEN you were irying to catch me you used to
send me presents: after you have caught me, you,
Rufus, give me nothing. To hold your catch, send
presents to him also when caught, that the boar,
being badly fed, may not escape from its pen.


LXXXIX


Do you by too hard a regulation compel your guest
to write verses, Stella? ‘Well, you are allowed to


write bad ones.”
XC
So, on flower-spangled sward reclining, where in
the runnels sparkling here and there the pebble is


2 To prevent theft: Plin. N.H. xxxiii. 6; Juv. xiv.
132,


137


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


curva calculus excitatur unda,

exclusis procul omnibus molestis,

pertundas! glaciem triente nigro, 5
frontem sutilibus ruber coronis ;

sic uni tibi sit puer cinaedus

et castissima pruriat puella:

infamem nimio calore Cypron

observes moneo precorque, Flacce, 10
messes area cum teret crepantis

et fervens iuba saeviet leonis.

at tu, diva Paphi, remitte, nostris

inlaesum iuvenem remitte votis,

sic Martis tibi serviant Kalendae 15
et cum ture meroque victimaque

libetur tibi candidas ad aras

secta plurima quadra de placenta.


XCI


Ap cenam si me diversa vocaret in astra
hine invitator Caesaris, inde Iovis,

astra licet propius, Palatia longius essent,
responsa ad superos haec referenda darem:

“ Quaerite qui malit fieri conviva Tonantis : 5.
me meus in terris Iuppiter ecce tenet.”


XCII


Quae mala sint domini, quae servi commoda, nescis,
Condyle, qui servum te gemis esse diu.


1 werfundas +.


1 Wine was strained through ice or snow: cf. v. Ixiv. 2;
XIV. cxvii.


138


BOOK IX. xc—xcn


tumbled by the rippling wave, with all your frets
banished afar, may you with measures of dark wine
break through the ice! while your brow blushes
with rose-stitched chaplets; so for you alone may a
fair boy-slave and a mistress most pure be eager, if,
as I warn and pray you, Flaccus, you beware of
Cyprus of evil name in summer’s height, when the
threshing-floor shall bray the rustling harvests, and
the Lion’s mane? be hot with rage. But do thou,
goddess of Paphos, send back to our prayers, send
back the youth unscathed ; so may March’s kalends 8
be in fealty to thee, and with incense, and new
wine, and victim, there be offered to thee at thy
fair altars many a quarter of parcelled cake.


XCI


Wen. I invited to diverse heavens to feast, on this
side by Caesar’s summoner, on that by Jove’s, though
the stars were nearer, the Palace more far, this
answer would I give to be returned to the High
Gods: “Seek ye one who would choose to be the
Thunderer’s guest; me on earth, mark ye, my Jupiter


1?


detains !
XCII


Wuar are a master’s ills, what a slave’s bless-
ings you do not know, Condylus, who groan that


2 The constellation Leo. ;
3 At the festival of the Matronalia men sent presents to


their mistresses: cf. v. lxxxiv. 11.


239


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


dat tibi securos vilis tegeticula somnos,
pervigil in pluma Gaius ecce iacet.

Gaius a prima tremebundus luce salutat 5
tot dominos, at tu, Condyle, nec dominum.

«Quod debes, Gai, redde”’ inquit Phoebus et illine
Cinnamus : hoc dicit, Condyle, nemo tibi.

tortorem metuis? podagra cheragraque secatur
Gaius et mallet verbera mille pati. 10

quod nec mane vomis nec cunnum, Condyle, lingis,
non mavis quam ter Gaius esse tuus?


XCIII


ApDERE quid cessas, puer, inmortale Falernum ?
quadrantem duplica de seniore cado.

nunc mihi dic, quis erit cui te, Calacisse, deorum
sex iubeo cyathos fundere? ‘“ Caesar erit.”

sutilis aptetur deciens rosa crinibus, ut sit 5
qui posuit sacrae nobile gentis opus.

nunc bis quina mihi da basia, fiat ut illud
nomen ab Odrysio quod deus orbe tulit.


XCIV


Sarponica medicata dedit mihi pocula virga,
os hominis! mulsum me rogat Hippocrates.


1 4.e, to extort confession of some offence: Juv. xiv. 2).

2 Domitian, who founded the temple of the Gens Flavia:
(Fan Oo batsig 1b S500 G IIE,

5 The six and the two tens represent respectively the
names Caesar, Domitianus, and Germanicus. For this prac-
tice, cf. 1. Ixxi.; XI. xxxvi. 7.


140


BOOK IX. xci—xcrv


- you are so long a slave. Your common rush-mat
affords you sleep untroubled; wakeful all night
on down, see, Gaius lies! Gaius from early morn
salutes trembling many masters ; but you, Condylus,
not even your master. “ What you owe, Gaius, pay,”
says Phoebus, and after him Cinnamus: this no one,
Condylus, says to you. Do you dread the torturer? 1
By gout in foot and hand Gaius is stabbed, and would
choose instead to endure a thousand blows. You do
not vomit in the morning, nor are you given to filthy
vice, Condylus: do you not prefer this to being your
Gaius three times over?


XCIII


Why linger, boy, to pour in the undying Falernian?
Double three measures from the older jar. Now tell
me who shall it be of the Gods to whom I bid thee,
Calocissus, pour six measures? ‘Caesar it shall
be.” Let the stitched rose be ten times fitted to
our locks, that he be shown who laid the noble
temple of his hallowed race.2, Now give me twice
five kisses to shape the name he brought from the
Thracian world.’


XCIV


Hippocrates‘! gave me—such is his impudence !—
a draught drugged with Sardinian root,’ and asks me


4H. of Cos was the founder of medicine. The name is


here put for a doctor.
5 The herbs of Sardinia were bitter, and affected honey :
Verg. Hcl. vii. 41. Yet H. expects in revurn ordinary


mulsum (wine and honey mixed).


141


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


tam stupidus numquam nec tu, puto, Glauce, fuisti,
xédxea donanti ypvoea qui dederas.

dulce aliquis munus pro munere poscit amaro? 5
accipiat, sed si potat in elleboro.


XCV


A.putus ante fuit, coepit nunc Olphius esse,
uxorem postquam duxit Athenagoras.


XCVB


. Nomen Athenagorae quaeris, Callistrate, verum.
si scio, dispeream, qui sit Athenagoras.

sed puta me verum, Callistrate, dicere nomen: 5
non ego sed vester peccat Athenagoras,


| XOVI
Cuinicus Herodes trullam subduxerat aegro:
deprensus dixit “Stulte, quid ergo bibis? ”’


XCVII


Rumpitur invidia quidam, carissime Iuli,’
quod me Roma legit, rumpitur invidia.


1 The Trojan, who exchanged armour with Diomede the
Greek, xptcea xadxelwv, ExatéuBor évveaBolwy: Hom. II. vi.


234. Homer remarks, Kpovldns ppévas é&€Aere (deprived him
of sense).


142


BOOK IX, xeiv—xcvn


for mead wine. So great a fool even you, Glaucus,!
never were, I fancy, who gave gold to him who gave
you bronze. Does any man ask a gift of sweets for
a gift of bitters? He may have it, but only if he
drinks it with hellebore.?


XCV


ATHENAGORAS was Alphius before, now he becomes
Olphius after that he has married a wife.®


XCVB


“Is the name ‘Athenagoras’ a real one,” you
ask, Callistratus. May I be hanged if I know who
Athenagoras is! But imagine, Callistratus, I men-
tioned a real name: not I, but your friend Athen-
agoras is at fault.*


XCVI


Docror Herodes had stolen a drinking-ladle from
a sick patient. When detected he said: “ You fool,
why then do you drink?’”’®


XCVII y


A certain fellow, dearest Julius, is bursting with
envy; because Rome reads me, he is bursting with


2 A supposed cure for madness: Hor. Sat. 11. iii, 82, 166.
3 The point of this epigram is unknown.

4 i.e. that he has this name.

5 He professes care for his patient’s health by removing


the article.
143


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


rumpitur invidia quod turba semper in omni
monstramur digito, rumpitur invidia.

rumpitur invidia tribuit quod Caesar uterque 5
ius mihi natorum, rumpitur invidia.

rumpitur invidia quod rus mihi dulce sub urbe est
parvaque in urbe domus, rumpitur invidia.

rumpitur invidia quod sum iucundus amicis,
quod conviva frequens, rumpitur invidia. 10

rumpitur invidia quod amamur quodque probamur.
rumpatur quisquis rumpitur invidia.


XCVIII


VINDEMIARUM non ubique proventus
cessavit, Ovidi; pluvia profuit grandis.
centum Coranus amphoras aquae fecit.


XCIX


Marcus amat nostras Antonius, Attice, Musas,
charta salutatrix si modo vera refert,

Marcus Palladiae non infitianda Tolosae
gloria, quem! genuit Pacis alumna Quies,

tu qui longa potes dispendia ferre viarum, 5
i, liber, absentis pignus amicitiae.

vilis eras, fateor, si te nunc mitteret emptor:
grande tui pretium muneris auctor erit.

multum, crede mihi, refert a fonte bibatur
quae fluit an pigro quae stupet unda lacu. 10


2 quam (Friedlander),


A cf. Ie XCil.5 Tite xcy.eGs
144


BOOK IX. xcvu—xcix


envy. He is bursting with envy because in every
throng I am always pointed out with the finger, he
is bursting with envy. He is bursting with envy
because each Caesar gave me the right of a father
of three sons,! he is bursting with envy. He is
bursting with envy because I have a suburban farm
and a small house in town, he is bursting with envy.
He is bursting with envy because I am delightful
to my friends, because I am often a guest, he is
bursting with envy. He is bursting with envy be-
cause I am loved and my works are approved. Let
anyone, whoever he is, who is bursting with envy,
burst !?


XCVIII


THE crop of the vineyards has not everywhere
failed, Ovidius: heavy rains have been profitable.
Coranus has made a hundred jars—of water.®


XCIX


Marcus Antonius loves my Muse, Atticus, if only
his letter of greeting says true—Marcus, cultured
Tolosa’s indisputable glory, whom Quietude, the
nursling of Peace, begot. Do you, who can put up
with long journeys, go, my book, pledge of an absent
friendship. A poor gift you would be, I own, if a
purchaser were sending you now; the author's giving
will lend you goodly value. Great is the difference,
believe me, whether water is drunk from the fountain
as it flows, or as it stagnates in a sluggish pool.

2 7.e, be d—-d. Rumpatur = diappayetn. The point of the


epigram seems to lie in the two senses of rumpz.
3 i.e. to mix with his wine. Coranus is probably a fraudu-


lent vintner: cf. 1. lvi.
a 145


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


C


Denaris tribus invitas et mane togatum
observare iubes atria, Basse, tua,

deinde haerere tuo lateri, praecedere sellam,
ad viduas tecum plus minus ire decem.

trita quidem nobis togula est vilisque vetusque: 5
denaris tamen hanc non emo, Basse, tribus.


CI


Appia, quam simili venerandus in Hercule Caesar
consecrat, Ausoniae maxima fama viae,

si cupis Alcidae cognoscere facta prioris,
disce: Libyn domuit, aurea poma tulit,

peltatam Scythico discinxit Amazona nodo, 5
addidit Arcadio terga leonis apro,

aeripedem silvis cervum, Stymphalidas astris
abstulit, a Stygia cum cane venit aqua,

fecundam vetuit reparari mortibus hydram,
Hesperias Tusco lavit in amne boves. 10

haec minor Alcides: maior quae gesserit audi,
sextus ab Albana quem colit arce lapis.

adseruit possessa malis Palatia regnis,
prima suo gessit pro Iove bella puer;

solus Iuleas cum iam retineret habenas, 15
tradidit inque suo tertius orbe fuit ;


1 About two shillings, or double the usual dole (cf. 111.
vii. 1) of centum quadrantes. Large doles were sometimes
given: cf. IV. xxvi. 3; X. xxvii. 3.


146


BOOK IX. c-ci


C


For three denarii! you invite me, and bid me
don my toga in the morning and wait in your hall,
Bassus; then closely to attend you, to walk before
your chair, with you to call upon ten widows more or
less. Worn indeed is my poor toga, and cheap and
old—yet for three denarii I cannot buy it, Bassus.


CI


Tuou Appian Way, which revered Caesar in the
guise of Hercules? hallows, chiefest glory of Auso-
nian ways, if thou desirest to know the deeds of
the ancient Alcides, learn them. The Libyan he
subdued, the golden apples he won; he ungirt the
Amazonian targeteer of her Scythian girdle; he
crowned the spoil of the lion’s skin with Arcadia’s
boar; he freed the woods from the brazen-hoofed
hind, the sky from the Stymphalian birds; from
the Stygian flood he returned with its hound; the
teeming hydra he let no more grow stronger by
death; he laved in the Tuscan stream Hesperian
oxen. These things wrought the lesser Alcides;
hear what that greater® did, whom men worship at
the sixth stone from Alba’s height. He redeemed
the Palatine held by an evil power;‘ his first wars
he waged, a boy, for his own Jove;* albeit alone
he already held the reins of Julian power, he gave
them up, and in a world that had been his own


4) cfr Ix Ixiy. 3 Domitian.

4 By the party of Vitellius after the death of that emperor.

5 He was besieged in the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus
by the Vitellians.


147


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


cornua Sarmatici ter perfida contudit Histyri,
sudantem Getica ter nive lavit equum ;
saepe recusatos parcus duxisse triumphos
victor Hyperboreo nomen ab orbe tulit ; 20
templa deis, mores populis dedit, otia ferro, -
astra suis, caelo sidera, serta Iovi.
Herculeum tantis numen non sufficit actis :
Tarpeio deus hic commodet ora patri.


CII :
QuaDRINGENToRUM reddis mihi, Phoebe, tabellas:
centum da potius mutua, Phoebe, mihi.
quaere alium cui te tam vano munete iactes:
quod tibi non possum solvere, Phoebe, meum est.


CHI -

QuaeE nova tam similis genuit tibi Leda ministros?
quae capta est alio nuda Lacaena cycno?

dat faciem Pollux Hiero, dat Castor Asylo,
atque in utroque nitet Tyndaris ore soror.

ista Therapnaeis si forma fuisset Amyclis, 5
cum vicere duas dona minora deas,

mansisses, Helene, Phrygiamque redisset in Iden
Dardanius gemino cum Ganymede Paris.


1 Though he had been proclaimed Caesar, and was in
possession of Rome, he resigned the empire to his father
Vespasian and his brother Titus in precedence to himself,
boasting, however, putri se et fratri imperium dedisse, illos
sthi reddidisse : Suet. Dom. xiii.

* In his three campaigns against the tribes on the Danube
As to the shattering of the horn, gf. x. vii. 6,


148


BOOK IX. ci-cu1


remained but -the third;! thrice he shattered-the
treacherous horns of Sarmatian Hister;? his sweat-
ing steed thrice he bathed in Getic snow; loth to
lead on triumphs oft resigned,? he won a victor’s
name from the Hyperborean world; temples he
gave the Gods, morals to the people, rest to the
sword, immortality to his own kin, to heaven stars,
wreaths to Jove. The Deity of Hercules sufficed not
for deeds so great: let him, our God, lend his features
to the Tarpeian # Sire!


CII


You return me, Phoebus, my bond for four hun-
dred thousand sesterces; rather give me on loan,
Phoebus, a hundred thousand. Look out for some
one else to whom you may boast of so empty a gift ;
what I can’t pay you, Phoebus, is my own.®


CIIl


Wuat new Leda® bore you attendants so like?
What nude Spartan maid was ravished by another
swan? Pollux gives his features to Hierus, Castor
gives his to Asylus, and in either face their sister
Tyndaris shines clear. Had such beauty existed at
Spartan Amyclae“ when a lesser gift o’erweighed the
goddesses twain,’ thou, Helen, wouldst have stayed
at home, and Dardan Paris have returned to Phrygian
Ida with twin Ganymedes !

3 cf. vill. xv. 5. 4 Jup. Capitolinus.


5 cf. for a similar idea VIII. xxxvii.

8 The mother of Castor and Pollux, and of Helen of Troy
(Tyndaris).

7 Both Therapnae and Amyclae were associated with Castor
and Pollux, but the use of 7'herapnueis is hard to explain.

8 When Venus’ promise to Paris of Helen overweighed the
promises of Hera (Juno) and Pallas in the contest of beauty.


149


ra


” aaaits t gasth et


rel apie pe Loreal Peril, at aa "2 %


‘a a2 sent


A cht agua
44 - oe pts
Las en age ee
Sate 2 beat raft i ae ied


i Far 78S Seite sacl? t Ps


| att os


mitkoas pdisnhs scat ig saecuhis eres tar os
imebtoran. i, bariatienr 2 ey as atieee, i

‘ej iio a0 ig. tk

4 5581 Rs cdeg
Si fs 3%: “wes. “Cin nit Rane hale!
‘ Vets eli = eet kite
(ere FE oes { thie} he Traci s 3 idee erage
ATH E 404 GF tha gee aX be csi SEA we ms


ar bert * Se rey


it
ok i ; fp pags 45, paises
Wo iB * JAAS OG - us Ho Bal te'L é
Os 2 -
~ 0
;
‘ 7
oe


LIBER DECIMUS


I


S1 nimius videor seraque coronide longus
esse liber, legito pauca: libellus ero.

terque quaterque mihi finitur carmine parvo
pagina: fac tibi me quam cupis ipse brevem,


II


Festinata prior, decimi mihi cura libelli
elapsum manibus nunc revocavit opus.
nota leges quaedam sed lima rasa recenti ;
pars nova maior erit: lector, utrique fave,
lector, opes nostrae: quem cum mihi Roma dedisset,
“Nil tibi quod demus maius habemus’”’ ait. 6
“ pigra per hune fugies ingratae flumina Lethes
et meliore tui parte superstes eris.
marmora Messallae findit caprificus et audax
dimidios Crispi mulio ridet equos: 10
at chartis nec furta nocent et saecula prosunt,
solaque non norunt haec monumenta mori.”


1 7.e. by reading only the short epigrams.

2 This book is not the first edition, which may have been
published in 95, but an enlarged edition published in 98
after Book XI. M. afterwards issued a selection from
Books X. and XI.: ¢f. x11. v. 1-2,


152


BOOK X


I


Ir I seem too big a book and long, with my colo-
phon delayed, read a few epigrams: I shall be a
little book. Often a page of mine ends with a small
poem: make me as short for yourself as you like.}


II


Too hurried before, the composition of my tenth
book has made me now recall the work that had
slipt from my hands.? You will read some things
you know, but polished lately by the file; the greater
part will be new; reader, be kind to both, reader, who
are my wealth; for when Rome had given you to
me, she said: ‘We have nothing greater to give
“you. By him will you escape unthankful Lethe’s
sluggish stream, and will in your better part survive.
Messalla’s marble the wild-fig sunders, and boldly
the mule-driver laughs at Crispus’ steeds broken
an two. But writings thefts do not injure, and
time befriends them, and alone these monuments


know not death.”


3 M. is M. Val. Messalla Corvinus, the patron of the poet
Tibullus: ¢f. vu. iii. 5. The Crispus is probably C. Pas-
sienus Crispus of the time of Claudius, and stepfather of


Nero.


VOL. II. F 253


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


III


VeRNACULORUM dicta, sordidum dentem,

et foeda linguae probra circulatricis,

quae sulpurato nolit empta ramento

Vatiniorum proxeneta fractorum,

poeta quidam clancularius spargit 5
et volt videri nostra. credis hoc, Prisce?

voce ut loquatur psittacus coturnicis

et concupiscat esse Canus ascaules?

procul a libellis nigra sit meis fama,

quos rumor alba gemmeus vehit pinna: 10
cur ego laborem notus esse tam prave,

coustare gratis cum silentium possit ?


IV


Qui legis Oedipoden caligantemque Thyesten,
Colchidas et Scyllas, quid nisi monstra legis?
quid tibi raptus Hylas, quid Parthenopaeus et Attis,
quid tibi dormitor proderit Endymion ?
exutusve puer pinnis labentibus ? aut qui 5
odit amatrices Hermaphroditus aquas ? ;
quid te vana iuvant miserae ludibria chartae?
hoc lege, quod possit dicere vita “ Meum est.”
non hic Centauros, non Gorgonas Harpyiasque
invenies: hominem pagina nostra sapit. 10
sed non vis, Mamurra, tuos cognoscere mores
nec te scire: legas Aetia Callimachi.


1 Beakers with four nozzles, said to be in imitation of the
nose of Vatinius, a Beneventan cobbler in Nero’s time: ef.
xiv. xevi.; Juv, v. 46. As to the sale of broken glass, cf.
I. xli. 3-5.


154


BOOK X. im-iv


Ill


Tue scurrilities of home-born slaves, low railing,
and the foul insults of a hawker’s tongue, which the
broker of shattered Vatinian glasses! would reject
as the price of a sulphur match, a certain skulking
poet scatters abroad, and would have them appear as
mine. Do you believe this, Priscus? that a parrot
speaks with the voice of a quail, and Canus? longs
to be a bagpipe-player? Far from poems of mine
be black repute, poems which lustrous fame
uplifts on pinions white. Why should I toil to
be known so evilly when stillness can cost me


nothing?


IV


You, who read of Oedipus and Thyestes neath a
darkened sun, of Colchian witches and Scyllas—of
what do you read but monsters? What will the rape
of Hylas avail you, what Parthenopaeus and Attis,
what the sleeper Endymion? or the boy stript of
his gliding wings? or Hermaphroditus who hates
the amorous waters? Why does the vain twaddle
of a wretched sheet attract you? Read this of which
Life can say: “’Tis my own.” Not here will you
find Centaurs, not Gorgons and Harpies: ‘tis of man
my page smacks. But you do not wish, Mamurra, to
recognize your own manners, or to know yourself.
Read the Origins of Callimachus.*


2 A famous flute-player: cf. Iv. v. 8.
% An Alexandrine grammarian and poet of the third cen-


tury B.c. who wrote an epic on the origins (Atria) of mytho-
logical stories


t55


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Vv


Quisquis stolaeve purpuraeve contemptor

quos colere debet laesit impio versu,

erret per urbem pontis exul et clivi,

interque raucos ultimus rogatores

oret caninas panis inprobi buccas. 5
illi December longus et madens bruma
clususque fornix triste frigus extendat :

vocet beatos clamitetque felices

Orciniana qui feruntur in sponda.

at cum supremae fila venerint horae 10
diesque tardus, sentiat canum litem

abigatque moto noxias aves panno.

nec finiantur morte supplicis poenae,

sed modo severi sectus Aeaci loris,

nunc inquieti monte Sisyphi pressus, 15
nunc inter undas garruli senis siccus

delasset omnis fabulas poetarum ;

et cum fateri Furia iusserit verum,

prodente clamet conscientia “ Scripsi.”’


VI


Fetices, quibus urna dedit spectare coruscum
solibus Arctois sideribusque ducem.

quando erit ille dies quo campus et arbor et omnis
lucebit Latia culta fenestra nuru ?


1 7.¢. of noble ladies, or of magistrates and senators.

2 Resorts of beggars: cf. II. xix. 3; XII. xxxii. 10, 25.

3 Where he took refuge.

47.e, the pauper’s bier (sandapila): cf. m. Ixxxi.; vu.
xxv, 5 Ready to eat him.


156


BOOK X. v-vi


Vv


Wuoe’er he be who, scorner of either stole or
purple,! has wounded with his wicked verse those
he should respect, let him wander through the city,
exile from bridge and hill,? and, last amid the hoarse-
throated beggars, pray for dogs’ morsels of vile bread.
To him may December be long and winter wet, and
the shutting of the archway prolong his miserable
chill; let him call those blest, and acclaim those for-
tunate, who are carried on the litter of Orcus.4 But
when the threads of his last hour have been spun, and
his lingering day has come, let him feel the wrangling
of dogs,® and flap away noxious birds with waving
rags. Nor let his punishment, despite his prayers,
be closed by death; but now scored by the scourge
of stern Aeacus,® now o’erwhelmed by the moun-
tainous stone of restless Sisyphus, now parching amid
the waters of the blabbing old man,’ may he weary
out all the fabled torments of the poets; and when
the Fury shall bid him confess the truth, may he
shriek, his conscience betraying him: “I wrote it.’’8


VI


Happy are they to whom Fortune’s urn has given
to see our Captain ablaze with northern suns and
stars!? When shal] that day be whereon plain and
tree shall be radiant, and every casement dight with


6 One of the three Judges of the Shades,
?7 Tantalus, who was doomed to thirst in Tartarus for


revealing the secrets of the gods. i :
8. M. follows in this ep., often closely, the Ibis of Ovid.


® This ep. was written when the new emperor, Trajan,
was expected from the Rhine in a.p. 98.


157


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quando morae dulces longusque a Caesare pulvis
totaque Flaminia Roma videnda via?

quando eques et picti tunica Nilotide Mauri
ibitis et populi vox erit una “ Venit?”’ ?


Vil


Nympuarvum pater amniumque, Rhene,
quicumque Odrysias bibunt pruinas,
sic semper liquidis fruaris undis

nec te barbara contumeliosi

calcatum rota conterat bubulci;

sic et cornibus aureis receptis

et Romanus eas utraque ripa:
Traianum populis suis et urbi,

Thybris te dominus rogat, remittas.


;, VItl
Nusere Paula cupit nobis, ego ducere Paulam
nolo: anus est. vellem, si magis esset anus.


IX
Unpenis pedibusque syllabisque


et multo sale nec tamen protervo
notus gentibus ille Martialis

et notus populis (quid invidetis ?)
non sum Andraemone notior caballo.


x


Cum tu, laurigeris annum qui fascibus intras,
mane Ssalutator limina mille teras,


5


5


1 Previously shattered by defeat: ef. vil. vii. 3; 1x. ci, 17.
2 Elegiacs and hendecasyllables.


158


BOOK. X. vi-x


Latin dames? When shall be hope’s sweet delays,
and the long trail of dust behind Caesar, and all
Rome visible on the Flaminian Way? When will ye
come, ye knights, and ye painted Moors in your
tunics of Nile, and one voice of the people go up,
“Does he come?”’?


VII


Fatuer, O Rhine, of Nymphs and of all rivers
that drink the Thracian frosts, so mayst thou alway
joy in limpid waters, and no insolent ox-driver’s bar-
barous wain trample roughly on thy head; so mayst
thou, with thy golden horns regained,! and a Roman
stream on either bank, flow on—send Trajan back to
his peoples and to his city: so doth thy Lord Tiber
entreat thee.


VIII


Pauta wishes to marry me: I decline to take
Paula to wife; she is an old woman. I might be
willing if she were older.


Ix


Wirtu my eleven-footed and eleven-syllabled verse,?
and flowing, yet not froward wit, I, that Martial,
who am known to the nations and to Rome’s peoples
(why do you envy me?) am not known better than
the horse Andraemon,


x


Wuen you, who usher in the year with laurelled
axes,® tread a thousand thresholds at morning levees,

3 As consul, and the first of the year. Men of position
often did not scruple to add to their income by taking the
sportula: cf. Juv. i. 99. Juv. (i. 117) also alludes to the
grievances in consequence of poor clients.


159


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hic ego quid faciam? quid nobis, Paule, relinquis,
qui de plebe Numae densaque turba sumus ?
qui me respiciet dominum regemque vocabo? 5
hoc tu (sed quanto blandius !) ipse facis.
lecticam sellamve sequar? nec ferre recusas,
per medium pugnas et prior isse lutum.
saepius adsurgam recitanti carmina? tu stas
et pariter geminas tendis in ora manus. 10
quid faciet pauper cui non licet esse clienti?
dimisit nostras purpura vestra togas.


XI


Nix aliud loqueris quam Thesea Pirithoumque
teque putas Pyladi, Calliodore, parem.
dispeream, si tu Pyladi praestare matellam
dignus es aut porcos pascere Pirithoi.
“ Donavi tamen”’ inquis ‘‘amico milia quinque 5
et lotam, ut multum, terve quaterve! togam.”
quid quod nil umquam Pyladi donavit Orestes?
qui donat quamvis plurima, plura negat.


XII


AEmILIAE gentes et Apollineas Vercellas
et Phaethontei qui petis arva Padi,

ne vivam, nisi te, Domiti, dimitto libenter,
grata licet sine te sit mihi nulla dies:

sed desiderium tanti est ut messe vel una 5
urbano releves colla perusta iugo.


1 terve quaterve Haupt, terque quaterque codd.


1 A method of applauding: ef. Juv. iii. 106. Or perhaps
the allusion is to throwing kisses; cf. 1. iii. 7.


160


BOOK xX. x-x


what can I do here? What do you leave to us, Paulus,
us who are of the herd of Numa and a teeming crowd?
Shall I greet as Lord and King him who but gives
me a glance ? This, and how much more blandly!
you also do. Shall I follow a litter or chair? You
don’t refuse even to shoulder one, and to struggle to
pass first through the middle of the mud. Shall I
repeatedly rise when a man recites poems? You are
already standing, and put to your lips both hands at
once.! What shall a poor man do, debarred from
being a client? Your purple has ousted our togas,


XI


You talk of nothing but Theseus and Pirithous,
and think yourself, Calliodorus, the peer of Pylades.
May I be hanged if you are fit to hand Pylades a
chamber-pot, or to feed Pirithous’ swine. “ Yet,”
you say, “I gave a friend five thousand, and a toga
only three or four times washed,? a considerable
gift.” And what if Pylades never gave anything to
Orestes? He who gives—however many gifts he
makes—denies more.


XII


You are going to the peoples on the Aemilian
Way, and to Apollo’s Vercellae, and the fields by
the Po where Phaethon died. May I perish, but I
let you go willingly, Domitius, although without you
no day is pleasant to me; but I can pay the price of
regret that, even for a single summer, you may ease
your neck galled by the city’s yoke. Go, I pray, and


24.e. nearly new. The phrase was apparently common:
Petr. 30. ;
3 P. and O. already shared in common.


161


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


i precor et totos avida cute conbibe soles:
© quam formosus, dum peregrinus eris!

et venies albis non adgnoscendus amicis
livebitque tuis pallida turba genis. 10

sed via quem dederit rapiet cito Roma colorem,
Niliaco redeas tu licet ore niger.


XII


Cum cathedralicios portet tibi raeda ministros
et Libys in longo pulvere sudet eques,
strataque non unas cingant triclinia Baias
et Thetis unguento palleat uncta tuo,
candida Setini rumpant crystalla trientes, 5
dormiat in pluma nec meliore Venus:
ad nocturna iaces fastosae limina moechae
et madet heu! lacrimis ianua surda tuis,
urere nec miserum cessant suspiria pectus.
vis dicam male sit cur tibi, Cotta? bene est. 10


XIV


Crepere de nostris nulli te dicis amicis.
sed, sit ut hoc verum, quid, rogo, Crispe, facis?
mutua cum peterem sestertia quinque, negasti,
non caperet nummos cum gravis arca tuos.
quando fabae modium nobis farrisve dedisti, 5
cum tua Niliacus rura colonus aret ?


162


BOOK X. xu-xiv


drink into your greedy pores the fullness of the sun-
shine—oh, how comely you will be while you are
abroad! And you will return not to be recognized
by your white-faced friends, and a pallid crowd will
envy your cheeks. But Rome will quickly efface
the tan your tour will have given you, though you
came home swarthy with an Egyptian’s face.


XIII


ALTHouGH a travelling-coach carries your lolling
minions, and a Libyan outrider sweats in a long
trail of dust, and your cushioned couches surround
more than one warm bath, and your sea-bath is pale
with the tinge of your perfumes; although draughts
of Setine fill to bursting your transparent crystal,
and in fairer down Venus herself does not repose ;
by night you lie on the threshold of a capricious
mistress, and her deaf door is wet, alas! with your
tears, and sighs do not cease to scorch your unhappy
breast. Do you wish me to say why it is ill with
you, Cotta? Because it is well.?


XIV


You say that you yield to none of my friends in
love. Yet to make this true, what, I ask, Crispus,
do you do? When I was asking you for a loan of
five thousand sesterces you refused it, although your
heavy coffer could not hold your moneys. When
did you give me a peck of beans, or of spelt, al-
though a tenant by the Nile tills fields of yours?


1 ©, is so well off he has to invent miseries.


163


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quando brevis gelidae missa est toga tempore brumae?


argenti venit quando selibra mihi?
nil aliud video quo te credamus amicum
quam quod me coram pedere, Crispe, soles.


XV


DoraTaE uxori cor harundine fixit acuta,
sed dum ludit, Aper. ludere novit Aper.


XVI


S1 donare vocas promittere nec dare, Gai,
vincam te donis muneribusque meis.

accipe Callaicis quidquid fodit Astur in arvis,
aurea quidquid habet divitis unda Tagi,

quidquid Erythraea niger invenit Indus in alga,
quidquid et in nidis unica servat avis,

quidquid Agenoreo Tyros inproba cogit aheno:


quidquid habent omnes, accipe, quomodo das.


XVII


SatTurnaticio Macrum fraudare tributo
frustra, Musa, cupis: non licet: ipse petit;

sollemnesque iocos nec tristia carmina poscit
et queritur nugas obticuisse meas.

mensorum longis sed nunc vacat ille libellis.
Appia, quid facies, si legit ista Macer?


1 Pearls: cf. V. xxxvii. 4.
2 The phoenix: cf. vi. lv. 2.
3 The purple of Tyre,


164


10


BOOK X. xiv—-xvu


When was a short toga sent me in chill winter’s
season? When did a half-pound of silver plate
come to me? I see no other reason why I should
believe you friend, than that you are wont, Crispus,
to break wind in my presence.


XV


His well-dowered wife’s heart Aper transfixed with
a sharp arrow, but it was in sport. Aper is a clever
sportsman.


XVI


Ir you call it bounty to promise and not to give,
Gaius, I will surpass you. by my bounties and offer-
ings. Receive all wealth the Asturian mines in
Gallician fields, all wealth rich Tagus’ golden wave
possesses, all the swarthy Indian discovers in Eastern
seaweed,! and all the solitary bird? treasures in its
nest, all Agenor’s city, cheating Tyre, stores in her
caldron.2 All wealth of all men receive—in your
fashion of giving!


XVII


You wish in vain, Muse, to defraud Macer of his
Saturnalian tribute: it can’t be; he himself asks
for it, and he claims the customary jokes and no
melancholy poems, and complains that my flippancies
have become dumb. But at present he has time to
look at the long reports of his surveyors. Appian
Way, what will you do if Macer reads these
poems ?®


4 Of which Macer was curator.
5 7.e. you will be neglected if M. devotes his leisure, not


to reports, but to poetry.
165


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XVIII


Nec vocat ad cenam Marius, nec munera mittit,
nec spondet, nec volt credere, sed nec habet.
turba tamen non dest sterilem quae curet amicum.

eheu! quam fatuae sunt tibi, Roma, togae!


XIX


Nec doctum satis et parum severum,

sed non rusticulum tamen libellum

facundo mea Plinio Thalia

i perfer: brevis est labor peractae

altum vincere tramitem Suburae. 5
illic Orphea protinus videbis

udi vertice lubricum theatri

mirantisque feras avemque regis,

raptum quae Phryga pertulit Tonanti ;

illic parva tui domus Pedonis 10
caelata est aquilae minore pinna.

sed ne tempore non tuo disertam

pulses ebria ianuam videto:

totos dat tetricae dies Minervae,

dum centum studet auribus virorum 15
hoc quod saecula posterique possint

Arpinis quoque conparare chartis.

seras tutior ibis ad lucernas :

haec hora est tua, cum furit Lyaeus,

cum regnat rosa, cum madent capilli: ~ 20
tune me vel rigidi legant Catones.


1 Pliny the younger, advocate and letter-writer. M.
mentions him also in v. lxxx. 13, and vit. lxxxiv. 1.

27.e. the ascent up the Esquiline from. the Subura.
Somewhere on this path was the Lacus Orphei, one of the
reservoirs of Rome, where was a statue of Orpheus sur-
rounded by beasts listening to his song.


166


BOOK X. xvimi—xix
XVIII


Marius invites no one to dinner, and sends no
presents, and is surety for no one, and is unwilling
to lend—in fact he has nothing. Yet a crowd is at
_ hand to court so unprofitable a friend. Alas! what
dolts, O Rome, your clients are!


XIX


Turs little book, not learned enough, nor very strict
in tone, yet not all unrefined, go, my Thalia, and
carry to eloquent Pliny:! short is your labour, when
you have crossed the Subura, in breasting the steep
path.? There you will at once notice Orpheus, spray-
sprinkled, crowning his drenched audience,’ and the
wild beasts marvelling at his song, and the Monarch’s
bird‘ that bore to the Thunderer the ravished Phry-
gian; there stands the modest dwelling of your
own Pedo,} its frieze graven with eagle of lesser wing.
But take heed you give no drunken knock on Elo-
quence’s door at a time that is not yours; all the
day he devotes to serious study, while he prepares
for the ears of the Hundred Court © that which time
and posterity may compare even with Arpinum’s
pages.’ Safer will you go at the time of the late-
kindled lamps; that hour is yours when Lyaeus is
in revel, when the rose is queen, when locks are
drenched. Then let even unbending Catos read me.


3 Friedlander, however, explains thcatrum ‘‘ semicircular
pool with steps.” For theatrum=audience, ¢f (as Housman
does) Ov. Met. xi. 25.

4 Jupiter’s eagle that carried off Ganymede: ¢f. I. vi.

5 P. Albinovanus, an epic poet and epigrammatist of the
Augustan age.

8 of. vi, xxxviii. 5. 7 Cicero’s.


167


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XxX


Ducir ad auriferas quod me Salo Celtiber oras,
pendula quod patriae visere tecta libet,

tu mihi simplicibus, Mani, dilectus ab annis
et praetextata cultus amicitia,

tu facis; in terris quo non est alter Hiberis 5
dulcior et vero dignus amore magis.

tecum ego vel sicci Gaetula mapalia Poeni
et poteram Scythicas hospes amare casas.

si tibi mens eadem, si nostri mutua cura est,
in quocumque loco Roma duobus erit. 10


XXI


Scripere te quae vix intellegat ipse Modestus
et vix Claranus quid rogo, Sexte, iuvat ?

non lectore tuis opus est sed Apolline libris:
iudice te maior Cinna Marone fuit.

sic tua laudentur sane: mea carmina, Sexte, 5
grammaticis placeant, ut sine grammaticis.


XXII


Cur spleniato saepe prodeam mento
albave pictus sana labra cerussa,
Philaeni, quaeris? basiare te nolo.


1 Learned commentators.
2 te, an interpreter.


168


BOOK X. xx-xxu


XX


Tuat Celtiberian Salo draws me to gold-bearing
shores, that I fain would see on the hillside the roofs
of my native land, you are the cause, Manius, dear
to me from my ingenuous years, and wooed with
boyhood’s friendship; than whom none else in Hi-
beria’s land is more sweet to me, and of genuine
love more worthy. At your side could I have wel-
comed the sun-parched Carthaginian’s Gaetulian huts
and the hospitality of Scythian steads. If your heart
be as mine, if you have a mutual love for me, then,
in whatever place, for us twain it will be Rome.


XXI


Wuy, I ask, do you, Sextus, like writing what
hardly Modestus himself, and hardly Claranus,! could
understand? Your books do not require a reader,
but an Apollo;? in your judgment Cinna? was
greater than Maro. On these terms let your books
be praised by all means; let my poems, Sextus, please
commentators—so as to do without commentators.


XXII


« Way do I often go abroad with a plastered chin,
and my healthy lips painted with white lead?’”’ Do
you ask, Philaenis? I don’t want to kiss you.


3 A friend of Catullus, who wrote a long and obscure epic
called Zmyrna: of. Cat. xciv. He is probably ‘‘Cinna the
poet” of Shak. Jul. Caes. 111. ili, 32.


169


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXII


Iam numerat placido felix Antonius aevo
quindecies actas Primus Olympiadas
praeteritosque dies et totos respicit annos
nec metuit Lethes iam propioris aquas.
nulla recordanti lux est ingrata gravisque ; 3)
nulla fuit cuius non meminisse velit.
ampliat aetatis spatium sibi vir bonus: hoc est
vivere bis, vita posse priore frui.


XXIV


Nataves mihi Martiae Kalendae,

lux formosior omnibus Kalendis,

qua mittunt mihi munus et puellae,
quinquagensima liba septimamque

vestris addimus hance focis acerram. 5
his vos, si tamen expedit roganti,

annos addite bis precor novenos,

ut nondum nimia piger senecta

sed vitae tribus areis! peractis

lucos Elysiae petam puellae. 10
post hune Nestora nec diem rogabo.?


XXV


In matutina nuper spectatus harena
Mucius, inposuit qui sua membra focis,


1 greis Ald., awreis codd., auribus L., arcubus Housman.
2 post hoc Friedl,, Nestora Heins., nec hora vel nethora codd.


1 7.e, seventy-five years: cf. vil. xl. 6. ;

2 Tacitus draws a very different picture: ef. the Index
under ‘‘ Primus.”

3 Who ordinarily received gifts on that day: ef. vy.
Ixxxiv. 11.


170


BOOK X. xxi-xxv


XXII


Now in his placid age happy Antonius Primus
reckons fifteen Olympiads gone,! and he looks back
upon past days and the vista of his years, and fears
not Lethe’s wave now drawing nigh. No day, as he
reviews it, is unwelcome and distressing to him,
none has there been he would not wish to recall.
A good man? widens for himself his age’s span; he
lives twice who can find delight in life bygone.


XXIV


My natal kalends of March, day fairer to me than
all the kalends, on which girls, too, send? me a gift,
for the fifty-seventh time cakes and this censer of
incense I lay on your altars. To these years—but
so that it be expedient on my asking—add, I pray,
twice nine years, that I, not as yet dull with too
protracted age, but when life’s three courses‘ are
run, may reach the groves of the Elysian dame.5
Beyond this Nestor’s span I will not crave even
a day more.


XXV


Ir Mucius,® whom of late you saw one morning
in the arena, when he laid his hand upon the fire,


4 Boyhood, manhood, old age. Housman’s conjecture is
arcubus = arcs, t.e. the four segments into which the full
circle of life (100 years) is divided: cf. Manil. ii. 844-55.
M., being fifty-seven, would in eighteen years have com-
pleted three arcs, and not have reached the last are of too
protracted age. 5 Proserpine.

6 of. 1. xxi.; vill. xxx. In this ep. M. takes a different
view of the event, saying that the criminal representing
Mucius chooses the lesser evil of losing only a limb.


171


,


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


si patiens durusque tibi fortisque videtur,
Abderitanae pectora plebis habes.

nam cum dicatur tunica praesente molesta 5
“Ure manum,” plus est dicere “ Non facio.’


XXVI


Vare, Paraetonias Latia modo vite per urbes
nobilis et centum dux memorande viris,

at nunc, Ausonio frustra promisse Quirino,
hospita Lagei litoris umbra iaces.

spargere non licuit frigentia fletibus ora, 5
pinguia nec maestis addere tura rogis.

sed datur aeterno victurum carmine nomen:
numquid et hoc, fallax Nile, negare potes ?


XXVII


Naraut, Diodore, tuo conviva senatus
accubat et rarus non adhibetur eques,

et tua tricenos largitur sportula nummos.
nemo tamen natum te, Diodore, putat.


XXVIII


ANNorvM nitidique sator pulcherrime mundi,
publica quem primum vota precesque vocant,


1 The people of Abdera in Thrace were, like the Boeotians,
notorious for their stupidity: ¢f. Juy. x. 50.

2 The tunica molesta: cf. Iv. lxxxvi. 8.

* With which a centurion kept discipline among his
soldiers.

« 4.e. whose return to Rome we were expecting.


172


BOOK X. xxv—xxvill


seem to you enduring, and unflinching, and strong,
you have the intelligence of Abdera’s} rabble. For,
when it is said to you, while the torturing tunic? is
by you, “ Burn your hand,” it is the bolder thing to
say “I refuse.”


XXVI


Noraste but lately with Latin vine-rod? mid
Egypt’s cities, and a captain of renown to thy
hundred soldiers, yet now, O thou who wert pro-
mised in vain to Ausonian Quirinus,* thou liest,
an alien ghost, on the Lagaean shore. ’Twas not
allowed me to sprinkle thy chill cheek with my
tears, nor to shed rich incense on thy lamented
pyre. But there is given thee a name that shall
live in deathless song: nay, treacherous Nile, canst
thou refuse that too?®


XXVII


On your birthday, Diodorus, the Senate is your
guest at dinner, and few are the knights not in-
vited, and your dole lavishes thirty sesterces on each
guest. Yet no one, Diodorus, imagines you had a
father.?


XXVIII


Faruer, most fair, of the years and of the bright
universe, whom first of all Gods public vows and


5 i.e, as well as his body?
6 About double the usual dole. A larger than the usual
dole was sometimes given (sportula major): ¢f. vuit. xlii. 1;
Aor

7 Non natus, a phrase expressing insignificance: ¢f. vi11.
Ixiv. 18.


173


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL
pervius ! exiguos habitabas ante penates,
plurima qua medium Roma terebat iter:
nune tua Caesareis cinguntur limina donis
et fora tot numeras, lane, quot ora geris.
at tu, sancte pater, tanto pro munere gratus,
ferrea perpetua claustra tuere sera.


XXIX


Quam mihi mittebas Saturni tempore lancem,
misisti dominae, Sextiliane, tuae ;

et quam donabas dictis a Marte Kalendis,
de nostra prasina est synthesis empta toga.

iam constare tibi gratis coepere puellae:
muneribus futuis, Sextiliane, meis.


XXX


O TempPERATAE dulce Formiae litus,
vos, cum severi fugit oppidum Martis
et inquietas fessus exuit curas,
Apollinaris omnibus locis praefert.

non ille sanctae dulce Tibur uxoris,
nec Tusculanos Algidosve secessus,
Praeneste nec sic Antiumque miratur;
non blanda Circe Dardanisve Caieta
desiderantur, nec Marica nec Liris,
nec in Lucrina lota Salmacis vena.


1 pervius s, praevius codd.


1 The old temple of Janus was near the Roman Forum,
and represented Janus with two faces (Janus Geminus).
Domitian built a new temple, giving Janus four faces (quadri-
frons), in the Forum Transitorium: cf. vin. ii. The other
three forums were the F. Romanum, F. Julii, and F. Augusti,


174


BOOK X. xxvimi~xxx


prayers implore, thou, pervious once, didst afore-
time inhabit a petty house, wherethrough populous
Rome wore her thoroughfare. Now is thy threshold
encircled with Caesarean offerings, and as many
forums thou numberest, Janus, as the faces thou
bearest.1 But do thou, hallowed sire, thankful for
a gift so great, guard thy iron portals with a bolt
ever undrawn.?


XXIX


Tue dish you used to send me at Saturn’s season
you have sent to your mistress, Sextilianus, and, at
the cost of the toga you used to give me on the
kalends named after Mars, has been bought a green
dinner dress. Now your girls begin to cost you
nothing: it is out of my presents, Sextilianus, you
carry on your amours.


XXX


O TEMPERATE Formiae, darling shore! When he
flies from stern Mars’ town, and weariedly puts
off distracting cares, ‘tis you Apollinaris prefers to
every spot. Not so does he admire his blameless
wife’s darling Tibur, nor the retreats of Tusculum-
or Algidus, not so does he admire Praeneste and
Antium; Circe’s witching headland or Dardan
Caieta® are not longed for, nor Marica‘ nor Liris,
nor Salmacis® bathed in the Lucrine’s waters. Here

2 When the gate of the temple was shut, it was a sign
that Rome was not at war.

3 Circeii and Caieta: cf. Vv. i. 5.

4 A Latin nymph, who had a temple and grove at Min-
turnae at the mouth of the Liris in Campania.

5 Probably a spring that fell into the Lucrine lake, and
hearing the same name as the spring in Caria associated
with the legend of Hermaphroditus: ¢f. v1. Ixviii. 10. It-is
here alluded to under the name of the nymph 8.

175


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hic summa leni stringitur Thetis vento ;

nec languet aequor, viva sed quies ponti
pictam phaselon adiuvante fert aura.

sicut puellae non amantis aestatem

mota salubre purpura venit frigus. 15
nec saeta longo quaerit in mari praedam,

sed a cubili lectuloque iactatam

spectatus alte lineam trahit piscis.

si quando Nereus sentit Aeoli regnum,

ridet procellas tuta de suo mensa: 20
piscina rhombum pascit et lupos vernas,

natat ad magistrum delicata muraena,
nomenculator mugilem citat notum

et adesse iussi prodeunt senes mulli.

frui sed istis quando, Roma, permittis ? 25
quot Formianos inputat dies annus

negotiosis rebus urbis haerenti ?

o ianitores vilicique felices !

dominis parantur ista, serviunt vobis.


XXXI


ADDIXTI servum nummis here mille ducentis,
ut bene cenares, Calliodore, semel.

nec bene cenasti: mullus tibi quattuor emptus
librarum cenae pompa caputque fuit.

exclamare libet : “Non est hic, inprobe, non est 5
piscis: homo est ; hominem, Calliodore, comes.”


XXXII


Hacc mihi quae colitur violis pictura rosisque,
quos referat voltus, Caediciane, rogas?


1 Nereus was a sea-god, and ‘Achlus the god éf ule winds.


176


BOOK X. xxx-xxxu


Ocean’s surface is ruffled by a gentle breeze; yet
is not the sea-floor still, but a slumberous swell
bears on the gaudy shallop with the assisting air, as
from the fluttering of a girl’s purple fan, when she
shuns the heat, there comes refreshing cool. The
line seeks not its prey in the distant sea, but the
fish, descried from above, draws down the cord cast
from bed or couch. If ever Nereus feel the power
of Aeolus! the table, safe-supplied from its own
store, laughs at the storm; the fishpond feeds turbot
and home-reared bass; to its master’s call swims the
dainty lamprey; the usher summons a favourite
gurnard, and, bidden to appear, aged mullets put forth
their heads. But when dost thou, Rome, permit to
enjoy those delights? How many days of Formiae
does the year put to the credit of one tied to city
business? O happy porters and bailiffs! Those
delights are procured for your masters, they belong
to you!


XXXI


You sold a slave yesterday for twelve hundred
sesterces, Calliodorus, that you might dine well once.
You have not dined well:? a four-pound mullet
which you bought was the ornament and chief dish
of your dinner. A man may cry, “This is not a
fish, not a fish, you profligate: ‘tis a man; a man,
Calliodorus, is what you eat.”


XXXII


Tuts picture which is honoured by me with violets
and roses—ask you, Caedicianus, whose features it


2M. plays on the meaning of bene, ‘“‘sumptuously,” or
“well” in a moral sense.
177


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


talis erat Marcus mediis Antonius annis
Primus: in hoc iuvenem se videt ore senex.

ars utinam mores animumque effingere posset ! 5
pulchrior in terris nulla tabella foret.


XXXII


Simpticior priscis, Munati Galle, Sabinis,
Cecropium superas qui bonitate senem,
sic tibi consoceri claros retinere penates
perpetua natae det face casta Venus,
ut tu, si viridi tinctos aerugine versus 5
forte malus livor dixerit esse meos,
ut facis, a nobis abigas, nec scribere quemquam
talia contendas carmina qui legitur.
hunc servare modum nostri novere libelli,
parcere personis, dicere de vitiis. 10


XXXIV


D1 tibi dent quidquid, Caesar Traiane, mereris
et rata perpetuo quae tribuere velint:

qui sua restituis spoliato iura patrono
(libertis exul non erit ille suis),

dignus es ut possis tutum! servare clientem : 5
ut (liceat tantum vera probare) potes.


1 tutum >, totum codd.


1 Referred to also in x. xxiii.
2 Epicurus (¢f. vit. xix. 3) or Socrates,


178


BOOK X,. xxxn—xxxiv


presents? Such was Marcus Antonius Primus! in
manhood’s years: in this face the old man sees
himself in youth. Would that art could limn his
character and mind! More beautiful in all the.
world would no painting be!


XXXII


Smpcer than the Sabines of old, Munatius Gallus,
who surpass the old Athenian? in goodness, so
may chaste Venus grant you, by your daughter’s
unsevered -marriage tie, to keep your alliance with
her father-in-law’s illustrious house, if you, when
perchance malicious envy shall call mine verses
steeped in poisonous gall, thrust that envy from
me, as you do, and urge that no man writes such
poems who is read. This measure my books learn
to keep, to spare the person, to denounce the vice.


XXXIV


May the gods grant you, Caesar Trajanus, what-
e’er you deserve, and be willing to confirm for all
time what they have bestowed. You, who give
back to the plundered patron his rights (no more
will he be his own freedman’s exile),? are worthy
of power to keep the client safe, power which—
may you only be allowed to prove it true!—you


have.


3 Trajan had forbidden clients and freedmen to bring ac-
cusations against their patrons: Plin. Pan. 42. M. now


pleads for the client.
179


4


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXV


Omnes Sulpiciam legant puellae
uni quae cupiunt viro placere ;
omnes Sulpiciam legant mariti

uni qui cupiunt placere nuptae.
non haec Colchidos adserit furorem,
diri prandia nec refert Thyestae ;
Scyllam, Byblida nec fuisse credit :
sed castos docet et probos amores,
lusus delicias facetiasque.

cuius carmina qui bene aestimarit,
nullam dixerit esse nequiorem,
nullam dixerit esse sanctiorem.
tales Egeriae iocos fuisse

udo crediderim Numae sub antro.
hac condiscipula vel hac magistra
esses doctior et pudica, Sappho:
sed tecum pariter simulque visam
durus Sulpiciam Phaon amaret.
frustra : namque ea nec Tonantis uxor
nec Bacchi nee Apollinis puella
erepto sibi viveret Caleno.


XXXVI


Inprosa Massiliae quidquid fumaria cogunt,
accipit aetatem quisquis ab igne cadus,

a te, Munna, venit: miseris tu mittis amicis
per freta, per longas toxica saeva vias ;


1 Medea. aT Chil aex lve.


10


15


20


> One of the native Italian Camenae, or Muses, said to
have been the wife of Numa, an early king of Rome: cf. v1.


xlvii. 3.


The grot was at the Porta Capena, or at Aricia.


4 of. X. XxXxviil.


180


BOOK X. xxxv—xxxvi


XXXV


Ler all young wives read Sulpicia, who wish to
please their lords alone; let all husbands read Sul-
picia, who wish to please their brides alone. She
claims not as her theme the frenzy of the Colchian
dame,} nor does she recount Thyestes’ dreadful
feast ;? Sceylla and Byblis she does not believe ever
were; but she describes pure and honest love,
toyings, endearments, and raillery. He who shall
weigh well her poems will say no maid was so roguish,
will say no maid was so modest. Such—I would
believe — were Egeria’s? pleasantries in Numa’s
dripping grot. With her as your school-mate, or
with her as your teacher, you would have been more
learned, Sappho, and have been chaste; but coy
Phaon, had he seen her with Sappho and by her
side, would have loved Sulpicia. In vain; for neither
as the Thunderer’s spouse, nor as Bacchus’ or Apollo’s
mistress, were her Calenus taken from her, would
she live.*


XXXVI


Wuatever Massilia’s vile smoke-rooms store,> what-
ever jar acquires its age from the fire, comes from
you, Munna; to your wretched friends you consign
over the sea, over long roads, deadly poison, and not


5 Wine was matured by being kept over the heat of the
furnace, but at Massilia the process appears to have been
overdone, and a taste of smoke clung to the wine: ¢/. III.
Ixxxii. 23 ; x11. cxxiii.


181


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nec facili pretio sed quo contenta Falerni
testa sit aut cellis Setia cara suis.

non venias quare tam longo tempore Romam,
haec puto causa tibi est, ne tua vina bibas.


XXXVIT


Iuris et aequarum cultor sanctissime legum,
veridico Latium qui regis ore forum,
municipi, Materne, tuo veterique sodali
Callaicum mandas si quid ad Oceanum—.
an Laurentino turpis in litore ranas
et satius tenues ducere credis acus,
ad sua captivum quam saxa remittere mullum,
visus erit libris qui minor esse tribus?
et fatuam summa cenare pelorida mensa
quosque tegit levi cortice concha brevis
ostrea Baianis quam non liventia testis,
quae domino pueri non prohibente vorent ?
hic olidam clamosus ages in retia volpem
mordebitque tuos sordida praeda canes:
illic piscoso modo vix educta profundo
inpedient lepores umida lina meos.
dum loquor ecce redit sporta piscator inani,
venator capta maele superbus adest :
omnis ab urbano venit ad mare cena macello.
Callaicum mandas si quid ad Oceanum—.


10


15


20


1M. proceeds to compare, with regard to advantages,
Laurentum with Spain, whither he is now returning. He is


182


BOOK X. XXXVI-XxXxvii


at an easy price, but at one which would satisfy a
crock of Falernian or Setine, dear to its own cellars.
Why you do not come to Rome after such an interval
this is, | think, your reason: you shun drinking your
own wines.


XXXVII


Most conscientious student of law and of just
statutes, who with your truthful tongue rule the
Latin forum, if you have any commission, Maternus,
to the Spanish ocean for your townsman and old
comrade—or! do you think it better on Laurentum’s
shore to pull up ugly frogs and thin needle-fish,?
than to return to its own rocks the captive mullet
which shall seem to you of less than three pounds?
and to dine on a tasteless Sicilian lobster set at the
top of the table, and on fish which with a smooth
coating a small shell covers,? than on oysters that
do not envy the shell-fish of Baiae, and which slaves
devour, unforbid by their master? Here with shouts
you will drive into your toils a stinking vixen, and
the foul quarry will bite your hounds; there the
net, scarce drawn just now from the deep that teems
with fish, will, all dripping, enmesh my own hares.
While I speak, see, your fisherman comes home with
empty creel, your huntsman is at hand, exulting in a
badger caught! ‘all your dinner by the sea comes
from the city market. If you have any commission
to the Spanish ocean—


supposed to be at Laurentum paying a farewell visit to


Maternus.
2 From the marshes of Laurentum.
3 Probably mussels (mitult): cf. 111. lx. 4.


183


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXVIII


O motes tibi quindecim, Calene,
quos cum Sulpicia tua iugales
indulsit deus et peregit annos!

o nox omnis et hora, quae notata est
caris litoris Indici lapillis !

o quae proelia, quas utrimque pugnas
felix lectulus et lucerna vidit

nimbis ebria Nicerotianis !

vixisti tribus, o Calene, lustris:

aetas haec tibi tota conputatur

et solos numeras dies mariti.

ex illis tibi si diu rogatam

lucem redderet Atropos vel unam,
malles quam Pyliam quater senectam.


XXXIX


Consute te Bruto quod iuras, Lesbia, natam,
mentiris. mata es, Lesbia, rege Numa?


10


sic quoque mentiris. namque, ut tua saecula narrant,


ficta Prometheo diceris esse luto.


XL


Semper cum mihi diceretur esse
secreto mea Polla cum cinaedo,
inrupi, Lupe. non erat cinaedus,


XLI


MenseE novo Jani veterem, Proculeia, maritum
deseris atque iubes res sibi habere suas.


Li Cfmvinalvar ot 2 Fifteen years.
5 One of the Fates. 4 te. the age of Nestor,
184


BOOK X, xxxvii-x11


XXXVIII


Ou, those fifteen years, rapturous to you, Calenus,
those wedded years which, along with your Sulpicia,
the god accorded and accomplished! O nights and
hours, each marked with the precious pebbles of
India’s shore! Oh, what conflicts of endearments,
what rivalry of love between you did your happy
couch witness, and the lamp o’ersated with showers
of Nicerotian! perfume! You have lived, O Calenus,
three lustres:? this is all the life you sum, and you
count your married days alone. Of them should
Atropos* restore you even one long asked for, you
would choose it rather than four spans of Pylian 4
old age.


XXXIX


You swear, Lesbia, you were born when Brutus
was consul: you lie. Were you born, Lesbia, when
Numa was king? There, too, you lie; for—as your
generations declare—you are said to be fashioned of
Promethean clay.®


XL


Since my Polla was always being reported to me
as consorting in secret with a , 1 broke in
upon them, Lupus. He was not a 6


XLI


In Janus’ opening month you abandon your old
husband, Proculeia, and bid him keep his own


5 7,e. incredibly old. P. fashioned the human race out of


clay: of. Ix. xlv. 8.
6 4.e, but much worse,


VOL, I. cg 185


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quid, rogo, quid factum est? subiti quae causa doloris,


nil mihi respondes? dicam ego, praetor erat:
constatura fuit Megalensis purpura centum
milibus, ut nimium munera parca dares,
et populare sacrum bis milia dena tulisset.
discidium non est hoc, Proculeia: lucrum est.


> XLII


Tam dubia est lanugo tibi, tam mollis ut illam
halitus et soles et levis aura terat.

celantur simili ventura Cydonea lana,
pollice virgineo quae spoliata nitent.

fortius inpressi quotiens tibi basia quinque,
barbatus labris, Dindyme, fio tuis.


XLII


Septima iam, Phileros, tibi conditur uxor in agro,


plus nulli, Phileros, quam tibi reddit ager.


XLIV


Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britannos
et viridem Tethyn Oceanumque patrem,

ergo Numae colles et Nomentana relinquis
otia, nec retinet rusque focusque senem?


1 Tuas res tibt habeto was the legal formula of divorce.
2 In honour of Cybele, the Great Mother of the Gods.


was scenic, and held in April,


186


5


It


BOOK X. xui-xtiv


_property.1 What, I ask, what is the matter? What
is the reason of this sudden resentment? Do you
answer me nothing? I will tell you: he was praetor.
The purple robe of the Megalensian? festival was
likely to cost a hundred thousand sesterces, should
you give even a too thrifty show, and the Plebeian
festival? would have run off with twenty thousand.
This is not divorce, Proculeia: it is good business. -


XLII


So shadowy is the down on thy cheeks, so soft
that a breath, or the sun, or a soft breeze, rubs it
away. With such a fleecy film are veiled ripening
quinces, that gleam brightly when plucked by maiden
‘fingers. Whenever I have too strongly impressed
upon thy cheek five kisses, I become, Dindymus,
bearded from thy lips.


XLII


A.reapy, Phileros, your seventh wife is being
buried on your land. Better return than yours,
Phileros, land makes to no man.‘


XLIV


Quintus Ovipivs, purposing to visit the Caledonian
Britons, and green Tethys, and father Ocean, can
it be you desert the hills of Numa and Nomentan
ease, and do not your fields and fireside hold you


3 The Ludi Plebett, held in November in the Flaminian


Circus, : e
4 7.e, he succeeds to their estates: cf. 11. lxv. 43 V. xxxvii.


24.
187


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


gaudia tu differs: at non et stamina differt
Atropos atque omnis scribitur hora tibi.

praestiteris caro (quis non hoc laudet ?) amico
ut potior vita sit tibi sancta fides ;

sed reddare tuis tandem mansure Sabinis
teque tuas numeres inter amicitias.


XLV


Si quid lene mei dicunt et dulce libelli,
si quid honorificum pagina blanda sonat,
hoc tu pingue putas et costam rodere mavis,
ilia Laurentis cum tibi demus apri.
Vaticana bibas, si delectaris aceto:
non facit ad stomachum nostra lagona tuum.


XLVI


Omnia vis belle, Matho, dicere. dic aliquando
et bene; dic neutrum; dic aliquando male.


XLVII


Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem,
iucundissime Martialis, haec sunt:
res non parta labore sed relicta;

non ingratus ager, focus perennis ;

lis numquam, toga rara, mens quieta ;
vires ingenuae, salubre corpus ;
prudens simplicitas, pares amici,
convictus facilis, sine arte mensa ;


1 One of the Fates.
2 ¢.e. whom you promised to accompany.
5 Consider yourself as well as your friends.


10


‘ This person requires (like Baeticus in m1. exxvii.) his
edibles to be full-flavoured. Pliny (N.H. xv. 32 and 33) con-


188


BOOK X. XLIV-XLVII


back in your old age? Enjoyment you put off, but
Atropos! does not also put off her spinning, and
every hour is scored against you. You will have
shown to your dear friend 2—who would not praise
this?—that your sacred word is more to you than
life; yet return to your Sabine farm, and there at
length abide, and count yourself one of your own


friends.
XLV


Ir my little books contain anything delicate and
toothsome, if my flattering page has any ring of
eulogy, this you call tasteless* and prefer to gnaw a
rib, although I offer you the loin of a Laurentine boar.
You may drink Vatican if you are pleased with
vinegar: my wine-jar does not suit your stomach.


XLVI


You want all you say to be smart, Matho. Say
sometimes what also is good; say what is middling ;
say sometimes what is bad.


XLVII


Tue things that make life happier, most genial
Martial, are these: means not acquired by labour,
but bequeathed ; fields not unkindly, an ever blazing
hearth; no lawsuit, the toga seldom worn, a quiet
mind; a free man’s strength,> a healthy body;
frankness with tact, congenial friends, good-natured
guests, a board plainly spread; nights not spent


trasts the pinguis sapor of olives, bay-leaves, walnuts, and
almonds with (inter alia) the sweetness of figs and the softness
(lenitas) of milk. -

5 7.e. the natural strength of a gentleman, not the coarse
strength of a labourer: of. 111. xlvi. 6; vI. xi. 6.


189


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nox non ebria sed soluta curis,

non tristis torus et tamen pudicus ; 10
somnus qui faciat breves tenebras :

quod sis esse velis nihilque malis ;

summum nec metuas diem nec optes.


XLVIII


NuntraT octavam Phariae sua turba iuvencae,
et pilata redit Tiamque subitqueT cohors.!
temperat haec thermas, nimios prior hora vapores
halat, et inmodico sexta Nerone calet.
Stella, Nepos, Cani, Cerialis, Flacce, venitis? 5
septem sigma capit, sex sumus, adde Lupum. =
exoneraturas ventrem mihi vilica malvas
adtulit et varias quas habet hortus opes.
in quibus est lactuca sedens et tonsile porrum,
nec dest ructatrix mentha nec herba salax ; 10
secta coronabunt rutatos ova lacertos
et madidum thynni de sale sumen erit.
gustus in his; una ponetur cenula mensa,
haedus inhumani raptus ab ore lupi,
et quae non egeant ferro structoris ofellae 15
et faba fabrorum prototomique rudes ;


1 redit 1am subiitque cohors Paley.


1 The goddess Isis, whose temple was closed at the eighth
hour: cf. Boissier, Rel. Rom. vol. ii. ch. 2 (3).

* Leeks were of two kinds (cf. 11. xlvii. 8), capitatum,
where the bulbs were allowed to grow on the top of the


190


BOOK X. xtivi—xuivitt


in wine, but freed from cares, a wife not prudish
and yet pure; sleep such as makes the darkness
brief: be content with what you are, and wish
no change; nor dread your last day, nor long
for it.


XLVITI


Her crowd of priests announces to the Egyptian
heifer! the eighth hour, and the praetorian guard
now returns to camp and another takes its place.
This hour tempers the warm baths, the hour before
breathes heat too great, and the sixth is hot with
the excessive heat of Nero’s baths. Stella, Nepos,
Canius, Cerialis, Flaccus, do you come? My crescent
couch takes seven: we are six, add Lupus. My
bailiff’s wife has brought me mallows that will un-
load the stomach, and the various wealth the garden
bears ; amongst which is squat lettuce and clipped
leek,? and flatulent mint is not wanting nor the sa-
lacious herb ;° sliced eggs shall garnish lizard-fish +
served with rue, and there shall be a paunch drip-
ping from the tunny’s brine. Herein is your whet:
the modest dinner shall be served in a single course
—a kid rescued from the jaws of a savage wolf,’
and meat-balls to require no carver’s knife, and
beans, the food of artisans, and tender young sprouts;


stalk, and sectile, tonsile, or sectivwm, where the stalks were
cut young: cf. x1. lii. 6; see Mayor on Juv. iii. 293.

8 Hruca, or rocket: of. 11. Ixxv. 3.

4 A poor fish: ¢f. vit. Ixxviii. 1.

§ ¢.e. damaged, and thus cheaper. But the flesh of an
animal that bad been mangled by a wolf or other savage
beast was supposed to be more tender: ¢f. mI. xlvii. 11;
Plut. Symp. ii., quaest. 9,


1QI


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


pullus ad haec cenisque tribus iam perna superstes
addetur. saturis mitia poma dabo,
de Nomentana vinum sine faece lagona,
quae bis Frontino consule trima? fuit. 20
aceedent sine felle ioci nec mane timenda
libertas et nil quod tacuisse velis :
de prasino conviva meus venetoque loquatur,
nec faciunt ? quemquam pocula nostra reum.


XLIX


Cum potes amethystinos trientes

et nigro madeas Opimiano,

propinas modo conditum Sabinum

et dicis mihi, Cotta, “ Vis in auro?”
quisquam plumbea vina volt in auro? 5


L


Franoat Idumaeas tristis Victoria palmas,
plange, Favor, saeva pectora nuda manu;

mutet Honor cultus, et iniquis munera flammis
mitte coronatas, Gloria maesta, comas.

heu facinus! prima fraudatus, Scorpe, iuventa 5
occidis et nigros tam cito iungis equos.

curribus illa tuis semper properata brevisque
cur fuit et vitae tam prope meta tuae?


1 trima Heins, prima codd. 2 facient B.


1 Friedlander (Int. p. 65) states that Frontinus was made
‘consul for the second time along with Trajan on Feb. 20,
98.” But can bis=iterum? Housman takes it with trima,
and Athenaeus, i. 27 8, says that the wine was ‘“‘fit for
drinking after five years.” To read prima would make
M. offer an undrinkable wine: cf. I. cv.


192


BOOK X. XLVII-L


to these a chicken, and a ham that has already sur-
vived three dinners, shall be added. When you have
had your fill 1 will give you ripe apples, wine without
lees from a Nomentan flagon, which was three years
old in Frontinus’ second consulship... To crown
these shall be jests without gall, and a freedom not
to be dreaded the next morning, and nd word you
would wish unsaid; let my guest converse of the
Green and the Blue;? my cups do not make any
man a defendant.


XLIX


A.tTHouGH you drink from cups of amethyst and
are drenched with dark Opimian, you give me to
drink Sabine ® just laid down, and say to me, Cotta:
“Will you drink in gold?’”’ Does any man wish to
drink leaden wines* in gold?


L


Ler Victory sadly break her Idumaean® palms;
beat, Favour, with cruel hand thy naked breast;
let Honour change her garb; and do thou, sorrowful
Glory, cast on the cruel flames the offering of thy
crowned locks. Ah, crime of fate! Robbed, Scorpus,®
of thy first youth, art thou fallen, and so soon dost
yoke Death’s dusky steeds! That goal, whereto
thy car sped ever in brief course, and swiftly won,
why to thy life also was it so nigh?

2 Factions of the charioteers in the circus.

3 A cheap wine: cf. Hor. Od. 1. xx. 1. Opimian was a
_ celebrated vintage of Caecuban: ¢f I. xxvi. 7; Ill. xxvi. 3.


4 4.e. worthless ones: cf. I. xcix. 15 (bad coin).
5 Idume was S. of Judaea, and was celebrated for its


palms, HE SSN,


193


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LI


Sipera iam Tyrius Phrixei respicit Agni
Taurus et alternum Castora fugit hiemps ;
ridet ager, vestitur humus, vestitur et arbor,
Ismarium paelex Attica plorat Ityn.
quos, Faustine, dies, quales tibi Roma fRavennaet! 5
abstulit ! o soles, o tunicata quies !
o nemus, o fontes solidumque madentis harenae
litus et aequoreis splendidus Anxur aquis,
et:non unius spectator lectulus undae,
qui videt hine puppes fluminis, inde maris! 10
sed nec Marcelli Pompeianumque, nec illic
sunt triplices thermae nec fora iuncta quater,
nec Capitolini summum penetrale Tonantis
quaeque nitent caelo proxima templa suo.
dicere te lassum quotiens ego credo Quirino: 15
“Quae tua sunt, tibi habe: quae mea, redde mihi


LII


TueELyn viderat in toga spadonem,
damnatam Numa dixit esse moecham.


LII


Inte ego sum Scorpus, clamosi gloria Circi,
plausus, Roma, tui deliciaeque breves,


1 recessus Friedl.


1 The Sun is in Gemini, having passed through Aries and
Taurus. May has begun.

2 Philomela (the nightingale) laments Itys, whom her
sister Procne (the swallow) slew.


194


.
®


BOOK X. u-tm


LI


Now looks the Tyrian bull back on the star of
Phryxus’ ram, and winter has fled from Castor in
Pollux’ place ;! smiling is the field, earth is putting
on her garb, the tree too its garb, the Attic adulteress
mourns for Thracian Itys.2 What days, Faustinus,
what fair days of Ravenna? has Rome robbed you
of; Ovsunny hours, O rest in tunic clad! O thou
grove, O ye founts, and thou shore of firm moist
sand, and Anxur gleaming in the ocean waves, and
the couch that views more waters than one, that
marks on this side the river’s* ships, on that the
sea’s! Aye, and no theatres of Marcellus and of
Pompey are there, nor there are the three warm
baths,> nor the four forums joined, nor the august
shrine of the Capitoline Thunderer, and the temples
that gleam nigh their own heaven.® How often do
I fancy you in your weariness saying to Quirinus:
“What is yours keep to yourself; what is mine
restore to me.”


LII


Numa saw the eunuch Thelys in a toga, and said
he was a convicted adulteress.’


LIT]


Tuatr Scorpus am I, the glory of the clamorous
Circus, thy applause, O Rome, and thy short-lived


2 Perhaps the name of his villa (Paley). But the text is


corrupt. ;
4 The canal following the course of the Appian Way: cf.
x. lviii. 4. 5 Agrippa’s, Nero’s, and Titus’.


6 The temple of the Gens Flavia: ¢f. 1x. i. 8.
7 of. W. xxxix 2.


195


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


invida quem Lachesis raptum trieteride nona,
dum numerat palmas, credidit esse senem.


LIV


Mensas, Ole, bonas ponis, sed ponis opertas.
ridiculum est: possum sic ego habere bonas.


LV


Arrectum quotiens Marulla penem
pensavit digitis diuque mensa est,
libras scripula sextulasque dicit ;
idem post opus et suas palaestras
loro cum similis iacet remisso,
quanto sit levior Marulla dicit.

non ergo est manus ista, sed statera.


LVI


Totis, Galle, iubes tibi me servire diebus
et per Aventinum ter quater ire tuum.
eximit aut reficit dentem Cascellius aegrum ;
infestos oculis uris, Hygine, pilos ;
non secat et tollit stillantem Fannius uvam ;
tristia servorum stigmata delet Eros;
enterocelarum fertur Podalirius Hermes:
qui sanet ruptos dic mihi, Galle, quis est ?


1 One of the Fates.


196


BOOK X. unetvr


darling. Me, snatched away in my ninth three
years’ span, jealous Lachesis,! counting my victories,
deemed old in years.


LIV


You lay out, Olus, handsome tables, but you lay
them out covered. Absurd! I can possess in this
fashion handsome tables.


LV


Oeni volta che Marulla ha pesato colle dita l’eretto
membro, e lungo tempo lo misurato, ne dice le libre,
gli scrupoli ed i grani. Parimenti dopo l’opera e
le sue giostre, quando giace simile ad un rilasciato
cuojo, Marulla dice di quanto sia pid leggiero.
Questa dunque non é una mano ma una stadera.


LVI

Aut day, Gallus, you bid me serve you, and thrice,
four times to mount your Aventine. Cascellius draws
or stops the decayed tooth; the hairs that wound
the eyes you, Hyginus, sear; without cutting Fan-
nius heals a suppurating uvula; the degrading brands
on slaves Eros obliterates; of hernia Hermes is held
a very Podalirius.2_ Who is there, Gallus, to mend
the ruptured ?%


2 The physician of the Greek camp before Troy.
3 7.e. those broken down (cf. IX. lvii. 4) by fatigue. There
is a play on ruptos.


197


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LVII


ArceEnT! libram. mittebas; facta selibra est,
sed piperis. tanti non emo, Sexte, piper.


LVIII


Anxuris aequorei placidos, Frontine, recessus
et propius Baias litoreamque domum,
et quod inhumanae Cancro fervente cicadae
non novere nemus, flumineosque lacus
dum colui, doctas tecum celebrare vacabat 5
Pieridas ; nunc nos maxima Roma terit.
hic mihi quando dies meus est? iactamur in alto
urbis, et in sterili vita labore perit,
dura suburbani dum iugera pascimus agri
vicinosque tibi, sancte Quirine, lares. 10
sed non solus amat qui nocte dieque frequentat
limina nec vatem talia damna decent.
per veneranda mihi Musarum sacra, per omnes
iuro deos, et non officiosus amo.


LIX


ConsumpTa est uno si lemmate pagina, transis,
et breviora tibi, non meliora, placent.

dives et ex omni posita est instructa macello
cena tibi, sed te mattea sola iuvat.

non opus est nobis nimium lectore guloso ; 5
hunc volo, non fiat qui sine pane satur.


1 M. ironically assumes that the pepper must be as valu-
able as the plate formerly sent.


198


BOOK X., tvi-.x


LVII


A pounp of silver plate you used to send me; it
has become half a pound, and of pepper too! I don’t
buy pepper so dear,! Sextus.


LVIII


Tue calm retreat, Faustinus, of Anxur by the sea,
and a nearer Baiae, and a house by the shore, and
the wood which the troublesome? cicadas have not
discovered when Cancer flames, and the fresh-water
canal—while I frequented these I had leisure along
with you for allegiance to the learned Muses; now
mightiest Rome wears us out. Here when is a day
my own? I am tossed on the deep ocean of the
city, and life is wasted in sterile toil while I main-
tain® stubborn acres of suburban land and a house
near to you, holy Quirinus, But he is not alone a
lover who day and night haunts thresholds, and such
loss of time ill befits a poet. By the Muses’ rites, to
be hallowed by me, by all the gods I swear: careless
client as I am, I love you yet.


LIX


Ir a column is taken up by a single subject, you
skip it, and the shorter epigrams please you, not the
better. A meal, rich and furnished from every
market, has been placed before you, but only a dainty
attracts you.- I have no need of a reader too nice:
I want him who is not satisfied without bread.

2 An English traveller compares the chirping of the cicada
in Italy to the ‘scream of the corn-craik.”

3 i.e. spend more on it than it brings in: cf, X. xevi. 7 ;
or, ‘‘ live on the produce of”; ¢f. 1x. Ixxx. 2.


de


e
THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LX


(ura trium petiit a Caesare discipulorum
adsuetus semper Munna docere duos.


LXI


Hic festinata requiescit Erotion umbra,
crimine quam fati sexta peremit hiemps.

quisquis eris nostri post me regnator agelli,
manibus exiguis annua iusta dato:

sic lare perpetuo, sic turba sospite solus 5
flebilis in terra sit lapis iste tua.


LXII


Luni magister, parce simplici turbae:

sic te frequentes audiant capillati

et delicatae diligat chorus mensae,

nec calculator nec notarius velox

maiore quisquam circulo coronetur, 5
albae Leone flammeo calent luces

tostamque fervens Iulius coquit messem.

cirrata loris horridis Scythae pellis,

qua vapulavit Marsyas Celaenaeus,

ferulaeque tristes, sceptra paedagogorum, 10
cessent et Idus dormiant in Octobres:

aestate pueri si valent, satis discunt.


LXIII


Marmora parva quidem sed non cessura, viator,
Mausoli saxis pyramidumque legis.
1M. parodies the jus trium liberorum: of. I. xci. 6; 1x
xevli. 6.
2 of. on the same subject v, xxxiv. and xxxvii.
200


BOOK X. tx-uxm


LX


Munna, who was accustomed always to teach two,
begged of Caesar the rights attached to three—
pupils.?

LXI


Here in too early gloom rests Erotion whom, by
crime of Fate, her sixth winter laid low. Whoe’er
thou shalt be, the lord after me of my little field,
to her tiny ghost pay thou year by year thy rites. So
may thy roof-tree continue, so thy household live
unscathed, and in thy fields this gravestone alone
call forth a tear! ?


LXII


ScHootMasteR, spare your simple flock ; so in crowds
may curly-headed boys listen to you, and a dainty
bevy round your table be fond of you, and no arith-
metic master or rapid shorthand teacher be ringed
with a larger circle. The glaring days glow beneath
flaming Leo, and blazing July ripens the parched
grain. Let the Scythian’s hide, thonged with brist-
ling lashes, with which Marsyas* of Celaenae was
scourged, and the alarming ferules, sceptres of
pedagogues, rest and sleep till October’s Ides. In
summer if boys are well, they learn enough.


LXIIlI


A marste, O traveller, you read small in truth,
but one that shall not give place to the stones of
3 A famous piper who challenged Apollo to a musical


contest on the terms that the loser should be dealt with as
the winner chose. His statue stood in the Forum; ¢f. 11.


lxiv. 8.
201


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


bis mea Romano spectata est vita Tarento
et nihil extremos perdidit ante rogos:

quinque dedit pueros, totidem mihi Iuno puellas, 5
cluserunt omnes ]umina nostra manus.

contigit et thalami mihi gloria rara fuitque
una pudicitiae mentula nota meae.


LXIV


ConTIGEris regina meos si Polla libellos,
non tetrica nostros excipe fronte iocos.

ille tuus vates, Heliconis gloria nostri,
Pieria caneret cum fera bella tuba,

non tamen erubuit lascivo dicere versu 5
«Si nec pedicor, Cotta, quid hic facio?”


LXV


Cum te municipem Corinthiorum

iactes, Charmenion, negante nullo,

cur frater tibi dicor, ex Hiberis

et Celtis genitus Tagique civis?

an voltu similes videmur esse? )
tu flexa nitidus coma vagaris,

Hispanis ego contumax capillis ;

levis dropace tu cotidiano,

hirsutis ego cruribus genisque ;

os blaesum tibi debilisque lingua est, 10
nobis ilia fortius loquentur :}


1 tlia f. loquentur Haupt, filia f. loquetur 8; Friedlander
suggests doguuntur.


1 of. Lib. Spect. i. 5.
202


BOOK X. txui-ixv


Mausolus?! and of the Pyramids. Twice was my life
approved at Roman Tarentos,? and ere my pyre at
last was lit it forfeited no virtue. Five sons, as many
daughters Juno gave me; the hands of all closed
my eyes. And rare honour fell to my wedded lot:
one spouse alone was all that my pure life knew.


LXIV


Potia,® queen of women, if you shall handle my
little volumes, with no frowning look greet my
_ jests. He, your own bard, the glory of our Helicon,

although on Pierian trump he made resound wild
wars, yet did not blush to write in playful verse:
“If I am not a Ganymede, Cotta, what do I here?’’4


LXV


Sremne that you boast yourself a townsman of the
Corinthians, Charmenion—and no one denies it—
why am I called “brother”’ by you, I, who was born
of the Iberians and Celts, and am a citizen of Tagus?
Is it in face we look alike? You stroll about sleek
with curled hair, my locks are Spanish and stiff; you
are smoothed with depilatory daily, I am one with
bristly shanks and cheeks; your tongue lisps, and
your utterance is feeble; my guts will speak in

2 A spot in the Campus Martius, where was an altar of
Dis (Pluto): cf Iv. i. 8. The Ludi Saeculares were cele-
brated here, and had been held by Claudius in a.p. 47, and
by Domitian in 88. Noble ladies (yuvaices émlonuor: Zos.
ul. v.) took part, and possibly they were bound to be of
acknowledged character and virtue.


3 The wife of Lucan the poet: ¢f. vii. xxi.
4 This line does not appear in Lucan’s extant works.


203


/


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


tam dispar aquilae columba non est

nec dorcas rigido fugax leoni.

quare desine me vocare fratrem,

ne te, Charmenion, vocem sororem, 15


LXVI


Quis, rogo, tam durus, quis tam fuit ille superbus
qui iussit fieri te, Theopompe, cocum?

hance aliquis faciem nigra violare culina
sustinet, has uncto polluit igne comas ?

quis potius cyathos aut quis crystalla tenebit ? 5
qua sapient melius mixta Falerna manu?

si tam sidereos manet exitus iste ministros,
Iuppiter utatur iam Ganymede coco.


LXVII


Pyrruak filia, Nestoris noverca,

quam vidit Niobe puella canam,

Laertes aviam senex vocavit,

nutricem Priamus, socrum Thyestes,

iam cornicibus omnibus superstes, 5
hoc tandem sita prurit in sepulchro

calvo Plotia cum Melanthione.


LXVIII


Cum tibi non Ephesos nec sit Rhodos aut Mitylene,
sed domus in vico, Laelia, patricio,


1 “Brother” and “sister” were often used in a disreput-
able sense: cf. 1. iv. 3; Tib. m1. i. 26.


204


BOOK X, .xv—vxvur


stronger tone: a dove is not so unlike an eagle,
nor a timid doe a savage lion. Wherefore cease to
call me “brother” lest I call you, Charmenion,
“ sister’ 12


LXVI


Wuo was he, I ask, so harsh, who was he so
insolent that bade you, Theopompus, become a
cook? Is this a face any man endures to mar with
black kitchen-soot, these the locks he pollutes with
greasy flame? Who in your stead will hold the
ladles, or who the crystal cups? From whose hand
shall the blended Falernian take sweeter savour? If
such an end as that await attendants so heavenly-
bright, let Jupiter now employ his Ganymede as
cook, ~


LXVII


Pyrrua’s daughter, Nestor’s step-mother,one whom
Niobe, when a girl, saw as an old crone, old Laertes
called his grandmother, Priam his nurse, Thyestes his
mother-in-law, Plotia, having now outlived all the
crows,” is laid in this tomb at last, and by the side of
bald Melanthion—itches with lust.


LXVIII


Atruoueu your home is not Ephesus, nor Rhodes,
nor Mitylene, but a house, Laelia, in Patrician street,


2 Crows were said to outlive nine (Hes. apud Plut. De Def.
Or. xi.), or at least five (Arist. Av. 609) generations of men.
3 Under the Esquiline in the middle of Rome: ¢f. vir.

lxxiii. 2.
205


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


deque coloratis numquam lita mater Etruscis,
durus Aricina de regione pater,
KUpLE “ov, MEAL mov, Wuxy pov congeris usque, 5
pro pudor! Hersiliae civis et Egeriae.
lectulus has voces, nec lectulus audiat omnis,
sed quem lascivo stravit amica viro.
scire cupis quo casta modo matrona loquaris ?
numquid, cum crisas, blandior esse potes ? 10
tu licet ediscas totam referasque Corinthon
non tamen omnino, Laelia, Lais eris.


LXIX


Cusropes das, Polla, viro, non accipis ipsa.
hoc est uxorem ducere, Polla, virum.


LXX


Qvop mihi vix unus toto liber exeat anno
desidiae tibi sum, docte Potite, reus.
iustius at quanto mirere quod exeat unus,
labantur toti cum mihi saepe dies.
non resalutantis video nocturnus amicos, 5
gratulor et multis; nemo, Potite, mihi.
nunc ad luciferam signat mea gemma Dianam,
nunc me prima sibi, nunc sibi quinta rapit.


1 ¢.e. Roman, not Greek. H. was the wife of Romulus,
K. of Numa, kings of Rome.


2 Juvenal (vi. 192-5) seems to have copied the last two
sentences.


% A celebrated Corinthian courtesan.
206


BOOK X. LXVIII-LXXx


and though your mother was one of the sunburnt
Etruscans, and never rouged, your sturdy father one
from the district of Aricia, you are continually heap-
ing on me in Greek “my lord,” “my honey,” “my
soul’’—shameful! although you are a fellow-citizen
of Hersilia and Egeria.1 Let a couch hear such
phrases, nor even every couch, but only that which
his mistress has laid out for an amorous paramour.?
You want to know how you are to speak as a chaste
matron? Can you be more alluring when your ges-
tures are lewd? You may learn by heart and repro-
duce all the ways of Corinth, yet nohow, Laelia, will
you be a Lais.®


LXIX


You set watchers over your husband, Polla, but do
not receive them yourself. This, Polla, is to take
your husband to wife.!


LXxX


Because scarcely one book of mine is published in
a whole year, I am by you, learned Potitus, accused
of laziness. But how much more justly should you
wonder that one is published at all, when often
whole days of mine slip away. Before daybreak I
call on friends who do not return my call, and I
offer congratulations to many: no one, Potitus, offers
them to me. Now my signet-ring seals a document
at the temple of Diana the Light-bringer;° now the
first hour, now the fifth hurries me off. Now consul
4 Husbands often set watchers over their wives: cf. Tac.
Ann. xi. 35. To return the compliment, says M., is to
convert a husband into a wife: of. VIII. xii.
5 On the Aventine (cf. vi, lxiv. 13), far from M.’s house
on the Esquiline.
207


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nunc consul praetorve tenet reducesque choreae ;
auditur toto saepe poeta die. 10

sed nec causidico possis inpune negare,
nec si te rhetor grammaticusve rogent.

balnea post decumam lasso centumque petuntur
quadrantes. fiet quando, Potite, liber ?


LXXI


Quisguis laeta tuis et sera parentibus optas
fata, brevem titulum marmoris huius ama.
condidit hac caras tellure Rabirius umbras ;
nulli sorte iacent candidiore senes:
bis sex lustra tori nox mitis et ultima clusit, 5
arserunt uno funera bina rogo.
hos tamen ut primis raptos sibi quaerit in annis.
inprobius nihil his fletibus esse potest.


LXXII


Frustra, Blanditiae, venitis ad me

adtritis miserabiles labellis :

dicturus dominum deumque non sum.

iam non est locus hac in urbe vobis;

ad Parthos procul ite pilleatos 5
et turpes humilesque supplicesque

pictorum sola basiate regum.

non est hic dominus sed imperator,

sed iustissimus omnium senator,


208


BOOK X. vxx-ixxu


or praetor detains me, and his escorting band ;! often
a poet is listened to a whole day long. Then also
you cannot with impunity refuse a pleader, nor if a
rhetorician or grammarian were to ask you. After
the tenth hour, fagged out, I make for the baths and
my hundred farthings.?, When, Potitus, shall a book
be written ?


LXXI


_


Wuoe’er thou art who for thy parents prayest for
a happy and a late death, regard with love this
marble’s brief inscription. In this earth Rabirius
has hidden dearly-loved shades: with fairer lot none
of the old lie in death. Twice six lustres of wedded
life one night, kindly and their latest, closed; on
one pyre two bodies burned. Yet he looks for them
as if they had been snatched away from him in
early years: naught more unwarranted can be than
such a lament.


LXXII


In vain, O ye Flatteries, ye come to me, wretched
creatures with your shameless lips; I think not to
address any man as Master and God.* No longer in
this city is there place for you; fly far off to the
turbaned Parthians, and kiss—base, crawling and
suppliant as ye are—the soles of bedizened kings.
No master is here, but a commander, aye, a senator
most just of all, by whose means rustic Truth with


\ i.e. escorting a magistrate home from some function ; ¢f.
II. Ixxiv. 2 x1. xxiv. 1.

2 of. m1. vii. 3.

3 A title assumed by Domitian, now dead. 4 Trajan.


209


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


per quem de Stygia domo reducta est 10
siccis rustica Veritas capillis.

hoc sub principe, si sapis, caveto

verbis, Roma, prioribus loquaris.


LXXIII


Lirrera facundi gratum mihi pignus amici
pertulit, Ausoniae dona fseveraf ! togae,
qua non Fabricius, sed vellet Apicius uti,
vellet Maecenas Caesarianus eques.
vilior haec nobis alio mittente fuisset ; 5
non quacumque manu victima caesa litat:
a te missa venit: possem nisi munus amare,
Marce, tuum, poteram nomen amare meum.
munere sed plus est et nomine gratius ipso
officium docti iudiciumque viri. 10


LXXIV .-


Iam parce lasso, Roma, gratulatori,

lasso clienti. quamdiu salutator

anteambulones et togatulos inter

centum merebor plumbeos die toto,

cum Scorpus una quindecim graves hora 5
ferventis auri victor auferat saccos ?

non ego meorum praemium libellorum

(quid enim merentur?) Apulos velim campos ;
non Hybla, non me spicifer capit Nilus,

nec quae paludes delicata Pomptinas 10


1 sera (pro severa) y, superba Heins.


1 F. is a type of early simplicity ; A. and M. of modern -
luxury.


210


BOOK X. itxxn—.xxiv


her unperfumed locks has been brought home from
her abode by Styx. Under such a prince, if thou
art wise, beware, O Rome, to speak the words thou
didst before.


LXXIII


Tue letter of my eloquent friend has brought me
a welcome pledge of love, the staid gift of an Italian
toga, which not Fabricius,! but Apicius would have
been glad to wear, glad too Maecenas, Caesar’s
knight. Less prized would it have been if another
sent it: tis not the victim slain by every hand that
wins favour. By you ‘tis sent and comes; if I could
not love your gift, Marcus, I could love at least my
own name.? But more than the gift, and more
welcome than the name itself, is the attention and
judgment of a learned man.


LXXIV


At length spare, O Rome, the weary congratu-
lator, the weary client! How long, at levees, among
the escort and the full-dressed throng, shall I earn a
hundred worthless farthings® in a whole day, whereas
in a single hour, Scorpus, a winner of the race, bears
off fifteen bags of gleaming gold? I would not as
reward for my little books—for what do they de-
serve ?—wish for Apulian plains ;* nor does Hybla
or corn-bearing Nile allure me, nor the dainty Setine


2 M.’s name was perhaps embroidered on the toga. Or
M. may mean, ‘“‘I value the gift as coming from another
Marcus.”

3 The usual client’s dole.

4 Celebrated for wool: cf. 11. xlvi. 6; VIII. xxviii. 3.

2it


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ex arce clivi spectat uva Setini.
quid concupiscam quaeris ergo? dormire.


LXXV


Mua viginti quondam me Galla poposcit
et, fateor, magno non erat illa nimis.
annus abit: “ Bis quina dabis sestertia,”’ dixit.
poscere plus visa est quam prius illa mihi.
iam duo poscenti post sextum milia mensem 5
mille dabam nummos.  noluit accipere.
transierant binae forsan trinaeve Kalendae,
aureolos ultro quattuor ipsa petit.
non dedimus. centum iussit me mittere nummos;
sed visa est nobis haec quoque summa gravis. 10
sportula nos iunxit quadrantibus arida centum ;
hanc voluit: puero diximus esse datam.
inferius numquid potuit descendere?  fecit.
dat gratis, ultro dat mihi Galla: nego.


LXXVI


Hoc, Fortuna, tibi videtur aequum ?

civis non Syriaeve Parthiaeve,

nec de Cappadocis eques catastis,

sed de plebe Remi Numaeque verna,
iucundus probus innocens amicus, 5
lingua doctus utraque, cuius unum est

sed magnum vitium quod est poeta,

pullo Maevius alget in cucullo;

cocco mulio fulget Incitatus.


1 The noises of Rome are described in x11. lvii.
212


BOOK X. .txxiv—.xxvi


grape which from the hill’s crest looks on the Pomp-
tine marshes. Do you ask, then, what I long for?
To sleep.!


LXXV


Gatta formerly demanded of me twenty thousand
sesterces, and I allow she was not too dear. A year
goes by: “ You will give ten thousand?” she said;
she appeared to me to be demanding more than
before. Then after six months, when she demanded
two thousand, I offered a thousand: she would not
accept them, Two, or perhaps three kalends had
passed, and voluntarily she herself asked for four
gold pieces:? I did not give them. She bade me
send her a hundred sesterces, but this sum, too,
seemed to me stiff. A starveling allowance of a
hundred farthings allied me with a patron: this she
wanted; I said I had given them to my slave. Could
she come down to lower depths? She achieved this.
Galla offers me her favours for nothing, offers of her
own accord : I decline.


LXXVI


Doss this, Fortune, seem to you to be fair? Here
is a citizen, not of Syria or Parthia, no knight from
Cappadocian slave-stands, but home-born, one of the
crowd of Remus and of Numa, a friend pleasant,
honest, blameless, learned in either tongue, whose
one fault—and that a great one—is that he is a
poet: ‘tis Maevius,? who shivers in a black cowl.
Incitatus, the mule-driver, shines in scarlet.

2 The aureolus was a gold coin worth 25 denarii, intrin-
sically about a pound of British money. Four, in terms of


sesterces, would be 400.
3 Perhaps Martial means himself.


-


213


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXVII


Negurus a Caro nihil umquam, Maxime, factum est
quam quod febre perit: fecit et illa nefas.

saeva nocens febris saltem quartana fuisset :}
servari medico debuit illa? suo.


LXXVIII


Inis litoreas, Macer, Salonas ;

ibit rara fides amorque recti

et quae, cum comitem trahit pudorem,
semper pauperior redit potestas.

felix auriferae colone terrae, 5
rectorem vacuo sinu remittes

optabisque moras, et exeuntem

udo, Dalmata, gaudio sequeris.

nos Celtas, Macer, et truces Hiberos

cum desiderio tui petemus. 10
sed quaecumque tamen feretur illine

piscosi calamo Tagi notata,

Macrum pagina nostra nominabit :

sic inter veteres legar poetas,

nec multos mihi praeferas priores, 15
uno sed tibi sim minor Catullo.


LXXIX


Ap lapidem Torquatus habet praetoria quartum ;
ad quartum breve rus emit Otacilius.


1 fuisses B. 2 tlla s, tlle codd.


1 C. was a specialist in quartan fever, and should have
been allowed to die by his own particular disease. With the


214


BOOK X. utxxvi—xxix


LXXVII


Notuine more scandalous, Maximus, was ever done
by Carus than his dying of fever, and it too com-
mitted an outrage. The cruel, fatal fever should
have been at least a quartan! That malady should
have been reserved for its own doctor.!


LXXVIII


You will go, Macer, to Salonae? by the sea; with
~ you will go rare loyalty and love of right, and
power, which, with moderation in its train, ever
returns the poorer. Happy dweller in that gold-
bearing land, you will send home your Governor
with empty pouch, and will beg him to linger, and
as he goes you, Dalmatian, will speed him with a
tearful joy. I, Macer, will seek the Celts and fierce
Hiberians, longing the while for you. Yet, whatever
page of mine shall be wafted from thence, scored
with a reed-pen from fish-teeming Tagus, it shall
speak of Macer’s name. So may I be read among
the old poets, and you prefer not many to me, but
may I be to you less than Catullus alone !


LXXIX


Ar the fourth milestone Torquatus possesses a
palace: at the fourth Otacilius bought a narrow


reading tlle in 1. 4 the meaning is that the disease should
have taken the mild form of a quartan (cf. Juv. iv. 57), and
the patient been left for his own doctor to kill.

2 The capital of Dalmatia, where M. was going as governor.
He had been (cf. x. xvii.) curator of the Appian Way.


215


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Torquatus nitidas vario de marmore thermas
extruxit ; cucumam fecit Otacilius.
disposuit daphnona suo Torquatus in agro;
castaneas centum sevit Otacilius.
consule Torquato vici fuit ille magister,
non minor in tanto visus honore sibi.
grandis ut exiguam bos ranam ruperat olim,
sic, puto, Torquatus rumpet Otacilium.


LXXX


Prorat Eros, quotiens maculosae pocula murrae
inspicit aut pueros nobiliusve citrum,

et gemitus imo ducit de pectore quod non
tota miser coemat Saepta feratque domum.

quam multi faciunt quod Eros! sed lumine sicco
pars maior lacrimas ridet et intus habet.


LXXXI


Cum duo venissent ad Phyllida mane fututum
et nudam cuperet sumere uterque prior,

promisit pariter se Phyllis utrique daturam,
et dedit : ille pedem sustulit, hic tunicam.


LXXXII


Si quid nostra tuis adicit vexatio rebus,
mane vel a media nocte togatus ero


10


1 Cucuma, literally, is a large seething pot.


? Augustus divided Rome into regions and districts (Suet.


216


BOOK X. vxxix—ixxxu


field. Torquatus built warm baths bright with
variegated marble: Otacilius set up a geyser.! On
his land Torquatus laid out a laurel-grove: Otacilius
planted a hundred chestnuts. When Torquatus was
consul the other was a vestryman,? in such a dignity
deeming himself no lesser man. Just as the huge ox
in the fable caused the frog to burst himself, so, I
think, Torquatus will burst Otacilius.


LXXX


Eros weeps whenever he inspects cups of spotted?
murrine, or slaves, or a citrus-wood table finer than
usual, and heaves groans from the bottom of his
chest because he—wretched man—cannot buy all
the whole Saepta* and carry it home. How many
act like Eros! But with dry eyes the greater part
laugh at his tears—and have them in their hearts.


LXXXI


Dur essendo venuti da Fillide di mattina per
immembrarla, e l’uno e l’altro desiderando goderla
nuda il primo, Fillide promise darsi in una volta a
tutti e due, e si diede. Quello sollevd il piede,
questo la tunica.


LXXXII


Ir my discomfort bring any advantage to your
affairs, at daybreak, or after midnight I will don my


Aug. 30), each of the latter being put under four vict magistri
chosen from the vicinity.
3 Transparency or paleness was a defect: cf. Iv. lxxxv. 2.
ancy. Ike XIV. Os


VOL. IL. H 217


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


stridentesque feram flatus Aquilonis iniqui
et patiar nimbos excipiamque nives.

sed si non fias quadrante beatior uno 5
per gemitus nostros ingenuasque cruces,

parce, precor, fesso vanosque remitte labores
qui tibi non prosunt et mihi, Galle, nocent.


LXXXIil


Raros colligis hine et hine capillos

et latum nitidae, Marine, calvae

campum temporibus tegis comatis ;

sed moti redeunt iubente vento
reddunturque sibi caputque nudum 5
cirris grandibus hine et inde cingunt.

inter Spendophorum Telesphorumque

Cydae stare putabis Hermerotem.

vis tu simplicius senem fateri,

ut tandem videaris unus esse ? 10
calvo turpius est nihil comato,


LXXXIV


Miranis, quare dormitum non eat Afer?
accumbat cum qua, Caediciane, vides.


LXXXV


Iam senior Ladon Tiberinae nauta carinae
proxima dilectis rura paravit aquis.


1 §. and T. are beautiful boys referred to in 1x. lvi.; x1.
218


BOOK X. vixxxn—Lxxxv


toga, and bear the whistling blasts of the harsh
North wind, and endure the storm-clouds and wel-
come the snow. But if you don’t become richer by
a single farthing through my groans and the servile
tortures of a free man, be merciful, I pray, to my
wearinéss, and remit these useless labours that don’t
help you, Gallus, and hurt me.


LXXXIII


From the one side and the other you gather up
your scanty locks and you cover, Marinus, the wide
expanse of your shining bald scalp with the hair from
both sides of your head. But blown about, they
come back at the bidding of the wind, and return
to themselves, and gird your bare poll with big
curls on this side and on that. You would think
the Hermeros of Cydas is standing between Spendo-
phorus and Telesphorus.! Will you, please, in simpler
fashion confess yourself old, so as after all to appear
a single person? Nothing is more unsightly than
a bald man covered with hair.?


' LXXXIV


Do you wonder why Afer does not go to bed?
You see, Caedicianus, the lady with whom he reclines
at table.

LXXXV


Now grown old, Ladon, the master of a boat on
Tiber, bought some land near his beloved stream.


xxvi. Hermeros is unknown, and may be someone sc called
on account of his ugliness and baldness.
2 of. v. xlix. on a similar subject.
219


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quae cum saepe vagus premeret torrentibus undis
Thybris et hiberno rumperet arva lacu,

emeritam puppim, ripa quae stabat in alta,
inplevit saxis opposuitque vadis.

sic nimias avertit aquas. quis credere posset?
auxilium domino mersa carina tulit.


or


LXXXVI


Nemo nova caluit sic inflammatus amica,
flagravit quanto Laurus amore pilae.

sed qui primus erat lusor dum floruit aetas,
nunc postquam desit ludere, prima pila est.


LXXXVII


Ocrosres age sentiat Kalendas
facundi pia Roma Restituti:
linguis omnibus et favete votis ;
natalem colimus, tacete lites.

absit cereus aridi clientis,

et vani triplices brevesque mappae
expectent gelidi iocos Decembris.
certent muneribus beatiores :
Agrippae tumidus negotiator
Cadmi municipes ferat lacernas ; 10
pugnorum reus ebriaeque noctis

cenatoria mittat advocato;


en


1 of. 11. xlili. 6. L. is now good for nothing. Or perhaps
the allusion may be to his dilapidated appearance through
poverty.


220


BOOK X. txxxv—-_xxxvir


As Tiber often o’erflowing was drowning it with
rushing waters, and with a winter flood usurping the
tilled fields, he filled with stones his boat, now past
service, that stood on the high bank, and opposed it
as a barrier to the waters. So he averted the deluge.
Who could believe it? The sinking of his ship
brought succour to its owner !


LXXXVI


No man has been so inflamed with ardour for
a new mistress as Laurus has been fired with the
delight of playing at ball. But he, who was a prime
player while life was in its bloom, now he has ceased
to play is a prime dummy.!


LXXXVII


Come, let duteous Rome recognise October’s
kalends, the birthday of eloquent Restitutus?: with
all your tongues, and in all your prayers, utter well-
omened words; we keep a birthday, be still, ye law-
suits! Away with the needy client’s wax taper! and
let useless three-leaved tablets and curt napkins wait
for the jollity of cold December.® Let richer men vie
in gifts: let Agrippa’s* pompous tradesman bring
mantles, the fellow-citizens of Cadmus®; let the de-
fendant in a charge of assault and drunkenness at

night send his counsel dinner-suits. Has a slandered

2 An advocate, perhaps the Claudius R. spoken of by Pliny
(Ep. m1. ix. 16) as ‘vir exercitatus et vigilans, et quamlibet
subitis paratus.” :

3“ Away with rubbishy gifts: let every one send his

12
“ae the Saepta where were fashionable shops: ¢f. Il. xiv.
5; 1x. lix. 1, 5 4.e. Tyrian.
221


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


infamata virum puella vicit ?

veros sardonychas, sed ipsa tradat ;
mirator veterum senex avorum
donet Phidiaci toreuma caeli ;
venator leporem, colonus haedum,
piscator ferat aequorum rapinas.

si mittit sua quisque, quid poetam
missurum tibi, Restitute, credis?


LXXXVIII


Omnes persequeris praetorum, Cotta, libellos ;
accipis et ceras. officiosus homo es.


LXXXIX


Iuno labor, Polyclite, tuus et gloria felix,
Phidiacae cuperent quam meruisse manus,

ore nitet tanto quanto superasset in Ide
iudice convictas non dubitante deas.

[unonem, Polyclite, suam nisi frater amaret,
Iunonem poterat frater amare tuam.


XC


Quip vellis vetulum, Ligeia, cunnum?
quid busti cineres tui lacessis ?

tales munditiae decent puellas

(nam tu iam nec anus potes videri) ;
istud, crede mihi, Ligeia, belle

non mater facit Hectoris, sed uxor.


1 cf. IVs XXXIx. 4.


15


20


® This ep. is unintelligible (Friedlander). It depends on


the meaning of libellos.
222


BOOK X. txxxvu~xc


young wife defeated her husband? Let her bestow,
and with her own hands, genuine sardonyxes. Let
the old admirer of ancient days give chased plate of
Phidias’ chisel,! the hunter a hare, the farmer a kid,
the fisher bring the spoil of the sea. If every man
send his own peculiar gift, what do you think, Re-
stitutus, a poet will send you?


LXXXVIII


You run after all the announcements of trials be-
fore the Praetor, Cotta, and you accept note books.
You are an attentive person !#


LXXXIX


Juno, thy work, Polyclitus, bringing thee proud
glory, such as the hands of Phidias might be eager
to have won, shines in beauty such as on Ida would
have o’ercome the goddesses condemned by no hesi-
tating judge.? Did nother brother * love his own
Juno, Polyclitus, that brother might well have loved
this Juno of thine!


XC


Why, Ligeia, do you depilate your aged charms?
Why do you stir the ashes of your dead self? Such
trickings befit young girls (for you cannot now seem
to be even an old crone); that which you do, Ligeia,
believe me, is not pretty in Hector’s mother, only


3 Paris, who adjudged Venus to be more beautiful than
Juno or Minerva.
4 Jupiter.
223


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


erras si tibi cunnus hic videtur,

ad quem mentula pertinere desit.

quare si pudor est, Ligeia, noli

barbam vellere mortuo leoni. 10


XCI


Omnes eunuchos habet Almo nec arrigit ipse:
et queritur pariat quod sua Polla nihil.


XCII


Mari, quietae cultor et comes vitae,

quo cive prisca gloriatur Atina,

has tibi gemellas barbari decus luci

conmendo pinus ilicesque Faunorum

et semidocta vilici manu structas 5
Tonantis aras horridique Silvani,

quas pinxit agni saepe sanguis aut haedi,
dominamque sancti virginem deam templi,

et quem sororis hospitem vides castae

Martem mearum principem Kalendarum, 10
et delicatae laureum nemus Florae,

in quod Priapo persequente confugit.

hoc omne agelli mite parvuli numen

seu tu cruore sive ture placabis,

“ Ubicumque vester Martialis est,” dices 15
“hae ecce mecum dextera litat vobis

absens sacerdos ; vos putate praesentem

et date duobus quidquid alter optabit.”


1 7,e. do not seek to stir passion now dead,


224


BOOK X. xc—xcn


in his wife. You are mistaken if you think those
are charms, when gallantry has ceased to concern
itself with them. So, if you have any shame, Ligeia,
forbear to pluck the beard of a dead lion.


XCI


Amo has eunuchs all about him, and he himself
is inefficient, and yet he complains that his Polla
produces nothing.


XCII


Marts, votary of that quiet life you shared with
me, citizen in whom ancient Atina makes her boast,
these twin pines, the ornament of an untrimmed
wood, I commend to you,” and the holm-oaks of the
Fawns, and the altars, built by my bailiff’s unprac-
tised hand, of the Thunderer and of shaggy Sil-
vanus, that oft the blood of lamb or goat has
stained; and the virgin goddess,? queen of her
hallowed shrine, and him whom you see, his pure
sister’s guest, Mars, who rules my birthday kalends ;
and the laurel grove of dainty Flora, whereinto she
fled when Priapus pursued. To all these gentle
deities of my small field, whoe’er they be, whom you
propitiate, whether with blood or incense, you shall
say: “Wherever your Martial is, behold, by this
right hand with me he sacrifices to you, an absent
priest. Deem ye that he is here, and grant to both
whatever either shall pray for!”


2 Martial, being about to return to Spain, commends to
M. the Nomentan farm, and the duty of keeping up its
sacred rites. 5 Diana.

225


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCIil


Si prior Euganeas, Clemens, Helicaonis oras
pictaque pampineis videris arva iugis,

perfer Atestinae nondum vulgata Sabinae
carmina, purpurea sed modo culta toga.

ut rosa delectat metitur quae pollice primo, 5
sic nova nec mento sordida charta iuvat.


XCIV


Non mea Massylus servat pomaria serpens,
regius Alcinoi nec mihi servit ager,

sed Nomentana securus germinat hortus
arbore, nec furem plumbea mala timent.

haec igitur media quae sunt modo nata Subura 5
mittimus autumni cerea poma mei.


XCV


InvaNTEM tibi vir, tibi, Galla, remisit adulter.
hi, puto, non dubie se futuisse negant.


XCVI


Saepe loquar nimium gentes quod, Avite, remotas
miraris, Latia factus in urbe senex,
auriferumque Tagum sitiam patriumque Salonem

et repetam saturae sordida rura casae.

1 Kuganei was the old name of the inhabitants of Venetia.
Uelicaon was the son of Antenor who founded Patavium
(Padua).

2 jugum is regularly used by Columella of the trellis to
which the vine shoots were fastened. oof. I. xvi. 8:


226


BOOK X. xcemt—xcvi
XCIII


Ir before me, Clemens, you shall behold Helicaon’s
Euganean shores,! and the fields decked with vine-
clad trellises,” carry to Sabina of Atesta poems, un-
published as yet, and that too newly arrayed in
purple wrapper. As the rose delights us that is first
plucked by the finger, so a sheet pleases when ’tis
new and unsoiled by the chin.’


XCIV


No Massylian serpent‘ guards my orchard, nor does
the royal plantation of Alcinous® serve my wants, but
my garden burgeons in security with its Nomentan
fruit-trees, and my poor fruits dread no thief. So
I send you these yellow apples of my autumn crop,
freshly grown—in the midst of the Subura.®


XCV


Your husband, Galla, has sent you back the babe,
your lover has sent it back. They, I think, in no
doubtful fashion deny connection.


XCVI


You often wonder, Avitus,’ why I speak overmuch
of nations very far off, though I have grown old in
Latium’s city, and long for gold-bearing Tagus and
my native Salo, and ]ook back to the rough fields of


4 That guarded the golden apples of the Hesperides: ef.


XIII. XXxvii. 5 lef Vile x1 2.6.
6 4.e. bought there by M., as his own farm at Nomentum


produced nothing worth sending: cf. vil. xxxi. 12.
7 of. 1x. i. Hp.
227


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


illa placet tellus in qua res parva beatum
me facit et tenues luxuriantur opes:

pascitur hic, ibi pascit ager; tepet igne maligno
hie foeus, ingenti lumine lucet ibi;

hic pretiosa fames conturbatorque macellus,
mensa ibi divitiis ruris operta sui;

quattuor hic aestate togae pluresve teruntur,
autumnis ibi me quattuor una tegit.

i, cole nunc reges, quidquid non praestat amicus
cum praestare tibi possit, Avite, locus.


XCVII


Dum levis arsura struitur Libitina papyro,
dum murram et casias flebilis uxor emit,
iam scrobe, iam lecto, iam pollinctore parato,

heredem scripsit me Numa: convaluit.


XCVIII


AppaT cum mihi Caecubum minister
Idaeo resolutior cinaedo,

quo nec filia cultior nee uxor

nec mater tua nec soror recumbit,
vis spectem potius tuas lucernas

aut citrum vetus Indicosque dentes ?
suspectus tibi ne tamen recumbam,
praesta de grege sordidaque villa
tonsos horridulos rudes pusillos
hircosi mihi filios subulci,

perdet te dolor hic: habere, Publi,
mores non potes hos et hos ministros,


228


10


10


BOOK X. xevi—xcvi


a fruitful country-house. That land is dear to me
wherein small means make me rich, and a slender
store is luxury. The soil is maintained! here, there
it maintains you; here your hearth is scarcely warm
with its grudging fire, with a mighty blaze it shines
there. Here hunger is dear and the market makes
you bankrupt, there stands a table covered with its
own country’s wealth. Here four togas or more
grow threadbare in a summer, there during four
autumns one covers me. Go to, now! and pay
court to great men, when a place can afford you,
Avitus, whatever a friend does not afford '


- XCVI


Wuite the lightly-heaped pyre was being laid with
papyrus for the flame,? while his weeping wife was
buying myrrh and casia, when now the grave, when
now the bier, when now the anointer was ready,
Numa wrote me down his heir, and—got well !


XCVIII


Wuewn an attendant more voluptuous than the
cupbearer of Ida® pours out my Caecuban, one than
whow your daughter or wife, or mother or sister, is
no smarter as she reclines at table, do you wish me
instead to look at your lamps, or at your antique
table of citrus-wood and its ivory legs? Neverthe-
less, that I may not be suspected by you at your table,
produce for me from the throng in your rough farm-
stead some short-haired, unkempt, clownish, puny fel-
lows, sons of a malodorous swineherd. This jealousy
of yours will betray you! You cannot, Publius,
possess such morals and such servants at once.


Wef. x. lviil.. 9: 2 of. vul. xliv. 14. 3 Ganymede.
229


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCIX


Sr Romana forent haec Socratis ora, fuissent
Iulius in Saturis qualia Rufus habet.


C


Quin, stulte, nostris versibus tuos misces ?

cum litigante quid tibi, miser, libro?

quid congregare cum leonibus volpes

aquilisque similes facere noctuas quaeris?
habeas licebit alterum pedem Ladae, 5
inepte, frustra crure ligneo curris.


CI


Exysio redeat si forte remissus ab agro
ille suo felix Caesare Gabba vetus,

qui Capitolinum pariter Gabbamque iocantes
audierit, dicet “ Rustice Gabba, tace.”


CII


Qua factus ratione sit requiris,

qui numquam futuit, pater Philinus ?
Gaditanus, Avite, dicat istud,

gui scribit nihil et tamen poeta est.


CIII


Monicipgs, Augusta mihi quos Bilbilis acri
monte creat, rapidis quem Salo cingit aquis,


* Possibly on a portrait of R. as a frontispiece to his
Satires. The portrait is as ugly as Socrates. Others,
however, suggest in Satyris ‘‘amid a group of satyrs.”


230


BOOK X. xcix—cim


XCIX


Ir this face of Socrates had been a Roman’s, it
would have been just what Julius Rufus presents in
his Satires.!


C


Way, you fool, do you mix your verses with mine?
What have you, wretched fellow, to do with a book
that is at odds with you?? Why do you try to herd
‘foxes with lions, and to make owls like eagles? You
may possess one foot as swift as Ladas,’ yet, you
stupid, you run in vain with a leg of wood.


CI


Ir, by chance sent back from the Elysian fields,
the old Gabba,‘ fortunate in his master, Caesar, were
to return, he who hears Capitolinus> and Gabba in
a jesting match will say: “ Boorish Gabba, hold your
tongue!”


CII


Do you ask how it comes that Philinus, who never
sleeps with his wife, is yet a father? Gaditanus
must answer that, Avitus: he writes nothing, and
yet he is “a poet.”


CIII


FELLow-TownsMEN, the children of Augustan Bil-
bilis on its keen hillside, which Salo girds with

AC feeTenlil 3:

3 A celebrated Spartan runner, and winner at Olympia:
cf. 11. Ixxxvi. 8.

4 The jester of the Emperor Augustus: cf. 1 xli. 16.

5 Trajan’s jester.


231


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ecquid laeta iuvat vestri vos gloria vatis?
nam decus et nomen famaque vestra sumus,
nec sua plus debet tenui Verona Catullo
meque velit dici non minus illa suum.
quattuor accessit tricesima messibus aestas,
ut sine me Cereri rustica liba datis,
moenia dum colimus dominae pulcherrima Romae
mutavere meas Itala regna comas.
excipitis placida reducem si mente, venimus ;
aspera si geritis corda, redire licet.


CIV


I nostro comes, i, libelle, Flavo
longum per mare, sed faventis undae,
et cursu facili tuisque ventis
Hispanae pete Tarraconis arces :
illine te rota tollet et citatus

altam Bilbilin et tuum Salonem
quinto forsitan essedo videbis.

quid mandem tibi quaeris? ut sodales
paucos, sed veteres et ante brumas
triginta mihi quattuorque visos

ipsa protinus a via salutes

et nostrum admoneas subinde Flavum
iucundos mihi nec laboriosos

secessus pretio paret salubri,

qui pigrum faciant tuum parentem.
haec sunt. iam tumidus vocat magister
castigatque moras, et aura portum
laxavit melior: vale, libelle:

navem, scis, puto, non moratur unus.


232


10


10


15


BOOK X. eci-crv


hurrying waters, does the glad renown of your bard
delight you? For I am your glory and repute, and
your fame, and his own Verona owes no more
to elegant Catullus, and would wish me to be
called no less her own son. A thirtieth summer
has been added to four harvests since without me
you offered to Ceres rustic cakes, while I have so-
journed within the fair walls of mistress Rome; the
realm of Italy has grizzled my locks. If you greet
me with gentle will on my return, I come to you;
if you carry churlish hearts, I can go back.}


CIV


- Go, fellow wayfarer of my Flavus; go, little book,
over the wide sea—but when the wave befriends
you—and, on easy course and with breezes all your
own, seek the heights of Spanish Tarraco. From
there the wheel will carry you, and, rapidly borne,
you will perchance at the fifth stage see high-set
Bilbilis and your Salo. Ask you what is my charge
to you? That you greet, even as you are on the
way, my comrades—few are they, but old ones, and
last seen by me now thirty and four winters back—
and now and then remind my Flavus that he procure
for me at a wholesome price some retreat, pleasant
and not hard to keep up, which may make a lazy
man of your begetter. This is my charge. Already
the skipper calls in blustering tones, and is blaming
the delay, and a fairer wind has opened the har-
bour. Farewell, little book : you know, I think, one
passenger does not delay a vessel.


1 M. appears to anticipate jealousy: ¢f. xii. Hp.


233


tal irl Sco: oblate FO ieee Sekt


nil Grr ahs — et ‘orth


wig vl eat iat q hie ti


| Ea), be Re per Giiet


; a & c: :
f sek 4 SMR " Aigetod! ce ae dytw :
Be Ne ta i oe ie A Sear ‘ <i


OY


eats ee"


FEMS 1 AEE or ete
ae *“ ARG eather dkosass


its a


re cre) aaa) Sirs ey stan te


ae
1 (oe
Ls FE St ee
Weta GEE Tico re oar i,


 sbbe paseo Nite


tao TS Saye aes = “3
‘ Aacstde
i aiTCAY SPSS S19 Wa Teh, at


x eadey, ogy a
oleh eae Tae ia sit


pare Be ora ¢ go ae a omits iyi
x i ach «<i? lb Fe


; te Wo Ch My oF


LIBER UNDECIMUS


I


Quo tu, quo, liber otiose, tendis

cultus Sidone! non cotidiana ?

numquid Parthenium videre? certe:

vadas et redeas inevolutus.

libros non legit ille sed libellos ; 5
nec Musis vacat, aut suis vacaret.

ecquid te satis aestimas beatum,

contingunt tibi si manus minores ?

vicini pete porticum Quirini:

turbam non habet otiosiorem 10
Pompeius vel Agenoris puella,

vel primae dominus levis carinae.

sunt illic duo tresve qui revolvant

nostrarum tineas ineptiarum,

sed cum sponsio fabulaeque lassae 15
de Scorpo fuerint et Incitato.


II


TrisTE supercilium durique severa Catonis
frons et aratoris filia Fabricii


1 sindone B.


1 He probably read these on behalf of the Emperor.
2 The Temple of Quirinus near M.’s house ; cf. x. lviii. 10.
3 The references are respectively to the Porticus Pompeii
(cf. 11. xiv. 10); the Porticus Huropae (of. 11. xiv. 15); and


236


BOOK XI]


I


WuereE, where are you going, idle book, smart
in purple not of every day? Can it be to see
Parthenius? No doubt: go and return unopened;
publications he does not read, only petitions,! nor
has he leisure for the Muses, or he would have leisure
for his own. Do you not think yourself fortunate
enough if lesser hands may await yon? Make for
Quirinus’ Colonnade? hard by ; a crowd more idle not
Pompey contains, nor Agenor’s daughter, nor the in-
constant captain of the first ship.3 There are two or
three there who may unroll my twaddle, fit only for
worms, but only when the bet and languid tales
about Scorpus and Incitatus* are done with.


I


Forsippine frowns, and rigid Cato’s brow austere,
and the daughter of Fabricius> the ploughman, and


the Porticus Argonautarum (cf. 11. xiv. 6). Jason is called
levis hecause of his conduct to Medea.

4 Charioteers: cf. x. ]. and x. Ixxvi. 9.

5 Fabricius, a type of the old Roman simplicity of life.
On account of their poverty, his daughters were dowered
by the Senate.


237


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et personati fastus et regula morum,
quidquid et in tenebris non sumus, ite foras.
clamant ecce mei “Io Saturnalia” versus : 5
et licet et sub te praeside, Nerva, libet.
lectores tetrici salebrosum ediscite Santram :
nil mihi vobiscum est: iste liber meus est.


Ill


Non urbana mea tantum Pimpleide gaudent
otia, nec vacuis auribus ista damus,

sed meus in Geticis ad Martia signa pruinis
a rigido teritur centurione liber,

dicitur et nostros cantare Britannia versus. . 5
quid prodest? nescit-sacculus ista meus.

at quam victuras poteramus pangere chartas
quantaque Pieria proelia flare tuba,

cum pia reddiderint Augustum numina terris,
et Maecenatem si tibi, Roma, darent ! 1 10


IV


Sacra laresque Phrygum, quos Troiae maluit heres
quam rapere arsuras Laomedontis opes,

scriptus et aeterno nunc primum I[uppiter auro
et soror et summi filia tota patris,


1 darent Heins., daret codd.


1 Who succeeded to the Empire in Oct. 96 a.p., this book
being published at the Saturnalia in December.

2 A Roman grammarian in the time of Julius Caesar. He
wrote a treatise on famous men, and a grammatical work,
De verborum antiquitate. He is mentioned by later writers,
including Jerome.


238


BOOK XI. n-1v


masked Conceit, and Propriety, and all things
which in our private lives we are not, get ye gone!
See, my verses cry “Ho for the Saturnalia!” ’tis
allowed, and under you, Nerva,! our Governor, ’tis
our joyas well. Ye strait-laced readers, learn by
heart rugged Santra?: I have nothing to do with
you: this book is mine!


Ill


Tis not city idleness alone that delights in my
_Muse, nor do I give these epigrams to vacant ears,
but my book, amid Getic frosts, beside martial stand-
ards, is thumbed by the hardy centurion, and Britain
is said to hum my verses. What profit is it? My
money-bag knows nothing of that. But what im-
mortal pages could I frame, and of wars how mighty
could I blow my Pierian trump, if the kindly deities,
now they have restored Augustus® to earth, were
also, Rome, to give you a Maecenas!


IV


Ye sacred symbols and native gods of Phrygia,
whom Troy’s heir* chose to rescue rather than Lao-
medon’s wealth doomed to the fire, and thou, Jupiter,
now for the first time depicted in everlasting gold,°
and thou, sister and daughter—all his own —of the


3 7.e, the Emperor Nerva.
4 Aeneas at the burning of Troy.
5 Some representation of Jupiter placed by Nerva in the
hae as on the Capitol. Aeterno=never again to be destroyed
re.
% Juno and Minerva, the latter being ‘‘all his own,” as
having sprung from his head.


239


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et qui purpureis iam tertia nomina fastis,
Iane, refers Nervae, vos precor ore pio:

hune omnes servate ducem, servate senatum ;
moribus hic vivat principis, ille suis.


Ni


Tanta tibi est recti reverentia, Caesar, at aequi
quanta Numae fuerat : sed Numa pauper erat.

ardua res haec est, opibus non tradere mores
et, cum tot Croesos viceris, esse Numam.

si redeant veteres, ingentia nomina, patres,
Elysium liceat si vacuare nemus,

te colet invictus pro libertate Camillus,
aurum Fabricius te tribuente volet;

te duce gaudebit Brutus, tibi Sulla cruentus
imperium tradet, cum positurus erit ;

et te privato cum Caesare Magnus amabit,
donabit totas et tibi Crassus opes.

ipse quoque infernis revocatus Ditis ab umbris
si Cato reddatur, Caesarianus erit.


VI
Unctis falciferi senis diebus,
regnator quibus inperat fritillus,
versu ludere non laborioso


10


1 Nerva being consul for the third time. The consular
records were kept in the Temple of Janus: cf. vim. Ixvi. 1).


2 The legendary second king of Rome.


3 The conqueror of Veii, and rescuer of Rome from the


Gauls.


4 Who refused the presents of Pyrrhus, king of Epirus.


5 M. credits 8. with patriotism. As a fact S. abdicated
the dictatorship in B.c. 79 at the height of his power, as he


240


BOOK XI. 1v-vi


Almighty Sire, and thou, Janus, who for the third time
now addest Nerva’s name to the annals of the purple,!
‘tis to you I pray with pious utterance. This our
Chief preserve ye all, preserve ye the Senate; by
its Prince’s pattern may it live, he by his own!


Vv


As great is thy reverence for right and justice,
Caesar, as was Numa’s, but Numa? was poor. ‘Tis a
hard task this, not to sacrifice manners to wealth,
and, though thou hast surpassed many a Croesus, to
be a Numa. Were our sires of old, mighty names, to
return, were it allowed to empty the Elysian grove,
to thee Camillus,’ liberty’s unconquered champion,
will pay his court, gold at thy giving will Fabricius 4
accept, in thee as captain will Brutus be glad, to
thee bloody Sulla will resign his power when he
shall seek to lay it down;® and thee the Great
Captain, allied with Caesar, only a private citizen, will
love, and Crassus® will bestow on thee all his wealth.
Cato,’ too, himself, were he called back to return from
the nether shades of Dis, will be Caesar’s partizan.


VI


On the old Scythe-bearer’s® feastful days,
whereof the dice-box ® is king and lord, you, cap-


had exterminated all his opponents and superstitiously fearing
to trespass further on the kindness of Fortune, whose child
he regarded himself.

6 A member of the first Triumvirate (Pompey, Crassus and
Caesar) and one of the richest Romans.

7 Who committed suicide rather than submit to Julius
Caesar.

8 Saturn, who gave his name to the Saturnalia.

® Gambling was allowed at the Saturnalia: ¢f. v. lxxxiv.5.


241


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


permittis, puto, pilleata Roma.
risisti; licet ergo, non vetamur.
pallentes procul hinc abite curae ;
quidquid venerit obvium loquamur
morosa sine cogitatione.

misce dimidios, puer, trientes,
quales Pythagoras dabat Neroni,
misce, Dindyme, sed frequentiores :
possum nil ego sobrius; bibenti
succurrent mihi quindecim poetae.
da nunc basia, sed Catulliana :
quae si tot fuerint quot ille dixit,
donabo tibi Passerem Catulli.


Vil


Iam certe stupido non dices, Paula, marito,
ad moechum quotiens longius ire voles,
“Caesar in Albanum iussit me mane venire,
Caesar Circeios.” iam stropha talis abit.
Penelopae licet esse tibi sub principe Nerva:
sed prohibet scabies ingeniumque vetus.
infelix, quid ages? aegram simulabis amicam ?
haerebit dominae vir comes ipse suae,
ibit et ad fratrem tecum matremque patremque.
quas igitur fraudes ingeniosa pares?
diceret hystericam se forsitan altera moecha
in Sinuessano velle sedere lacu.
quanto tu melius, quotiens placet ire fututum,
quae verum mavis dicere, Paula, viro !


10


15


10


1 The pillewm, or cap of liberty worn by manumitted
slaves (cf. Ir. lxvili. 4) was also generally worn at the
Saturnalia. It was a symbol of licence. Thus, on the death
of Nero, the common people assumed it, and ran about the


whole city : Suet. Nero lvii.
242


BOOK XI. vi-vu


clad! Rome, allow me, I wot, to trifle in verse un-
toilsome. You have smiled: I may then, I am not
forbidden. Ye pallid cares, far hence away! what-
ever comes to my mind let me speak without
wrinkled meditation. Blend, boy, cups half and
half, such as Pythagoras ? offered Nero; blend them,
thou, Dindymus,? and that more oft ; nothing sober
can I do: as I drink a fifteen-poets power will bear
me up. Give me kisses now, and by Catullus’s
measure; if they be as many as he said, I will give
thee a Sparrow of Catullus.4


VII


Now at least you will not say, Paula, to your dolt
of a husband, every time you want to go to a lover
at a distance, “ Caesar bade me come in the morning
to his Alban villa, Caesar bade me come to Circeii.”’
Now such a maneeuvre is off. ’Tis lawful for you
to be a Penelope under Nerva as chief, but your
itch and inveterate bent forbid you. Unfortunate
woman, what will you do? Will you pretend the
sickness of a friend? Your husband in person will
cling to his dame’s skirts, and will go with you to
brother and mother and father. What fraud then
would your ingenuity devise? Another wanton
would perhaps say she is hysterical, and wished to
sit in Sinuessa’s baths. How much better is your
practice whenever you have a mind to stray! You,
Paula, prefer to tell your husband the truth!


2 Nero’s cupbearer, with whom he went through the form
of marriage: cf. Suet. Nero xxix. ; Tac. Ann, xv. 37.

3 M.’s attendant: cf x. xlii.

4 ©. asked Lesbia for thousands of kisses (Cat. v. 7-9); he
aisu wrote a poem (Cat, iii.) on the death of her sparrow.


243


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


‘


Vill


Lassa quod nesterni spirant opobalsama dracti,2
ultima quod curvo quae cadit aura croco ;
poma quod hiberna maturescentia capsa,
arbore quod verna luxuriosus ager ;
de Palatinis dominae quod Serica prelis, 5
sucina virginea quod regelata manu ;
amphora quod nigri, sed longe, fracta Falerni,
quod qui Sicanias detinet hortus apes ;
quod Cosmi redolent alabastra focique deorum,
quod modo divitibus lapsa corona comis : 10
singula quid dicam? non sunt satis; omnia misce:
hoc fragrant pueri basia mane mei.
scire cupis nomen? si propter basia, dicam.
iurasti. nimium scire, Sabine, cupis.


IX


Crarus fronde Iovis, Romani fama coturni,
spirat Apellea redditus arte Memor.


x


ConrutiT ad saturas ingentia pectora Turnus.
cur non ad Memoris carmina? frater erat.


XI


Tour, puer, calices tepidique toreumata Nili
et mihi secura pocula trade manu


1 dracti Housman for drauct; Spaxrds, a vase: see new
edition of Liddell and Scott.


1 Which was sprinkled about the theatre or amphitheatre:
of. V. XxV. 85; VIII. Xxxili. 4.


* He swears too eagerly, and M. withholds the name,


244


BOOK XI. viri—x1


Vit


Breatu of balm from phials of yesterday, of the
last efluence that falls from a curving jet of saffron ;4
perfume of apples ripening in their winter chest,
of the field lavish with the leafage of spring; of
Augusta’s silken robes from Palatine presses, of
amber warmed by a maiden’s hand; of a jar of dark
Falernian shattered, but far off, of a garden that
stays therein Sicilian bees; the scent of Cosmus’
alabaster boxes, and of the altars of the gods; of
a chaplet fallen but now from a rich man’s locks—
why should I speak of each? Not enough are they:
mix them all; such is the fragrance of my boy’s
kisses at morn. Would you learn his name? If the
kisses only make you ask, I will tell you. You have
sworn. You want to know too much, Sabinus!2


Ix
In.usrrious in Jove’? leafage,? Memor, the glory
of the Roman buskin, breathes here, rendered by
Apelles’ art.


x


Turnus * brought to Satire a mighty intellect, why
not to Memor’s song? He was his brother.


XI


Away, boy, with chalices and embossed glasses from
the warm Nile, and offer me with fearless hand the


3¢f. 1v. i. 6. Memor was a tragic poet, and brother of


Turnus in the next epigram. 4 ;
4 f. vit. xevii. 8. As to Memor see preceding epigram.
Yurnus would not compete with his own brother.


245


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


trita patrum labris et tonso pura ministro ;
anticus mensis restituatur honor.

te potare decet gemma qui Mentora frangis 5
in scaphium moechae, Sardanapalle, tuae.


XII


Ius tibi natorum vel septem, Zoile, detur,
dum matrem nemo det tibi, nemo patrem.


XIII


Quisguis Flaminiam teris, viator,

noli nobile praeterire marmor.

urbis deliciae salesque Nili,

ars et gratia, lusus et voluptas,

Romani decus et dolor theatri 5
atque omnes Veneres Cupidinesque

hoc sunt condita, quo Paris, sepulchro.


XIV


Herepss, nolite brevem sepelire colonum:
nam terra est illi quantulacumque gravis.


XV


Sunt chartae mihi quas Catonis uxor
et quas horribiles legant Sabinae :


1 Not by the ringleted minion of the day.
2 Of, IVeeX XIX. Ouspr xs EX LG:
3 of. 11. xci. 6.
4 He is a mere terrae filius, a homo non natus, i.e. of no
account: cf. viii. Ixiv. 18.


246


BOOK XI. xi-xv


cups worn by our father’s lips and cleansed by a short-
haired attendant :1 let its old-world honour be given
back to the board. It becomes you to drink from a
jewelled cup, who break up Mentor’s? handiwork to
shape, Sardanapallus, an utensil for your mistress.


XII


Let the rights of a father of sons, even of seven,
be granted you, Zoilus—provided no man assign you
a mother, no man a father.


XIII


Whor’er thou art, traveller, that treadest the
Flaminian Way, give heed not to pass by a noble
monument. The delight of the city and the wit
of Nile, incarnate art and grace, frolic and joy, the
fame and the affliction of Rome’s theatre, and all
the Venuses and Cupids,® are buried in this tomb
where Paris ® lies.


XIV


Ye heirs, do not bury the dwarf farmer; .for any
earth would be heavy upon him.’


XV


I wave writings that Cato’s wife and that grim
Sabine dames might read; I wish this little book


5 An echo of Catullus, iii. 1.

$§ A famous actor of mimes, put to death by Domitian
because of an intrigue with Domitia, the Empress: ¢f. Suet.
Dom. iii.

7 A common wish was “‘ svt tabs terra levis”: ¢f. V. xxxiv.9;
Ix. xxix. 11.


247


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hic totus volo rideat libellus

et sit nequior omnibus libellis.

qui vino madeat nec erubescat 5
pingui sordidus esse Cosmiano,

ludat cum pueris, amet puellas,

nec per circuitus loquatur illam,

ex qua nascimur, omnium parentem,

quam sanctus Numa mentulam vocabat. 10
versus hos tamen esse tu memento
Saturnalicios, Apollinaris :

mores non habet hic meos libellus.


XVI


Qui gravis es nimium, potes hinc iam, lector, abire
quo libet: urbanae scripsimus ista togae ;

iam! mea Lampsacio lascivit pagina versu
et Tartesiaca concrepat aera manu.

o quotiens rigida pulsabis pallia vena, 5
sis gravior Curio Fabricioque licet!

tu quoque nequitias nostri lususque libelli
uda, puella, leges, sis Patavina licet.

erubuit. posuitque meum Lucretia librum,
sed coram Bruto; Brute, recede: leget. 10


AVAL


Now omnis nostri nocturna est pagina libri:
invenies et quod mane, Sabine, legas.


1 nam y.


se opanare hig 315 2 The second legendary king of Rome.
3 The same caution is found in 1. iv. 8.


* 7.e. Priapean, L. being a town on the Hellespont where
Priapus was worshipped.


248


BOOK XI. xv—xvi


to laugh from end to end, and be naughtier than
all my little books. Let it be drenched in wine
and not ashamed to be stained with rich Cosmian!
unguents ; let it play with the boys, love the girls,
and in no roundabout phrase speak of that where-
from we are born, the parent of all, which hallowed
Numa? called by its own name. Yet remember that
these verses are of the Saturnalia, Apollinaris: this
little book does not express? my own morals.


XVI


You, reader, who are too strait-laced, can now go
away from here whither you will: I wrote these
verses for the citizen of wit ; now my page wantons
in verse of Lampsacus,‘ and beats the timbrel with
the hand of a figurante of Tartessus.2 Oh, how
often will you with your ardour disarrange your
garb,® though you may be more strait-laced than
Curius and Fabricius! You also, O girl, may, when
in your cups, read the naughtiness and sportive
sallies of my little book, though you may be from
Patavium.’ Lucretia’ blushed and laid down my
volume; but Brutus was present. Brutus, go away:
she will read it.


XVII


Nor every page of my book is for reading at night;
you will find, too, what you may read in the morning,®
Sabinus.


5 7.e. of a female dancer from Gades: cf. v. Ixxviii. 26.

8 For the idea cf. Catullus, xxxii. 11.

7 Where the women had the reputation of chastity: cf. v1.
xlii. 4. 8 Put here as symbolical of chastity.

9 7.e. when you are sober.


VOL. 1. pea


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XVIII


Donasti, Lupe, rus sub urbe nobis ;

sed rus est mihi maius in fenestra.

rus hoc dicere, rus potes vocare?

in quo ruta facit nemus Dianae,

argutae tegit ala quod cicadae, 5
quod formica die comedit uno,

clusae cui folium rosae corona est;

in quo non magis invenitur herba

quam Cosmi folium piperve crudum ;

in quo nec cucumis iacere rectus 10
nec serpens habitare tota possit.

urucam male pascit hortus unam,

consumpto moritur culix salicto,

et talpa est mihi fossor atque arator.

non boletus hiare, non mariscae 15
ridere aut violae patere possunt.

finis mus populatur et colono

tamquam sus Calydonius timetur,

et sublata volantis ungue Procnes

in nido seges est hirundinino ; 20
et cum stet sine falce mentulaque,

non est dimidio locus Priapo.

vix implet cocleam peracta messis,

et mustum nuce condimus picata.

errasti, Lupe, littera sed una: 25
nam quo tempore praedium dedisti,

mallem tu mihi prandium dedisses.


.


1A leaf of rue” seems to have been proverbial for a
narrow space: Petr. 37, 58; ef. also x1. xxxi. 17.
2 The swallow.


250


BOOK XI. xvi


XVIII


You have given me, Lupus, a suburban farm, but I
have a bigger farm in my window. A farm can you
call this, style this a farm, wherein a plant of rue!
forms a grove of Diana, which the wing of a shrill
cicala covers, which an ant eats up in a single day ; for
which a shut rose’s petal would be a canopy ; wherein
grass is no more found than a leaf for Cosmus’ per-
fumes or green pepper; wherein a cucumber cannot
lie straight, nor a snake harbour its whole length ?

The garden gives short commons to a single cater-
pillar ; a gnat, when it has consumed the willow,
expires, and a mole is my ditcher and ploughman.
No mushroom can swell, no figs can split, or violets
expand. My borders a mouse ravages, and is feared
by the tenant as much as a Calydonian boar, and my
crop, lifted by the claws of flying Procne,? lies in
a swallow’s nest; and, though he stands shorn of
his sickle and his appurtenances, there is no room
by half for Priapus. My harvest, when gathered,
hardly fills a snail-shell, and we store the must in a
pitch-sealed nut. You have made a mistake, Lupus,
but only by one letter; for when you gave me a fee


I would you had given me a feed.’

3 Lupus gave a praediwm (land), and M. wanted a prandiwm
(lunch), the difference being the letter n. ‘‘Fee” in law
means an estate in land that descends to the holder’s heir;
here used in the sense of landed property.


251


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XIX


Quaenis cur nolim te ducere, Galla? diserta es.
saepe soloecismum mentula nostra facit.


XX


Carsaris Augusti lascivos, livide, versus
sex lege, qui tristis verba Latina legis:

“Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, hance mihi poenam
Fulvia constituit, se quoque uti futuam.

Fulviam ego ut futuam? quod si me Manius oret 5
pedicem, faciam? non puto, si sapiam.

‘ Aut futue, aut pugnemus’ ait. quid quod mihi vita
carior est ipsa mentula? signa canant !”

absolvis lepidos nimirum, Auguste, libellos,
qui scis Romana simplicitate loqui. 10


XXI


Lypra tam laxa est equitis quam culus aeni,
quam celer arguto qui sonat aere trochus,


1 of. Juv. vi. 456, soloecismum liceat fecisse marito, of the
husband of a learned wife. But here M. adds an obscene
sense.

2 A beautiful hetaera, whose charms procured her son
Archelaus at the hands of Antony the kingdom of Cappadocia.

3 These lines are historically interesting as giving the
explanation attributed to Octavius of the origin of the civil
war between him and Antony, namely, pique on the part of
Fulvia, Antony’s wife, at the rejection by Octavius of her
advances. Montaigne (iii. 12) refers to them as showing for
how small causes great emperors will go to war.

The scene between Fulvia and Octavius was depicted on a


252


BOOK XI. xix-xx1


XIX


Do you ask why I am loth to marry you, Galla?
You are a blue-stocking. My manhood often com-
mits a solecism.!


XX


Reap six wanton verses of Caesar Augustus, you
spiteful fellow, who with a sour face read words of
Latin:

“ Because Antony handles Glaphyra,? Fulvia has ap-
pointed this penalty for me, that I, too, should handle
her. Ito handle Fulvia? What if Manius were to
implore me to treat him as a Ganymede? Am I to
doit? I trow not, if I be wise. ‘ Either handle me
or let us fight,’ she says. And what that my person
is dearer to me than my very life? Let the trumpets
sound,” ®

You justify for certain my sprightly little books,
Augustus, who know how to speak with Roman
bluntness.*


XXI


Lypia is as widely developed as the rump of a
bronze equestrian statue, as the swift hoop that re-
sounds with its tinkling rings,® as the wheel so often


cameo by Arellius, probably the painter mentioned by Pliny,
N.H. xxxv. 37, as having outraged his art by depicting
prostitutes. Fulvia is represented as sitting nude upon a
bed, and holding Octavius by thearm. He is in full armour,
and is beckoning to two soldiers in the rear. The cameo hag
been reproduced in a rare book published at the Vatican
Press in 1786, and entitled ‘‘ Monumens de la vie privée des
douze Césars d’aprés une suite de pierres gravées sur leur
régne,”

4 As to Augustus’s plain speech, cf. Suet. Aug. xix.

5 cf, XIV. clxviil.


253


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


quam rota transmisso totiens inpacta petauro,
quam vetus a crassa calceus udus aqua,

quam quae rara vagos expectant retia turdos, 5
quam Pompeiano vela negata Noto,

quam quae de pthisico lapsa est armilla cinaedo,
culcita Leuconico quam viduata suo,

quam veteres bracae Brittonis pauperis, et quam
turpe Ravennatis guttur onocrotali. 10

hanc in piscina dicor futuisse marina.
nescio ; piscinam me futuisse puto.


XXII


Motta quod nivei duro teris ore Galaesi
basia, quod nudo cum Ganymede iaces,

(quis negat?) hoc nimiumst. sed sit satis; inguina

saltem

parce fututrici sollicitare manu.

levibus in pueris plus haec quam mentula peccat 5
et faciunt digiti praecipitantque virum:

inde tragus celeresque pili mirandaque matri
barba, nec in clara balnea luce placent.

divisit natura marem : pars una puellis,
una viris genita est. utere parte tua. 10


1 A very obscure line, which may mean ‘‘so often struck
by the acrobat in his flight.” The nature of the petauruwm
has never been clearly known; sometimes it seems to be a
kind of springboard or seesaw, sometimes a wheel suspended
in the air: ¢f. m1. lxxxvi. 7. The performance was dangerous:
Fest. xiv. s.v. Petaurista, quoting Arist. Fr. 234.


254


BOOK XI. xxi-xxn


struck from the extended springboard,! as a worn-
out shoe drenched by muddy water, as the wide-
meshed net that lies in wait: for wandering fieldfares,
as an awning that does not belly to the wind? in
Pompey’s theatre, as a bracelet that has slipped
from the arm of a consumptive catamite, as a pillow
widowed of its Leuconian stuffing,’ as the aged
breeches of a pauper Briton, and as the foul throat
of a pelican* of Ravenna. This woman I am said
to have embraced in a marine fishpond: I don’t
know; I think I embraced the fishpond itself.


XXII


TuaT with your hard mouth you rub the soft
lips of white-cheeked Galaesus, that you consort
with a naked Ganymede, ’tis too much—who denies
it?—but let that be enough; at least refrain from
waking passions. with lascivious hand. Towards
beardless boys this is a greater sinner than your
yard, and your fingers create and hasten manhood.
Thence comes a goatish odour, and quick-springing
hair, and a beard, a wonder to mothers, and baths
in broad day are displeasing. Nature has separated
the male: one part has been produced for pul, one
for men. Use your own part.


BNC TX XXX Vlas 8 of. xiv..clix.

4 Described by Pliny, V.H. x. 66. By ‘‘throat” M.
means the large pouch under the mandibles (the alterius uters
genus of Pliny’s description), where the pelican stores its
catch of fish previously to consumption,


255


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXII


Nusere Sila mihi nulla non lege parata est;
sed Silam nulla ducere lege volo.
cum tamen instaret, “ Deciens mihi dotis in auro
sponsa dabis ” dixi; “‘ quid minus esse potest ?
nec futuam quamvis prima te nocte maritus, 5
communis tecum nec mihi lectus erit ;
complectarque meam, nec tu prohibebis, amicam,
ancillam mittes et mihi iussa tuam,
te spectante dabit nobis lasciva minister
basia, sive meus sive erit ille tuus. 10
ad cenam venies, sed sic divisa recumbes
ut non tangantur pallia nostra tuis.
oscula rara dabis nobis et non dabis ultro,
nec quasi nupta dabis sed quasi mater anus.
si potes ista pati, si nil perferre recusas, ° 15
invenies qui te ducere, Sila, velit.”


XXIV


Dom te prosequor et domum reduco,

aurem dum tibi praesto garrienti,

et quidquid loqueris facisque laudo,

quot versus poterant, Labulle, nasci!

hoe damnum tibi non videtur esse, 5
si quod Roma legit, requirit hospes,

non deridet eques, tenet senator,

laudat causidicus, poeta carpit,

propter te perit? hoc, Labulle, verum est?

hoc quisquam ferat? ut tibi tuorum 10
sit maior numerus togatulorum,

librorum mihi sit minor meorum?


BOOK XI. xxi1—xxiv


“XXII


Sixa is ready to marry me on any terms, but on no
terms am I willing to take Sila to wife. Yet, when
she urged me: “ You shall bring me, as bride’s dower,
in gold a million sesterces,’”’ I said: “ What can be
smaller than that? And I will have no marital re-
lations with you even on the wedding-night, nor shall
my bed be the same as yours; and I will embrace
my mistress, and you shall not forbid me, and, if
bidden, you shall send me your own maid. Before
your eyes an attendant shall give me wanton kisses,
whether he is my own or yours. You shall dine with
me, but you shall recline so apart from me that my
robe is not touched by yours. Kisses you shall give
me but rarely, and you shall not give them uninvited ;
and you shall not give them like a bride, but like an
aged mother. If you can suffer that, if there be
nothing you refuse to endure—you will find a man,
Sila, who is willing to marry you!”


XXIV


Waite I escort you and bring you home, while I
lend my ear to your babbling, and praise whatever
you say and do, how many verses, Labullus, might
have seen the light! Does not this seem to you an
injury if, what Rome reads, the stranger asks for,
the knight does not laugh at, the senator knows by
heart, the pleader praises, the poet carps at—this
because of you is lost? Is this fair, Labullus? Is
this what any man would endure? That the number
of your wretched clients should increase, of my
books the number decrease? ’Tis now almost thirty


257


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


triginta prope iam diebus una est
nobis pagina vix peracta. sic fit
cum cenare domi poeta non vult. 15


XXV


Ixia salax nimium nec paucis nota puellis
stare Lino desit mentula. lingua, cave.


XXVI


O miut grata quies, o blanda, Telesphore, cura,
qualis in amplexu non fuit ante meo,

basia da nobis vetulo, puer, uda Falerno,
pocula da labris facta minora tuis.

addideris super haec Veneris si gaudia vera, 5
esse negem melius cum Ganymede Iovi.


XXVII


FERREUS es, si stare potest tibi mentula, Flacce,
cum te sex cyathos orat amica gari,
vel duo frusta rogat cybii tenuemve lacertum
nec dignam toto se botryone putat ;
cui portat gaudens ancilla paropside rubra 5
allecem, sed quam protinus illa voret ;
aut cum perfricuit frontem posuitque pudorem,
sucida palliolo vellera quinque petit.
at mea me libram foliati poscat amica
aut virides gemmas sardonychasve pares, 10
nec nisi prima velit de Tusco Serica vico
aut centum aureolos sic velut aera roget.
nunc tu velle putas haec me donare puellae?
nolo, sed his ut sit digna puella volo.


1 The foliatum or nardinum was a choice compound of
nard, myrrh, and other aromatic herbs: cf. Plin. N. A. xiii. 2.


258 :


BOOK XI. xxiv—xxvu


days, and scarce a single page has been finished.
This is the result when a poet does not wish to dine
at home!


XXV


Que.ia troppo salace mentola, né nota a poche
ragazze, cessa stare a Lino: guardati, O lingua.


XXXVI


O Tuou, my pleasant solace, O thou, Telesphorus,
my soothing care, whose peer has never yet Jain in
my embrace, give me kisses, boy, dewy with aged
Falernian, give me the cup that has minished beneath
thy lips. If, to crown these, thou shalt add love’s
true joys, then should I say Jove’s lot with Ganymede
_ is not more blest.


XXVII


You are a man of iron if you can show any amorous
power, Flaccus, when your mistress prays you for
six helpings of fish-pickle, or asks for two slices of
tunny, or a skinny lizard-fish, and does not think her-
self worth a whole bunch of grapes—a woman to
whom her maid delightedly carries anchovy sauce in
a dark earthenware platter, to be immediately gulped
down; or, who, when she has hardened her brow
and laid aside all shame, solicits five greasy skins to
make a small mantle. But let my mistress demand
of me a pound of nard,! or emeralds, or a pair of
sardonyxes, and not look at any but prime silk from
the Tuscan street, or let her beg a hundred gold
coins just as if they were pence. Now do you
imagine I am willing to give these things to a girl?
Iam not; but that a girl should be worthy of these
things, I do wish.

ao


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXVIII


Invasir medici Nasica phreneticus Eucti
et percidit Hylan. hic, puto, sanus erat.


XXIX


Laneuipa cum vetula tractare virilia dextra
coepisti, iugulor pollice, Phylli, tuo:
nam cum me murem, cum me tua lumina dicis,
horis me refici vix puto posse decem.
blanditias nescis: “ Dabo” dic “tibi milia centum 5
et dabo Setini iugera culta soli;
accipe vina domum pueros chrysendeta mensas,”
nil opus est digitis: sic mihi, Phylli, frica.


XXX


Os male causidicis et dicis olere poetis.
sed fellatori, Zoile, peius olet.


XXXI


Arreus Caecilius cucurbitarum

sic illas quasi filios Thyestae

in partes lacerat secatque mille.

gustu protinus has edes in ipso,

has prima feret alterave cena, 5
has cena tibi tertia reponet,

nine seras epidipnidas parabit.

hine pistor fatuas facit placentas,


260


BOOK XI. xxvut—xxx1


XXVIII


Nasica, “a madman,” attacked Doctor Euctus’s
Hylas and outraged him. This fellow was, I imagine,
sane !


XXIX


Wuen you begin to paw my apathetic person
with your antediluvian hands, I am murdered by
that fnger of yours, Phyllis; for when you call me
“mouse,” when you call me “light of your eyes,” I
can scarcely, I think, get over it in ten hours. Blan-
dishments you know nothing of: say, “I will give
you a hundred thousand sesterces,” and “I will give
you well-tilled acres of Setine land; accept wines,
a town house, slaves, enamelled dishes, tables.”
I don’t require your thumbing: scratch me in this
way, Phyllis.

XXX

Vitety smells, you say, the breath of lawyers,
and of poets.1 But that of a , Zoilus, smells
worse ! ;


XXXI


Caeci.ius is a very Atreus to gourds: he so mangles
them and cuts them into a thousand pieces, just as
if they were the sons of Thyestes.2 Gourds you
will eat at once even among the hors d’euvre, gourds
he will bring you in the first or second course, these
in the third course he will set again before you, out
of these he will furnish later on your dessert. Out
of these the baker makes insipid cakes, and out of


1 From anxiety as to their cases or poems, like the rez of
Iv. iv. 8? 2 See note to 111, xlv. 1.
261


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


hine et multiplices struit tabellas

et notas caryotidas theatris. 10
hine exit varium coco minutal,

ut lentem positam fabamque credas ;

boletos imitatur et botellos,

et caudam cybii brevesque maenas.

hine cellarius experitur artes, 15
ut condat vario vafer sapore

in rutae folium Capelliana.

sic inplet gabatas paropsidesque

et leves scutulas cavasque lances.

hoc lautum vocat, hoc putat venustum, 20
unum ponere ferculis tot assem.


XXXII


Nec toga nec focus est nec tritus cimice lectus
nec tibi de bibula sarta palude teges,
nec puer aut senior, nulla est ancilla nec infans,
nec sera nec clavis nec canis atque calix.
tu tamen adfectas, Nestor, dici atque videri 5
pauper, et in populo quaeris habere locum.
mentiris vanoque tibi blandiris honore.
non est paupertas, Nestor, habere nihil.


XXXII


Saepius ad palmam prasinus post fata Neronis
pervenit et victor praemia plura refert.

i nunc, livor edax, dic te cessisse Neroni:
vicit nimirum non Nero, sed prasinus.


1 Possibly rare sweetmeats named after a famous maker;
cf. Cosmianum in XI. xv. 6 and xu. ly. 7. The cellarius, b
the use of various flavours, makes bits of gourd taste like the
famous Capelliana.

2 a play on the two meanings of ponere, to serve up and to
spend.


262


BOOK XI.°xxxi—xxxi1


these he constructs sweets of all shapes, and dates
such as the theatres know well. From these are
turned out the cook’s various mincemeats, so that
you believe lentils and beans are set before you; he
imitates mushrooms and black-puddings, and tunny’s
tail, and tiny sprats. On these the store-keeper tries
his art, with various flavours wrapping up—cunning
man !—Capellian sweetmeats! in a leaf of rue. So
he fills his platters, and side-dishes, and polished
saucers, and hollow plates. This he calls sumptuous,
this he fancies elegant—in so many courses to lay
out? one penny!


XXXII


You have neither toga, nor fire, nor bug-haunted
bed, nor have you a mat stitched of thirsty rushes,
nor boy, nor older slave; you have no maid, nor
infant, nor door-bolt, nor key, nor dog, nor cup.®
Yet you aim, Nestor, at being called, and seeming
a poor man, and look to having a place among the-
people. You are a fraud, and flatter yourself with
an empty honour. It is not poverty, Nestor, to have
nothing at all.4


XXXII


Ortener after Nero’s® death the green charioteer
reaches the goal, and as winner bears off more
prizes. Go to now, grudging envy,® say you yielded
to Nero! ’Twas not Nero, I wot, who won, but the
Green.


3 Imitated from Cat. xxii. 1-2. 4 But sheer beggary.

5 ¢.e. Domitian, the calvus Nero of Juv. iv. 38. He
favoured the green faction of the charioteers:;

8 4.e. of a rival charioteer.


263


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXIV


Arpes emit Aper sed quas nec noctua vellet
esse suas; adeo nigra vetusque casa est.

vicinos illi nitidus Maro possidet hortos.
cenabit belle, non habitabit Aper.


XXXV


Ignotos mihi cum voces trecentos,
quare non veniam vocatus ad te
miraris quererisque litigasque.
solus ceno, Fabulle, non libenter.


XXXVI


Gatus hane lucem gemma mihi Julius alba
signat, io, votis redditus ecce meis :
desperasse iuvat veluti iam rupta sororum
fila; minus gaudent qui timuere nihil.
Hypne, quid expectas, piger? inmortale Falernum 5
funde, senem poscunt talia vota cadum :
quincunces et sex cyathos bessemque bibamus,
Gatus ut fiat Iutius et Procutus.


XXXVII


Zoe, quid tota gemmam praecingere libra
te iuvat et miserum perdere sardonycha ?

anulus iste tuis fuerat modo cruribus aptus :
non eadem digitis pondera conveniunt.


1 The numbers represent the letters in the three names
respectively. of. note to IX. xciii. 8.


264


BOOK XI. XxxIv—xxxvi1


XXXIV


Aper bought a house, but one that not even an
owl would wish its own, so dark and tumbledown is
the cottage. Next door to him fashionable Maro
owns gardens. Aper will dine but not lodge nicely.


XXXV


ALTHOUGH you invite three hundred guests un-
known to me, you wonder why, when invited, I
don’t come to you, and you complain and quarrel
with me. ’Tis no pleasure to me, Fabullus, to dine
alone.


XXXVI


Gaius Juttus marks this day for me with a white
stone: ko! see he comes, given back to my vows'
Glad am I that I despaired, as though the Sisters’
threads were already snapped: they rejoice less who
have known no fear. Hypnus, why linger, you lag-
gard? Pour the immortal Falernian: such vows as
mine call for an olden jar. Measures five and six
and eight let us drink, that the name “ Gaius Julius
Proculus”’ be summed up.!


XXXVII ns


Zoitus, why do you like to set your jewel in a
whole pound of gold, and to overwhelm your un-
happy sardonyx? That ring of yours was lately
suited to your shanks;? the same weight does not
suit fingers.


2 Z. had been a slave, and is now a knight: cf. 111. xxix.


265


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXVITI


Muuio viginti venit modo milibus, Aule.
miraris pretium tam grave? surdus erat.


XXXIX


Cunarum fueras motor, Charideme, mearum
et pueri custos adsiduusque comes.
iam mihi nigrescunt tonsa sudaria barba
et queritur labris puncta puella meis ;
sed tibi non crevi!: te noster vilicus horret, 5
te dispensator, te domus ipsa pavet.
ludere nec nobis nec tu permittis amare ;
nil mihi vis et vis cuncta licere tibi.
corripis, observas, quereris, suspiria ducis,
et vix a ferulis temperat ira tua. 10
si Tyrios sumpsi cultus unxive capillos,
exclamas “ Numquam fecerat ista pater” ;
et numeras nostros adstricta tronte trientes,
tamquam de cella sit cadus ille tua.
desine ; non possum libertum ferre Catonem, 15
esse virum iam me dicet amica tibi.


XL


Formosam Glyceran amat Lupercus

et solus tenet imperatque solus.

quam toto sibi mense non fututam

cum tristis quereretur et roganti

causam reddere vellet Aeliano, 5
respondit Glycerae doiere dentes.


1 crevit TBV.
266


BOOK XI. xxxvm—xt


XXXVIII


A MULE-DRIVER was lately sold, Aulus, for twenty
thousand sesterces. Do you wonder at so heavy a
price? He was deaf!


XXXIX


You were the rocker of my cradle, Charidemus,
and guardian of my boyhood, and my constant com-
panion. By now the napkin grows black from the shavy-
ings of my beard, and my mistress complains of being
pricked by my lips. But to you I have not grown:
from you my steward shrinks, at you my treasurer,
at you my very house is in a panic! You don’t
allow me to frolic, nor do you allow me to woo: you
wish me to have no liberty, and wish to have all
liberty yourself. You take me up, watch me, grumble,
heave sighs, and your wrath scarce keeps your hand
off the ferule. If I have put on a purple dress or
anointed my hair, you cry out: “Never did your
father do that”; and with knitted brow you count
my cups, as if the jar they came from were one from
your own cellar. Desist: I cannot stand a freedman
Cato. That I am now a man my mistress will inform
you.


XL


Lurercus loves the beautiful Glycera, and he is
her sole possessor and her sole commander. When
he was sadly regretting that for a whole month he
had not enjoyed her favours, and wished to give the
reason to Aelianus who asked him, he replied that
Glycera had the toothache.?


1 And so could not hear the talk of those in the carriage :


cf. XIL. xxiv. 8.
2 There appears to be an obscene inference here.


267


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLI


INDULGET pecori nimium dum pastor Amyntas
et gaudet fama luxuriaque gregis,

cedentis oneri ramos silvamque fluentem
vicit, concussas ipse secutus opes.

triste nemus dirae vetuit superesse ruinae!
damnavitque rogis noxia ligna pater.

pingues, Lygde, sues habeat vicinus Iollas:
te satis est nobis adnumerare pecus.


XLII


Vivipa cum poscas epigrammata, mortua ponis
lemmata, qui fieri, Caeciliane, potest ?

mella iubes Hyblaea tibi vel Hymettia nasci,
et thyma Cecropiae Corsica ponis api!


XLII


DeprENsUM in puero tetricis me vocibus, uxor,
corripis et culum te quoque habere refers.
dixit idem quotiens lascivo Iuno Tonanti!
ille tamen grandi cum Ganymede iacet.
incurvabat Hylan posito Tirynthius arcu :
tu Megaran credis non habuisse natis?
torquebat Phoebum Daphne fugitiva: sed illas
Oebalius flammas iussit abire puer.


1 ruinae de Rooy, rapinae codd.


1 The acorns.


268


BOOK XI. xix ui


XLI


Too eager to indulge his charge, and proud of the
fame and fatness of his herd, their keeper Amyntas
broke the boughs that yielded to his weight, and
the down-streaming foliage, himself following the
spoil! he shook to earth. His sire forbade the ill-
omened tree survive such dread ruin, and condemned
the fatal timber to the funeral pyre.

Lygdus,? let neighbour Iollas have his swine fat:
‘tis enough for me that you keep well the reckoning
of my herd.


XLII


AtTHouGcH you call for lively epigrams you set
lifeless themes. How is that possible, Caecilianus?
You bid Hyblan or Hymettian honey be made for
you, and serve up to the Cecropian bee Corsican
thyme?!


XLII


Tu, moglie, con arrabiate parole rimbrotti me
sorpreso con ragazzo, ed adduci che anche tu hai il
culo. Quante volte Giunone non disse lo stesso a
Giove Tonante! con tutto cid esso giace col grande
Ganimede. ‘Tirinzio, deposto l’arco, incurvava Ila;
credi tu che Megara non avesse natiche? Dafne
fuggitiva tormentava Febo; ma il ragazzo Oebalio
fece partire quelle fiamme. Quantunque Briseide


2 The swineherd of the writer, who is warned not to be
venturesome like A., but to be content with not losing the
swine. M. means that L.’s life is too precious to be risked.

3 Which produced the inferior honey of Corsica: cf. 1x.
XXVi. 4.


269


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL
SS


Briseis multum quamvis aversa iaceret,

Aeacidae propior levis amicus erat. 10
parce tuis igitur dare mascula nomina rebus

teque puta cunnos, uxor, habere duos.


XLIV


Orsus es et locuples et Bruto consule natus :
esse tibi veras credis amicitias ?

sunt verae, sed quas iuvenis, quas pauper habebas.
qui novus est, mortem diligit ille tuam.,


XLV


InrrRasTi quotiens inscriptae limina cellae,
seu puer adrisit sive puella tibi,

contentus non es foribus veloque seraque,
secretumque iubes grandius esse tibi:

oblinitur minimae si qua est suspicio rimae 5
punctaque lasciva quae terebrantur acu.

nemo est tam teneri tam sollicitique pudoris
qui vel pedicat, Canthare, vel futuit.


XLVI co


Iam nisi per somnum non arrigis et tibi, Maevi,
incipit in medios meiere verpa pedes,

truditur et digitis pannucea mentula lassis
nec levat extinctum sollicitata caput.

quid imiseros frustra cunnos culosque lacessis? 5
summa petas: illic mentula vivit anus.


1 ge. you are incredibly old : of. x. xxxix. 1.
270


BOOK XI. xuui-xtvi


giacesse molto aversa, l’imberbe amico era pit con-
tiguo ad Eacide. Contieniti dunque di dar nomi
mascolini alle cose tue, ed immaginati, O moglie,
d’aver due c—ni!


XLIV


You are childless and rich and were born in the
consulship of Brutus:! do you imagine you have
true friendships? True friendships there are, but
those you possessed when young, those when poor.
The new friend is one who has an affection for
your death.


XLV


Wuenever you have passed the threshold of a
placarded cubicle, whether it be a boy or a girl who
has smiled on you; you are not satisfied with a door
and a curtain and a bolt, and you require that
greater secrecy should be provided for you. It
there be any suspicion of the smallest chink it is
plastered up, as also the eyelets that are bored by
a mischievous needle. No one is of a modesty so
tender and so anxious, Cantharus, who is: either
a—— ora x3


XLVI


Di gia non arrigi che in sogno, ed il tuo pene, O
Mevio, incommincia pisciarti fra i piedi, e la corrugata
mentola é provocata dalle stanche dita, ne sollicitata
rizza |’ estinto capo. <A che inutilmente importuni i
poveri c—ni e culi? Va in alto: cola una vecchia
mentola vive.

2 4-e. whose tastes are not abnormal.
271


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLVII


Omnia femineis quare dilecta catervis
balnea devitat Lattara? ne futuat.
cur nec Pompeia lentus spatiatur in umbra
nec petit Inachidos limina? ne futuat.
cur Lacedaemonio luteum ceromate corpus 5
perfundit gelida Virgine? ne futuat.
cum sic feminei generis contagia vitet,
cur lingit cunnum Lattara? ne futuat.


XLVIUI


Sti1us haec magni celebrat monimenta Maronis,
iugera facundi qui Ciceronis habet.
‘ heredem dominumque sui tumulive larisve
non alium mallet nec Maro nec Cicero.


XLIX


Iam prope desertos cineres et sancta Maronis
nomina qui coleret, pauper et unus erat.
1 +Silius optataef succurrere censuit umbrae,
Silius et? vatem, non minor ipse, colit.
1 qllius, Lindsay. orbatae Ribbeck, wt patriae Postgate,
o pietas Lindsay, en tantae Gilbert. censwit umbrae Heins.,
cenis ut cliabrae (vel diabrae) y.


2 filius ut Ribbeck. minor ipse colit Heins., minus ipse
tulit +».


Pip tsm oh MS ose Bl
2 ae. of Isis: ef. 1. xiv. 7. This temple is called by Juv.


272


BOOK XI. xivi—x Linx


XLVII


Wuy does Lattara avoid all the baths affected by
crowds of women? that he may not be tempted.
Why does he not idly stroll in the shade of Pompey’s
Porch,! nor resort to the threshold of the daughter
of Inachus?? that he may not be tempted. Why
does he plunge in the cold Virgin water his body
yellow with Lacedaemonian ointment?3 that he
may not be-tempted. Seeing that he so avoids the
contagion of the generation of women, why is Lattara
a woman’s ? That he may not be tempted.


XLVIII


Situs, who possesses the land which was eloquent
Cicero’s, honours this monument of great Maro.
As heir and owner of his tomb or dwelling no other
would either Maro or Cicero choose.


XLIX


To honour the ashes, now well-nigh abandoned,
and the sacred name of Maro was there but one,° and
he was poor. Silius resolved to rescue the regretted
dead: and Silius—no less himself a poet—honours
the bard.


(vi. 489) ‘‘Isiacae sacraria lenae,” as being the resort of
prostitutes, 3 of. VII. xxxii. 9.

4 Silius the poet, who was a rich man and possessed one
of Cicero’s villas, had bought the ground on which Vergil’s
tomb stood. Pliny says (Zp. iii. 7) that he kept Vergil’s
birthday more religiously than his own, and regarded his
tomb in the light of a temple.

5 7,e. the owner of the ground before Silius bought it.


273


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


L


Nutra est hora tibi qua non me, Phylli, furentem
despolies: tanta calliditate rapis.

nunc plorat speculo fallax ancilla relicto,
gemma vel a digito vel cadit aure lapis ;

nunc furtiva lucri fieri bombycina possunt, 5
profertur Cosmi nunc mihi siccus onyx ;

amphora nunc petitur nigri cariosa Falerni,
expiet ut-somnos garrula saga tuos;

nunc ut emam grandemve lupum mullumve bilibrem,
indixit cenam dives amica tibi. 10

sit pudor et tandem veri respectus et aequi:
nil tibi, Phylli, nego; nil mihi, Phylli, nega.


LI


Tanta est quae Titio columna pendet
quantam Lampsaciae colunt puellae.

hic nullo comitante nec molesto

thermis grandibus et suis lavatur.

anguste Titius tamen lavatur. 5


LIT


Crnapis belle, [uli Cerialis, apud me;
condicio est melior si tibi nulla, veni.
octavam poteris servare ; lavabimur una:
scis quam sint Stephani balnea iuncta mihi.


RGjee Ville Liv as
2 See note to x1. xvi. 3.


274


BOOK XI. .t-1u


L


Tuere is not an hour comes amiss to you, Phyllis,
for plundering me in my infatuation: with such cun-
ning do you rob me. Now your lying maid laments
because a mirror has been left behind, or a jewel
drops from your finger, or a stone from your ear; at
one time silks lost by theft may be a means of profit,
at another there is shown to me an empty casket
of Cosmus’ perfume; now a crumbling jar of dark
Falernian is asked for that a chattering wise-woman
may exorcise your dreams;! now, to induce me to
buy, either a huge bass or a two-pound mullet, a rich
woman friend has proposed a dinner at your house.
Let there be some moderation and at length some
regard for fairness and justice. I deny nothing to
you, Phyllis: deny nothing, Phyllis, to me.


LI


Si grande é la colonna che pende a Tizio quanto
quella che le zitelle Lampsiache? venerano. Costui
senza compagno né molestato si lava in ampie terme
e nelle sue: con tutto cid angustamente Tizio si
lava.


LI


You will dine nicely, Julius Cerialis, at my house ;
if you have no better engagement, come. You will
be able to observe the eighth hour;? we will bathe
together: you know how near Stephanus’ baths are


3 The usual hour for dining in summer, the bath being
taken before: cf. xX. xlviii. 1. There were sundials at the


baths,
275


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


prima tibi dabitur ventri lactuca movendo 5
utilis, et porris fila resecta suis,
mox vetus et tenui maior cordyla lacerto,
sed quam cum rutae frondibus ova tegant ;
altera non derunt tenui versata favilla,
et Velabrensi massa coacta foco, 10
et quae Picenum senserunt frigus olivae.
haec satis in gustu. cetera nosse cupis ?
mentiar, ut venias: pisces, conchylia, sumen,
et chortis saturas atque paludis aves,
quae nec Stella solet rara nisi ponere cena. 15
plus ego polliceor: nil recitabo tibi,
ipse tuos nobis relegas licet usque Gigantas,
rura vel aeterno proxima Vergilio.


LIII
Craupia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis
edita, quam Latiae pectora gentis habet!
quale decus formae! Romanam credere matres
Italides possunt, Atthides esse suam.
di bene quod sancto peperit fecunda marito, 5
quod sperat generos quodque puella nurus.
sic placeat superis ut coniuge gaudeat uno
et semper natis gaudeat illa tribus.


LIV


UNGUENTA et casias et olentem funera murram
turaque de medio semicremata rogo


1 Porrum sectivum : of. X. xlviii. 9. tcfe sd xxod


276


BOOK XI. tu-Liv


tome. First, there will be given you lettuce useful
for relaxing the bowels, and shoots cut from their
parent leeks;! then tunny salted and bigger than a
small lizard-fish, and one too which eggs will garnish
in leaves of rue. Other eggs will not be wanting,
roasted in embers of moderate heat, and a lump of
cheese ripened over a Velabran hearth,? and olives
that have felt the Picenian frost. These are enough
for a whet: do you want to know the rest? I will
deceive you to make you come: fish, mussels, sow’s
paps, and fat birds of the poultry-yard and the marsh,
which even Stella is not used to serve except at a
special dinner. More I promise you: I will recite
nothing to you, even although you yourself read
again your “Giants” straight through, or your
“ Pastorals”’ that rank next to immortal Virgil.


LIII


Tuoueu Claudia Rufina® has sprung from the woad-
stained Britons, how she possesses the feelings of
the Latin race! What grace of form has she!
Mothers of Italy may deem her Roman, those of
Attica their own. May the Gods bless her in that
she, a fertile wife, has borne children to her constant
spouse, in that she hopes, though youthful still, for
sons- and daughters-in-law. So may it please the
Gods above she should joy in one mate alone, and
joy ever in three sons!


LIV


Tue unguents and casia, and myrrh that smells of
funerals, and the frankincense half-burned snatched


8 Probably the Claudia Peregrina of Iv. xiii.
277


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et quae de Stygio rapuisti cinnama lecto,
inprobe, de turpi, Zoile, redde sinu.

a pedibus didicere manus peccare protervae.
non miror furem, qui fugitivus eras.


LV


Hortatur fieri quod e Lupus, Urbice, patrem,
ne credas; nihil est quod minus ‘ille velit.
ars est captandi quod nolis velle videri ;
ne facias optat quod rogat ut facias.
dicat praegnantem tua se Cosconia tantum :
pallidior fiet iam pariente Lupus.
at tu consilio videaris ut usus amici,
sic morere ut factum te putet esse patrem.


LVI


Quop nimium mortem, Chaeremon Stoice, laudas,
vis animum mirer suspiciamque tuum ?

hanc tibi virtutem fracta facit urceus ansa,
et tristis nullo qui tepet igne focus,

et teges et cimex et nudi sponda grabati,
et brevis atque eadem nocte dieque toga.

0 quam magnus homo es qui faece rubentis aceti
et stipula et nigro pane carere potes!

Leuconicis agedum tumeat tibi culcita lanis
constringatque tuos purpura pexa toros,

dormiat et tecum modo qui dum Caecuba miscet
convivas roseo torserat ore puer :


278


10


BOOK XI. Liv—-Lv1


from the midst of the pyre, and the cinnamon you
have snatched from the bier of death—these, rascally
Zoilus, surrender out of your foul pocket. ’Tis from
your feet your froward hands have learned mis-
doings: I don’t wonder you are a thief who were
- a runaway slave.


LV


Lupus urges you, Urbicus, to become a father:
don’t believe him; there is nothing he wishes less.
The art of the legacy-hunter is to seem to wish what
one does not wish: he prays you will not do what he
asks you todo. Let your Cosconia only say she is
pregnant, Lupus will become paler than a lady
already in labour. But do you, by way of seeming
to adopt your friend’s counsel, die in such a way!
that he may think you have become a father.


LVI


BrcausE you, Stoic Chaeremon, so much praise
death, do you want me to admire and look up to
your mind? “Tis a jug with a broken handle that
creates this virtue of yours, and a melancholy hearth
chill with no fire, and a beggar’s rug, and bugs and
the framework of a bare truckle-bed, and a short toga,
your one covering night and day alike. Oh, what a
great man you are, who can do without dregs of red
vinegar and straw and black bread! Come, imagine
your pillow swells with Leuconian wool,’ and that
close-napped purple binds your couches, and a boy
waits upon you who, while he mixed the Caecuban
yesterday, distracted your guests with his rosy lips!


1 3.e. leave him nothing. 2 of, xiv. clix.
g


279


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


o quam tu cupies ter vivere Nestoris annos
et nihil ex ulla perdere luce voles!

rebus in angustis facile est contemnere vitam : 15
fortiter ille facit qui miser esse potest.


LVII
Miraris docto quod carmina mitto Severo,
ad cenam cum te, docte Severe, vocem?
Iuppiter ambrosia satur est et nectare vivit ;
nos tamen exta Iovi cruda merumque damus.
omnia cum tibi sint dono concessa deorum, 5
si quod habes non vis, ergo quid accipies ?


LVII


Cum me velle vides tentumque, Telesphore, sentis,
magna rogas: puta me velle negare: licet ?

et nisi iuratus dixi “ Dabo,” subtrahis illas,
permittunt in me quae tibi multa, natis.

quid si me tonsor, cum stricta novacula supra est, 5
tunc libertatem divitiasque roget?

promittam ; neque enim rogat illo tempore tonsor,
latro rogat; res est inperiosa timor:

sed fuerit curva cum tuta novacula theca,
frangam tonsori crura manusque simul. 10

at tibi nil faciam, sed lota mentula laeva
Aatkalew cupidae dicet avaritiae.


Ieee litle In its regular sense of ‘‘ poetic.”
9 of Sole Leela x, cline de


280


BOOK XI. tvi-ivim


Oh, how you will long to live Nestor’s years thrice
over, and wish to lose no moment of any day! In
narrow means ’tis easy to despise life: he acts the
strong man who is wretched and can endure.!


LVII


Do you wonder I send learned? Severus verse
when I ask you, learned Severus, todinner? Jupiter
is cloyed with ambrosia and he lives on nectar, yet
we offer to Jupiter raw entrails and new wine. As
by the gift of the Gods all things have been granted
to you, if you do not wish to receive what you
possess, what then will you accept?


LVIII


Wuen you see that I am desirous, and perceive
that I am on the stretch, Telesphorus, you ask a big
price. Imagine I wish to refuse it: can I? And
unless I swear when I say “I will give it,’ you with-
draw those charms that give you much licence with
me. What if a barber, when his drawn razor is over
my head, should then ask me for his liberty and
for wealth? I will promise it; for it is not a barber
who asks on that occasion, a highwayman asks; a
thing imperious is fear: but when his razor is safe
in its crooked case, I will break the barber’s
shanks and his hands to boot. To you, however, I
will do nothing; but, when it is otherwise sated, my
ardour will bid your grasping avarice to go hang.*


f


4 The word Aa:xd(ew is possibly only a coarse imprecation,
and is not to be taken literally.


VOL. Il. K 281


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LIX


Senos Charinus omnibus digitis gerit
nec nocte ponit anulos

nec cum lavatur. causa quae sit quaeritis ?
dactyliothecam non habet.


LX


Sir Phlogis an Chione Veneri magis apta requiris?
pulchrior est Chione; sed Phlogis ulcus habet,
ulcus habet Priami quod tendere possit alutam
quodque senem Pelian non sinat esse senem ;
ulcus habet quod habere suam vult quisque puellam, 5
quod sanare Criton, non quod Hygia potest.
at Chione non sentit opus nec vocibus ullis
adiuvat, absentem marmoreamve putes.
exorare, dei, si vos tam magna liceret
et bona velletis tam pretiosa dare, 10
hoe quod habet Chione corpus faceretis haberet
ut Phlogis, et Chione quod Phlogis ulcus habet.


LXI


Lineva maritus, moechus ore Nanneius,
Summemmianis inquinatior buccis ;

quem cum fenestra vidit a Suburana !

obscena nudum Leda, fornicem cludit
mediumque mavult basiare quam summum;_ 5


1 Suburana >, suburbana codd.


1 ¢.e. he has merely hired them. The reason given is a
surprise.


282


BOOK XI. urx-.x1


LIX


Srx rings Charinus wears on each of his fingers,
and he does not take them off at night nor when he
bathes. Do you ask the reason? He has not got a
ring-case.}


LX


Is Phlogis or Chione the more fitted for dalliance,
do you ask? More beautiful is Chione, but Phlogis
has an itch; she has an itch that would rejuvenate
Priam’s powers and would not permit the aged
Pylian? to be aged; she has an itch that every man
wishes his own mistress to have, one Criton can cure,
not Hygeia.* But Chione is impassive, nor does she
encourage you by any wooing word: you would
fancy she were away from you, or were a marble
statue. Ye Gods, were it permitted to prevail on
you to bestow so great a gift, and were ye willing
to give a blessing so precious, you would make
Phlogis to have this body that Chione has and
Chione the itch that Phlogis has!


LXI


NanegJo é marito colla lingua, adultero colla bocca,
pid sporco delle bocche Summemiane: il quale quando
Yoscena Leda vede nudo dalla Suburana finestra
ella chiude il lupanario, ed ama meglio baciare al
mezzo che all’ alto; il quale poco fa entrava per


2 Nestor, the typical old man.

3 7.e. to be cured by male, not by female doctors: ¢f. x1.
ixxi. 9. Criton was a doctor of M.’s time; Hygeia, the
Goddess of Health, the daughter of Aesculapius, is here put
for female doctors generally.


283


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


modo qui per omnes viscerum tubos ibat

et voce certa consciaque dicebat

puer an puella matris esset in ventre,

(gaudete cunni; vestra namque res acta est)
arrigere linguam non potest fututricem. 10
nam dum tumenti mersus haeret in volva

et vagientes intus audit infantes,

partem gulosam solvit indecens morbus.

nec purus esse nunc potest nec inpurus.


LXII


Lessia se iurat gratis numquam esse fututam.
verum est. cum futui vult, numerare solet.


LXII


Specras nos, Philomuse, cum lavamur,

et quare mihi tam mutuniati

sint leves pueri subinde quaeris.

dicam simpliciter tibi roganti:

pedicant, Philomuse, curiosos. 5


LXIV


Nescio tam multis quid scribas, Fauste, puellis :
hoe scio, quod scribit nulla puella tibi.


LXV


SEesceNnTI cenant a te, Iustine, vocati
lucis ad officium quae tibi prima fuit.


284


BOOK XI. .txi-Lv


tutti i tubi delle viscere, e con certa e consapevole
asserzione diceva se era un maschio o una femina nel
ventre della madre (rallegratevi, c—ni, perché le
vostre faccende sono finite); non puo erigere |’
immembratice lingua. Imperocché, mentre che sta
immerso nella tumente volva, e dentro sente i vagi-
enti bambini, un’ indecente morbo! struge la parte
golosa: né ora pud esser puro né impuro.


LXII


Lespia swears she has never granted her favours
without a price. That is true: on those occasions she
is wont herself to pay it.


LXIII


You eye me, Philomusus, when I bathe, and con-
tinually enquire why I have with me smooth-cheeked
boys so well developed. I will answer your question
in plain terms: Philomusus, they assault meddlers.


LXIV


I pon’r know what you write, Faustus, to so many
girls: this I know, what? no girl writes to you.


LXV


A crowp of guests dine at your invitation, Justinus,
to celebrate the day of your birth. Among them,
1 of. x1. Ixxxv. 1. 2 7,e. ‘Come.’


285


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


inter quos, memini, non ultimus esse solebam ;
nec locus hic nobis invidiosus erat.

postera sed festae reddis sollemnia mensae ; 5
sescentis hodie, cras mihi natus eris.


LXVI


Er delator es et calumniator,

et fraudator es et negotiator,

et fellator es et lanista. miror
quare non habeas, Vacerra, nummos.


LXVII


Nix mihi das vivus; dicis post fata daturum.
si non es stultus, scis, Maro, quid cupiam.


LXVIII


Parva rogas magnos; sed non dant haec quoque
magni.
ut pudeat levius te, Matho, magna roga,


LXIX


AMPHITHEATRALEs inter nutrita magistros
venatrix, silvis aspera, blanda domi,

Lydia dicebar, domino fidissima Dextro,
qui non Erigones mallet habere canem,


1 M. has been invited on the morrow to the remnants of
to-day’s birthday feast to J.’s fine friends. ‘‘ To-morrow,” he
says, ‘it will be my turn to find out that you are a gentle-
man.” For this sense of natus, of, Iv. lxxxiii. 3; vii. Lx iv,
18; and x. xxvii. 4,


286


BOOK XI. rxv—ix1x


I recollect, I used not to be the last, and this place
was not begrudged me. But to-morrow you repeat
the festive ceremony: for the crowd you are born
to-day, to-morrow you shall be born for me.}


LXVI


You are an informer and a backbiter, and you are
a cheat and a pimp, and you are a foul rascal and a
master of gladiators. I wonder why you are not
rich, Vacerra.?


LXVII


Notuine you give me while you are living: you
say you will give after your death. If you are not
a fool you know, Maro, what I desire.®


LXVIII


For small gifts you solicit great men, but not even
these do your great men give. That you may be
the less ashamed, Matho, solicit great gifts.


LXIX


Rearep among the trainers of the amphitheatre,
a hunter, savage in the woods, gentle at home, I was
called Lydia, most faithful to my master Dexter,
who would not have prized Erigone’s hound? more


2 See further as to this person, x1. Ixxvii. and XII. xxxii.


3 cf. VIII; XXVii.
4 Maera, the dog that showed to Erigone where her


murdered father Icarius lay. Erigone became the constella-
tion Virgo and Maera Procyon.


287


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nec qui Dictaea Cephalum de gente secutus 5
luciferae pariter venit ad astra deae.

non me longa dies nec inutilis abstulit aetas,
qualia Dulichio fata fuere cani:

fulmineo spumantis apri sum dente perempta,
quantus erat, Calydon, aut, Erymanthe, tuus. 10

nec queror infernas quamvis cito rapta sub umbras.
non potui fato nobiliore mori.


LxXx


VENDERE, Tucca, potes centenis milibus emptos?
plorantis dominos vendere, Tucca, potes ?

nec te blanditiae, nec verba rudesve querellae,
nec te dente tuo saucia colla movent?

a facinus! tunica patet inguen utrimque levata, 5
inspiciturque tua mentula facta manu.

si te delectat numerata pecunia, vende
argentum mensas murrina rura domum ;

vende senes servos, ignoscent, vende paternos ;
ne pueros vendas omnia vende miser. 10

luxuria est emere hos (quis enim dubitatve negatve?)
sed multo maior vendere luxuria est.


LXXI


Hystericam vetulo se dixerat esse marito
et queritur futui Leda necesse sibi ;


1 Laelaps, given to Procris by Diana and by her to her
husband Cephalus. When Cephalus was added to the stars
by Aurora, his hound followed him,


288


BOOK XI. vx1x-Lxx1


than me, nor the one of Dicte’s breed that
followed Cephalus,! and with him passed to the
heaven of the goddess, the Bringer of Light. Not
length of days nor fruitless age carried me off, as
was the fate of the Dulichian hound:? I was slain
by the lightning tusk of a foaming boar, huge as was
thine, Calydon, or, Erymanthus, thine. Yet I murmur
not, albeit swiftly hurried to the Nether Shades: I
could not die by nobler death.


LXX


Can you endure to sell, Tucca, those you bought
for a hundred thousand sesterces? Can you endure,
Tucca, to sell your weeping masters?? Do not their
caresses, or their prattle or artless plaints, or the
necks wounded by your tooth, move you? Ah,
shame! Lift up the tunic of either, and his naked-
ness is seen, and there is revealed the manhood,
fashioned‘ by your hand. If money paid down is
your attraction, sell silver plate, tables, porcelain
cups, land, town-house; sell aged slaves—they will
pardon—sell paternal slaves: to avoid selling your
boys, sell, wretched man, everything. ’Twas extrava-
gance to buy these boys—for who either doubts or
denies it ?>—but much greater extravagance is it to
sell them.


LXXI


Lypia told her aged husband that she was
hysterical, and regrets that intercourse is necessary

2 Argus, the hound of Ulysses, that recognised him after
twenty years, and died: Hom. Od. xvii. 291-327.


3 This word has an indecent sense: ¢f. x11. lxvi. 8.
« This word is probably explained by x1. xxii. 6.


289


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


sed flens atque gemens tanti negat esse salutem
seque refert potius proposuisse mori.

vir rogat ut vivat, virides nec deserat annos,
et fieri quod iam non facit ipse sinit.

protinus accedunt medici medicaeque recedunt,
tollunturque pedes. o medicina gravis!


LXXII


Dravci Natta sui vocat pipinnam,
conlatus cui Gallus est Priapus.


LXXIII


VeNTuRUM iuras semper mihi, Lygde, roganti
constituisque horam constituisque locum.

cum frustra iacui longa prurigine tentus,
succurrit pro te saepe sinistra mihi.

quid precer, o fallax, meritis et moribus istis?
umbellam luscae, Lygde, feras dominae.


LXXIV


CuraNpuM penem commisit Baccara Raetus}
rivali medico. Baccara Gallus erit.


LXXV
Tueca tectus ahenea lavatur


tecum, Caelia, servus; ut quid, oro,


1 Ruetus Schneid., graecus 8, vetus y.
290


BOOK XI. Lxxi~Ltxxv


for her; yet with tears and groans she says her
health is not worth the sacrifice, and declares she
would rather choose to die. Her lord bids her
live, and not desert the bloom of her years, and
he permits to be done what he cannot do himself.
Immediately men doctors come in, and lady doctors
depart, and her feet are hoisted. Oh, what stringent
treatment ! :


LXXII


Natta chiama pipinna quella del suo drauco, alla
quale Priapo! confrontato é un Gallo.?


LXXIII


You always swear, Lygdus, you will come to me
when I ask you, and you appoint the hour and you
appoint the place. When I have lain fruitlessly
racked with lingering desire, a substitute has often
come to my rescue. What should be my curse, false
boy, one fitted to deserts and habits like yours?
May you carry, Lygdus, the sunshade of a one-eyed
mistress !

LXXIV


Baccara, a Rhaetian, entrusted the care of his
person to a doctor, his rival in love: Baccara will
now be a Gaul.?


LXXV


Your slave bathes with you, Caelia, covered with
a sheath of brass; to what end, I pray, seeing he is
T ¢f-Vi.-xlix., 2, .
4 7.¢. a eunuch ; see notes to I, xxxv. 15 and 111. xxiv. 13.
291


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


non sit cum citharoedus aut choraules?

non vis, ut puto, mentulam videre.

quare cum populo lavaris ergo? 5
omnes an tibi nos sumus spadones?

ergo, ne videaris invidere,

servo, Caelia, fibulam remitte.


LXXVI


SotverE, Paete, decem tibi me sestertia cogis,
perdiderit quoniam Bucco ducenta tibi.

ne noceant, oro, mihi non mea crimina: tu qui
bis centena potes perdere, perde decem.


LXXVII


In omnibus Vacerra quod conclavibus
consumit horas et die toto sedet,
cenaturit Vacerra, non cacaturit.


LXXVIII


Urere femineis conplexibus, utere; Victor,
ignotumque sibi mentula discat opus. >

flammea texuntur sponsae, iam virgo paratur,
tondebit pueros iam nova nupta tuos.

pedicare semel cupido dabit illa marito, 5
dum metuit teli vulnera prima novi:

saepius hoc fieri nutrix materque vetabunt
et dicent: “ Uxor, non puer, ista tibi est.”

heu quantos aestus, quantos patiere labores,
si fuerit cunnus res peregrina tibi! 16

ergo Suburanae tironem trade magistrae.
illa virum faciet; non bene virgo docet.


1 of, vil. Ixxxii. 1; xiv. cexv.
292


BOOK XI. txxv—Lxxvi


no harper or flutist in the chorus?! You don’t wish,
as I suppose, to see his nakedness. Why, then, do
you bathe with the crowd? Are all of us eunuchs
to you? Therefore, that you may not appear to be
jealous, undo, Caelia, your slave’s fibula.


‘ LXXVI


You compel me, Paetus, to pay you ten thousand
sesterces because Bucco has lost you your two hun-
dred thousand. Don’t let offences not mine injure
me, I pray: do you, who can endure to lose two
hundred, lose ten.


LXXVII


Vacerra dallies for hours, and sits a whole day in
all the closets. Vacerra wishes to dine, not to dis-
embogue.?


LXXVIII


Fa uso, fa uso dei feminei amplessi, O Vittore, e
la mentola impari l’opra ad essa ignota. II] velo é
tessuto per la sposa, di gia la vergine é preparata, di
gid la nuova maritata tosera? i tuoi ragazzi. Essa
dara una volta da pedicare all’ avido marito mentre
teme le prime ferite della nuova lancia; la nutrice
e la madre vieteranno che cid si facia troppo sovente,
e diranno “questa ti é¢ moglie, non ragazzo.” Oh,
quanti furori e quanti stenti se il c—no sara a te
cosa insolita! Dunque consegnati qual novizio ad
una Suburana maestra. Quella ti fara uomo; una
vergine insegna cid malamente.


2 He hopes to meet some acquaintance and to get an
invitation. 3 Youths of that character wore long hair.


205


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXIX


Ap primum decuma lapidem quod venimus hora,
arguimur lentae crimine pigritiae.

non est ista viae, non est mea, sed tua culpa est,
misisti mulas qui mihi, Paete, tuas.


LXXX


Lirus beatae Veneris aureum Baias,

Baias superbae blanda dona Naturae,

ut mille laudem, Flacce, versibus Baias,

laudabo digne non satis tamen Baias.

sed Martialem malo, Flacce, quam Baias. 5
optare utrumque pariter inprobi votum est.
quod si deorum munere hoc tibi! detur,

quid gaudiorum est Martialis et Baiae!


LXXXI


Cum sene communem vexat spado Dindymus Aeglen
et iacet in medio sicca puella toro.

viribus hic, operi non est hic utilis annis:
ergo sine effectu prurit utrique labor.

supplex illa rogat pro se miserisque duobus, 5
hune iuvenem facias, hunc, Cytherea, virum.


LXXXII


A Sinuessanis conviva Philostratus undis
conductum repetens nocte iubente larem


1 bi. tamen Munro.


1 M. has arrived an hour late for dinner: ¢f. Iv. viii. 6.
* Under this view tibi can have no meaning, so I have


294


BOOK XI. Lxxix—Lxxx11


LXXIX


Because I have reached the first milestone at the
tenth hour I am convicted on a charge of tardiness
and sloth! It is not the fault of the road; it is not
mine, but yours, who sent me your mules, Paetus.


LXXX


Batak, the golden shore of blessed Venus; Baiae,
the witching gift of proud Nature !—though in a
thousand verses, Flaccus, I were to laud Baiae, yet
I shall not laud Baiae as it deserves. But I prefer
Martial, Flaccus, to Baiae: to ask for both at once
were a presumptuous prayer. Yet if by heaven’s
bounty this could still be granted, what wealth of joy
—Martial and Baiae too !?


LXXXI


L’eunuco Dindimo vessa Egle in comune con un
vecchio, e la giovane giace asciutta in mezzo al letto.
Quello non ha vigore all’ opra, questo é inutili per
gli anni; percid gli sforzi dell’ uno e dell’ altro in-
citano senza effetto. Essa supplichevole prega per
se e per i due sfortunati che tu, O Citerea, renda
questo giovane, e quello uomo.


LXXXII


PuiLostratus, returning from a party at the baths
of Sinuessa to his hired house at the bidding of
rendered Munro’s tamen. Some, however, take ‘‘Martialis”


as meaning the poet, in which case ‘‘tibi” means Flaccus,
and the last lines of the epigram are self-depreciatory.


295


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


paene imitatus obit saevis Elpenora fatis,
praeceps per longos dum ruit usque gradus.

non esset, Nymphae, tam magna pericula passus 5
si potius vestras ille bibisset aquas,


LXXXIIl


Nemo habitat gratis nisi dives et orbus apud te.
nemo domum pluris, Sosibiane, locat.


LXXXIV


Qui nondum Stygias descendere quaerit ad umbras
tonsorem fugiat, si sapit, Antiochum.

alba minus saevis lacerantur bracchia cultris,
cum furit ad Phrygios enthea turba modos;

mitior inplicitas Alcon secat enterocelas 5
fractaque fabrili dedolat ossa manu.

tondeat hic inopes Cynicos et Stoica menta
collaque pulverea nudet equina iuba.

hic miserum Scythica sub rupe Promethea radat,
carnificem duro pectore poscet avem ; 10

ad matrem fugiet Pentheus, ad Maenadas Orpheus,
Antiochi tantum barbara tela sonent. —

haec quaecumque meo numeratis stigmata mento,
in vetuli pyctae qualia fronte sedent,


1 The companion of Ulysses, who, awaking suddenly from
a drunken sleep in the house of Circe, fell from the roof;
Hom. Od. x. 552 seqq.

2 And not wine. Moreover, the waters of Sinuessa were
medicinal : ¢f. x1. vii. 12.

® The votaries of Cybele.


296


BOOK XI. txxxi—Lxxxiv


night, nearly copied Elpenor,! and died by a cruel
death while he was hurrying headlong down a long
flight of steps. He would not have incurred such
great danger, ye Nymphs, if he had drunk your
waters instead.”


LXXXIil


Nopopy lives scot-free with you, unless he be rich
and childless. Nobody, Sosibianus, lets his house on
better terms.


LXXXIV


He who desires not yet to go down to Stygian
shades, let him, if he be wise, avoid barber Antiochus.
White arms are mangled with knives less cruel when
the frenzied throng? raves to Phrygian strains; with
gentler touch Alcon‘ cuts the knotted hernia, and
lops away broken bones with a workman’s hand.
Shearer let this man be of starveling Cynics and of
Stoic chins, and let him bare the necks of steeds of
their dusty manes. Let this man but rasp hapless
Prometheus neath the Scythian crag, with bared
breast will he summon the bird his torturer;> to
his mother will Pentheus fly; to the Maenads Or-
pheus,® at the mere clash of Antiochus’ savage steel.
These scars, whate’er they are thou numberest on
my chin, scars such as are fixed on some time-worn


4 A surgeon of the day: cf. vi. Ixx. 6.

5 The eagle preyed upon his liver, which was always
renewed,

8 Pentheus, king of Thebes, for his hostility to the rites of
Bacchus, was torn to pieces by his mother and-other Maenads;
and Orpheus was similarly treated by the Thracian women
because he slighted them.


297


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


non iracundis fecit gravis unguibus uxor:
Antiochi ferrum est et scelerata manus.

unus de cunctis animalibus hireus habet cor :
barbatus vivit ne ferat Antiochum.


LXXXV


S1pErE percussa est subito tibi, Zoile, lingua,
dum lingis. certe, Zoile, nunc futues.


LXXXVI


Leniat ut fauces medicus, quas aspera vexat
adsidue tussis, Parthenopaee, tibi,


mella dari nucleosque iubet dulcesque placentas


et quidquid pueros non sinit esse truces.
at tu non cessas totis tussire diebus.
non est haec tussis, Parthenopaee, gula est.


LXXXVII


Dives eras quondam: sed tunc pedico fuisti
et tibi nulla diu femina nota fuit.

nunc sectaris anus. o quantum cogit egestas !
illa fututorem te, Charideme, facit.


LXXXVIII


Mu tis iam, Lupe, posse se diebus
pedicare negat Charisianus.

causam cum modo quaererent sodales,
ventrem dixit habere se solutum.


15


BOOK XJ. LxxxIv—Lxxxvin


boxer’s face—these a wife, formidable with wrathful
talons, wrought not: ’tis Antiochus’ steel and hand
accursed. Alone among all beasts the he-goat has
sense: bearded he lives to escape Autiochual


LXXXV


ImMprovisaMENTE, O Zoilo, t’é da un contagio! per-
cossa la lingua mentre lingi il c—no. Almeno ora,
O Zoilo, immembrerai.


LXXXVI


To soothe your throat, which a racking cough
incessantly afflicts, Parthenopaeus, your doctor pre-
scribes honey, and nuts, and sweet cakes, and what-
ever thing stops the fractiousness of boys. Yet all
and every day you don’t cease coughing. This is no
cough, Parthenopaeus: it is gluttony.”


LXXXVII


You were once rich, but then young men were
your favourites, and for long no woman was known
to you. Now you run after old crones.. Oh, how
compelling is poverty! It turns you, Charidemus,
into a gallant.


LXXXVIII


CaristaNo dice, O Lupo, di non poter pedicare da
molti giorni. Dimandandogliene poco fa i compagni
la cagione, disse che aveva la diarrea.®

1 i.e, planet-struck. This was called s:deratio: Plin. N. H.


ii, 41; Petr: 2. of. vil. xcil. 9 a Cfo Ttorxl,
° Thus betraying the fact that he was a pathic.


299


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXIX


InTacras quare mittis mihi, Polla, coronas?
vexatas a te malo tenere rosas.


XC
Carmina nulla probas molli quae limite currunt,
sed quae per salebras altaque saxa cadunt,
et tibi Maeonio quoque carmine maius habetur,
“ Lucili columella hic situ’ Metrophanes”’ ;
attonitusque legis “terrai frugiferai,”’ 5
Accius et quidquid Pacuviusque vomunt.
vis imiter veteres, Chrestille, tuosque poetas?
dispeream ni scis mentula quid sapiat.


XCI


Ago.ipos Canace iacet hoe tumulata sepulchro,
ultima cui parvae septima venit hiemps.

a scelus, a facinus! properas qui flere, viator,
non licet hic vitae de brevitate queri:

tristius est leto leti genus: horrida vultus 5
apstulit et tenero sedit in ore lues,

ipsaque crudeles ederunt oscula morbi
nec data sunt nigris tota labella rogis.


1 « Tenfold the length of this terrene.”—MiLron. Terras
Jilius is found in Ennius,


300


BOOK XI. ~txxxix—xc1


LXXXIX


Way dost thou send me, Polla, chaplets thou hast
not fingered? Liefer would I handle roses tumbled
by thee.


XC


No poems win your favour that speed on a gentle
path, only those that fall over rough places and high
cliffs, and this appears to you finer even than
Homer’s song:


“ Pillar of Lucilius’ house, here lieth Metrophanes.”’


And in amazed wonder you read of the “ frugiferous
terrene,’! and whatever phrase Accius and Pacu-
vius spew.” Do you want.me, Chrestillus, to copy
the old poets, your poets? May I die, but you ap-
preciate the flavour of virility ! §


XCI


Arouts’ child, Canace, lies buried in this tomb,
little Canace, whose seventh winter came her last.
Ah! for the guilt, the crime! Thou, wayfarer, who
art quick to weep, here mayst thou not lament the
shortness of life: sadder than death is death’s guise ;
a dire canker wasted her face, and settled on her
tender mouth, and her very kisses the cruel scourge
consumed ; not whole were her lips surrendered to


2 Old Roman tragic poets. L. Accius died B.c. 180,
M. Pacuvius about 131. Only fragments of their works
remain. As to the preference for ancient poets in Horace’s
time : cf. Hp. 11. i. 49 seq.

3 7.e. (acc. to Housman) a virile style ; or (in another sense)
‘* fellator ¢8.”


, 301


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


si tam praecipiti fuerant ventura volatu,

debuerant alia fata venire via. 10
sed mors vocis iter properavit cludere blandae,

ne posset duras flectere lingua deas.


XCII


MENTITuR qui te vitiosum, Zoile, dicit.
non vitiosus homo es, Zoile, sed vitium.


XCIII


Prerios vatis Theodori flamma penates
abstulit. hoc Musis et tibi, Phoebe, placet ?
o scelus, o magnum facinus crimenque deorum,
non arsit pariter quod domus et dominus!


XCIV


Quop nimium lives nostris et ubique libellis
detrahis, ignosco: verpe poeta, sapis.

hoc quoque non curo, quod cum mea carmina carpas,
conpilas : et sic, verpe poeta, sapis.

illud me cruciat, Solymis quod natus in ipsis 5
pedicas puerum, verpe poeta, meum.

ecce negas iurasque mihi per templa Tonantis.
non credo: iura, verpe, per Anchialum.


1 Supposed to represent the ejaculation ‘‘as the Lord
liveth ” in Hebrew, and mistaken by Romans for the name
of a deity. Another explanation (out of many) is that


392


BOOK XI. xci—xciv


the smoky pyre. If it had to come with so mistimed
a flight, fate should have come by other path. But
death hasted to close the channel of her winsome
speech, lest her tongue might have power to bend
the hard goddesses.


XCII


He lies who says you are vicious, Zoilus: you are
not a vicious man, Zoilus, but vice.


XCIII


Tue poetic abode of bard Theodorus a fire has
destroyed. Does this please you, ye Muses, and
you, Phoebus? Oh, what guilt, oh, what a huge
crime and scandal of the gods is here! House and
master did not burn together !


Be XCIV


Your overflowing malice, and your detraction every-
where of my books, I pardon: circumcised poet, you
are wise! This, too, I disregard, that when you carp
at my poems you plunder them: so, too, circumcised
poet, you are wise! What tortures me is this, that
you, circumcised poet, although born in the very
midst of Solyma, outrage my boy. There! you
deny it, and swear to me by the Thunderer’s Temple.
I don’t believe you: swear, circumcised one, by
Anchialus.?

Anchialus is the name of M.’s boy, and the name is common


in inscriptions of slaves and freedmen. Friedlander considers
it the name of some Rothschild of Jerusalem.


3°3


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCV


[nctpErIs quotiens in basia fellatorum,
in solium puta te mergere, Flacce, caput.


XCVI


Marcia, non Rhenus, salit hic, Germane: quid
obstas
et puerum prohibes divitis imbre lacus?
barbare, non debet, summoto cive, ministro
captivam victrix unda levare sitim.


XCVII


Una nocte quater possum: sed quattuor annis
si possum, peream, te, Telesilla, semel.


XCVIII


ErruGerr non est, Flacce, basiatores.

instant, morantur, persecuntur, occurrunt

et hinc et illinc, usquequaque, quacumque.

non ulcus acre pusulaeve lucentes,

nec triste mentum sordidique lichenes, 5
nec labra pingui delibuta cerato,

nec congelati gutta proderit nasi.

et aestuantem basiant et algentem,


1 Made foul by bathers of impure habits: cf m1. xlii.;
vi. 1xxxi.

2 A German slave had prevented a freeborn Roman boy
from drinking of a reservoir fed by the aqua Marcia, E


3°


BOOK XI. xcv—xeviir


i XCV


WHENEVER you run across the kisses of some
rascals think you are plunging your head, Flaccus,
into a bath-tub.!


XCVI


"Tis Marcia, not Rhine, that jets here, German;
why withstand and elbow the boy from the gush
of the precious pool? Barbarian, ’tis not meet that
a citizen be thrust aside, and the victor’s fountain
slake a captive’s thirst.”


XCVII


I can dally with four women in a single night,
but may I die if I could in four years dally with
you, Thelesilla, once !


XCVIII


’Tis impossible, Flaccus, to get free from kissers ;°
they press on you, stay you, follow you up, meet
you, and from this side and from that, no matter
when, wherever. No malignant ulcer or inflamed
pustules, nor diseased chin* and dirty scabs, nor
lips smeared with oily salve, nor icicle on a frozen
nose, will protect you. They kiss you both when
you are hot and when you are cold, and when


3 See on the same subject vil. xcv. and x1. lix.

4 An allusion to the mentagra, a skin disease attacking
first the chin, and propagated by kissing: ¢f. Pliny, NV. 7.
xxvi. 2, 3. It was brought to Rome from Asia in Tiberius’
reign. Pliny says that women, and slaves, and the piebs


were immune.
3$°5


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et nuptiale basium reservantem.

non te cucullis adseret caput tectum, 10
lectica nec te tuta pelle veloque,

nec vindicabit sella saepius clusa :

rimas per omnis basiator intrabit.

non consulatus ipse, non tribunatus

senive fasces nec superba clamosi 15
lictoris abiget virga basiatorem :

sedeas in alto tu licet tribunali

et e curuli iura gentibus reddas,

ascendet illa basiator atque illa.

febricitantem basiabit et flentem, 20
dabit oscitanti basium natantique,

dabit cacanti. remedium mali solum est,

facias amicum basiare quem nolis.


XCIX


De cathedra quotiens surgis (iam saepe notavi),
pedicant miserae, Lesbia, te tunicae.

quas cum conata es dextra, conata sinistra
vellere, cum lacrimis eximis et gemitu :

sic constringuntur magni Symplegade culi 5
et nimias intrant Cyaneasque natis.

emendare cupis vitium deforme? docebo:
Lesbia, nec surgas censeo nec sedeas.


1 The praetor was preceded by a lictor, or beadle, and by
six attendants carrying bundles of rods surrounding an axe


(fasces).
306


BOOK XI. xevii—xcrx


you are keeping a kiss for your bride. A head
shrouded in a cowl will not free you, nor a litter
defended with head and curtain; nor will a sedan,
though oftener closed, protect you: through any
chink the kisser will enter. Not even the very
consul’s office, not the tribunate, nor the six fasces,
nor the lordly rod of the clamorous lictor,! will drive
off the kisser: you may be sitting on a high tribunal,
and from curule chair be declaring the laws to the
nations, the kisser will climb up to that place and to
that. When you are fevered he will kiss you, and
when you are in tears; he will give a kiss to you
when you are yawning, and when you are swim-
ming; he will give it when you are in the jakes
Remedy for the evil is this alone: make a friend of
a man you don’t want to kiss.?


XCIX


WHENEVER you get up from your chair—I have
often noticed it ere now—your unhappy garments,
Lesbia, treat you indecently. When you attempt
with your right hand, attempt with your left, to
pluck them away, you wrench them out with tears
and groans; they are so gripped by the straits of
your mighty rump, and enter a pass difficult and
Cyanean.2 Do you wish to cure this ugly defect?
I will instruct you: Lesbia, I advise you neither to
get up nor to sit down!


2 7.e. who, if he be really your friend, will respect your
wish not to be kissed.

3 The Symplegades, or Cyaneae rupes, were two rocks at the
entrance of the Bosphorus that were said to clash together


and crush ships: ¢f. VII. xix, 3.
3°7


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


C


Hasere amicam nolo, Flacce, subtilem,

cuius lacertos anuli mei cingant,

quae clune nudo radat et genu pungat,

cui serra lumbis, cuspis eminet culo.

sed idem amicam nolo mille librarum. 5
carnarius sum, pinguarius non sum.


CI


Tuarpa tam tenuem potuisti, Flacce, videre?
tu, puto, quod non est, Flacce, videre potes.


CII


Non est mentitus qui te mihi dixit habere
formosam carnem, Lydia, non faciem.
est ita, si taceas et si tam muta recumbas
quam silet in cera vultus et in tabula.
sed quotiens loqueris, carnem quoque, Lydia, perdis 5
et sua plus nulli quam tibi lingua nocet.
audiat aedilis ne te videatque caveto:
portentum est, quotiens coepit imago loqui.


CII


Tanta tibi est animi probitas orisque, Safroni,
ut mirer fieri te potuisse patrem.


1 It was the duty of the aedile to note and report all
prodigies, such as a talking statue. M. means that Lydia is


308


BOOK XI. ccm


C


I pon’tr wish, Flaccus, to have a mistress who is
thin, whose arms my rings can go round, who rasps
me with her skinny haunch and pricks me with her
knee, from whose spine protrudes a saw, from whose
latter-end a spear. But all the same I reject a
mistress a thousand pounds’ weight: I am an admirer
of flesh—of tallow, no!


CI


Coutp you see Thais who is so thin, Flaccus?
You, I think, are able, Flaccus, to see what does
not exist.


CII


He was not wrong who told me that you had a
beautiful complexion, Lydia, but no expression. ’Tis
so, should you not speak, and should you recline as
mute asa silent face depicted in wax and in a picture.
But as often as you talk you ruin, Lydia, even your
complexion, and her tongue spoils no woman more
than you. Take care the aedile does not hear and
see you!! It is a portent whenever an image begins
to speak.


CIII


Sucu is your modesty in mind and aspect, Safro-
nius, that I wonder you have managed to become a


father.
only a beautiful image. A similar idea is found in a Greek
epigram: Pal. Anth. xi. 420,

59S


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CIV


Uxor, vade foras aut moribus utere nostris :
non sum ego nec Curius nec Numa nec Tatius.
me iucunda iuvant tractae per pocula noctes :
tu properas pota surgere tristis aqua.
tu tenebris gaudes : me ludere teste lucerna 5
et iuvat admissa rumpere luce latus.
fascia te tunicaeque obscuraque pallia celant :
at mihi nulla satis nuda puella iacet.
basia me capiunt blandas imitata columbas:
tu mihi das aviae qualia mane soles. 10
nec motu dignaris opus nec voce iuvare
nec digitis, tamquam tura merumque pares :
masturbabantur Phrygii post ostia servi,
Hectoreo quotiens sederat uxor equo,
et quamvis Ithaco stertente pudica solebat 15
illic Penelope semper habere manum.
pedicare negas: dabat hoc Cornelia Graccho,
Iulia Pompeio, Porcia, Brute, tibi ;
dulcia Dardanio nondum miscente ministro
pocula, Iuno fuit pro Ganymede Iovi. —_- 20
si te delectat gravitas, Lucretia toto
sis licet usque die; Laida nocte volo,


CV


Mirresas libram, quadrantem, Garrice, mittis.
saltem semissem, Garrice, solve mihi.


1 Types of ancient Roman manners.
° #.e. for purposes of a vow, or of purification in a temple.
Chastity on the previous night (sometimes for ten days: ~


Prop. U1. xxii. 62) was essential according to the rites of
310


BOOK XI. civ~cv


CIV


Wire, out of my house, or conform to my ways;
no Curius am I, or Numa, or Tatius.1_ Nights drawn
out by cheerful cups are my pleasure: you with a
sad air haste to get up after drinking water. You
delight in darkness: it pleases me to revel, with
the lamp my witness, and to strain my flanks
though I have admitted daylight. A breast-band,
and a tunic, and opaque robes conceal you; but
for me no girl lies naked enough. Kisses that are
like those of caressing doves attract me; you give
me such as you are wont in the morning to give
your grandmother. Nor by gesture, nor by words,
speech, or fingers, do you deign to accommodate me,
just as if you were getting ready incense and wine.?
I Frigii servi masturbavano dietro le porte ogni volta
che la moglie sedeva su 1]’Ettoreo cavallo, e Itaco
quantunque russante, la pudica Penelope suoleva aver
sempre cola la mano. Tu ricusi pedicare: Cornelia
accordava cid a Gracco, Giulia a Pompeo, e Porzia a
te, Bruto; il Dardanio ministro quando non mischiava
i dolci bicchieri, Giunone era a Giove in vece di
Ganymede. If austerity please you, you may be
Lucretia all through the day: Lais I wish for at
night.


CV


You used to send me a pound’s weight; a quarter,
Garricus, you now send. At least pay me half,
Garricus.®
Ceres (Ov. Am. ut. x. 2) or of Isis: Ov. Am. 1. viii. 74 ;
Tib, 1. iii. 25.

3 cf. x. lvii. M. humorously treats the present as a debt.
Moreover payment should be reduced gradually: ¢f. vii.
lxxi.


311


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CVI


Vis1 Maxime, si vacas havere,

hoc tantum lege: namque et occupatus
et non es nimium laboriosus.

transis hos quoque quattuor? sapisti.


CVII


ExpuiciTuM nobis usque ad sua cornua librum
et quasi perlectum, Septiciane, refers.

omnia legisti. credo, scio, gaudeo, verum est.
perlegi libros sic ego quinque tuos.


CVIII


Quamvis tam longo possis satur esse libello,
lector, adhuc a me disticha pauca petis.

sed Lupus usuram puerique diaria poscunt.
lector, solve. taces dissimulasque ? vale.


1 The cornua were the knobs at the end of the roller
(umbilicus) round which the parchment or papyrus was
wrapped, The text means ‘‘unrolled to the very end.”


312


BOOK XI. cvi—cvill


CVI


Vistus Maximus, if you have time for a greeting,
read this only; for you are both engaged and not
over-industrious. Do you skip even these four lines?
You are wise.


CVII


You return me my book unrolled to its very horns,!
and as if, Septicianus, you had read it through. “ You
have read it all.” I believe it, I know it, I am glad,
what you say is true. I have read through your five
books in the same way.?


CVIII


A.tHouGH with so long a book you may well be
sated, reader, you still ask for a few distichs from
me. But Lupus? requires his interest, and my slaves
their rations. Reader, pay me. Do you say nothing,
and pretend you don’t understand? Good bye!


2 7.e. not read it at all.
3 A moneylender


1
VOL, II. iP 313


= = Salli
?
2 }
Sw
Ss
a (ices
— Se RES,


s
: wntisa: 40057
FS : >
3 2 sonra, * as Spey -
oy Ard oye Ae
be AL SE OPE ES eet TS SEG Hah Sore
BS : :
oe}
* a


shag “cae rors Snr entero: 2


shee Boy penny cn
: OKA r 4 ferSifod, be OY is. a basa
: srernttdhas wate i
re
ue
7
; Lott
- itera 7 3 tes ge i
: eaves Cab aia Jeoeg sii. eiiscare:
m stat $3 Ch, ae FEO Al Byes ses y pt eh
aye bowed. <¢ beademth ere J aoh: sort J
~~ 4 => -
z BF a} dh jk Fone *
=yrtuyatt AR
y ‘v
\!
*
*
segaky:
et ‘ ¢
ua


*


LIBER DUODECIMUS


Vaterius Martiatis Prisco suo SALUTEM


Scio me patrocinium debere contumacissimae
trienni desidiae ; quo absolvenda non esset inter illas
quoque urbicas occupationes, quibus facilius con-
sequimur ut molesti potius quam ut officiosi esse
videamur; nedum in hac provinciali solitudine, ubi
nisi etiam intemperanter studemus, et sine solacio et
sine excusatione secessimus. accipe ergo rationem.
in qua hoc maximum et primum est, quod civitatis
aures quibus adsueveram quaero, et videor mihi in
alieno foro litigare ; si quid est enim quod in libellis
meis placeat, dictavit auditor: illam iudiciorum sub-
tilitatem, illud materiarum ingenium, bibliothecas
theatra convictus, in quibus studere se voluptates
non sentiunt, ad summam omnium illa quae delicati
reliquimus desideramus quasi destituti. accedit his
municipalium robigo dentium et iudici loco livor, et
unus aut alter mali, in pusillo loco multi; adversus


quod difficile est habere cotidie bonum stomachum:


316


BOOK XII


VaLerius MarTIALIs To HIS Priscus sENDS GREETING


I know that I ought to offer some plea in defence of
a most obstinate three-years’ indolence; yet no such
plea could have secured an acquittal even amid those
City pursuits in which we more easily succeed in
appearing troublesome than dutiful ;! much less in
this provincial solitude, where, unless we study even
immoderately, retirement is at once without solace
and without excuse. Hear, then, my reasons. Of
these this is the most important and first of all: I
miss that audience of my fellow-citizens to which I
had grown accustomed, and seem to myself a pleader
in a strange court; for whatever is popular in my
small books my hearer inspired. That subtlety of
judgment, that inspiration of the subject, the libra-
ries, theatres, meeting-places, where pleasure is a
student without knowing it—to sum up all, those
things which fastidiously I deserted I regret, like
one desolate. Added to this is the back-biting of
my fellow-townsmen, and envy ousting judgment,
and one or other evilly disposed persons—a_ host
in a tiny place—a circumstance against which it is

1 The allusion is to the so-called duties” of a client
which in reality hored the patron. 317


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ne mireris igitur abiecta ab indignante quae a
gestiente fieri solebant. ne quid tamen et advenienti
tibi ab urbe et exigenti negarem (cui non refero
gratiam, si tantum ea praesto quae possum), inperavi
mihi quod indulgere consueram, et studui paucissimis
diebus, ut familiarissimas mihi aures tuas exciperem
adventoria sua. tu velim ista, quae tantum apud te
non periclitantur, diligenter aestimare et excutere
non graveris ; et, quod tibi difficillimum est, de nugis
nostris iudices candore! seposito ne Romam, si ita
decreveris, non Hispaniensem librum mittamus sed
Hispanum.


I


Reria dum cessant latratoresque Molossi
et non invento silva quiescit apro,

otia, Prisce, brevi poteris donare libello.
hora nec aestiva est nec tibi tota perit.


1 candore Housman, nidore B, nitore y, nimio favore Munro.


1 The cena adventoria was a dinner given to one arriving
from abroad. The phrase here represents a book of epigrams
which was handed to Terentius Priscus on his arrival in
Spain in the winter of 101, and immediately forwarded to
Rome. This book, having been written paucissimis diebus,
is probably the brevis libel/us of x11. i. 3, and not Book XII.
as we have it, which was probably an enlarged edition,
perhaps compiled even after Martial’s death, and which


318


BOOK XII. 1


difficult every day to keep a good stomach; do not
wonder therefore that occupations have been cast
aside in repugnance which I used to follow with
ardour. Yet, not to deny you anything on your
arriving from the City and claiming it—and I am
not shewing you any fitting thanks if I do only
what I can—I have enjoined on myself a task that
I used to allow myself as a pleasure, and have de-
voted a very few days to study that I might greet
your ears, my most friendly hearer, with their due
feast of welcome.! I would wish you not to think it
a trouble to weigh with care and to scrutinise those
efforts that in your hands alone are in no danger,
and—what is most difficult for you—to judge my
trifling effusions with especial impartiality, so that,
if you decide it should go, I may not transmit to
Rome a book, not merely written in Spain, but
Spanish.


I


Wuite the nets are idle, and your barking Mo-
lossian hounds, and the wood is at rest, now you
have found no boar, you will be able, Priscus, to
bestow your leisure on my small volume.? The
hour is neither summer’s nor is it lost to you


wholly.


certainly contains epigrams written earlier than 101, eg.
vi., vill., xi. and xv. So Friedlander.

2 Studious men used to read or write in the intervals of
the chase: Plin. Zp. i. 6; v. 18.

3 «Tt will take you less time to read, and the time will be
well spent.” A Roman hour, being a twelfth of the time
between sunrise and sunset, was shorter in winter.


319


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


II


Quak modo litoreos ibatis carmina Pyrgos,
ite Sacra, iam non pulverulenta, via.


III


Ap populos mitti qui nuper ab urbe solebas,
ibis io Romam nunc peregrine liber
auriferi de gente Tagi tetricique Salonis,
dat patrios amnes! quos mihi terra potens.
non tamen hospes eris nec iam potes advena dici
cuius habet fratres tot domus alta Remi.
iure tuo veneranda novi pete limina templi,
reddita Pierio sunt ubi templa choro.
vel si malueris, prima gradiere Subura ;
atria sunt illic consulis alta mei:
laurigeros habitat facundus Stella penatis,
clarus Iantheae Stella sititor aquae ;
fons ibi Castalius vitreo torrente superbit,
unde novem dominas saepe bibisse ferunt:


10


ille dabit populo patribusque equitique legendum 15


nec nimium siccis perleget ipse genis.
quid titulum poscis? versus duo tresve legantur,
clamabunt omnes te, liber, esse meum.


1 amnes quos Housman, manes quod y, manes quae B. tibi Bp.


1 The book went by sea to Pyrgi, an ancient town in
Etruria on the Via Aurelia, about 26 English miles N.W. of
Rome, and was to enter Rome by the Via Sacra, which in
December would not be dusty. The distich seems to be a


fragment,
320


BOOK XII. n-n1


II


Ye poems of mine that went of late to Pyrgi on
the coast, go thence by the Sacred Way: it is not
dusty now.!


II


You that lately used to be sent from the City to
the provinces, ho! you will now go to Rome, O foreign
book, from the people of gold-bearing Tagus and
of rugged Salo, native streams that a great land
makes mine. Yet you will not be a stranger, nor can
you now be called a visitor, whose many brothers the
lofty house of Remus holds. Of your own right make
for the reverend threshold of the new temple where
a fane has been restored to the Pierian choir.? Or,
if you prefer, you will walk through the entrance to
the Subura; there stands the high hall of my consul;
eloquent Stella inhabits a house crowned with bay *—
illustrious Stella, who thirsts for-the stream of his
Ianthis; * a fount of Castaly there proudly wells with
its glassy torrent, whereof the Nine Dames oft, they
say, have drunk. He will give you to people and
senate and knight to be read, nor with eyes over-
tearless will he himself read you through. Why
do you require a title? Let two or three verses be
read : all will cry that you, O book, are mine.


2 Hither the Temple of Apollo on the Palatine, rebuilt by
Augustus (cf. Hor. Od. 1. xxxi), with a portico attached and
library of Greek and Latin books: Suet. Aug. xxix. ; or thu
Temple of Augustus, to which was added a library dedicated
to the Muses, which Domitian removed and Trajan restored.

3 Stella was consul a.p. 101.

4 Stella had called a spring in his house after his wife


Ianthis: of. vil. xv. 1.
321


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


IV


Quop Flacco Varioque fuit summoque Maroni
Maecenas, atavis regibus ortus eques,

gentibus et populis hoc te mihi, Prisce Terenti,
fama fuisse loquax chartaque dicet anus.

tu facis ingenium, tu, si quid posse videmur ; 5
tu das ingenuae ius mihi pigritiae.


Vv


Lonetor undecimi nobis decimique libelli
artatus labor est et breve rasit opus.

plura legant vacui, quibus otia tuta dedisti:
haec lege tu, Caesar; forsan et illa leges.


VI


Contiair Ausoniae procerum mitissimus aulae
Nerva : licet toto! nunc Helicone frui :

recta Fides, hilaris Clementia, cauta Potestas
iam redeunt; longi terga dedere Metus.

hoe populi gentesque tuae, pia Roma, precantur: 5
dux tibi sit semper talis, et iste diu.

macte animi, quem rarus habes, morumque tuorum,
quos Numa, quos hilaris possit habere Cato.

largiri, praestare, breves extendere census
et dare quae faciles vix tribuere dei, 10


1 tuto Friedl.


1 A quotation from Hor. Od. 1. i. 1.
* Horace, Varius, and Virgil.
322


BOOK XII. 1v-vi


IV


Wuart Maecenas, a knight sprung from ancestral
kings,) was to Flaccus and Varius and _ illustrious
Maro,” this chattering fame and antique records
shall tell the nations and provinces, Priscus Teren-
tius, that you were to me. You create my genius,
you create whatever power I seem to show; you
give me the free man’s right of idleness.


Vv


TueE too lengthy labour of my eleventh and tenth
books has been shortened, and has filed down my
work to a brief compass. Let idle men, to whom you
have given protected leisure, read a fuller number ;
do you, Caesar, read these: perhaps you will read
those too!%


VI


Miuvest of princes, Nerva‘* has attained the
Ausonian hall: we may enjoy now full draughts
of Helicon. Steadfast Honour, cheerful Clemency,
chastened Power now return; long lasting Terrors
have turned to flight. This prayer thy peoples and
nations make, duteous Rome—may thy Chief be ever
such as he, and he abide long! Blessings on thy
heart—the heart of few—and on thy manners, such
as a Numa, such as a Cato in cheerful mood might
possess! To be bounteous, to lend protection, to
enlarge narrow incomes, and to bestow gifts which
even the gracious gods have scarce given, is now


3 M. had published a selection from Bks, X. and XI. He
hopes Caesar will read the fuller work.
* He became Emperor 4.D. 96.


323


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nunc licet et fas est. sed tu sub principe duro
temporibusque malis ausus es esse bonus.


VII


Toro vertice quot gerit capillos
annos si.tot habet Ligeia, trima est.


Vill


TreRRARUM dea gentiumque Roma,

cui par est nihil et nihil secundum,

Traiani modo laeta cum futuros

tot per saecula conputaret annos,

et fortem iuvenemque Martiumque 5
in tanto duce militem videret,

dixit praeside gloriosa tali:

“ Parthorum proceres ducesque Serum,
Thraces, Sauromatae, Getae, Britanni,
possum ostendere Caesarem ; venite.” 10


IX


PatMA regit nostros, mitissime Caesar, Hiberos,
et placido fruitur Pax peregrina iugo.

ergo agimus laeti tanto pro munere grates:
misisti mores in loca nostra tuos.


xX


Haser Africanus miliens, tamen captat.
Fortuna multis dat nimis, satis nulli.
1 Under Domitian.


? Nerva’s successor, A.D. 98, in January.
* Trajan was born A.D. 52 at Italica, near Seville,


324


BOOK XII. vi-x


permitted and is right; but thou, under a hard
prince and in evil times,! didst have courage to be
good.


VII


Ir Ligeia has as many years as the number of hairs
she carries on the whole of her head, she is three
years old.


Vill


Wuart time Rome, Goddess of Earth and of the
nations, that has no peer and no second, was of late
joyfully counting Trajan’s? future years through so
many generations, and saw a soldier strong, young,
and warlike in so great a chief, glorying in such a
governor, she said: “ Ye rulers of the Parthians and
chiefs of the Seres, Thracians, Sauromatians, Getians,
Britons, I can show you a Caesar: come.”


IX


ad


Parma governs our® native Iberians, most gentle
Caesar, and Peace beyond the sea enjoys his placid
sway. Gladly therefore we pay thee thanks for a
boon so great: thou hast sent into our land the
manners that are thine.


Xx


ArricaNus possesses a hundred millions, yet he
angles‘ for more. Fortune to many gives too much,


enough to none.


4 As a captator or fortune-hunter : ¢f. 1x. 1xxx. vili.; x1. lv.


S25


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XI


ParTHeEnto dic, Musa, tuo nostroque salutem :
nam quis ab Aonio largius amne bibit ?

cuius Pimpleo lyra clarior exit ab antro?
quem plus Pierio de grege Phoebus amat ?

et si forte (sed hoc vix est sperare) vacabit, 5
tradat ut ipse duci carmina nostra roga,

quattuor et tantum timidumque brevemque libellum
commendet verbis “ Hunc tua Roma legit.”


XII


Omnia promittis cum tota nocte bibisti:
mane nihil praestas. Pollio, mane bibe.


XIl


Genus, Aucte, lucri divites habent iram :
odisse quam donare vilius constat.


XIV


Parcius utaris moneo rapiente veredo,
Prisce, nec in lepores tam violentus eas.
saepe satistecit praedae venator et acri
decidit excussus nec rediturus equo.
insidias et campus habet: nec fossa nec agger 5
nec sint saxa licet, fallere plana solent.
non derit qui tanta tibi spectacula praestet !
invidia fati sed leviore cadat.?


1 deerunt—praestent By. 2 cadant B.


1 The Emperor’s secretary: ¢f. v. vi. 2; x1. i. He was
murdered by the Praetorian guard in a.p. 97.


326


BOOK XII. xi—xiv


XI


Bear greeting, Muse, to your Parthenius! and
mine; for who more fully drinks of the Aonian
stream? Whose lyre with clearer tone sounds forth
from Pimpla’s grot? Whom of the Pierian band
loves Phoebus more? And if by chance—yet can
I searce so hope—he shall be at leisure, bid him offer
with his own hand my verses to our Chief, and in
four words only let him commend my shrinking and
brief little? book: “This thy Rome reads.”


XII


You promise everything when you have drunk all
night: in the morning you make good no promise.
Pollio, drink in the morning !


XIII


Ricu men, Auctus, regard anger as a kind of profit ;
to hate is cheaper than to give !%


XIV


Use more sparingly, I warn you, Priscus, your
tearing hunter, nor rush so violently after hares.
Often has the huntsman atoned to his prey, and,
flung from his mettled horse, fallen to mount no
more. Snares even a plain has: though there be no
ditch, nor mound, nor stones, level ground can oft de-
ceive. Never will you lack some one to offer you such
a sight, but let it be one whose fall brings lighter ~


2 Possibly the selection alluded to in x11. v.
8 Picking quarrels with clients saves you giving them
presents ; ¢f. II. xxxvii.


327


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


si te delectant animosa pericula, Tuscis

(tutior est virtus) insidiemur apris. 10
quid te frena iuvant temeraria? saepius illis,

Prisce, datum est equitem rumpere quam leporem.


XV


Qurpguw Parrhasia nitebat aula

donatum est oculis deisque nostris.

miratur Scythicas virentis auri

flammas Iuppiter et stupet superbi

regis delicias gravesque luxus: 5
haec sunt pocula quae decent Tonantem,
haec sunt quae Phrygium decent ministrum.
omnes cum love nunc sumus beati ;

at nuper (pudet, a pudet fateri)

omnes cum love pauperes eramus. 10


XVI


AvprxT1, Labiene, tres agellos ;
emisti, Labiene, tres cinaedos.
pedicas, Labiene, tres agellos.


XVII


QuareE tam multis a te, Laetine, diebus
non abeat febris quacris et usque gemis.

gestatur tecum pariter tecumque lavatur ;
cenat boletos, ostrea, sumen, aprum ;


1 The Palatine is called Parrhasian because Evander, who
settled on the P., came from Parrhasia, a district of Arcadia :
cf. Vu. lvi. 2 and xcix. 3.


328


BOOK XII. xiv—xvu


reproach of fate. If perilous hardihood delight you,
let us then—safer is such courage—lay snares for
Tuscan boars. Why does rash riding please you?
More often its issue, Priscus, is to break up the rider
rather than the hare.


XV


At. that glittered in the Palatine! hall has been
given to our view and to our gods.? Jupiter wonders
at the flashing of gold set with Scythian emeralds,
and is amazed at the toys and grievous luxury of a
haughty king?; here are cups that befit the Thun-
derer, here are such as befit his Phrygian cupbearer;
we all, together with Jove, are now rich; but of late
—'tis shame, ah, ’tis shame to confess it !—we all,
together with Jove, were poor.


XVI


You have sold, Labienus, three small fields; you
have bought, Labienus, three favourites. You defile,
Labienus, your three small fields.


XVII


You ask, Laetinus, why, after so many days, your
fever doesn’t leave you, and you are incessantly
groaning. It rides in your litter with you, and with
you it bathes; it dines on mushrooms, oysters,


2 Trajan dedicated the Imperial jewels to Jupiter Capito-


linus and other gods. ;
8 4¢. Domitian. M. chooses in ‘“‘king” the term most


offensive to a Roman ear. “ Ganymede.
379


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ebria Setino fit saepe et saepe Falerno
nec nisi per niveam Caecuba potat aquam ;

circumfusa rosis et nigra recumbit amomo,
dormit et in pluma purpureoque toro,

cum sit ei pulchre, cum tam bene vivat apud te,
ad Damam potius vis tua febris eat ?


XVIII


Dom tu forsitan inquietus erras
clamosa, Iuvenalis, in Subura

aut collem dominae teris Dianae ;
dum per limina te potentiorum
sudatrix toga ventilat vagumque
maior Caelius et minor fatigant :
me multos repetita post Decembres
accepit mea rusticumque fecit

auro Bilbilis et superba ferro.

hic pigri colimus labore dulci
Boterdum Plateamque (Celtiberis
haec sunt nomina crassiora terris)
ingenti fruor inproboque somno
quem nec tertia saepe rumpit hora,
et totum mihi nunc repono quidquid
ter denos vigilaveram per annos.
ignota est toga, sed datur petenti
rupta proxima vestis a cathedra.
surgentem focus excipit superba
vicini strue cultus iliceti,

multa vilica quem coronat olla.
venator sequitur, sed ille quem tu


33°


BOOK XII. xvii—xviit


sow’s paps, boar; it often gets drunk on Setine, and
often on Falernian, and drinks Caecuban only when
strained through snow-water; wreathed with roses
and dark with balsam it lies at board, and it sleeps
in down and ona purple bed. Seeing it is so well-
off, seeing it lives so comfortably with you, do you
wish your fever to migrate in preference to Dama?!


XVIII


White perchance you are restlessly wandering,
Juvenal, in the noisy Subura, or treading the hill of
Queen Diana; while, amid the thresholds of great
men, your sweaty toga fans you, and, as you stray,
the greater Caelian and the less? wearies you, me
my Bilbilis, sought once more after many Decem-
bers, has received and made a countryman, Bilbilis,
proud of its gold and iron. Here indolently, with
pleasant toil, I frequent Boterdus and Platea (such
in Celtiberian lands are the uncouth names!); I
enjoy a huge unconscionable sleep which often not
even the third hour breaks, and I pay myself now in
full for all my sleeplessness for thrice ten years.
Unknown is the toga; rather, when I ask for it, the
first covering at hand is given to me from a broken
chair. When I get up, a fire, served with a lordly
heap of logs from the neighbouring oak-wood, wel-
comes me, and my bailiff’s wife crowns it with many
a pot. Next comes my huntsman, and he too a


1 A slave (cf. Hor. Sat. 1. v. 18), or a beggar. A Greek
epigram (Pal. Anth. xi. 403), which M. may have remembered,
has the same idea as the last line of this epigram.

2 The Mons Caelius properly consisted of the Caelius and
the Caeliolus, a lesser height.


BST


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


secreta cupias habere silva:

dispensat pueris rogatque longos

levis ponere vilicus capillos. 25
sic me vivere, sic iuvat perire.


XIX


In thermis sumit lactucas, ova, lacertum,
et cenare domi se negat Aemilius.


XX


Quare non habeat, Fabulle, quaeris
uxorem Themison? habet sororem.


XXI


Monicipem rigidi quis te, Marcella, Salonis
et genitam nostris quis putet esse locis ?

tam rarum, tam dulce sapis. Palatia dicent,
audierint si te vel semel, esse suam ;

nulla nec in media certabit nata Subura 5
nec Capitolini collis alumna tibi ;

nec cito ridebit! peregrini gloria partus,
Romanam deceat quam magis esse nurum.

tu desiderium dominae mihi mitius urbis
esse iubes: Romam tu mihi sola facis. 10


XXII


Quam sit lusca Philaenis indecenter
vis dicam breviter tibi, Fabulle ?
esset caeca decentior Philaenis.


1 ridebit. parebit Munro.


1 cf. v. xlvii. What he takes at the baths is all he will get.
35*


BOOK XII. xvi—xxu


youth whom you would desire to consort with in
some secret grove. The unbearded bailiff gives my
slaves their rations, and asks permission to crop his
long hair. So I love to live, so I love to die.


XIX


At the warm baths Aemilius takes lettuce, eggs,
lizard-fish, and says that he is not dining at home !!


XX


Do you ask, Fabullus, why Themison has not got
awife? He has? a sister.


04 Oe


Wuo would think, Marcella? that you were a
burgess of iron-tempering‘* Salo, who, that you
were born in my native land? So rare, so sweet is
your quality! The Palatine will declare, should it
but hear you once, that you are its own; nor will
a daughter of mid Subura, nor a nursling of the
Capitoline hill, vie with you; nor soon shall the
fairest of foreign birth laugh at one whom it would
more befit to be a Roman bride. You bid my long-
ing for the Queen City be allayed: you by yourself
make a Rome for me!


XXII


Wovutp you have me say shortly how uncomely
one-eyed Philaenis is, Fabullus? If she were blind
Philaenis would be comelier. 2

2 Used ambiguously in two senses. As to one sense: cf.
Quis heri Chrysidem habuit? Ter. And. 85; and line 23 of
Ep. xviii. of this Book. So éxew in Grk.: Thue. vi. 54.

3 of. Intr. to vol. i. p. xi, and x11. xxxi. * ef. 1. xlix. 12.


333


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXIII


Denrtisus atque comis (nec te pudet) uteris emptis.
quid facies oculo, Laelia? non emitur.


XXIV


O 1ucunpa, covinne, solitudo,

carruca magis essedoque gratum

facundi mihi munus Aeliani !

hic mecum licet, hic, Iubate,! quidquid

in buccam tibi venerit loquaris. 5
non rector Libyci niger caballi

succinctus neque cursor antecedit ; =
nusquam est mulio: mannuli tacebunt.

© si conscius esset hic Avitus,

aurem non ego tertiam timerem. 10
totus quam bene sic dies abiret !


XXV


Cum rogo te nummos sine pignore, ‘ Non habeo’
inquis ;
idem, si pro me spondet agellus, habes.
quod mihi non credis veteri, Telesine, sodali,
credis coliculis arboribusque meis ?
ecce reum Carus te detulit: adsit agellus,
exilii comitem quaeris: agellus eat. 5


1 Jubate Postgate, iwvate codd.


1 ef. Pal. Anth. xi. 310.


* Stertinius Avitus, who had placed a bust of M. in his
library: cf. 1x. Intr. Ep,


334


BOOK XII. xxui—xxv


XXII


You use, and you are not ashamed, teeth and hair
that you have bought. What will you do for an
eye, Laelia? That cannot be bought.!


XXIV


O ruou chaise, that affordest pleasant solitude, the
gift to me of eloquent Aelianus, more grateful than
travelling-coach and curricle! Here at my side, here

-may you, Jubatus, say whatever rises to your lips. No
black driver of. Libyan steed, nor runner with upgirt
loins goes before; nowhere is any muleteer; the
nags will be silent. Oh, if Avitus? were here to
share our secrets, I should dread no third ear! How
well thus would a whole day pass!


XXV


Wuen I ask you for money without security, “I
haven’t any,” you say ; all the same, if my little farm
pledge itself on my behalf, you have. The credit
you will not give me, your old comrade, Telesinus,
do you give my cabbages and trees? See, Carus?
has informed against you: let my little farm appear
for you; you ask for a companion in exile:* let my
little farm go with you.


3 Mettius Carus, a favourite dwarf of Nero’s and an in-
former: Juv. i. 36. The name is here put generally for an


informer.
4 To follow a friend into exile was the highest proof of


friendship ; ¢f, vu. xliv, and xlv.


335


»


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXVI


SExaGENA teras cum limina mane senator,
esse tibi videor desidiosus eques,

quod non a prima discurram luce per urbem
et referam lassus basia mille domum.

sed tu, purpureis ut des nova nomina fastis
aut Nomadum gentes Cappadocumve regas :

at mihi, quem cogis medios abrumpere somnos
et matutinum ferre patique lutum,

quid petitur? rupta cum pes vagus exit aluta
et subitus crassae decidit imber aquae

nec venit ablatis clamatus verna lacernis,
accedit gelidam servus ad auriculam,

et ‘ Rogat ut secum cenes Laetorius’ inquit.
viginti nummis? non ego: malo famem

quam sit cena mihi, tibi sit provincia merces,
et faciamus idem nec mereamur idem.


XXVII


A LATRONIBUS esse te fututam
dicis, Saenia: sed negant latrones.


XXVIII


Poro ego sextantes, tu potas, Cinna, deunces:
et quereris quod non, Cinna, bibamus idem ?


10


15


— SS


1 a.e, become a consul. Consul’s names were entered in
the Fasti in the Temple of Janus: cf. vii. Ixvi. 12; x1, iv. 5.
* ““Negant te impulsam ab iis; vel negant hoc, aiuntque


te inhonestius quippiam passam esse”: of. XII. xxxv.,


336


BOOK XII. xxvi-xxvin


XXMI-


Anasmucu as you, though a senator, tread innumer-
able thresholds in the morning, I, a knight, appear
to you slothful because I do not scour the city
from early dawn, and wearily bring home with me
a thousand kisses. But you do this that you may
add a new name to the purple records,! or be sent
to govern Numidian or Cappadocian tribes. But I,
whom you compel to break off my slumber in the
middle, and to bear and endure the morning mud,
what do I look for? When my protruding foot gapes
out of a broken shoe, and a sudden downpour of
heavy rain falls, and my home-born slave, who has
taken away my cloak, does not appear when I bawl
for him, a slave approaches my frozen ear and “ Lae-
torius asks you to dine with him,” he says. For
twenty sesterces a head? Not I: I prefer starva-
tion to getting a dinner as reward, while you get a
province, and to our performing the same services
and not earning the same recompense,


XXVII


You say, Saenia, you were raped by footpads ; but
the footpads deny it.?


XXVIII


I prink cups containing two measures; you, Cinna,
drink cups holding eleven. And do you then com-
plain, Cinna, that we don’t drink the same wine? ?


3 It was a vulgar habit of some hosts to give their guests
inferior food or wine to what the host and his particular
friends ate or drank: ¢f. vi. xi. 2; Plin. Hp. 1. vi. 2. See
on the subject generally Juv. v. In the epigram in the text
the host excuses himself; ‘‘ You cannot expect the best wine
if you drink so much.” 337


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXIX


Hermocenes tantus mapparum, Pontice, fur est
quantus nummorum vix, puto, Massa fuit ;

tu licet observes dextram teneasque sinistram,
inveniet mappam qua ratione trahat :

cervinus gelidum sorbet sic halitus anguem ; 5
casuras alte sic rapit Iris aquas.

nuper cum Myrino peteretur missio laeso,
subduxit mappas quattuor Hermogenes ;

cretatam praetor cum vellet mittere mappam,
praetori mappam surpuit Hermogenes. 10

attulerat mappam nemo dum furta timentur ;
mantele a mensa surpuit Hermogenes.

hoc quoque si derit, medios discingere lectos
mensarumque pedes non timet Hermogenes.

quamvis non modico caleant spectacula sole, 15
vela reducuntur cum venit Hermogenes.

festinant trepidi substringere carbasa nautae,
ad portum quotiens paruit Hermogenes.

linigeri fugiunt calvi sistrataque turba,
inter adorantes cum stetit Hermogenes. 20

ad cenam Hermogenes mappam non attulit umquam,
a cena semper rettulit Hermogenes.


1 Hermes was the thief among the gods: cf. Hor. Od. 1.x. 7;
accordingly M. invents the name ‘‘ Sprung of Hermes.”

? Stealing napkins was common, and was satirised by
Catullus (Cat. xii.).

3 Probably Baebius Massa, a mountebank of Nero’s: Schol.
on Juv. i. 35. He was, on the accusation of the younger
Pliny, condemned a.p. 93 for embezzlement when proconsul
of Hispania Baetica.

4 The left was the thievish hand (Cat. xlvii. 1; Ov. Met.
xiii. 110 (natasque ad furta sinistras)) ; hence M.’s distinction
between watching and holding,


338


BOOK XII. xxix.


XXIX


Hermocenss! is as great a thief, Ponticus, of nap-
kins? as I hardly imagine even Massa® was of money.
You may watch his right hand and hold his left,* he
will discover some method of withdrawing a napkin.
So a stag’s breath sucks up a clammy snake,’ so Iris®
plucks up the waters that will afterwards fall from
on high. Of late when a discharge was sought for
wounded Myrinus, Hermogenes filched four nap-
kins ;7 when the praetor wanted to throw his white
napkin,’ Hermogenes pilfered his napkin from the
praetor, When no one had brought a napkin, in
fear of theft, Hermogenes pilfered the table-cloth
from off the table. If this, too, is not to be found,
Hermogenes is not afraid to strip the valance from
round the couches and the feet of the tables. Al-
though the arena is burning under an immoderate
sun, the awning is drawn back when Hermogenes
arrives. Sailors in a panic hurry to brail up their
canvas whenever Hermogenes has appeared at the
port. Linen-clad, bald priests and the company with
the timbrels® fly when Hermogenes has taken his
stand among the worshippers. To a dinner Hermo-
genes has never brought .a napkin: from a dinner
Hermogenes has always carried a napkin home.

5 According to Pliny (NV. H. viii. 50) stags with their breath
drew serpents out of their holes: ¢f. also Lucr. vi. 765.


6 The rainbow.

7 Handkerchiefs were waved when a discharge or quarter
was wished by the spectators for a gladiator: cf. Lib.
Spect. xxix. 3.

8 As a signal for the starting of the races in the circus.
The praetor presided. : ;

® The priests and worshippers of Isis. The priests and

‘initiates wore linen, and their heads were shaved: Juv. vi.


533.
339


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXX


Stccus, sobrius est Aper ; quid ad me?
servum sic ego laudo, non amicum.


XXXI


Hoc nemus, hi fontes, haec textilis umbra supini
palmitis, hoc riguae ductile flumen aquae,
prataque, nec bifero cessura rosaria Paesto,
quodque viret Iani mense nec alget holus,
quaeque natat clusis anguilla domestica lymphis, 5
quaeque gerit similes candida turris aves,
munera sunt dominae : post septima lustra reverso
has Marcella domos parvaque regna dedit.
si mihi Nausicaa patrios concederet hortos,
Alcinoo possem dicere “ Malo meos.”’ 10


XXXII


O Iutiarum dedecus Kalendarum,

vidi, Vacerra, sarcinas tuas, vidi ;

quas non retentas pensione pro bima
portabat uxor rufa crinibus septem

et cum sorore cana mater ingenti. 5
Furias putavi nocte Ditis emersas.

has tu priores frigore et fame siccus

et non recenti pallidus magis buxo

Irus tuorum temporum sequebaris.


migrare clivom crederes Aricinum. 10

1 Paestum in Campania was celebrated for roses: cf. vi.

lxxx. 6. ‘‘Twice-bearing” was a common epithet: Verg.
G. iv. 119.


2 A Spanish lady to whom he also addresses x1. xxi,
340


BOOK XIt. xxx-xxxm


XXX


Aper is abstemious, sober: what is that to me?
A slave I praise so, not a friend.


XXXI


Tuts grove, these founts, this matted shade of
arching vine, this conduit of refreshing water, and
the meadows, and the beds of rose that will not
yield to twice-bearing Paestum,! and the pot-herb
in January green, nor seared by frost;:and the tame
eel that swims in its shut tank, and the white dove-
cote that harbours birds as white—these are my
lady’s gifts: to me returned after seven lustres has
Marcella? given this house and tiny realm. If Nau-
sicaa were to yield me her sire’s gardens, I could say
to Alcinous? “I prefer my own.”


XXXII


O you disgrace of July’s kalends,* I have seen
your traps, Vacerra, I have seen them, the lot that
was not distrained upon for two years’ rent, and
- which your wife carried, red-headed with her seven
curls, and your white-headed mother, together with
your hulking sister. Furies were they, methought,
emerged from the night of Dis! These two ladies
in front, you, parched with cold and hunger, and
paler than faded boxwood, the Irus® of your day,
followed: you would have thought Aricia’s hill ® was


3 «The gardens of Alcinous,” king of Phaeacia, was pro-


verbial. 4 Quarter-day.
5 The beggar in the Odyssey who was beaten by Ulysses.


6 Where beggars took their stand : cf. 11. xix. 3.
341


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ibat tripes grabatus et bipes mensa

et cum lucerna corneoque cratere
matella curto rupta latere meiebat ;
foco virenti suberat amphorae cervix ;
fuisse gerres aut inutiles maenas

odor inpudicus urcei fatebatur,

qualis marinae vix sit aura piscinae.
nec quadra derat casei Telosatis,
quadrima nigri nec corona pulei
calvaeque restes alioque caepisque,
nec plena turpi matris olla resina
Summemmianae qua pilantur uxores.
quid quaeris aedes vilicosque derides,
habitare gratis, o Vacerra, cum possis ?
haec sarcinarum pompa convenit ponti.


XXXII


‘Ur pueros emeret Labienus vendidit hortos.
nil nisi ficetum nune Labienus habet.


342


XXXIV


Tricinta mihi quattuorque messes
tecum, si memini, fuere, Juli.
quarum dulcia mixta sunt amaris
sed iucunda tamen fuere plura ;
et si calculus omnis huc et illuc
diversus bicolorque digeratur,
vincet candida turba nigriorem.
si vitare voles acerba quaedam

et tristis animi cavere morsus,
nulli te facias nimis sodalem:
gaudebis minus et minus dolebis,


15


20


25


10


BOOK XII. xxxi—xxxiv


shifting! There went along a three-legged truckle-
bed and a two-legged table, and, alongside a lantern
and bow] of cornel, a cracked chamberpot was making
water through its broken side; the neck of a flagon
was lying under a brazier green with verdigris; that
_ there were salted gudgeons, too, or worthless sprats,
the obscene stench of a jug confessed—such a stench
as a whiff of a marine fish-pond would scarcely equal.
Nor was there wanting a section of Tolosan cheese,
nor a four-year-old chaplet of black pennyroyal, and
ropes shorn of their garlic and onions, nor your
mother’s pot full of foul resin, the depilatory of
_ dames under the walls. Why do you look for a house
and scoff at rent-collectors when you can lodge for
nothing, O Vacerra? This procession of your traps
befits Beggars’ bridge.


XXXII


To purchase slaves, Labienus sold gardens. Now
Labienus has nothing but a clump of figs.


XXXIV


TuirTY summers and four there were which, if I
mind me, I spent, Julius,? with you. Thereof the
sweets were blended with the bitters, but yet were
the pleasant things the more ; and if all the pebbles
were sorted, on this side and on that, into two heaps
of diverse colour, the white heap will outnumber
that more dark. If you wish to shun some bitter-
nesses and to beware of sorrows that gnaw the
heart, to no man make yourself too much a comrade:
your joy will be less and less will be your grief.

1 A play on the two meanings of ficus : cf. 1. Ixv. ; iv. lii.

2 His friend and namesake Julius Martialis.


343


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXV


Tamouam simpliciter mecum, Callistrate, vivas,
dicere percisum te mihi saepe soles.

non es tam simplex quam vis, Callistrate, credi.
nam quisquis narrat talia plura tacet.


XXXVI


Lieras quattuor aut duas amico

algentemque togam brevemque laenam,
interdum aureolos manu crepantis,

possint ducere qui duas Kalendas,

quod nemo nisi tu, Labulle, donas, 5
non es, crede mihi, bonus. quid ergo?

ut verum loquar, optimus malorum es.

Pisones Senecasque Memmiosque

et Crispos mihi redde, sed priores:

fies protinus ultimus bonorum. 10
vis cursu pedibusque gloriari ?

Tigrim vince levemque Passerinum :

nulla est gloria praeterire asellos.


XXXVII


NasutTus nimium cupis videri.
nasutum volo, nolo polyposum.


XXXVIII


Hunc qui femineis noctesque diesque cathedris
incedit tota notus in urbe nimis,


Weft iv. xlviii; 1.
2 Racehorses: ¢f. vil. vii. 10.


344


BOOK XII. xxxv—xxxvur


XXXV


As if you lived with me on the frankest terms,
Callistratus, you are used often to tell me you have
been debauched.! You are not so frank'as you would
have it believed, Callistratus; for a man who blabs
of such things, conceals more.


XXXVI


Four pounds of plate, or two, to a friend, and a
shivering toga and short cloak, sometimes sovereigns
that chink in your hand, sufficient to last over two
kalends—because no one but you, Labullus, makes
such presents, you are not, believe me, good at giving.
What then? To say the truth, you are the best of a
bad lot. Give me back the Pisos, and the Senecas,
and the Memmiuses, and the Crispuses—but those
of former days—you will at once become the worst
of a good lot. Would you pride yourself on your
running and speed of foot? Beat Tigris and nimble
Passarinus:2 there is no glory in outstripping
donkeys.


XXXVII


You are over-anxious to appear aman with a nose.?
I approve of a man with a nose: I object to one with
a polypus.
XXXVIII


Here is a fellow who day and night parades in
women’s chairs*—one notorious through the whole


3 ¢.e. a fine critic: cf. I. iii. 63; x1. ii. 1. ‘‘ Don’t overdo
it,” says M.; ‘your critical faculty has become a disease.”

4 Effeminate men often used the woman’s chair asa sedan:
of. X. xiii. 1; Juv. i. 65.


VOL. Il. m 345


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


crine nitens, niger unguento, perlucidus ostro,
ore tener, latus pectore, crure glaber,

uxori qui saepe tuae comes inprobus haeret, 5
non est quod timeas, Candide: non futuit.


XXXIX


Opi te quia bellus es, Sabelle.

res est putida, bellus et Sabellus;
bellum denique malo quam Sabellum.
tabescas utinam, Sabelle, belle!


XL


Mentiris, credo: recitas mala carmina, laudo:
cantas, canto: bibis, Pontiliane, bibo:

pedis, dissimulo: gemma vis ludere, vincor :
res una est sine me quam facis, et taceo.

nil tamen omnino praestas mihi. “Mortuus” inquis 5
“accipiam bene te.” nil volo: sed morere.


?


XLI


Non est, Tucca, satis quod es gulosus:
et dici cupis et cupis videri.


XLII


Barsatus rigido nupsit Callistratus Afro
hae qua lege viro nubere virgo solet.


1 Or ‘I prefer war ” (Housman).


346


BOOK XII, xxxvi—xiu


city—sleek of hair, dark with unguent, bright with
purple, languishing of eye, broad of breast, smooth
of shank, who often clings to your wife as an offi-
cious attendant. You need not be alarmed, Can-
didus: he is no practitioner.


XXXIX
I perest you because you are a pretty fellow,
Sabellus. ’Tis a disgusting object, and so_ is


pretty Sabellus. In a word, I prefer a pretty fellow!
to Sabellus. May you go off into a pretty decline,
Sabellus.?


XL


You tell fibs, I believe you; you recite poor poems,
I praise them; you sing, I sing; you drink, Pontili-
anus, I drink; you break wind, I pretend not to
hear; you want to play at draughts, I am beaten;
there is one thing you do without my privity, and I
hold my tongue. Yet you guarantee me nothing at
all. “ When I am dead,” you say, “I will treat you
well.” I want nothing—nevertheless die!


XLI


Ir is not enough, Tucca, that you are a glutton:
you want to be called one, and you want to appear
one.


XLII


Bearpen Callistratus as a bride wedded the brawny
Afer in the usual form as when a virgin weds a
2 The ep. is untranslatable in English so as to keep up the

puns on the syllable “‘ bell.”
347


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


praeluxere faces, velarunt flammea vultus,
nec tua defuerunt verba, Talasse, tibi.
- dos etiam dicta est. nondum tibi, Roma, videtur 5
hoc satis ? expectas numquid ut et pariat ?


XLII


Facunpos mihi de libidinosis

legisti nimium, Sabelle, versus,

quales nec Didymi sciunt puellae

nec molles Elephantidos libelli.

sunt illic Veneris novae figurae, 5
quales perditus audeat fututor,

praestent et taceant quid exoleti,

quo symplegmate quinque copulentur,

qua plures teneantur a catena,

extinctam liceat quid ad lucernam. 10
tanti non erat esse te disertum.


XLIV


Unice, cognato iunctum mihi sanguine nomen
qui geris et studio corda propinqua meis;
carmina cum facias soli cedentia fratri,
pectore non minor es sed pietate prior.
Lesbia cum lepido te posset amare Catullo, 5
te post Nasonem blanda Corinna sequi.
nec derant Zephyri si te dare vela iuvaret;
sed tu litus amas. hoc quoque fratris habes.


1 cf. the nuptials of Nero and Pythagoras described by
Tac. Ann. xv. 37.


2 Unknown.


348


BOOK XII. xii—xtiv
husband. The torches shone before him, a wedding-
veil disguised his face, nor were the words of thy
song, God of Marriage, unheard. A dower even was
arranged. Do you not yet think, O Rome, this is
enough? Are you waiting also for an accouchement?!


XLII


Tu nrhai letto, O Sabello, dei versi troppo facondi
di cose libidinose, che né le ragazze di Didimo?
sanno, né gli effeminati Elefantidi® libri. Qui vi
sono nuove figure di venere, che il piu scellerato
immembratore avventurebbe ; che i vecchi libertini
fanno e tacciono; con qual accoppiamento cinque
sono legati; da qual catena parecchi sono tenuti,
qual cosa é permessa, estinta la lucerna. La materia
non era si sublime per comparire eloquente.


XLIV


Unicus,‘ that bearest a name knit to mine by kin-
dred blood, and a heart close allied to my studies,
though thou shapest lays that yield the palm to thy
brother alone, yet in genius art thou not less than
he, albeit in mutual devotion greater. Lesbia might
have loved thee as well as witty Catullus; to thee,
after Naso, might winsome Corinna have clung.
Winds failed not didst thou wish to spread thy sails ;
but thou lovest the shore: herein, too, art thou like
thy brother.

3 Elephantis was a Greek poetess of the period who wrote
lascivious poems. The Emperor Tiberius had these at his


villa at Capreae as guidebooks to his lusts: Suet. 7%b. xliii.
4 «Possibly a Valerius Unicus, only mentioned here.”


349


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLV


Haenina tibi pelle contegenti
nudae tempora verticemque calvae
festive tibi, Phoebe, dixit ille

qui dixit caput esse calceatum.


XLVI


VenpunT carmina Gallus et Lupercus.
sanos, Classice, nunc nega poetas.


XLVII


Dirricius facilis, iucundus acerbus es idem :
nec tecum possum vivere nec sine te.


XLVIII


Boteros et aprum si tamquam vilia ponis
et non esse putas haec mea vota, volo:
si fortunatum fieri me credis et. heres
vis scribi propter quinque Lucrina, vale.
lauta tamen cena est: fateor, lautissima, sed cras
nil erit, immo hodie, protinus immo nihil,
quod sciat infelix damnatae spongea virgae
vel quicumque canis iunctaque testa viae:
mullorum leporumque et suminis exitus hic est.
sulpureusque color carnificesque pedes.


1 As to such a covering cf. xiv. 1.
° The last line is borrowed from Ovid, Am. 111. xi. 39.


5


10


* Used for sanitary purposes. Seneca (Hp. 70) tells the
story of a bestiarius who asked leave to retire to the latrine


and choked himself with the sponge.
35°


~


BOOK XII. xiv—xivin


XLV


As you cover with a kid’s skin! your temples and
the crown of your bald pate, he made a happy re-
mark to you, Phoebus, who told you your head was
well shod.


XLVI


Gat.us and Lupercus sell their poems: now, Clas-
sicus, tell us poets are not sane!


XLVII


Dirricutr and easy-going, pleasant and churlish,
you are at the same time: I can neither live with
you nor without you.?


‘


XLVIII


Ir you serve me mushrooms and boar as your usual
fare, and don’t imagine that these are what I pray
for, I am willing to come; if you believe I am be-
coming wealthy, and you want to be written down
my heir in return for five Lucrine oysters, good-
bye! Yet your dinner is sumptuous: I confess, most
sumptuous, but to-morrow ‘twill be nought, nay to-
day, nay a moment hence, nought that the luckless
sponge at the end of a degraded mop-stick? would
discover, or any dog,’ or crock by the highway.’ Of
mullets, and hares, and sow’s paps, this is the re-
sult—a_ bilious complexion and torturing feet. No


4 Qui ad vomitum accurrit—-Schrev. :
5 Set by the roadside as a urinal: ¢f. vi. xciii. 2.


351


4


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


non Albana mihi sit comissatio tanti
nec Capitolinae pontificumque dapes ;
inputet ipse deus nectar mihi, fiet acetum
et Vaticani perfida vappa cadi.
convivas alios cenarum quaere magister 15
quos capiant mensae regna superba tuae:
me meus ad subitas invitet amicus ofellas :
haec mihi quam possum reddere cena placet.


XLIX


CriniTaE Line paedagoge turbae,

rerum quem dominum vocat suarum

et credit cui Postumilla dives

gemmas, aurea, vina, concubinos,

sic te perpetua fide probatum 5
nulli non tua praeferat patrona:

succurras misero, precor, furori

et serves aliquando neglegenter

illos qui male cor meum perurunt,

quos et noctibus et diebus opto 10
in nostro cupidus sinu videre,

formosos niveos pares gemellos

grandes, non pueros, sed uniones,


L


Dapnnonas, platanonas et aerios pityonas
et non unius balnea solus habes,

et tibi centenis stat porticus alta columnis
calcatusque tuo sub pede lucet onyx,


1 Such as Domitian gave at his Alban villa.
2 Banquets by the Epulones to Jupiter Capitolinus, or
those given by the College of Pontiffs: as to the latter cf.


352


BOOK XII. xtvuir-r ©


Alban revel! would be worth it to me, or Capitoline
and Pontifical feasts;? should the God himself ac-
count me his debtor for nectar, it will become vinegar
and the deceptive vapidity of a Vatican’ jar. Look
out, as lord of the banquet, for other guests whom
the royal magnificence of your table may attract:
as for me, let my friend invite me to hasty collops.
The dinner I like is the dinner | can return.


XLIX


Linus, guardian of a long-haired troop, whom
rich Postumilla calls the: master of her fortune, and
to whom she entrusts gems, gold plate, wines, para-
mours; so may your patroness prefer none other to
you who are proved by constant fidelity; come, I
pray you, to the aid of my wretched frenzy, and
sometimes guard negligently those that sadly con-
sume my heart, those that night and day I long in
eagerness to see in my bosom, beautiful, snowy-
white, a pair, twins, big—I mean not boys, but
pearls.


L


Lauret-groves, plane-groves, and aery pine-groves,
and a bath not made for one, you keep to yourself,
and your colonnade stands high on a hundred columns,
and trodden under your foot gleams the alabaster ;
Hor. Od. 11. xiv. 28. Macrobius (Sat. iii. 13) describes the


courses of a pontifical feast given by Cecilius Metellus, who
was pontiff before Julius Caesar. SChicc Vile Silene


303


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


pulvereumque fugax hippodromon ungula plaudit 5
et pereuntis aquae fluctus ubique sonat ;

atria longa patent. sed nec cenantibus usquam
nec somno locus est. quam bene non habitas !


LI


Tam saepe nostrum decipi Fabullinum
miraris, Aule ? semper homo bonus tiro est.


Lil


Tempora Pieria solitus redimire corona
nec minus attonitis vox celebrata reis,
hic situs est, hic ille tuus, Sempronia, Rufus,
cuius et ipse tui flagrat amore cinis.
dulcis in Elysio narraris fabula campo 5
et stupet ad raptus Tyndaris ipsa tuos:
tu melior quae deserto raptore redisti,
illa virum voluit nec repetita sequi.
audit! et Iliacos ridet Menelaus amores:
absolvit Phrygium vestra rapina Parim. 10
accipient olim cum te loca laeta piorum,
non erit in Stygia notior umbra domo:
non aliena videt sed amat Proserpina raptas:
iste tibi dominam conciliabit amor.


1 audet—ridet Stephenson, ridet—audit codd., ridet ut
Postgate.


354


BOOK XII. t-Lu


and the flying hoof makes ring your dusty drive, and
on every side babbles the water of a stream crossing
your ground; your halls lie open without end. But
nowhere is there a place for dining or for sleep
How well you are—not housed !


LI


Do you wonder, Aulus, that our friend Fabullinus
is so often taken in? A good man is always a
greenhorn.


LII


He who was wont to bind his temples with the
Muses’ crown, whose eloquence was no less famed
among dismayed defendants, here, here he lies, Sem-
pronia, who was once thy own Rufus, whose very
ashes glow with love for thee. Sweetly mid Elysian
fields is thy story told, and dazed is even Tyndarus’
daughter! at thy ravishment; thy fame is the hap-
pier, for, quitting thy ravisher, thou didst return;
she, even when sought again, would not join her
spouse. Menelaus? listens to a Trojan love-tale and
smiles: the story of your rape makes Phrygian
Paris guiltless. When the joyous abodes of pious
souls shall some day receive thee, no shade more
famed will dwell in the house of Styx; Proserpina
looks not strangely on the ravished,? but loves
them: that love thou hast shown shall win thy


Queen’s good-will.


1 Helen of Troy.
2 King of Sparta, and husband of Helen. The meaning


seems to be that the charm of the story of these two would
make even M. pardon Paris.
3 For she was herself carried off by Pluto.


355


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LI


Nummr cum tibi sint opesque tantae

quantas civis habet, Paterne, rarus

largiris nihil incubasque gazae

ut magnus draco quem canunt poetae
custodem Scythici fuisse luci. 5
sed causa, ut memoras et ipse iactas,

dirae filius est rapacitatis.

ecquid tu fatuos rudesque quaeris

inludas quibus auferasque mentem ?

huic semper vitio pater fuisti. 10


LIV


CrineE ruber, niger ore, brevis pede, lumine laesus,
rem magnam praestas, Zoile, si bonus es.


LV


Gratis qui dare vos iubet, puellae,
insulsissimus inprobissimusque est.

gratis ne date, basiate gratis.

hoc Aegle negat, hoc avara vendit

(sed vendat: bene basiare quantum est!) 5
hoc vendit quoque nec levi rapina:1!

aut libram petit illa Cosmiani

aut binos quater a nova moneta,

ne sint basia muta, ne maligna,

ne clusis aditum neget labellis. 10
humane tamen hoc facit: recusat 2

gratis quae dare basium, sed unum,

gratis lingere non recusat Aegle.


1 5, 6 om. 8, post 8 transp. Friedl.
2 recusat Housman, sed unum codd.


356


BOOK XII. uim-tv


LII


TuHoueH you have moneys and wealth such as only
a citizen here and there owns, you bestow nothing,
Paternus, and brood over your treasure like the great
dragon that poets sing of as guardian once of the
Scythian grove.! But the reason, as you report,
and yourself repeat, is a son of dreadful rapacious-
ness. Are you looking, then, for simpletons and
ignoramuses to delude and rob of sense? To this
vice you have always been father.


LIV


Or hair red, swarthy of face, short of foot, of eye
blear, you show yourself to be a portent, Zoilus,
if you are virtuous.?


LV


He who bids you, girls, give your favours for no-
thing, is a most foolish and impudent fellow. Do
not give them for nothing, kiss for nothing. This
Aegle refuses, this in her greed she sells. But let
her sell it: how precious is a good kiss! This she
sells, I say, and for no small plunder too; she asks
for either a pound of Cosmian unguent, or four times
two gold coins of the new mintage, that her kisses
may not be silent ones or grudgingly given, that she
may not with shut lips deny their approach. Yet
this one thing she does graciously; Aegle, who
refuses to give a kiss, a single kiss, for nothing,
does not refuse to for nothing.


1 Guarding the golden fleece.
2 7.e. Heaven has marked you as one to be avoided.


357


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LVI


AgGroras uno decies aut saepius anno,

nec tibi sed nobis hoc, Polycharme, nocet :
nam quotiens surgis, soteria poscis amicos.

sit pudor: aegrota iam, Polycharme, semel.


LVII


Cur saepe sicci parva rura Nomenti

laremque villae sordidum petam, quaeris?

nec cogitandi, Sparse, nee quiescendi

in urbe locus est pauperi. negant vitam

ludi magistri mane, nocte pistores, 5
aerariorum marculi die toto;

hine otiosus sordidam quatit mensam
Neroniana nummularius massa,

illine palucis! malleator Hispanae

tritum nitenti fuste verberat saxum 3 10
nec turba cessat entheata Bellonae,

nec fasciato naufragus loquax trunco,

a matre doctus nec rogare Iudaeus,

nec sulpuratae lippus institor mercis.
numerare pigri damna qui potest somni, 15
dicet quot aera verberent manus urbis,

cum secta Colcho Luna vapulat rhombo.

tu, Sparse, nescis ista nec potes scire,


1 palucis Friedl., balucis Turnebus, paludis By, pollicent T.


1 4.e. either coins of light weight introduced by Nero, who
debased the coinage, or small coins bearing the head of the
emperor stamped — in a particular way to distinguish them,
The nummularius had a heap (massa) of these.

2 Palux is the smaller gold found by washing in Spain, not
large enough to constitute a nugget: Plin. N.A. xxxiii, 21.


358


BOOK XII. tvi-tvu


LVI


You are ill in a single year ten times, or oftener,
and this does not hurt you, but it hurts us, Poly-
charmus; for every time you rise from your bed you
claim congratulatory gifts from your friends. Be
moderate : now be ill, Polycharmus, once for all.


LVII


Do you ask why I often resort to my small fields
in arid Nomentum, and the unkempt household of
my villa? Neither for thought, Sparsus, nor for
quiet is there any place in the city for a poor man.
Schoolmasters in the morning do not let you live;
before daybreak, bakers; the hammers of the copper-
smiths all day. On this side the money-changer
idly rattles on his dirty table Nero’s coins,! on that
the hammerer of Spanish gold-dust? beats his well-
worn stone with burnished mallet; and Bellona’s
raving throng does not rest, nor the canting ship-
wrecked seaman with his swathed body,’ nor the
Jew taught by his mother to beg, nor the blear-eyed
huckster of sulphur wares. He who can count the
losses lazy sleep must bear will say how many
brass pots and pans city hands clash when the
eclipsed moon is being assailed by the Colchian
magic-wheel.4 You, Sparsus, know nothing of these
things, and cannot know, luxurious as you are in your

3 So pretending he had lost a limb. Some however under-
stand fasciato trunco as a fragment of the wrecked vessel, or
a picture of the pale: perhaps painted on a plank, swathed
in a covering: of. Pers. i. 88; Juv. xiv. 302.

4 An eclipse was attributed to witches, and the clashing


of brass vessels was in order to drive away evil demons: ¢f.
Theoer, ii. 36; Tac. Ann. i. 28.


359


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


Petilianis delicatus in regnis,

cui plana summos despicit domus montis, 20
et rus in urbe est vinitorque Romanus
(nec in Falerno colle maior autumnus)
intraque limen latus essedo cursus,

et in profundo somnus et quies nullis
offensa linguis, nec dies nisi admissus,
nos transeuntis risus excitat turbae,

et ad cubile est Roma. taedio fessis
dormire quotiens libuit, imus ad villam.


bo
On


LVIII


ANCILLARIOLUM tua te vocat uxor, et ipsa
lecticariola est. estis, Alauda, pares.


LIX


Tantum dat tibi Roma basiorum

post annos modo quindecim reverso

quantum Lesbia non dedit Catullo.

te vicinia tota, te pilosus

hircoso premit osculo colonus ; 5
hine instat tibi textor, inde fullo,

hine sutor modo pelle basiata,

hine menti dominus periculosi,

hince tdexiocholusf,! inde lippus

fellatorque recensque cunnilingus. 10
iam tanti tibi non fuit redire.


1 dexiocholus et B, dewiocolus KH, dexioculus A, istine dexio-
cholus Lindsay, nec deest hinc oculis et Heins.


1 .e. a palace that had once belonged to Petilius, perhaps
ee P. Cerealis who had been in a.p. 71 the governor of
ritain.


360


BOOK XII. tvi—-Lix


Petilian! domain whose ground floor looks down on
the hill tops, and where you have country in the
town, and a Roman for your vine-dresser—not on
Falernian hills is there a greater crop—and within
your boundary a broad drive for your curricle, and
unfathomed depths of slumber, and a. stillness
broken by no tongues, and no daylight unless you
let it in. As for me, the laughter of the passing
throng wakes me, and Rome is at my bed’s head.
Whenever, worn out with worry, I wish to sleep, I
go to my villa.


LVIII


Your wife calls you an admirer of servant maids,?
and she herself is an admirer of litter-bearers. You
are a pair, Alauda.


LIX


Rome gives you as many kisses, when after fifteen
years you have just returned, as Lesbia never gave
Catullus.2 Upon you all the neighbourhood presses,
upon you the bristly farmer with a kiss like a he-
goat's; on this side the weaver crowds you, on that
the fuller, on this the cobbler who has just been
kissing his hide, on this the owner of a perilous
chin ;* on this side the one-eyed and on that the
blear-eyed, and many a rascal with foulest lips. By
now you find it was not worth while to return.


2 This seems to have been, among Roman matrons, a term
of reproach of those who kept mistresses of low degree: ¢/f.
Sen. De Ben. i. 9.

CECH Cave

47.e. suffering from mentagra; cf. IV. xxxvi. 2; XI.
xeviii. 5.


361


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LX


Martis alumne dies, roseam quo lampada primum


magnaque siderei vidimus ora dei,

si te rure coli viridisque pudebit ad aras,
qui fueras Latia cultus in urbe mihi:

da veniam, servire meis quod nolo Kalendis
et qua sum genitus vivere luce volo.

natali pallere suo, ne calda Sabello [ LX®
desit ; et ut liquidum potet Alauda merum,

turbida sollicito transmittere Caecuba sacco ;
atque inter mensas ire redire suas ;

excipere hos illos et tota surgere cena
marmora caleantem frigidiora gelu:

quae ratio est haec sponte sua perferre patique
quae te si iubeat rex dominusque, neges ?


LXI


Versus et breve vividumque carmen
in te ne faciam times, Ligurra,

et dignus cupis hoc metu videri.

sed frustra metuis cupisque frustra.
in tauros Libyci ruint leones,

non sunt papilionibus molesti.
quaeras censeo, si legi laboras,

nigri fornicis ebrium poetam,

qui carbone rudi putrique creta
scribit carmina quae legunt cacantes.


frons haec stigmate non meo notanda est.


10


10


1 M. isin Spain celebrating his birthday, the First of March,
a day sacred to Mars. He contrasts the simplicity of his


celebration with a birthday feast at Rome.


2 The Sun. The epithet is an allusion to the statue of the


Sun in front of the Colosseum : cf. Spec. ii. 1.


362


BOOK XII. tx—.x1


LX


Tuovu day, nursling of Mars,! whereon I first saw
the rosy light and the mighty visage of the star-
encircled god,? if it shall shame thee to be worshipped
in the country and at green altars, who wert. wor-
shipped by me in the Latian city, grant thy pardon
in that I refuse to be a slave on’ my kalends, but
wish to dive? on the day I was born. To grow pale
on one’s birthday lest Sabellus lack warm water ; and,
that Alauda may drink his wine strained, anxiously
to pass the turbid Caecuban through the bag; and
to go to and fro among one’s tables ; to receive these
and those guests, and all through the dinner to be
getting up, treading on marble colder than ice *—
what reason is there why one should suffer and
endure these things of one’s owm accord, which, if
your lord and master ® bade you, you would refuse?


LXI


You are afraid, Ligurra, I should write verses on
you, and some short and lively poem, and you long
to be thought a man that justifies such fear. But
vain is your fear, and your longing is vain. Against
bulls Libyan lions rage, they are not hostile to but-
terflies. Look out, I advise you, if you are anxious
to be read of, for some dark cellar’s sottish poet, one
who with coarse charcoal or crumbling chalk scrawls
poems which people read in the jakes. Your brow
is not one to be marked by my brand.


3 M. constantly harps upon this idea: ¢f. II. xc. 3; Vv.


<Sieo E
4M. would be barefooted, as the shoes were not worn


during dinner.
5 Your patron.


363


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXI


ANTIQUI rex magne poli mundique prioris,
sub quo pigra quies nec labor ullus erat,

nec regale nimis fulmen nec fulmine digni,
scissa nec ad Manes sed sibi dives humus:

laetus ad haec facilisque veni sollemnia Prisci 5
gaudia: cum sacris te decet esse tuis.

tu reducem patriae sexta, pater optime, bruma
pacifici Latia reddis ab urbe Numae.

cernis ut Ausonio similis tibi pompa macello
pendeat et quantus luxurietur honos? 10

quam non parca manus largaeque nomismata mensae,
quae, Saturne, tibi pernumerentur opes?

utque sit his pretium meritis et gratia maior,
et pater et frugi sic tua sacra colit.

at tu sancte (tuo sic semper amere Decembri) 15
hos illi iubeas saepe redire dies,


LXII


Uncto Corduba laetior Venafro,

Histra nec minus absoluta testa,

albi quae superas oves Galaesi

nullo murice nec cruore mendax,

sed tinctis gregibus colore vivo: 5
dic vestro, rogo, sit pudor poetae


1 When there was no mining for precious metals.

2 Priscus’ father is giving a feast to celebrate his son’s
return to Spain: ef. xii. Host.

® Rome: cf. viil. viii. 5.

“ Representing prizes to be taken away by guests. The
fourteenth Book is wholly concerned with such prizes,


304


BOOK XII. txn—-L_xiu1


LXII


Great king of the ancient heaven and of a by-
gone world, under whose reign was lazy rest and no
toil, nor over-tyrannous thunderbolt, nor men that
deserved the bolt, when earth was not cleft to its
nether deeps but kept her riches for herself,! gladly
and graciously come thou to Priscus’ 2 festival of joy:
it befits thee to attend thy own rites. Thou in the
sixth winter, Father most good, bringest him back
to his fatherland from peaceful Numa’s Latin city.$
Seest thou how, as in a Roman market, hangs cheer,
to honour thee, how full is festive luxury? how un-
sparing the hand? and the tokens‘ on the loaded
board? what rich gifts, Saturnus, are measured out
to thee? And, to give value and greater praise to
such worth, ’tis a father and a frugal man who so
celebrates thy rites. And do thou, hallowed Sire
(so mayst thou be ever loved thus in thy own De-
cember), bid days like these return upon him oft.


LXIll


Corpusa, more prolific than oil-bearing Venafrum,®
nor less perfect than the jars of Istria,° thou that dost
outvie the sheep of white Galaesus,’ not by the aid
of any cheating shell-fish or blood, but by flocks
coloured in native hues,’ tell your poet, I beg you,


5 A town on the borders of Latium celebrated for the
excellence of its olives: cf. Hor. Od. 11. vi. 16.

6 A district on the N. of the Adriatic, celebrated for its oil.

7 A river flowing into the gulf of Tarentum, on the banks
of which sheep fed, celebrated for the whiteness of their
wool, which was protected by skins: ¢f. Hor. Od. 11. vi. 10.

8 The fleeces of the sheep fed by the Baetis were not
artificially dyed, but had a natural golden hue: ef. vu.


XXvili. 6.
365


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


nec gratis recitet meos libellos.
ferrem, si faceret bonus poeta,

cui possem dare mutuos dolores.
corrumpit sine talione caeleps ;

caecus perdere non potest quod aufert.
nil est deterius latrone nudo:

nil securius est malo poeta.


LXIV


VINCENTEM roseos facieque comaque ministros
Cinna cocum fecit. Cinna, gulosus homo es.


LXV


Formosa Phyllis nocte cum mihi tota

se praestitisset omnibus modis largam,

et cogitarem mane quod darem munus,
utrumne Cosmi, Nicerotis an libram,

an Baeticarum pondus acre lanarum,

an de moneta Caesaris decem flavos,
amplexa collum basioque tam longo
blandita quam sunt nuptiae columbarum,
rogare coepit Phyllis amphoram vini.


LXVI
Bis quinquagenis domus est tibi milibus empta,
vendere quam summa vel breviore cupis.
arte sed emptorem vafra corrumpis, Amoene,
et casa divitiis ambitiosa latet.
gemmantes prima fulgent testudine lecti
et Maurusiaci pondera rara citri ;


1 His sight.
* Because his poems are not worth stealing.


366


BOOK XII. txmi-1xvi


to have some shame, and not to recite my poems
scot-free. I could bear it if a good bard did this,
one I could visit with pain in his turn. A bachelor
debauches without reprisal, a blind man cannot lose
that} whereof he robs you. Nothing is worse than
a naked robber, nothing more safe than a bad poet.?


LXIV


A sLAVE surpassing with his face and locks the
rosy-cheeked attendants Cinna has made his cook.
Cinna, you are a lickerish fellow!


LXV


Wuen lovely Phyllis had all the evening yielded
herself bounteously to me in every way, and I was
considering next morning what present to give her,
whether a pound of unguent of Cosmus’ or Niceros’®
make, or full weight of Baetic wool, or ten yellow
boys of Caesar’s mintage, Phyllis, embracing my
neck, and wheedling me with a kiss as lingering as
that of wedded doves, began to ask me for a—jar
of wine!


LXVI


A Town house was bought by you for twice fifty
thousand sesterces, and you long to sell it even
for a scantier sum. But you seek to seduce a pur-
chaser with crafty art, Amoenus; and a cottage lies
disguised pretentiously in riches. Couches gleam
bright, inlaid with peerless tortoiseshell, and there
are pieces, choice and weighty, of Moorish citrus-


3 Noted perfumers.of the day, and often mentioned by M.
367


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


argentum atque aurum non simplex Delphica portat;
stant pueri, dominos quos precer esse meos.

deinde ducenta sonas et ais non esse minoris.
instructam vili vendis, Amoene, domum. 10


LXVII


Matar Mercurium creastis Idus,

Augustis redit Idibus Diana,

Octobres Maro consecravit Idus.

Idus saepe colas et has et illas,

qui magni celebras Maronis Idus, 5


LXVIil


Marurtine cliens, urbis mihi causa relictae,
atria, si sapias, ambitiosa colas. =

non sum ego causidicus nec amaris litibus aptus
sed piger et senior Pieridumque comes ;

otia me somnusque iuvant, quae magna negavit 5
Roma mihi: redeo, si vigilatur et hic.


LXIX


Sic tamquam tabulas scyphosque, Paule,
omnes archetypos habes amicos.


1 This term has an indecent sense: cf. xt. lxx. 2.

2 Amoenus disguised the poorness of the house, which was
a mere cottage (1. 4), by fine furniture, which was not to be
sold with the house. A. asks 200,000, although he had given
only half that sum, and would take less (1. 2). M. ironically
ignoring the fact that the house was not sold furnished,
pretends to agree with A. that the house was cheap.

% May 15 was the dedication day of the Temple of Mer-


368


BOOK XII. uxvi-uxix


wood; an elaborate sideboard is loaded with silver
and gold plate; young slaves are standing there
whom I would wish my masters!!_ Then you loudly
prate of two hundred thousand sesterces, and say
the place is not worth less. Furnished as it is,
Amoenus, you are selling your town house cheap.?


LXVII


You, Ides of May, brought forth Mercurius; on
August’s Ides return Diana’s feasts; Maro has hal-
lowed the Ides of October. Oft may you keep
these Ides and those, you, who celebrate great
Maro’s Ides! :


LXVIII


Mornine client, the cause of my leaving Rome, you
would court, were you wise, the halls of greatness.
No pleader am J, nor fitted for bitter lawsuits, but
an indolent man and one growing old, and the com-
rade of the Muses. Ease and sleep attract me, and
great Rome denied me these; I return if I am
sleepless even here.*


LXIX


Jusr like your pictures and cups, Paulus, all the
friends you possess are “ genuine antiques.’ 5


cury ; Aug. 13 that of the Temple of Diana on the Aventine ;
and Oct. 15 the birthday of Virgil. The person addressed is
probably Silius Italicus: ¢f. x1. xlix.

2 “Tt is no use your calling on me in the morning,” says
M. ; ‘‘ the duties of a client drove me from Rome: I don’t
expect to be a client in Spain, and lose my sleep.”

5 7.e. as false as they are; or (perhaps) kept only for show
(Paley). Housman, however, treats the epigram as laudatory
of P.’s friends.


369


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXX


Lintea ferret Apro vatius cum vernula nuper
et supra togulam lusca sederet anus
atque olei stillam daret enterocelicus unctor,
udorum tetricus censor et asper erat:
frangendos calices effundendumque Falernum 5
clamabat, biberet quod modo lotus eques.
a sene sed postquam patruo venere trecenta,
sobrius a thermis nescit abire domum.
o quantum diatreta valent et quinque comati !
tune, cum pauper erat, non sitiebat Aper. 10


LXXI


Nit non, Lygde, mihi negas roganti.
at quondam mihi, Lygde, nil negabas.


LXXII-


Iucera mercatus prope busta latentis agelli
et male compactae culmina fulta casae,

deseris urbanas, tua praedia, Pannyche, lites
parvaque sed tritae praemia certa togae.

frumentum, milium tisanamque fabamque solebas 5
vendere pragmaticus, nunc emis agricola.


LXXIII


Herepem tibi me, Catulle, dicis.
non credam, nisi legero, Catulle.


L of, xt, Ixxiii.
? Lining the great roads leading out of Rome. It was so
small that the tombs dwarfed it.


37°


BOOK XII. txx-ixxn1


LXX


Wuen of late a bow-legged home-born slave carried
his towels for Aper, and a one-eyed old crone sat
guard over his scanty toga, and a ruptured anointer
offered him his drop of oil, he was a stern and harsh
censor of drinkers; he used to shout that the cups
ought to be smashed, and the Falernian poured away
that the knight, just bathed, was drinking. But
after three hundred thousand sesterces came to him
from an old uncle, he doesn’t know how to go home
from the warm baths sober. Oh, how great is the
influence of fretwork chalices and five long-haired
slaves! Then, when he was poor, Aper was not
thirsty !
LXXI

Tuere is nothing you do not deny-me, Lygdus,
when I ask; but once there was nothing, Lygdus,
you denied.!

LXXII


Havine purchased the acres of a small farm lying
hid near the tombs,” and an ill-built cottage with a
shored-up roof, you desert the city law-suits, that
were your landed estate, Pannychus, and the small
but certain reward of your threadbare gown. Wheat,
millet, and barley and beans you used to sell when
you were an attorney: you buy them now you are a
farmer.


LXXIIl


You say I am your heir, Catullus. I won’t believe
it unless I read my name, Catullus.®


3 4.e. in the will, which would be after C.’s death. A hint
to him to die.


ey a


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXIV


Dom tibi Niliacus portat crystalla cataplus,
accipe de circo pocula Flaminio.

hi magis audaces, an sunt qui talia mittunt
munera? sed geminus vilibus usus inest :

nullum sollicitant haec, Flacce, toreumata furem 5
et nimium calidis non vitiantur aquis.

quid quod securo potat conviva ministro
et casum tremulae non timuere manus?

hoe quoque non nihil est, quod propinabis in istis,
frangendus fuerit si tibi, Flacce, calix. 10


LXXV


FestinaT Polytimus ad puellas ;

invitus puerum fatetur Hypnus ;

pastas glande natis habet Secundus ;

mollis Dindymus est sed esse non vult;
Amphion potuit puella nasci. 5
horum delicias superbiamque

et fastus querulos, Avite, malo

quam dotis mihi quinquies ducena.


Peel


Ampnora Vigesis, modius datur aere quaterno.
ebrius et crudus nil habet agricola.


1 The ninth region of Rome, N.W. of the Capitol, and
including the Saepta, where were shops: cf. Ix. lix. 1. It
took its name from the Circus Flaminius on the Tiber, S. of
the Campus Martius.

3 Audaces calices were cups not valuable enough to cause
anxiety as to breakage: cf. xiv. xciv. It is a “bold” thing
to send such cups to a man that imports crystal.


372


BOOK XII. cuxxiv—ixxvi


LXXIV


Wuite a fleet from Nile is bringing you crystal
glass, accept some cups from the Flaminian Circus.}
Are these the more “dreadnought’’? or are they
who send such presents? But in cheap vessels is a
double advantage: these embossed cups attract no
thief, Flaccus, and they are not cracked by water
too hot. What of this, too, that the attendant is
not nervous while a guest drinks, and shaky hands
do not fear a slip? This, also, is something: you
will drink a health in these vessels, Flaccus, if you
have to break the cup afterwards.?


LXXV


Potytimus hurries off to girls, Hypnus unwillingly
confesses that he is a boy, Secundus has buttocks
yard-fed,4 Dindymus is effeminate but wishes not
to seem so, Amphion might have been born a girl.
The caprice of these boys, and their haughtiness,
and their querulous disdain, 1 prefer, Avitus, to five
times two hundred thousand sesterces of dower.


LXXVI


A FLaGon of wine is sold for twenty pence, a peck
of corn for four. The husbandman is drunk and


overfed, but has nothing.°


3 As having beeu defiled by impure lips: ¢f. 11. xv. and
Anth. Pal. xi. 39.

4 There is a play in the Latin on glande. The metaphor
is taken from the feeding of hogs on acorns. As to the
ambiguous meaning of ‘‘ yard,” ¢f Shak. L.L.L. v. ii. 676

5 Things are so cheap it does not pay to sell.


373


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXVII


Mu tis dum precibus Jovem salutat

stans summos resupinus usque in ungues
Aethon in Capitolio, pepedit.

riserunt homines, sed ipse divom

offensus genitor trinoctiali 5
adfecit domicenio clientem.

post hoc flagitium misellus Aethon,

cum vult in Capitolium venire,

sellas ante petit Paterclianas

et pedit deciesque viciesque. 10
sed quamvis sibi caverit crepando,

compressis natibus Iovem salutat.


LXXVIII


Nu in te scripsi, Bithynice. credere non vis
et iurare iubes? malo satisfacere.


LXXIX


Donavi tibi muita quae rogasti;
donavi tibi plura quam rogasti:
non cessas tamen usque me rogare.
quisquis nil negat, Atticilla, fellat.


LXXX


NE laudet dignos, laudat Callistratus omnes.
cui malus est nemo quis bonus esse potest?


1 Aethon was a parasite, to whom “dining at home” was
a penalty.

2 A plaintiff was entitled by Roman law to challenge the
defendant to take an oath as to the justice of his own case,
refusal being treated as tantamount tp an admission of the


374


BOOK XII. vxxvit-_xxx


LXXVII


Wuite with many prayers he addressed Jupiter,
standing all the time, with eyes upturned, on the
tips of his toes, Aethon in the Capitol broke wind.
Men laughed, but the Father of the Gods himself
was offended, and amerced his client in domiciliary
dinners for three nights! After this outrage
wretched Aethon, when he is minded to enter the
Capitol, makes beforehand for Paterclius’ latrines,
and lets off his piece ten and twenty times. But,
however much he has taken precautions by this crepi-
tation, "tis with constricted buttocks he addresses
Jove!


LXXVIII


I wrote nothing against you, Bithynicus. Do you
refuse to believe me, and require me to swear? I
prefer to pay the debt.?


LXXIX


I nave given you much you asked; I have given
you more than you asked; yet you do not cease
continually to ask me. He who refuses nothing,
Atticilla, is capable of anything.


LXXxX


To avoid praising the worthy, Callistratus praises
everybody. Who can be good in his eyes to whom
no man is bad?


plaintiff’s claim. Hence the oath was called jusjwrandwm
necessarium. Thus a debtor must deny the debt or pay it.
M. being challenged by B. says that he prefers to discharge
what he regards as an obligation, 7.e. to write an offensive
epigram.


375


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXI


Brumae diebus feriisque Saturni
mittebat Umber aliculam mihi pauper ;


nunc mittit alicam: factus est enim dives.


LXXXII


ErruGere in thermis et circa balnea non est
Menogenen, omni tu licet arte velis.

captabit tepidum dextra laevaque trigonem,
inputet exceptas ut tibi saepe pilas.

colligit et referet laxum de pulvere follem,
et si iam lotus, iam soleatus erit.

lintea si sumes, nive candidiora loquetur,
sint licet infantis sordidiora sinu.

exiguos secto comentem dente capillos
dicet Achilleas disposuisse comas.

fumosae feret ipse tropin! de faece lagonae,
frontis et umorem colligit ille tuae.

omnia laudabit, mirabitur omnia, donec
perpessus dicas taedia mille “ Veni!”


LXXXIII


Derisor Fabianus hirnearum,
omnes quem modo colei timebant


1 tropin ¢, propin: codd.


10


1 The point of the epigram is that alicula, the first gift, is
in form a diminutive of alica, the second (barley water :
cf. xiii. 6), whereas in fact alica is a smaller gift than alicula.

* Trigon was a game of handball played by three standing


376


BOOK XII. txxxi—-Lxxxi


LXXXI


In the days of winter and at the feast of Saturn,
Umber used to send me a cape: he was poor. Now
he sends me capers: for he has become rich.!


LXXXxI


To escape Menogenes in the warm baths and about
the baths is impossible, try what artifice you will. He
will grab the warm hand-ball with right and left,
that he may be able often to score to your account
the balls he catches.?2, He picks up and will restore
to you the flaccid bladder-ball from the dust, even if
he has already bathed, is already in his dinner slip-
pers. If you take your towels, he will speak of
them as whiter than snow, although they are dirtier
than an infant’s bib. While you are arranging with
a comb your scanty hairs, he will say these are
Achilles’ locks that you have ordered. He will with
his own hands bring you the dregs from the bottom
of the smoky wine-jar,? and he wipes the moisture
on your brow. Everything he will praise, will ad-
mire everything, until, having endured to the end a
thousand boredoms, you say ‘‘ Come and dine.”


LXXXUI


Fapranus, who derided hernia, whom of late all
lewd fellows dreaded,* when he inveighed against


in a triangle: cf. Iv. xix. 7. M. scores his own catches to
Martial. But the meaning of 1. 4 is very uncertain.

3 Perhaps to be used as an emetic before dinner: cf. Sen.
Ad Helv. x. 3; or as a detergent of the skin. The line may,
however, mean ‘‘ will put up with the dregs for himself.”

4 Possibly his rivals in amours whom he stigmatised as
diseased.


VOL. Il. N 377


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


dicentem tumidas in hydrocelas

quantum nec duo dicerent Catulli,

in thermis subito Neronianis 5
vidit se miser et tacere coepit.


LXXXIV


No.vueraM, Polytime, tuos violare capillos,
sed iuvat hoc precibus me tribuisse tuis.

talis eras, modo tonse Pelops, positisque nitebas
crinibus ut totum sponsa videret ebur.


LXXXV


Pepiconisus os olere dicis.
hoe si, sicut ais, Fabulle, verum est,
quid tu credis olere cunnilingis ?


LXXXVI


Triainta tibi sunt pueri totidemque puellae:
una est nec surgit mentula. quid facies ?


LXXXVII


Bis Cotta soleas perdidisse se questus,

dum neglegentem ducit ad pedes vernam,

qui solus inopi praestat et facit turbam,
excogitavit homo sagax et astutus

ne facere posset tale saepius damnum: 5
excalceatus ire coepit ad cenam.


1 A writer of mimes: cf. V xxxi. 3.
2 Now his hair is cut Polytimus’ skin will be seen,


378


BOOK XII. txxxim—Lxxxvil


swelling ruptures in tones even two Catulluses!
could not match, suddenly beheld himself-——wretched
fellow !—in Nero’s warm baths, and began to hold
his tongue.


LXXXIV


I was loth, Polytimus, to mar those locks of thine,
but glad am I to have granted that much to thy
prayers. Such wert thou, O Pelops lately shorn, and
thus, when thy hair was laid aside, didst thou shine,
so that thy spouse saw all the ivory of thy shoulder.?


LXXXV


You say that the breath of unnatural rascals smells.
If this be, as you say, true, Fabullus, what do you
imagine is the smell of some others?


LXXXVI


Tu hai trenta ragazzi, ed altre tante ragazze: la
mentola non é che una, né si rizza._ Che farai?


LXXXVII


Corra, after complaining that he had twice lost
his house-shoes while he brought with him a careless
attendant, the only slave that serves for and makes
up his staff, thought out—sagacious and acute man!
—how to avoid such a loss too often. He now goes
out to dine without outdoor shoes! 3


as white as the shoulder of Pelops, which was made of
ivory.

3 we barefoot. He has in fact neither indoor nor outdoor
shoes,


SAg


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


4
LXXXVIII


Tonartranus habet nasum, scio, non nego.’ sed iam
nil praeter nasum Tongilianus habet.


LXXXIX


Quop lana caput alligas, Charine,
non aures tibi sed dolent capilli.


XC


Pro sene, sed clare, votum Maro fecit amico,
cui gravis et fervens hemitritaeos erat,

si Stygias aeger non esset missus ad umbras,
ut caderet magno victima grata lovi.

coeperunt certam medici spondere salutem, 5
ne votum solvat nunc Maro vota facit.


XCI


Communis tibi cum viro, Magulla,
cum sit lectulus et sit exoletus,
quare, dic mihi, non sit et minister.
suspiras ; ratio est, times lagonam.


XCII


SakepeE rogare soles qualis sim, Prisce, futurus,
si fiam locuples simque repente potens.

quemquam posse putas mores narrare futuros ?
dic mihi, si fias tu leo, qualis eris ?


1 non nego >, non ego codd.


1 He is all nose, z.e. critic and nothing else: ¢f. x11. ii. 2
2 C. swathes his head really to conceal his baldness.


380


BOOK XII. exxxvin—xcn


LXXXVIII


Toner1anus has a nose: I know, I don’t deny it.
But now Tongilianus has nothing but a nose.


LXXXIX


You swathe your head in wool, Charinus; but it
is not with your ears that it goes sadly, but with
your hair.?


XC


For his old friend, ill of a severe and burning
semi-tertian fever, Maro—and aloud 3—made a vow
that, if the sick man were not sent down to the
Stygian shades, there should die a victim welcome
to mighty Jove. The doctors begin to guarantee
a certain recovery. Maro now makes vows not to
pay his vow.

XCI


A.tuouacu, Magulla, you have a couch, and have a
concubine in common with your husband, tell me
why you have not a cupbearer also. You sigh: the
reason is, you fear the wine-cup.4


XCII


You are often wont to ask me what sort of person
I should be, Priscus, if I became rich and were sud-
denly powerful. Do you think any man can declare
his character in future? Tell me, if you became a
lion, what sort of lion will you be?


3 4.e. that it should be reported to the sick man (Maro was
a captator) ; or perhaps this was his public vow, his real vow
for the patient’s death being under his breath : ¢f. Pers. ii. 8 ;
Juv. xii. 98. 4 7.e, poison.


381


eo


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCIII


Qua moechum ratione basiaret

coram coniuge repperit Labulla.

parvum basiat usque morionem ;

hune multis rapit osculis madentem

moechus protinus et suis repletum 5
ridenti dominae statim remittit.

quanto morio maior est maritus!


XCIV


ScrIBEBAMUS epos; coepisti scribere: cessi,
aemula ne starent carmina nostra tuis.

transtulit ad tragicos se nostra Thalia cothurnos:
aptasti longum tu quoque syrma tibi.

fila lyrae movi Calabris exculta Camenis: 5
plectra rapis nobis, ambitiose, nova.

audemus saturas: Lucilius esse laboras.
ludo levis elegos: tu quoque ludis idem.

quid minus esse potest? epigrammata fingere coepi:
hine etiam petitur iam mea palma tibi. 10

elige quid nolis (quis enim pudor omnia velle ?)
et si quid non vis, Tucca, relinque mihi.


XCV


Musar! pathicissimos libellos,
qui certant Sybariticis libellis,


1 By Horace, who however was not born in Calabria: of.
Vill. xviii. 5.

2 The instrument with which the strings of the lyre were
struck.

3 The father of Roman satire.


382


BOOK XII. xcni—xcv


XCHI


Lasutta has discovered how to kiss her lover
in the presence of her husband. She gives repeated
kisses to her dwarf fool; this creature, slobbered
with many kisses, the lover at once pounces upon,
fills him up with his own kisses, and hands him back
to the smiling lady. How much bigger as a fool is
the husband !


XCIV


I was writing an epic; you began to write one:
I left off, that my poems should not stand in rivalry
with yours. My Thalia shifted to tragic buskins:
-you also fitted on yourself the long train of tragedy.
I struck the strings of a lyre practised by the Cala-
brian Muses:! you, ambitious man, snatch from me
the new quill.? I venture satire: you strain to be
a Lucilius.? I sport with light elegies: you, too,
sport with the same thing. What lesser art can there
be? I begin to model epigrams: in this quarter, too,
my fame is already sought after by you. Pick out
something you do not want—for what modesty is
there in wanting everything?—and if there is any-
thing you don’t want, Tucca, leave it to me.


XCV


Leec1, O Istantio Rufo, i paticissimi libelli di
Museo che garreggiano coi Sibaritici libelli,* e le


4 By Hemitheon, ‘‘a Sybarite of the vilest character,” and
the author of an obscene work, a text-book of vice, probably
called Sybaritis. He is called by Lucian 6 xlvaidos (adv. In-
doctum, c. 23), and is probably alluded’to by Ovid (77isé. ii.
417). If there the reading ‘‘ nuper” be correct, H. flourished
not long before Ovid.


383


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


et tinctas sale pruriente chartas

Instanti lege Rufe; sed puella

sit tecum tua, ne thalassionem 5
indicas manibus libidinosis

et fias sine femina maritus.


XCVI


Cum tibi nota tui sit vita fidesque mariti
nec premat ulla tuos sollicitetve toros,
quid quasi paelicibus torqueris inepta ministris,
in quibus et brevis est et fugitiva Venus?
plus tibi quam domino pueros praestare probabo: 5
hi faciunt ut sis femina sola viro ;
hi dant quod non vis uxor dare. “Do tamen” inquis
“ne vagus a thalamis coniugis erret amor.”
non eadem res est: Chiam volo, nolo mariscam :
ne dubites quae sit Chia, marisca tua est. 10
scire suos fines matrona et femina debet:
cede sua pueris, utere parte tua.


XCVII


Uxor cum tibi sit puella qualem

votis vix petat inprobus maritus,

dives nobilis erudita casta,

rumpis, Basse, latus, sed in comatis,

uxoris tibi dote quos parasti. 5
et sic ad dominam reversa languet

multis mentula milibus redempta ;

sed nec vocibus excitata blandis,

molli pollice nec rogata surgit.

sit tandem-pudor aut eamus in ius. 10
non est haec tua, Basse: vendidisti.


384


BOOK XII. xcv—xcvn


carte asperse di sale solleticante; ma la tua ragazza
sia teco, affinche tu non publici Talassione alle mani
libidinose,! e diventi marito senza donna.


XCVI


Essenpo la vita e la fedelta del tuo marito a te
nota, e veruna premendo o sollicitando il tuo talamo,
a che, sciocca, ti tormenti tu dei servi come di con-
cubine, coi quali il piacere di venere é breve e fuggi-
tivo? Ti proverd che i ragazzi giovano pil a te che
al loro padrone: questi son la cagione che tu sola
sii moglie al tuo marito; essi danno cid che tu, come
moglie, non vuoi dare. “ Peraltro il do,” di tu, “af-
finche l’amore non travii incostante dai talami con-
jugali.”’ Non é la stessa cosa: voglio una Chia, non
voglia una marisca.?_ Affinche non dubbiti cosa sia
una Chia, la tua € una Marisca. Una matrona deve
sapere i suoi limiti, ed una femina i suoi. Cedi ai
ragazzi la loro parte: tu fa uso della tua.


XCVII


ANcorcHE tua moglie sia una pulcella quale un’
improbo marito appena dimandarebbe, ricca, nobile,
erudita, casta, tu, O Basso, ti rompi i lati, ma in cin-
cinnati, che ti procacciasti colla dote della tua moglie.
E cosi la tua mentola, comparata con molti milliaja,
sul ritorno alla padrona é fiacca; si; né eccitata con
dolci parole, né pregata con tenera mano, surge.
Vergognati finalmente, o andiamo in judicio. Questa
mentola non é tua, O Basso: tu l’hai venduto.!


Ti Cha TX Xie OE Nit 26.4 Tiatsh
3 7,e, to your wife at the price of her dower,


385


a


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCVITI


Baetis olivifera crinem redimite corona,
aurea qui nitidis vellera tinguis aquis ;

quem Bromius, quem Pallas amat; cui rector aquarum
Albula navigerum per freta pandit iter:

ominibus laetis vestras Instantius oras 5
intret, et hic populis ut prior annus eat.

non ignorat onus quod sit succedere Macro;
qui sua metitur pondera, ferre potest.


1 The Guadalquiver. 2 Ch, NakXXVALI SEEX SEX O.
5 Bacchus. The province of Baetica abounds in wine and
oil.


386


BOOK XII. xcvin


XCVIII


Baetis,! with thy hair wreathed with the olive
crown, that dippest thy golden? fleeces in sparkling
waters, whom Bromius,? whom Pallas loves, to whom
the king of waters, Albula,* opens a path that wafts
the ships over the seas, with glad omens may In-
stantius5 first tread thy shores, and this year pass
for the peoples as the last. He is not blind to the
burthen of succeeding Macer: he that gauges his
load can bear it.


4 An old name of the Tiber: Ov. F. ii. 389.
5 Perhaps the same as is mentioned in vill. Ixxiii. 1 and
vu. li. 21.


387


Te


uf


oe
ye
——=
=.
Pe sie
t rs
md YES
* wt
Ct 1S 2S
~¥ $e
é sy *
; ia
; tel Ese,
fy ei By
i. n re
7 FS SL
:
» - ae:
a a a
a1 TISh fh tres
Ny
i
;
\


i


Way ok: ani oe
ay tte Bubs, iracie. To fror


saz col iaietk


D > sagt Dal tio 4,
mul ats ameretL hi


[LIBER ‘TERTIUS DECIMUS]


XENIA
I


Ne toga cordylis et paenula desit olivis
aut inopem metuat sordida blatta famem,

perdite Niliacas, Musae, mea damna, papyros:
postulat ecce novos ebria bruma sales.

non mea magnanimo depugnat tessera telo,} 5
senio nec nostrum cum cane quassat ebur:

haec mihi charta nuces, haec est mihi charta fritillus:
alea nec damnum nec facit ista lucrum.


Il


Nasutus sis usque licet, sis denique nasus,
quantum noluerat ferre rogatus Atlans,

et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,
non potes in nugas dicere plura meas

ipse ego quam dixi. quid dentem dente iuvabit 5
rodere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis.


1 talo By.


1 q.e. wrappers: cf. II. ii. 43 Iv. Ixxxvi. 8.
2 Often used to gamble with, especially by boys: cf. v.
Lxeexive ric


She


BOOK XIII


GUEST-GIFTS
I


Tuat tunny-fry may not lack a gown, and olives
a eapote,! nor the foul black beetle fear pinching
hunger, destroy, ye Muses—the loss is mine—
papyrus from the Nile: see tipsy winter calls for
new pleasantries. No die of mine contends with
dauntless weapon, nor does sice together with ace
“shake my ivory box: this paper is my nuts,? this
paper is my dice-box; hazard that brings me no
loss nor yet any gain.


II


ALTHOUGH you have always a critic’s nose, are in a
word a nose so great that Atlas? on request would
not: have consented to shoulder it, and though you
can deride even. Latinus* himself, you cannot say
more against my trifling effusions than I have said
myself. What pleasure is there in tooth gnawing
tooth ?> you require flesh if you want to be fat.


3 Who bore the weight of heaven.

4 A celebrated mime or comic actor: cf. IX. xxviii.

5 4.e. something that can retort? Or (perhaps) ‘‘ why
gnaw something that cannot be hurt, like the viper in Aesop
that gnawed a file?”


391


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


ne perdas operam, qui se mirantur, in illos
virus habe; nos haec novimus esse nihil.

non tamen hoc nimium nihil est, si candidus aure
nec matutina si mihi fronte venis. 10


Til


Omnis in hoc gracili xeN1orum turba libello
constabit nummis quattuor empta tibi.

quattuor est nimium? poterit constare duobus,
et faciat lucrum bybliopola Tryphon.

haec licet hospitibus pro munere disticha mittas, 5
si tibi tam rarus quam mihi nummus erit.

addita per titulos sua nomina rebus habebis :
praetereas, si quid non facit ad stomachum.,


IV.—Tus


Serus ut aetheriae Germanicus imperet aulae
utque diu terris, da pia tura Iovi.


V.—Piper


Crrea quae patulo lucet ficedula lumbo,
cum tibi sorte datur, si sapis, adde piper.


>


VI.—Alica


Nos alicam, poterit mulsum tibi mittere dives.
si tibi noluerit mittere dives, emes.}


1 eme y.


1 7.e. tuo sober.


392


BOOK XIII. n—-vi


Lest you should waste your time, keep your venom
for those that fancy themselves ; I know these efforts
of mine are nothing worth. And yet not altogether
nothing if you come to me with a just ear, and not
with a morning ! aspect.


Ill


Tue whole collection of Mottoes? in this slender
little volume will cost you to buy four sesterces. Is
four too much? it can cost you two, and bookseller
Tryphon would make his profit. These distichs you
can send to your guests instead of a gift, if a coin
shall be as rare with you as with me. In addition
you will get the names of the things on the headings:
pass it by if anything is not to your stomach.


LV.—Incense


TuaT it may be late ere Germanicus rule the
palace of Heaven, and that he may long rule earth,
give pious incense to Jove.


V.— Pepper
Wuen a beccafico, with its bright waxen flesh and
plump sides, falls to you by lot, if you have taste,
add pepper.
VI.—Barley-water


I can send you barley-water,’ a rich man will be
able to send you mead. If the rich man be unwilling
to send it, you will buy.

2 Lit. Xenia (gifts to guests). M. means here ‘the headed
distichs, which were like the mottoes on Christmas crackers.

3 A cheap drink : ¢f. x1. Ixxxi. 3.

393


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


VII.—Faba


Si spumet rubra conchis tibi pallida testa,
lautorum cenis saepe negare potes.


VIIL.—Far


InsveE plebeias Clusinis pultibus ollas,
ut satur in vacuis dulcia musta bibas.


IX.—Lens


AccirE Niliacam, Pelusia munera, lentem:
vilior est alica, carior illa faba.


X.—Simula


Nec dotes simulae possis numerare nec usus,
pistori totiens cum sit et apta coco.


XI.—Hordeum


Mutio quod non det tacituris, accipe, mulis.
haec ego coponi, non tibi, dona dedi.


XI.—Frumentum


Ter centum Libyci modios de messe coloni
sume, suburbanus ne moriatur ager.


1 « You will get such a good dinner at home.”
2 Pulse was probably supposed to ripen new wine,
5 Celebrated for its lentils; Verg. Georg. i. 228.


394


BOOK XIII. vu-xn


VII.—Beans


Ir pale beans bubble for you in a red earthenware
pot you can often decline the dinners of sumptuous
hosts.


VIII.— Spelt


Favour common jars with pulse from Clusium,
that, after dinner, you may drink from them, when
empty, new wine.’


IX.—Lentils


Receive lentils of Nile,a present from Pelusium 3;
they are cheaper than spelt, dearer than beans.


X.—Flour


One cannot enumerate the properties or the uses
of flour, seeing that it is so often handy for the
baker and the cook.


XI.— Barley


Receive something for your muleteer to withhold
from your mules that will not blab. I have given
this to the inn-keeper, not to you,‘ as a gift.


XII.—Corn


Take three hundred pecks from the harvest of
the Libyan farmer, that your suburban land may
not grow sterile.°


4 The muleteer steals the barley and sells it to the inn-


keeper.
5 By being over-cropped, and not allowed to lie fallow.
This gift of Libyan corn will maintain the farmer for a time.


3.95.


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XIII.— Betae


Ur sapiant fatuae, fabrorum prandia, betae,
© quam saepe petet vina piperque cocus !


XIV.—Lactucae


CLUDERE quae cenas lactuca solebat avorum,
dic mihi, cur nostras inchoat illa dapes?


XV.—Ligna Acapna


Sr vicina tibi Nomento rura coluntur,
ad villam moneo, rustice, ligna feras,


XVI.— Rapa


Hagc tibi brumali gaudentia frigore rapa-
quae damus, in caelo Romulus esse solet.


XVII.— Fascis Colicult


NE tibi pallentes moveant fastidia caules,
nitrata viridis brassica fiat aqua.


XVIII.—Porri Sectivi


Fira Tarentini graviter redolentia porri
edisti quotiens, oscula clusa dato.


1 cf. x1. lii. 5, where M. gives the reason.

2 Situated in a marshy district, where the wood would be
wet and not smokeless. Wood was also made smokeless by
special treatment, viz. soaking in water and drying, or in
the lees of oil (Plin. V.H. xv. 8), or by scorching.

3 The deified Romulus retains his simple tastes in Heaven:


396


BOOK XIII. xin—xvin


XIII.— Beet


Tuat insipid beet, the noon-meal of artizans, may
acquire flavour, oh, how often will the cook ask for
wine and pepper!


XIV.—Leltuce


TELL me, why is it that lettuce, which used
to end our grandsires’ dinners, ushers in! our
banquets?


XV.—Smokeless Wood


Ir you till fields near to me at Nomentum,? I
remind you, rustic, to bring wood to my villa.


XVI.—Rape


TuesE rapes, delighting in winter’s cold, which I
give you, in heaven Romulus is wont to eat.®


XVII.—A Bundle of Cabbage Sprouts


In order that pale sprouts may not move your
disgust, let the cabbage become green in water and
soda,


XVIII.—Cut Leeks


As often as you have eaten the strong-smelling
shoots* of Tarentine leeks, give kisses with shut
mouth.


cf. Sen. Apoc. 9, where Hercules is of opinion that it is ‘‘ to
the interest of the state” that R. should have someone to
‘‘devour hot rape” with him, and therefore that the Emperor
Claudius should be admitted as a God.

4 4.e. porrum sectivum: cf. X. xlviii. 9. Nero ate them in
oil to improve his voice: Plin. N.#. xix. 33.


397


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XIX.—Pornt Capitat:


Mirrir praecipuos nemoralis Aricia porros :
in niveo virides stipite cerne comas.


XX.—Napi


Hos Amiternus ager felicibus educat hortis :
Nursinas poteris parcius esse pilas.


XXI.—Asparagi


Motus in aequorea quae crevit spina Ravenna
non erit incultis gratior asparagis.


XXI1.—Uvae Duracinae


Non habilis cyathis et inutilis uva Lyaeo,
sed non potanti me tibi nectar ero.


XXIUII.—Ficus Chiae


Cuia seni similis Baccho, quem Setia misit,
ipsa merum secum portat et ipsa salem.


1 But, according to Pliny (V.H. xix. 33), the finest came
from Egypt, those from Ostia and Aricia ranking next.

2The navew is also. called the French turnip (Napus
brassica), in Greek padus or Bovvidas, and has a root elongated
like a carrot. It likes a sloping situation, and a light and
dry soil, whereas the ordinary rape thrives in the marsh:
Col. ii. 10. Amiternum was famed for them, and Nursia
came second: Plin. V.H. xix. 25.

8 Which often produced asparagus of three to the pound ;


398


BOOK XIII. xix—xxim


XIX.—Headed Leeks


Woopy Aricia sends the finest leeks!: observe on
the white stem the green blades.


XX.—Navens


Tuese the land of Amiternum nurtures in its
fertile gardens; the round rapes of Nursia you will
be able to eat at less cost.?


XXI— Asparagus ‘


Tue succulent stalk that has grown in watery
Ravenna? will not be more palatable than wild
asparagus.


XXII.—Hard-skinned Grapes


I aM a grape unfit for the wine-cup and worthless
to Lyaeus, but, if you do not drink me, I shall be
nectar to you.


XXIII.—Chian Figs


A Cuan fig is like the old wine Setia has sent
you; it carries in itself new wine, and in itself


salt too.>


Pliny, V.H. xix. 19 (2). According to Athenaeus (ii. 62) the
planted asparagus grew to a great size, but the best were not
the cultivated.. The wild was called corruda: Plin. supra.

4 These grapes were kept to be eaten, and not turned into
wine. They were when eaten seemingly very palatable.
The temperate Augustus speaks of himself (Suet. Aug. 1xxvi).
as eating in his litter an ounce of bread and a few duracinae.

5 The Chian fig was not only pungent (¢f vu. xxv. 8), but
also juicy.


399


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXIV.—Cydonea


Si tibi Cecropio saturata Cydonea melle
ponentur, dicas: “ Haec melimela placent.”


XXV.—Nuces Pineae


Poma sumus Cybeles: procul hinc discede, viator,
ne cadat in miserum nostra ruina caput.


XX VI.—Sorba


SorBa sumus, molles nimium tendentia ventres :
aptius haec puero quam tibi poma dabis.


XXVU.—Petalium! Caryotarum


Aurea porrigitur Iani caryota Kalendis ;
sed tamen hoc munus pauperis esse solet.


XXVIII.—Vas Cottanorum


Hacc tibi quae torta venerunt condita meta,
si maiora forent cottana, ficus erat.


XXIX.—Vas Damascenorum


Pruna peregrinae carie rugosa senectae
sume: solent duri solvere ventris onus.


1 petadium 8, petavivum T, palathion Salmasius,


1 As recommended by Pliny (WV. H. xv. 18 (2)).

2 Because she turned her favourite Attis into a fir, which
thus became sacred to her.

8 7.e. cinaedo. Pliny (N.#. xxiii. 73) says the dried berries
were astringent. Wine was sometimes made of them: Verg.
Georg. iii, 379.


400


BOOK XIII. xxiv—xxrx


XXIV.—Quinces


Ir quinces steeped in Attic honey! shall be put
before you, you would say: “These honey-apples
are delicious.”


XXV.—Pine Cones


WE are Cybele’s apples?; depart far hence, tra-
veller, lest our downfall descend on your wretched
head.


XX VI.—Service Berries
We are service berries that astrict too relaxed


bowels; you will better give these apples to your
boy® than to yourself.


XXVII.—A Stem nith Dates


A aitT date is offered on the kalends of January‘;
but yet this is wont to be the gift of a poor man,


XXVIIL—A Jar of small Syrian Figs


Turse Syrian figs, which, stored in a round conical
jar, have reached you, would, if larger,® be figs.


XXIX.—A Jar of Damascene Plums


Taxe plums wrinkled by shrivelling old age
abroad ®: they are used to lighten the load of an
obstinate stomach. ;


4 By poor clients to their patrons: cf, vil. xxxiii. 11, 12.

5 Cottana were small figs from Syria: Plin. N.H. xiii. 10;
of. IV. Ixxxviii. 6 and vu. liii. 7.

6 of, v. xviii. 8. Pliny (NV. H. xv. 12) says that D. plums
grown in Italy did not shrivel for lack of sun.


401


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XX X.—Caseus Lunensts


Caseus Etruscae signatus imagine Lunae
praestabit pueris prandia mille tuis.


XX XI.—Caseus Vestinus


Si sine carne voles ientacula sumere frugi,
haec tibi Vestino de grege massa venit.


XX XII.—Caseus Fumosus


Non quemcumque focum nec fumum caseus omnem,
sed Velabrensem qui bibit, ille sapit.


XXXIUI.—Casei Trebulani


TREBULA nos genuit; commendat gratia duplex,
sive levi flamma sive domamur aqua.


XXXIV.—Bulli


Cum sit anus coniunx et sint tibi mortua membra,
nil aliud bulbis quam satur esse potes.


XXX V.—Lucanicae


Fiza Picenae venio Lucanica porcae :
pultibus hine niveis grata corona datur.


1 Cheeses were made very large at Luna: Plin. N.H. xi.
97, who says they were made of a thousand pounds’ weight.

2 Vestinian cheese was a favourite with the Romans. The
Vestini were in central Italy, between the Apennines and
the Adriatic.

’ A district of Rome on the W. slope of the Palatine.
Cheeses were smoked here to improve their flavour.

* A town in the Sabine country: ¢f v. Ixxi. 1. The


402


BOOK XIII. xxx—xxxvy


XXX.—Cheese from Luna


Cuegse, stamped with the crest of Etruscan Luna,
will afford your slaves a thousand lunches.}


XXXI.—A Vestinian Cheese


Ir you wish without meat to take a frugal break-
fast, this lump comes to you from a Vestinian?
flock.


XXXII.—Smoked Cheese


It is not every heat, or every smoke that a cheese
imbibes; but that which has imbibed Velabran? has
flavour.


XXXITI.—Cheese from Trebula


Tresua ‘* gave us birth; a double excellence re-
commends us; we are tamed by a moderate fire or
by water.

XXXIV.— Bulbs


Since your wife is an old woman, and your members
are nerveless, you can do nothing but satisfy your
hunger with bulbs.®


XXXV.—Lucanian Sausages


Davuenter of a Picenian sow,® here I come, a Lu-
canian sausage; with me you may put a toothsome
garnish round white pottage.


cheese was good to eat, whether toasted, or moistened in
water.

5 Bulbs were eaten as aphrodisiacs: cf. mI. Ixxv. 3;
Athen. ii. 64.

6 of. tv. xlvi. 8; v. Ixxviii. 9. According to Apicius (ii. 4)
the sausage was compounded of minced pork flavoured with
pepper, cumin, savory, rue, parsley, and bay-leaves. It was
called in Low Latin salsicia, whence the word sausage.


403


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXX VI.—Cistella Olivarum


Haec quae Picenis venit subducta trapetis
inchoat atque eadem finit oliva dapes.


XXXVII—Mala Citrea


Aut Corcyraei sunt haec de frondibus horti,
aut haec Massyli poma draconis erant.


XXX VIII.—Colustrum


SusripultT pastor quae nondum stantibus haedis
de primo matrum lacte colustra damus.


XX XIX.—Haedus
Lascrvum pecus et viridi non utile Baccho
det poenas; nocuit iam tener ille deo.


XL.—Ova


Canpipa si croceos circumfluit unda vitellos,


Hesperius scombri temperet ova liquor. ‘


XLI.— Porcellus Lactans


Lacte mero pastum pigrae mihi matris alumnum
ponat, et Aetolo de sue dives edat. ‘


iopoke 2d bbl

2 They were either from King Alcinous’ garden: cf. x.
xciv. 2, or were golden apples of the Hesperides.

’ The first milk given by the mother: Plin. N. H, xxviii. 33.


404


BOOK XIII. xxxvi-xui


XXXVI.—A Small Box of Olives


Tuese olives which have reached you, withdrawn
from the oil Piseeyiek Picenum,! begin and also
end our repasts.


XXXVII.—Citrons


Tuese were either from the branches of Corcyra’s
garden, or they were apples, the Massylian dragon’s
charge.”


XXXVIII.—Beestings


Berstines,? whereof the shepherd has robbed the
kids while not yet able to stand, I give you from the
first milk of the dams.


XXXIX.—A Kid


Ler the wanton beast, and one of no service to
the green vine, pay the penalty; though young, it
has already injured the god.‘


XL.— Eggs
Ir a white liquid surround the saffron-coloured
yolks, let the sauce ® of Spanish mackerel season the
eggs.
XLI.—A Suching Pig


Let a rich man set before me the nursling, fed on
milk alone, of a lazy mother, and let him eat of an
Aetolian boar.®


4 Bacchus. The kid has nibbled the vine. In Anth. Pal.
x. 75 and 79 the wounded vine retorts. The goat was a
victim sacred to Bacchus. 5 7.e. garum: cf. XIL. cii.

6 Like that slain by Meleager: ¢f. vil. xxvii. 2.


495


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLIL.—Apyrina et Tubures


Non tibi de Libycis tubures et apyrina ramis,
de Nomentanis sed damus arboribus.


XLITI.—Jdem


Lecra suburbanis mittuntur apyrina ramis
et vernae tubures. quid tibi cum Libycis?


XLIV.—Sumen


Esse putes nondum sumen; sic ubere largo
et fluit+ et vivo lacte papilla tumet.


XLV.—Pulli Gallinacet


S1 Libycae nobis volucres et Phasides essent,
acciperes, at nunc accipe chortis aves.


XLVI.—Persica Praecocia 2


Vit1a maternis fueramus Persica ramis :
nunc in adoptivis Persica cara sumus.


1 effluet By. 2 praecocta a, praecoqua +.


1 According to Pliny (NV. H. xv. 14) a kind of African apple,
or rather berry, of two kinds, one white, the other red. At
Verona grew a variety called Janata from having a down like


a peach.


* Pliny says (V.H. xv. 14) the tuber-apple was introduced
into Italy by Sextus Papinius, ‘‘ quem consulem vidimus,”
i.e. comparatively recently. Suetonius (Dom. xvi.) tells a


406


BOOK XIII. xuu—xtv1


XLII.—Pomegranates and T: uber-apples


I po not give you tuber-apples! and pomegranates
from Libyan boughs, but from my Nomentan trees.


XLITI.—The Same


Cuttep from suburban boughs are sent you pome-
granates and home-grown tuber-apples.2- What do
you want with Libyans?


XLIV.—Son’s Paps


You would think it not yet a dish of udder, so full-
flowing is the dug, and so does the pap swell with
living milk.’


XLV.—Fonls


Ir I possessed guinea-fowls and pheasants you
should receive them; but now receive the birds of
the farmyard.


XLVI.—Early Peaches


Or little worth should we peaches have been on
the branches of our mother tree; now on adoptive
boughs we peaches are prized.4


story how Domitian on the day before his murder, being
offered some tuber-apples, commanded their being kept for
the morrow, ‘‘ s? modo uti licuerit.”

3 The thing sent is apparently the udder cooked, which is
so full of milk it seems alive.

4 Friedlander explains of peaches grafted on an apricot
(malum praecox) tree; cf. Calp. ii. 42, of peaches grafted on
a plum tree.


407


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLVII.—Panes Picentini


PicenTiINa Ceres niveo sic nectare crescit
ut levis accepta spongea turget aqua.


XLVIII.—Bolet


ARGENTUM atque aurum facilest laenarnqu2 togamque
mittere ; boletos mittere difficilest.


XLIX.— Ficedulae


Cum me ficus alat, cum pascar dulcibus uvis,
cur potius nomen non dedit uva mihi?


L.—Terrae Tubera


Rumpimus altricem tenero quae vertice terram
tubera, boletis poma secunda sumus.


LI.—Turdorum Decuria


Texta rosis fortasse tibi vel divite nardo,
at mihi de turdis facta corona placet.


LI.—Anates


Tota quidem ponatur anas, sed pectore tantum
et cervice sapit: cetera redde coco.


1 According to Pliny (NV.H. xviii. 27) Picenian bread was
made of spelt (a/zca), steeped for nine days, then mixed with
raisin juice, and kneaded into the shape of a spool of wool
(in speciem tractae), and then baked. He adds that it was
not fit to eat till it had been moistened with milk mixed with
honey (mulswm).

* Wither because they grow only at certain seasons (Fried-
lander), or because they are so precious that one prefers to
eat them oneself.


408


~


BOOK XIII. x1vn—-in


XLVII.—Picenian Loaves


Tue bread of Picenum grows big with its white
nectar as a light sponge swells when it has taken in
water.!


XLVIII.—Mushrooms


Sitver and gold, and a mantle, and a toga it is
easy to send; to send mushrooms is difficult.?


XLIX.—Beccaficos


Serine that figs nourish me, seeing that I am fed
on sweet grapes, why did not the grape rather give
me my name ?%

L.— Truffles

We truffles * that burst through the nurturing soil
with our soft heads are of earth’s apples second to
mushrooms. i


LI.—A Decade of Fieldfares


A cirRcLET woven of roses or rich spikenard
perhaps pleases you, but one made of fieldfares®
pleases me.


LII.— Ducks


Ler a duck certainly be served up whole; but it
is tasty only in the breast and neck: the rest return
to the cook.


3 «*Why am I not called wvedula?”

4In Greek f5va. See Athen. ii. 60 and Plin. xix. 11.
They grow of their own accord, particularly in dry and sandy
soil. Pliny calls them ‘‘callosities of the earth” (terrae
callum). Juvenal (v. 115) refers to the fable (rejected by
Plutarch: Quaest. Conv. iv. 2) that truffles were produced
by thunderstorms.

5 Fieldfares were often strung round a hoop: ¢f. Ill.
xlvii. 10.


VOL. I. 0-4-9


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LUI.—Turtures


Cum pinguis mihi turtur erit, lactuca, valebis ;
et cocleas tibi habe. perdere nolo famem.


LIV.— Perna


CerrerTana mihi fiat vel missa licebit
de Menapis: lauti de petasone vorent.


LV.— Petaso


Musteus est: propera, caros nec differ amicos.
nam mihi cum vetulo sit petasone nihil.


LVIL.—Volva


Te fortasse magis capiat de virgine porca;
me materna gravi de sue volva capit.


LVII.—Colocasia


Niziacum ridebis holus lanasque sequaces,
inproba cum morsu fila manuque trahes,


LVIII.—Tecur Anserinum


AsPIcE quam tumeat magno iecur ansere maius!
miratus dices “ Hoe, rogo, crevit ubi?”’


1 By eating the lettuce and snails at the gustatio.


2 Spanish. The Cerritani were a people in the Pyrenees,


celebrated for bacon.


3 A people on the left bank of the Rhine, near its mouth.
4 cf. vil. xx. 11. There is a long dissertation on the


subject in Ath. iii. 57 seqq.


5 cf. vim. xxxili. 13. Pliny (N.H. xxi. 51) says it is ‘* caule


410


BOOK XIII. um—tvm


LITL.— Turtle-doves


Wuen I shall have a fat turtle-dove, good-bye,
lettuce; and keep the snails for yourself. I don’t
want to spoil my appetite.!


LIV.—Gammon of Bacon


Lert me have Cerretanian? gammon served to me,
or it may be sent from the Menapians?; let gourmets
devour ham.


LV.—Ham


Ir is freshly cured: make haste, and do not put
off your dear friends; for let me have nothing to do
with an old ham.


LVL—Womb


You perhaps the womb of a virgin pig may allure
more: the maternal womb of a pregnant sow
allures me.*


LVII.— Egyptian Beans


You will scoff at this vegetable from Nile and its
tenacious threads when with teeth and hands you
draw out its stubborn fibres.®


LVIII.—Goose’s Liver


Ser how the liver is swollen bigger than a big
goose! In wonder you will say: ‘Where, I ask,
did this grow?” 6
araneoso in mandendo,” i.e. like spider’s webs. Athenaeus
(iii. 2) gives a long description of it from Theophrastus.

6 Geese were fattened on figs by gourmets: Hor. Sat. m1.
viii. 88 ; and their livers grew to a great size: Juv. v. 114.
See generally Athen. ix. 32. The practice is recalled by the
word fegato, Italian for liver.


4II


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LIX.—Ghres


Tota mihi dormitur hiemps et pinguior illo
tempore sum quo me nil nisi somnus alit.


LX.—Cunicult
Gaupet in effossis habitare cuniculus antris.
monstravit tacitas hostibus ille vias.
LXI.—Aittagenae
Inter sapores fertur alitum primus
Ionicarum gustus attagenarum.
LXIL.—Gallinae Altiles
Pascitur et dulci facilis gallina farina,
pascitur et tenebris. ingeniosa gula est.
LXIII.—Capones
NE nimis exhausto macresceret inguine gallus,
amisit testes. nunc mihi Gallus erit.
LXIV.—Idem


SuccumaiT sterili frustra gallina marito.
hune matris Cybeles esse decebat avem.


1 of. 111. lviii. 36. Dormice were kept in pens (gliraria),
and, for purposes of fattening, even in casks: Varr. R.R. iii.
15. They were fattened on beech-nuts: Plin. N.A. xvi. 7.


2 Cuniculus is also a military term for a mine.


3 So, according to Pliny, V.H. x. lxviii., who says the
atlagen was formerly a rare bird, but in his day was found


in Gaul and Spain and in the Alps.
412


BOOK XIII. urx-txiv


LIX.—Dormice


ALL my winter is passed in sleep, and I am fatter
at that season during which nothing but sleep
nourishes me.!


LX.— Rabbits


A raspiT delights in dwelling in burrowed holes:
he taught foes the art of secret paths.?


LXI.—Heathcocks


Or all flavours of fowls the most tasty is said to be
that of Ionian * heathcocks.


LXIIl.—Fatted Fonls


Tue hen is easily fattened on sweetened meal; it
fattens, too, on the dark.* Ingenious is gluttony!


LXIII.—Capons


TuaT the cock might not grow thin by over in-
dulgence, he has been gelded. Now he will be to


me a Gaul.
LXIV.—The Same


In vain the hen submits to her sterile husband.
This bird it beseemed to have been the bird of


Mother Cybele.®


4 Ut immotae facile pinguescant, in obscuro continentur:
Sen. Zp. cxxii. 4.

5 M. plays on the meanings of gallus, viz. a cock, a Gaul,
or a priest of Cybele. See next epigram.

6 Whose priests were called Galli: of m. xlv. 2; vut.
lxxv. 16.


413


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LX V.—Perdices


Ponitur Ausoniis avis haec rarissima mensis :
hanc in piscina ludere saepe soles.


LX VI.—Columbinae


Nz violes teneras periuro dente columbas,
tradita si Gnidiae sunt tibi sacra deae.


LXVIIL—Palumbi ©


Ineurna torquati tardant hebetantque palumbi:
non edat hanc volucrem qui cupit esse salax.


LXVUI—Galbuli


Gatsina! decipitur calamis et retibus ales,
turget adhuc viridi cum rudis uva mero,


LXIX.—Caittae


Pannonicas nobis numquam dedit Umbria cattas :
mavult haec domino? mittere dona Pudens.


LX X.—Pavones


Mirarts, quotiens gemmantis explicat alas.
et potes hunc saevo tradere, dure, coco?


1 Galbula y. 2 dominae B.


1 No explanation of this epigram is known.

2 Doves were sacred to Venus.

3 The identity of the bird, here called witwall, is very
obscure. It is generally supposed to be the same as the
Yerepos, or vireo, and has been variously identified with the


414


BOOK XIII. txv—1.xx


LXV.—Partridges


Turis bird is very rarely served on Italian tables:
one often sees it playing in the fishpond.1


LXVI.— Doves


Do not violate with profane tooth tender doves,
if the rites of the goddess of Cnidos? have been
entrusted to you.


LXVII.— Wood-pigeons


Rinepoves check and blunt the manly powers: let
not him eat this bird who wishes to be lickerish.


LXVIIL.— Witmalls


Tue green bird ? is beguiled by canes‘ and nets at
the season when the young grape is swelling with
juice yet immature.


LXIX.—Caltae


Umeria has never supplied us with Pannonian
cattae; these are the gifts Pudens prefers to send
to his lord.®


LX X.— Peacocks ©


Dosr thou admire it, oft as it spreads its spangled
wings, and hast the heart, unfeeling man, to deliver
this bird to a cruel cook ?


golden oriole (O. galbula), the greenfinch, and the green
woodpecker.

4 Limed canes: gf. Ix. liv. 3; xIv. ccxviii.

5 P., who came from Umbria, preferred to send these birds,
which he had reared in Umbria, as a present to his patron,
rather than birds of his native country. The catta is
unknown.


415


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXI.—Phoenicoptert


Dar mihi pinna rubens nomen, sed lingua gulosis
nostra sapit. quid si garrula lingua foret ?


LX XII.—Phasiani


ArGoa primum sum transportata carina:
ante mihi notum nil nisi Phasis erat.


LX XIII.—Numidicae


AnsErRE Romano quamvis satur Hannibal esset,
ipse suas numquam barbarus edit aves.


LXXIV.—Anseres


Haec servavit avis Tarpeia templa Tonantis.
miraris? nondum fecerat illa deus.


LXXV.—Grues


Tursasis versus nec littera tota volabit,
unam perdideris si Palamedis avem.


LXX VI.—Rusticulae


Rustica sim an perdix quid refert, si sapor idem est?
carior est perdix. sic sapit illa magis.


1 This may be an allusion to Aesopus, the tragic actor, who
served up a dish consisting only of singing birds: Plin. N.H.
x. 72. Housman, however, thinks that garrula = telltale,
and that the bird could say how impure the mouths were
that fed on it.

2 A river of the Colchians from which the Argonauts are
said to have brought the pheasant (the Phasian bird).

3 Because luxury had not at that time introduced them
into Italy. As to Numidicae, ef. 11. lviii, 15,


416


BOOK XIII. vtxxi-ixxvi


LXXI.—Flamingoes


My ruddy wing gives me a name, but my tongue
is a delicacy to gluttons. What if my tongue were
to speak ?}

LXXII.— Pheasants


I was transported first by Argo’s keel; ere that
Phasis ? was all I knew.


LXXIII.—Guinea-fonls


A.tuoucn Hannibal ate his fill of Roman geese,
yet the barbarian never ate the birds of his own
land.?

LXXIV.—Geese


Tuis bird saved the Thunderer’s Tarpeian fane.
Do you wonder? a god had not yet built it.4


LXX V.—Cranes


You will disorder the lines, and the letter will not
fly complete if you make away with a single bird of
Palamedes.®

LXXVI.— Woodcock


Wuetnuer I am woodcock or partridge, what does
it matter if the flavour be the same? A partridge
is dearer. ’Tis,thus it has better flavour.®


‘ The cackling of geese saved the Capitol B.c. 390 from a
night attack by the Gauls. Now it can run norisk. Domi-
tian rebuilt the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus, which had
been twice burnt: Suet. Dom. v ; 1x. iii. 7.

5 P. is said to have copied the shape of the letters he in-
vented from the order of the flight of cranes. In Ix. xiii. 7
the letter is Y=V. M. is probably playing on two meanings
of versus (line). See also Luc. v. 716, which M. had in mind.

& gf. Magis ila juvant quae pluris emuntur, Juy, xi. 16.
ae Al]


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXVIL.—Cyens


Dutcra defecta modulatur carmina lingua
cantator cycnus funeris ipse sui.


LX XVIII.— Porphyriones


Nomen habet magni volucris tam parva gigantis?
et nomen prasini Porphyrionis habet.


LXXIX.—Mulli Vivi


Spirat in advecto sed iam piger aequore mullus
languescit. vivum da mare: fortis erit.


LX xX X.—Muraenae


Quae natat in Siculo grandis muraena profundo,
non valet exustam mergere sole cutem.


LX X XI.—Rhombi


Quamvis lata gerat patella rhombum,
rhombus latior est tamen patella.


1 According to Aristotle (Athen. ix. 49), ‘‘eialy Bducod Kad
pddtora wept ras TeAeutds.” Plin. (N.H. x. 32) denies it.

2 The porphyrion is unknown. It was a bird with a long
and narrow neck, and long legs. The beak and legs were
red. So Pliny, N.H. x. Ixiii. and xt. Ixxix. It is distin-
guished from the pelican in Arist. Av. 881. According to
AR (ix. 40) it came from Libya, and was also a domestic

ird.

3 P. one of the giants who made war on the gods: Hor.
Od. 111. iv. 54.

‘ A charioteer of the Green faction of the Circus.


418


BOOK XIII. txxvit—-Lxxxi


LXXVII.—Swans


Tue swan gives forth its sweet measured song with
failing tongue, itself the minstrel of its own death.


LXXVIII.— Porphyrions


Has so small a bird? the name of a great giant ?
It has, too, the name.of Porphyrion? of the Green.‘


LXXIX.—Live Mullets


Tue mullet breathes in the sea-water brought
with him, but, already torpid, he begins to languish.
Give him the fresh sea; he will be strong.5


LXXX.—Lampreys


Tue big lamprey that swims in the Sicilian deep
sea has not the strength to plunge when its skin is
scorched by the sun.®


LXXXI.—Turbots


However wide is the dish that bears the turbot,
yet the turbot is wider than the dish.


5 According to Friedlander fish were brought alive to table
in glass vessels and boiled before the eyes of the guests, who
observed the changing hues of the dying fish: cf. Sen. Quaest.
iii. 17, who observes that it sounds like a fable that the eyes
were fed before the throat.

6 According to Arist. (H.A. vi. iii. 4) turtles, when
their shells were scorched by the sun, were unable to sink,
and so were caught; see also Plin. N.H. ix. 12. M. says
the same thing of the lamprey. Such animals were called
mara or flutue: Macrob. Sat. iii. 15. The best lampreys

came from the Straits of Messena:; ibid.


419


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXII.—Ostrea
Esria Baiano modo veni concha Lucrino:
nobile nunc sitio luxuriosa garum.
LXXXIII.—Squillae
Carruceus nos Liris amat, quem silva Maricae
protegit: hinc squillae maxima turba sumus.
LXXXIV.—Scarus
Hic searus, aequoreis qui venit adesus ab undis,
visceribus bonus est, cetera vile sapit.
LXXXV.—Coracinus


Princeprs Niliaci raperis, coracine, macelli;
Pellaeae prior est gloria nulla gulae.


LXXXVI.—Echini


Isre licet digitos testudine pungat acuta,
cortice deposita mollis echinus erit.


1 Which produced the finest oysters: cf. m1. Ix. 3;


Macrob. Sat. iii. 15. 2 Garum: cf. XIV. cii.


3 A river in Campania near Minturnae. Marica was its
tutelary nymph who had a grove near it: Hor. Od. m1.


xvii. 7.


4 The scarus is really unknown. It was a favourite fish,
brought originally, according to Pliny (N.H. ix. 29), by
Tiberius from the Carpathian Sea, and planted by Optatus,
praefectus classis, in the sea between Ostia and Campania.
It was preserved for the first five years. Athenaeus (vii. 113)


gives a description.


420


BOOK XIII. vxxxu—.xxxvi


LXXXII.— Oysters


DrunkeEN with the water of Baiae’s Lucrine,! have
_ I, a shell-fish, just arrived. Now, luxurious that I
am, I thirst for the noble pickle.?


LXXXIII.—Prawns


Cerutean Liris,? which Marica’s wood guards, is
fond of us: from hence we prawns come in greatest
numbers.


LXXXIV.—Sea-bream


Or this sea-bream,* which has come lean from the
sea-waves, the entrails are good eating; as to the
rest it has poor flavour.


LXXXV.—Coracinus


You of all fish are scrambled for, Coracinus,) in
the markets of Nile; to Alexandria’s gourmets no
fish has renown surpassing yours.


LXXXVI.—Sea-urchins


A.TuouaeH that sea-urchin may prick your fingers
with its sharp shell, yet, when it lays aside its husk,
it will be soft.®


5 An unknown but valued fish peculiar to the Nile:
Plin. N.H xxxii. 19, who says it was not caught in winter
except on the same few days: N.H. ix. 24. See also
Athen. vii. 81, who says it was so called from its continually
moving the pupils of its eyes (xépa:). It was regarded as in
every way superior to the mu//us: Athen. iii. 93.

6 It was eaten with vinegar and honey sauce, parsley, and
mint: Athen. iii. 41. Athenaeus (loc. cit.) tells the story of
a Spartan who at a dinner bit a sea-urchin, shell and all, in
ignorance and cursed the viand (¢dynua piapdy), adding he
would not be beaten by it, but would never eat another.

421


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LX XX VIL.—Murices


SaNGUINE de nostro tinctas, ingrate, lacernas
induis, et non est hoc satis: esca sumus.


LXXXVIII.— Gobi


In Venetis sint lauta licet convivia terris,
principium cenae gobius esse solet.


LXXXIX.—Lupus


Lanevus Euganei lupus excipit ora Timavi,
aequoreo dulces cum sale pastus aquas.


XC.—Aurata


Non omnis laudes pretiumque aurata meretur,
sed cui solus erit concha Lucrina cibus.


XCI.—Acipensis


Ap Palatinas acipensem mittite mensas :
ambrosias ornent munera rara dapes.


1 of. v. xxiii. 5. Pliny (ix. 60) says that luxury had made
the fish as precious as pearls. Travellers speak of a hill still
standing at Tarentum of the debris of the murez.

2 of. Col. viii. 16; Hor. Sat. 1. iv. 32.

3 A small fish, ordinarily little esteemed, but common in
the lagoons of Venice. Inferior to a blenny: Diog. L. ii. 67.
Juy. (xi. 37) treats the price of a gobius as an insignificant
sum, as compared with the price of a mudlus.

* The most prized /upi were called nati or Janet from the
whiteness and softness of their flesh: Plin. N.A. ix. 28.
The /upus may have been the bass, one name of which is the
sea-wolf, from its rapaciousness (Grk. AdSpat); ef. the proverb
AdBpaxes MiAhotor of greedy persons; and generally Athen.
vii. 86.

422


BOOK XIII. txxxvu—xci


LXXXVII.—Purple Mussels


Croaks dyed in our blood,! ingrate, you put on;
and this is not enough: we are your food.?


LXXXVIII.—Gudgeons


In Venetian territory, however choice may be the
entertainment, the beginning of the dinner is wont
to be a gudgeon.®


LXXXIX.—The Bass


Sorr and white‘ the bass breasts the mouths of
Euganean Timavus,° fed on fresh water and the salt
of the sea.


XC.—The Gilthead


Nor every gilthead® deserves praise and a big
price, but the one that feeds only on Lucrine shell-
fish.

XCI.—The Sturgeon


Senp sturgeon to Palatine tables; let rare offer-
ing adorn ambrosial 8 feasts.


5 A river, now the Timavo, forming the boundary of
Istria and Venetia and falling into the Adriatic,

& The same as the Greek xpucoppus (the zoological name of
which is Chrysophrys aurata), and probably not the John
Dory, the name of which is Zeus faber. It feeds on molluscs,

7 According to Pliny (.V.H. ix. 27) the fish, though rare,
was little esteemed in his time.

8 qe. of the emperor. M. anticipates the English common
law whereby ‘‘ whales and sturgeons are royal fish, and
belong to the King by his prerogative” : 7 Coke’s Reports,
16 A. Macrob. (Sat. ili. 16) says that, at a banquet of the
Emperor Septimius Severus, the fish was ushered in by
crowned attendants to the sound of flutes, quasi: numinis
pompa.


423


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCII.—Lepores


InrerR aves turdus, si quid me iudice certum est,
inter quadripedes mattea prima lepus.


XCIII.—A per
Qu: Diomedeis metuendus saetiger agris


Aetola cecidit cuspide, talis erat.


XCIV.—Dammae


Dente timetur aper, defendunt cornua cervum:
inbelles dammae quid nisi praeda sumus?


XCV.— Oryx
MarTuTINARUM non ultima praeda ferarum
saevos oryx constat quot mihi morte canum!


XCVI.—Cervus


Hic erat ille tuo domitus, Cyparisse, capistro.
an magis iste tuus, Silvia, cervus erat?


XCVII.—Lalisio


Dum tener est onager solaque lalisio matre
pascitur, hoc infans sed breve nomen habet.


1 Meleager’s, who slew the Calydonian boar: cf. 1x.


xlviii. 6; x1. lxix. 10. 2 of. viii. lxvii. 4.


3 A one-horned, cloven-hoofed animal, not unlike a wild
goat; Plin. N.H. xi. 106. It was a ferocious animal, and
came from Gaetulia: Opp. De Ven. ii. 445. Its flesh was


esteemed by rich epicures: Juv. xi. 140.


‘C., having by accident shot his favourite stag, prayed
the gods to grant him perpetual grief, and was turned into a
cypress, the symbol of mourning: Ov. Met, x. 109 et segq.


424


BOOK XIII. xcn—xevii


XCII.—Hares
Amonest birds the fieldfare, if my judgment can
aught decide, amongst quadrupeds the primest deli-
cacy is a hare.


XCIIIL—A Boar


Tue terror in the land of Diomedes, the bristly
beast that fell beneath an Aetolian spear,! was such
as this.

XCIV.—Does

For his tusk is the boar dreaded, his horns defend
the stag; we, unwarlike does, what are we but a
prey ?

XCOV.—The Oryx

Not the meanest quarry among the beasts of
morning shows,? the savage oryx* costs me the
death of how many dogs!


XCVI.—The Stag


Was this the stag tamed by your halter, Cypa-
rissus,‘ or rather was it your stag, Silvia’ ?


XCVII.—The Milk-foal of the Wild Ass


Wuite he is a young wild ass, and is fed by his
mother alone, the lalisio® has, as a nursling, this
name, but one short-lived.’


5 Silvia was the daughter of Tyrrheus, the huntsman of
King Latinus. Ascanius, the son of Aeneas, shot her
favourite stag, and thus brought about the war between the
Trojans and the Latins: cf. Verg. Aen. vii. 483 et seqq.

6 Pliny (N.H. viii. 69) says that the flesh of the dalisio was
much appreciated.

7 When weaned it is called a wild ass.


425


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCVIII.—Caprea


PENDENTEM Summa capream de rupe videbis :
casuram speres; despicit illa canes.


XCIX.—Dorcas


Deticium parvo donabis dorcada nato:
iactatis solet hance mittere turba togis.


C.—Onager


Putcuer adest onager: mitti venatio debet
dentis Erythraei: iam removete sinus.


CI.—Oleum Venayrum


Hoc tibi Campani sudavit baca Venafri:
unguentum quotiens sumis, et istud olet.


CIIl.—Garum Sociorum


ExprranTis adhuc scombri de sanguine primo
accipe fastosum, munera cara, garum.


CIII.—Amphora Muriae


ANTIPOLITANI, fateor, sum filia thynni :
essem si scombri, non tibi missa forem.


1 Perhaps a reminiscence of Verg. Hcl. i. 76.

2 7.e. in the Amphitheatre.

3 It is no use to supplicate for the return of the elephant
hunt. As to this practice, ¢f. Ov. Am, 111. ii. 74.

4 Which was celebrated for its olives: cf. x11. lxiii.; Hor.
Od. 11. vi. 16.

5 Garum, made of the intestines and offal of mackerel. The


426


BOOK XIII. xcvin-cim


XCVIII.—The Roe
You will see a roe poised on the summit of a
rock;! one can only hope she will fall; she is
showing contempt of the dogs.


XCIX.—The Gazelle
You shall give a gazelle as a pet to your little son.
The crowd loves to procure its dismissal by fluttering
their togas.?
C.—The Wild Ass


A BEAUTIFUL wild ass comes; the hunt of the
Indian tusk must be sent away; now shake your togas
no longer.®
Cl.—Venafran Oil


Tus oil the berry of Campanian Venafrum ‘ has
distilled for you; your unguent, as often as you use
it, smells too of that oil.


CII.—Fish Sauce of the Allies


Receive this proud sauce,> made of the first blood
of a mackerel breathing still, an expensive gift.


CIII.—A Jar of Tunny-fish Sauce


Daveuter of the tunny of Antipolis I confess I
am. Were I of the mackerel, I should not have
been sent to you.’


finest was called garum sociorum, and came from a manu-
factory at New Carthage in Spain: Plin. NV. H. xxxi. 43, who
says it was almost as dear as unguent, and was sold for a
thousand sesterces (£8) for 2 congii = 12 pints.

6 7.e. I am the inferior fish sauce called muria, made of the
entrails of other fish than mackerel, principally tunny.

7 But to a rich man.


427


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CIV.—Mel Atticum


Hoc tibi Thesei populatrix misit Hymetti
Pallados a silvis nobile nectar apis.


CV.—Favi Stcult


Cum dederis Siculos mediae de collibus Hyblae,
Cecropios dicas tu licet esse favos.


CVI.—Passum


Gnosta Minoae genuit vindemia Cretae
hoc tibi, quod mulsum pauperis esse solet.


CVII.— Picatum


Hacc de vitifera venisse picata Vienna
ne dubites, misit Romulus ipse mihi.


CVIII.—Mulsum


Attica nectareum turbatis mella Falernum.
misceri decet hoc a Ganymede merum,


CIX.—Albanum


Hoc de Caesareis mitis vindemia cellis
misit, Iuleo quae sibi monte placet.


1 A hill near Athens famous for its thyme.

? Sicilian honey was inferior to Attic, though Hyblan and
Hymettian honey are constantly mentioned together: cf
x1. xlii. 3. Pliny calls each optimum: N.H. xi. 13.

3 Mulsum was wine and honey mixed: cf. Ep. eviii.
Passum was made from a grape called apiana (? muscatel)
dried in the sun: Plin. N.7/. xi. 11.

4 Vienne in Gallia Narbonensis. The district bore vines


428


BOOK XIII. civ-crx


_ CIV.—Attic Honey
Tuis the bee, spoiler of Thesean Hymettus,! has
sent you, noble nectar from the woods of Pallas.


CV.—Sicilian Honeycombs
Wuen you make a present of Sicilian combs from
amid Hybla’s hills? you may say they are Attic
combs, _
CVI.—Raisin Wine
Tue vintage of Gnossos in Minoan Crete brought
forth for you this, which is wont to be the poor man’s
mead.?
CVII.—Pitch-flavoured Wine
Tuat this pitch-flavoured wine came from vine-
bearing Vienna‘ do not doubt; Romulus® himself
sent it to me.


CVIII.—Honeyed Wine or Mead
You, Attic honey, thicken the nectarous® Faler-
nian. It is meet that such a drink be mixed by a
Ganymede.
CIX.—Alban Wine


_ Tuis wine the mild grape, proud of itself on the
Julian mount,’ sends you from Caesar’s cellars.


producing wine with a natural taste of pitch: Plin. N.H.
xiv. 3; xxiii. 24.

5 Some friend at V. where Martial was known: cf. vu.
Ixxxviii. 2.

8 To blend with honey the wine had to be old: Plin. NV. H.


xxii. 53.

7 It was inferior only to Falernian and Setine: Plin. NV.
xiv. 8 (3). One variety was sweet (Athen. i, 48). Juv.
(xiii. 214) speaks of its preteosa senectus,


429


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX.—Surrentinum


Surrentina bibis? nec murrina picta nec aurum
sume: dabunt calices haec tibi vina suos.


CXI.—Falernum


De Sinuessanis venerunt Massica prelis:
condita quo quaeris consule? nullus erat.


CXII.—Setinum


Penputa Pomptinos quae spectat Setia campos,
exigua vetulos misit ab urbe cados.


CXIII.— Fundanum


Haec Fundana tulit felix autumnus Opimi.
expressit mustum consul et ipse bibit.


CXIV.—Trifolinum


Non sum de primo, fateor, trifolina Lyaeo,
inter vina tamen septima vitis ero.


1 Tiberius called it generous vinegar, and Claudius noble
vapidity : Plin. N.. xiv. 8 (3). It was a thin wine, suitable
for invalids: zbid.

2 of. XIV. Cxill. 1.

3 Surrentine earthenware: cf, xIv. cii.; vii. vi. 2.

* In Campania, near which was Mons Massicus and Mons
Falernus.

5 The wine was as old as the kings (B.c. 510). This is of
course hyperbolical. ,


430


BOOK XIII. cx—cxiv


CX.—Surrentine Wine


Drink you Surrentine?! Take not. beakers ot
painted murrine,? nor of gold: these wines will
supply you with their native cups.®


CXI1.—Falernian Wine


From presses of Sinuessa* has the Massic come.
Stored in what consul’s year do you ask? there was
no consul then.®


CXII.—Seline Wine


Setia high-poised, that looks on the Pomptine
levels, has sent from a tiny city casks of aged wine.®


CXIII.—Fundanian Wine


Tuis Fundanian the rich autumn of Opimius’ year?
produced. The consul squeezed out the must, and
himself drank the wine.


CXIV.—Trifoline Wine


I am not, I confess, of the first brand of Lyaeus;
yet among wines my vintage shall be the seventh.®


6 The favourite wine of the Emperor Augustus: Plin. V.H.
xiv. 8 (1). Pliny describes it as less strong than Surrentine,
less rough than Alban, and more fiery than Falernian: NV. H.
xxill. 21.

7 g.c. 121, a famous year: cf. I. xxvi. 7. Athen. (i. 48)
describes it as a heady wine.

8 The wine was called trifolinum because it matured tertio
foliorum exortu, i.e. in three years. It had an earthy flavour:
Athen. i. 48; and is called by Pliny (NV. H. xiv. 8 (6)) plebevwm.
But it is praised by Juv. (ix. 56).


431


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX V.—Caecubum


Carecusa Fundanis generosa cocuntur Amyclis,
vitis et in media nata palude viret.


CX VI.—Signinum
Porasis liquidum Signina morantia ventrem ?
ne nimium sistas, sit tibi parca sitis.


CXVII.—Mamertinum


Ampuora Nestorea tibi Mamertina senecta
si detur, quodvis nomen habere potest.


CX VIII.— Tarraconense


Tarraco, Campano tantum cessura Lyaeo,
haec genuit Tuscis aemula vina cadis.


CXIX.—Nomentanum


NoMENTANA meum tibi dat vindemia Bacchum:
si te Quintus amat, commodiora bibes.


CXX.—Spoletinum


De Spoletinis quae sunt cariosa lagonis
malueris quam si musta Falerna bibas.


2 A stimulating and vigorous wine, to be laid down:
Athen. i. 48

2 Pliny says (N.H. xiv. 8(3)) that it was considered a
medicine ‘‘ austeritate nimia continendae utile alvo.” It
improved after six years: Athen. i. 48.

5 From Messena, in Sicily. It was a sweet and light wine:
Athen. i. 48. ° sos

4 i.e. it is as good as any wine,


432


BOOK XIII. cxv—cxx


OXY. Caccuban Wine


Generous Caecuban! is ripened at Amyclae by
Fundi, and the vine grows green, born in the middle
of the marsh.


CXVI.—Signine Wine


Witt you drink Signine that constricts relaxed
bowels? That you may not check them too much,
let your thirst be sparing.”


CX VII.—Mamertine Wine


Ir a jar of Mamertine® as old as Nestor be given
to you, it can bear any name you please.


CX VIII.—Tarraconian Wine


Tarraco, that will yield only to Campanian vine-
yards, begot this wine that vies with Tuscan jars.5


CXIX.—Nomentan Wine


A NomenTan vintage gives you this wine of my
own. If Quintus loves you, you will drink better
wines.§®


CXX.—Spoletine Wine


Crustep wines from Spoletine flagons you will
prefer to the drinking of Falernian must.”


5 <* Nobilitantur eleyantia Tarraconensia, et conferuntur
Italiae primis”: Plin. N.H. xiv. 8 (6).

6 Yet M. saye that Nomentan, when it is old, can compare
with any wine: cf. 1. ev. 4. It ripened quickly, and was
drinkable after five years: Athen. i. 48.

7 7.e. F. new wine. Yet Spoletine was a poor wine: cf.
xiv. cvi. In Athen, (i. 48) it is described as sweet and
golden in colour.


433


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX XI.—Paelignum


Marsica Paeligni mittunt turbata coloni:
non tu, libertus sed bibat illa tuus.


COXXIL—Acetum


Ampuora Niliaci non sit tibi vilis aceti:
esset cum vinum, vilior illa fuit.


CX XII.—Massilitanum


Cum tua centenos expunget! sportula civis,
fumea Massiliae ponere vina potes.


COX XIV.— Caeretanum


Carretana Nepos ponat, Setina putabis.
non ponit turbae, cum tribus illa bibit.


CXXV.—Tarentinum


Nopsitis et lanis et felix vitibus Aulon
det pretiosa tibi vellera, vina mihi.


1 expugnet TB.


1 cf. xtv. evi. A rough, but stomachic wine: Athen. i. 48.

2 Kgyptian vinegar was celebrated: Athen. ii. 76; Juv.
xiii. 85,

3 i.e. when you wish to repay clients for their services.
Massilia had a bad reputation for exposing its wines too long


434


BOOK XIII. cxxi-cxxy


CXXI.—Paelignian Wine


PAELIGNIAN wine-growers send you turbid Marsic!
wine. Do not drink it yourself, but let your freed-
man do so. ;


CXXII.— Vinegar


Ler not a jar of Egyptian vinegar be mean in your
_ eyes. When it was wine it was more mean.?


CX XIIIL.—Massilian Wine


Wuen your dole shall strike off the list a hundred
citizens, you can serve them the smoky wines of
Massilia.


CX XIV.—Caeretan Wine


Let Nepos‘ serve Caeretan,® you will imagine it
Setine. He does not serve it to a crowd : with three
guests he drinks it.


CXXV.—Tarentine Wine


Let Aulon,® renowned for wool and blest in vines,
give precious fleeces to you, wines’ to me.


to the smoke of the furnace: cf. x. xxxvi.l. But Athenaeus
(i. 48) calls it a good full-bodied wine.

4 of. VI. xxvii. 1.

5 From Caere in Etruria, now Cervetri.

6 A valley in the region of Tarentum. M. has in mind
Hor. Od. u. vi. 18.

7-T, wine was sweet and soft, with no strength: Athen.
i. 48.


435


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXXVI.— Unguentum


Unauentum heredi numquam nec vina relinquas,
ille habeat nummos, haec tibi tota dato.


CXXVII.—Coronae Roseae


Dart festinatas, Caesar, tibi bruma coronas:
quondam veris erat, nunc tua facta rosa est.


436


BOOK XIII. cxxvi-cxxvu


CXXVI.—Unguent


UneuenT or wine never bequeath to your heir;
let him have your cash: the whole of these give to
your own self.


CXXVII.—A Crown of Roses


Forcep coronals winter gives thee, Caesar: ere-
while the rose was Spring’s: now has it become
thine.!

1 of. vi. Ixxx.


437


= ae Ba Veen anes
— 24 - =e Rees
—s — ae “tae: me!


ees eee fs .
PN TBE Teo nese gee
s adi = a ois 4 ee joraaee
“2 orig geadld Te olotw 2
-_ ¢
: és oe ¢ oe
(i mf saith aera Toxhen ap. “xno:


», BERD dE zeit wea tee sd Sea


er
F 3


[LIBER QUARTUS DECIMUS]
APOPHORETA


I


SynTHEsIBus dum gaudet eques dominusque senator
dumque decent nostrum pillea sumpta Iovem ;
nec timet aedilem moto spectare fritillo,
cum videat gelidos tam prope verna lacus:
divitis alternas et pauperis accipe sortes: 5
praemia convivae dent sua quisque suo.
« Sunt apinae tricaeque et si quid vilius istis.’’
quis nescit? vel quis tam manifesta negat ?
sed quid agam potius madidis, Saturne, diebus,
quos tibi pro caelo filius ipse dedit? 10
vis scribam Thebas Troiamve malasve Mycenas ?
“‘Lude”’ inquis “ nucibus”: perdere nolo nuces.


1 Domitian : ¢f. x1. vi. 4. The wearing of the pilleum, or
cap of liberty, was common at the Saturnalia, as being sym-
bolical of the licence of the season.

2 7.e. when he sees that the time is winter. Lucian, how-
ever, says (Saturn. 2) that a common Saturnalian joke was to
blacken a man’s face and to duck him in the water. If
M. alludes to this, the rendering should be ‘‘ although he
sees” ete.

8 Apophoreta are presents given “to be carried away”
by guests, and probably distributed by lot (sortes i. 5 and


440


BOOK XIV
APOPHORETA


I


Wuite the knight and My Lord the Senator re-
joice in dinner-dress, while wearing freedom’s cap
beseems our Jove,! and the home-bred slave, as
he shakes the dice-box, does not fear to look the
Aedile in the face, when he sees the cold tanks
so near,” receive these lots, gifts of rich and poor
alternate; let everyone give his own guest his proper
prize.2 “They are worthless and gim-cracks, or
anything still meaner, if possible.” Who does not
know it? Or who denies what is so plain? But
what else am I to do, Saturn, on the unsober days
your son himself gave you in exchange for Heaven?
Do you wish me to write of Thebes, or Troy, or
guilty Mycenae? “Play with nuts,” you say. I
don’t want to lose my nuts.5


Petr. 40, 56). Martial’s couplets describe such gifts, and
were clearly intended to go in pairs, one couplet describing
something that would be given by a rich man, and the next
something similar that would be given by a poor man. But
some couplets appear to have been lost or to have got out of
order—e.g. Ixvii. and Ixxi.; but the following are among
some of the pairs about which there can be no doubt, viz.
vy. and vi.; xliii. and xliv.; lxxxix.and xc. ; xciii. and xciv. ;
clix. and elx. ; clxi. and clxii. See Friedlinder’s full exami-
nation. 4 Jupiter. 5 cf. v. xxx. 8.


VOL. Il. P 441


THE &PIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


II


Quo vis cumque loco potes hunc finire libellum ;
versibus explicitumst omne duobus opus.

lemmata si quaeris cur sint adscripta, docebo,
ut, si malueris, lemmata sola legas.


WII.—Pugillares Citret
SectTa nisi in tenues essemus ligna tabellas,
essemus Libyci nobile dentis onus.
IV.— Quinquiplices
CarEDE iuvencorum domini calet area felix,
quinquiplici cera cum datur altus honos.
V.—Pugillares Eborei
Laneurpa ne cristes obscurent lumina cerae,
nigra tibi niveum littera pingat ebur.
VI.—Triplices
Tunc triplices nostros non vilia dona putabis,
cum se venturam scribet amica tibi.


VII.—Pugillares Membranei


Esse puta ceras, licet haec membrana vocetur:
delebis, quotiens scripta novare voles.


1 Round table-tops (orbes) were supported on ivory legs:
ChatXalixa7a8: =

* The sacrifice takes place when the tablets arrived by
which the emperor sent notice of promotion.

3 But generally so considered : of. vis. lxxii. 2; x. Ixxxvii 6.


442


BOOK XIV. u-va


II


You can finish this little book at whatever point you
like ; every subject is summed up in two verses. If
you ask why headings are added, I will explain: it is
that, if you prefer, you may read the headings only.


IlI.—Tablets of Citrus-wood


Hap not our wood been cut into thin plates, we
should have been the noble burden of a Libyan
tusk.!

IV.—Five-leaved Tablets


Tue glad court of our master is warm with the
slaughter of steers, when by the five-leaved waxen
tablet is conferred on him high honour.?


V.—Ivory Tablets

Lest dark-coloured waxen tablets dim your failing
eyesight, let black letters dye for you snow-white
ivory.

VI.—Three-leaved Tablets

You will then deem my three-leaved tablets no
mean? gift, when your mistress shall write to you
that, she will come.


VIL—Parchment Tablets


ImacineE these tablets are waxen, although they
are called parchment. You will rub out as often as
you wish to write afresh.*

4 Parchment according to Quintilian (x. 3) was used by
persons of weak sight. The parchment seems therefore to
have been specially prepared so as to admit of erasure, as on
a wax tablet.


443


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


VIII.—Vitelliant
Nonpvm legerit hos licet puella,
novit quid cupiant Vitelliani.
IX.—Idem
Quop minimos cernis, mitti nos credis amicae.
falleris: et nummos ista tabella rogat.
X.—Chartae Maiores
Non est munera quod putes pusilla,
cum donat vacuas poeta chartas.
XI.—Chartae Epistulares


Seu leviter noto seu caro missa sodali
omnes ista solet charta vocare suos.


XII.—Loculk Ebore:


Hos nisi de flava loculos implere moneta
non decet: argentum vilia ligna ferant.


XITI.—Loculi Lignet


S1 quid adhuc superest in nostri faece locelli,
munus erit. nihil est? ipse locellus erit.


1 Possibly of very small size and named after the maker.
They were often used for billets-doux: ¢f. 11. vi. 6,
2 4.e. you will not be bored by any poems.


444


BOOK XIV. vin—xm1


VUL— Vitelian Tablets


AtTHouGH she may not as yet have read them,a
girl knows what Vitellian! tablets wish for.


IX.—The Same


BEcausE you see we are very small, you believe we
are being sent to a mistress. You are mistaken: a
tablet of that sort also duns for money,


X.—Bigger Sheets


Tuere is no reason you should think the offering
puny when a poet gives you blank sheets.?


XI.—Letter-paper
Wuetu_er sent to a slight acquaintance or to a


dear comrade, this paper is accustomed to address
everyone as its “ Dear friend.’ §


~ XII.—Jvory Money-boxes


To fill these money-boxes with anything but yellow
money is unfitting : let cheap wood carry silver.


XIII.—Wooden Money-boxes


Ir anything still remain at the bottom of me, a
little money-box, it shall be a gift. Is there nothing?
The little box itself shall be the gift.

8 Suus was commonly used in the heading to a letter, e.g.


G. Plinius Maximo suo S. (salutem). 8. is the ‘* felix litera”
of vil. xlv. 4.


445


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XIV.—Tak Eborei


Cum steterit nullus vultu tibi talus eodem,
munera me dices magna dedisse tibi.


XV.— Tesserae


Non sim talorum numero par tessera, dum sit
maior quam talis alea saepe mihi.


XVI.—Turricula


Quase scit compositos manus inproba mittere talos,
si per me misit, nil nisi vota feret.


XVIL.—Tabula Lusoria


Hac mihi bis seno numeratur tessera puncto 3;
caleulus hae gemino discolor hoste perit.


XVIII.—Nuces


ALBA parva nuces et non damnosa videtur ;
saepe tamen pueris abstulit illa natis.


1 The jactus Veneris, or highest throw with the tali, was
where each of them turned up a different number. The ¢adi
were three or four in number, and on four of the flat sides
were marked 1, 3, 4, and 6. The remaining two sides were
rounded and blank.

2 Two, sometimes three, dice (¢esserae) were used, but four
talt.

5 Gambling with dice was for money, and seems to have
been a more expensive mode of gambling than with the
knucklebones : cf. Iv. Ixvi. 15.


446


- BOOK XIV. xiv—xvin


XIV.—Ivory Knuckle-bones


WHEN no one of the bones you throw stands with
the same face as another you will say I have given
you a great present.!


XV.— Dice


Ler us dice be not equal in number to the knuckle-
bones,” if only our stakes be often greater than with -
the knuckle-bones.?


XVI.—The Littte Tower Dice-box


Ir the cheating hand, that knows how to arrange
and throw the bones, has thrown them through me,
he will achieve nothing beyond prayers.*


XVIL—A_ Gaming-board


On this side of me dice are counted by double
sixes: on this other the piece of hostile colour is
taken by twin foemen.°®


XVITL.—WNuts


Nuts appear a small stake, and one not ruinous; yet
often has that stake made prize of boys’ buttocks.®


4 7.e. his fraud does not succeed. The turricula appears to
have been made with internal grooves to prevent cheating.

5 The epigram is on a gaming-table suitable both for the
game ‘‘of the twelve lines” (similar to backgammon) and
the game of ‘‘robbers” (like chess or draughts) : ¢f. vil.
lxxii. 8. In the first game the highest throw appears to have
been two sixes: cf. (of three dice) Aesch. Ag. 33. In the
second game a piece was taken by being hemmed in by two
opposing ‘‘robbers”: cf. Ep. xx.

6 When they gamble, whereas they ought to be in school :
of. v. lxxxiv. 1, 2. But Gronovius’ comment is, ‘* Videtur
potius turpe aliquid ac nefandum significart.”


447


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XIX.—Theca Libraria


Sortirus thecam calamis armare memento;
cetera nos dedimus, tu leviora para.


XX.—Calculi


Insrprosorum si ludis bella latronum,
gemmeus iste tibi miles et hostis erit.


XXI.—Graphiarium


Haec tibi erunt armata suo graphiaria ferro:
si puero dones, non leve munus erit.


XXIL—Dentiscalpium


Lentiscum melius: sed si tibi frondea cuspis
defuerit, dentes pinna levare potest.


XXTL—Auriscalpium


S1 tibi morosa prurigine verminat auris,
arma damus tantis apta libidinibus.


XXIV.—Acus Aurea


SpLENpDIpA ne madidi violent bombycina crines,
figat acus tortas sustineatque comas.


XX V.—Pectines


Quip faciet nullos hic inventura capillos
multifido buxus quae tibi dente datur?


1 Inbraria marks it as for the use of the librarius, con-
taining all that he needed. 2 of, Ep. xvii.


448


BOOK XIV. x1x—xxv


XIX.—A Case for Writing Materials


Havine won the case! in the raffle, remember to
equip it with pens: we have given you all else, do
you provide the slighter things.


XX.—Draught Pieces


Ir you play the war-game of robbers in ambush,
these glass pieces will be your soldiers and their
enemies.”


XXL—A Style-case


Tuis style-case, fitted with its proper iron styles,’
shall be for you: if you give it to your boy, it will
be no slight gift.


XXIL—A_ Toothpick


Mastick* is better; but if pointed wood be not
forthcoming, a quill can relieve your teeth.


XXII.—An Earpick


Ir your ear is troubled with a persistent itching, I
give you an instrument appropriate to such vagaries.


XXIV.—A Gold Hairpin


TuaT your moistened hair may not soil your bright
silks, let a pin fix and hold up your knotted locks.


XXV.—Combs
Wuar will be the use, when it will find here no
hair, of this many-toothed piece of box which is
given you?
3 Pointed instruments for writing on wax.
4 of. 11. 1xxxii. 9,


449


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XX VI.—Crines


Cuartica! Teutonicos accendit spuma capillos :
captivis poteris cultior esse comis.


XXVII.—Sapo


Si mutare paras longaevos cana capillos,
accipe Mattiacas (quo tibi calva ?) pilas.


XX VIUL—Umbella


AccIPE quae nimios vincant umbracula soles :
sit licet et ventus, te tua vela tegent.


XXIX.—Causea


In Pompeiano tecum spectabo theatro.
mandatus? populo vela negare solet.


XX X.—Venabula


ExcIPIENT apros expectabuntque leones,
intrabunt ursos, sit modo firma manus.


XX XI.—Culter Venatorius


S1 deiecta gemas longo venabula rostro,
hic brevis ingentem comminus ibit aprum.


1 Chaticas T, Castica By.
2 mandatus quid sit nondum satis liquet, nam ventus y,
nam flatus Pontanus.


1 Ladies wore false hair, much of which came from
Germany, or from German captives. This hair was dyed
with sapo, consisting of goats’ fat and beechwood ashes (Plin.
N H. xxviii. 51) in the form of balls. See next epigram, and
cf. spuma Batava in Vill. xxxili. 20.


450


BOOK XIV. xxvi-xxx1


XXVI.—Soap

Tue spume of the Chatti turns to flame Teutonic
locks: you can be smarter with the hair of a captive
slave.} -

XXVII.—Soap-balls from Mattiacum

Ir white-haired you are set on dyeing your aged
locks, acecept—why be hairless?—these balls from
Mattiacum.?

XXVIUI.—A Sunshade

AccepT a sunshade to subdue the overpowering
heat; even though there be a wind,? your own
awning will cover you.


XXIX.—A Broad-brimmed Hat

I witt be a spectator with you in Pompey’s theatre,
for blasts of wind are apt to deny the people an
awning.‘

XXX.—Hunting-spears

Tuey will counter boars, and will wait for the
lion’s rush; they will pierce bears if the hand be
but firm enough.


XXXI.—A Hunting-knife
Ir you lament that your hunting spear with its
long blade has been struck down, this short weapon
will closely engage a huge boar.


2 Supposed to be Marpurg or Wiesbaden. It was a town


of the Chatti.

3 When the ordinary vela could not be spread, or had to
be furled: cf. xxix. 2.

4 Therefore the head requires a covering. The causea was
a high-crowned and broad-brimmed hat. | It came originally
from Macedonia: Val. Max. v. i. 4, and was especially worn


by fishermen and sailors.
451


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XX XII.—Parazonium


MinitiaE decus hoc gratique erit omen honoris,
arma tribunicium cingere digna latus.


XXXII.—Pugio
Puaio, quem curva signat brevis orbita vena,


stridentem gelidis hunc Salo tinxit aquis.


XXXIV.—Falx


Pax me certa ducis placidos curvavit in usus.
agricolae nunc sum, militis ante fui.


XXX V.—Securicula


Cum fieret tristis solvendis auctio nummis,
haec quadringentis milibus empta fuit.


XXXVI.—Ferramenta Tonsoria
Tonpenpis haec arma tibi sunt apta capillis;
unguibus hie longis utilis, illa genis.
XXXVIL.—Scrinium


SeteEcTos nisi das mihi libellos,
admittam tineas trucesque blattas,


1 The parazontum was a waist belt carrying a sword worn
on the left side by military tribunes, whereas the ordinary
soldier wore his sword slung on the right side by a shoulder-
strap. 2 7.e. of an appointment to a tribuneship.

t cf. 1. xlix. 12. Salo was the river of Bilbilis, M.’s birth-
place.


452


BOOK XIV. xxxu—xxxvir


XXXIL—A Belt and Sword


A soupier’s decoration! is this, and it will be a
sign of a prized honour,? a weapon worthy to gird a
tribune’s side.


XXXIIL—A Dagger


Tuis dagger, which a narrow circle marks with its
rounded groove, Salo dipt® while it was hissing in
his chilling waters.


XXXIV.—A Sickle


ME our Captain’s assured peace has bent to serve
quiet uses: the husbandman’s am I now, the soldier’s
was I aforetime.


XXXV.—A Small Axe


When a melancholy auction for payment of debts
was held, this was bought for four hundred thousand
sesterces.*


XXXVI.—A Barber's Implements


Turse instruments are suitable for the cutting of
your hair; this one® is serviceable to long nails,
that ® to your cheeks.


XXXVIIL—A Bookcase


Untess you provide me’ with choice books I will
let in moths and savage bookworms.


4 The price is meant to be absurd. The securicula was
a child’s ornament or toy: cf. Plaut. Rud. 1159 Such
things were also hung round children’s necks as amulets, or
as proofs of identity. 5 Cultellus. § Novacula.

7 The scriniwm was a circular case (Ov. J'rist. 1. i. 106) for
holding books and papers.


453


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XXXVIIL.—Fasces Calamorum


Dar chartis habiles calamos Memphitica tellus ;
texantur reliqua tecta palude tibi.


XXXIX.—Lucerna Cubicularis


Dutcis conscia lectuli lucerna,
quidquid vis facias licet, tacebo.


XL.—Cicindela
ANCcILLAM tibi sors dedit lucernae,
totas quae vigil exigit tenebras.


XLI.—Lucerna Polymyxos


INLUSTREM cum tota meis convivia flammis
totque geram myxas, una lucerna. vocor.


XLIT.—Cereus


Hic tibi nocturnos praestabit cereus ignis:
subducta est puero namque lucerna tuo,


XLIU.—Candelabrum Corinthium


Nomina candelae nobis antiqua dederunt.
non norat parcos uncta lucerna patres.


XLIV.—Candelabrum Ligneum


Esse vides lignum; servas nisi lumina, fiet
de candelabro magna lucerna tibi.


1 Candles were made of rope or rush dipped in wax, tallow,
or pitch: Varr. De Ling. Lat. v. 119; Plin. N.H. xvi. 70.
A candle was a poor man’s light; hence it is called a
‘‘handmaid.” of the rich man’s lamp: cf. Juv. iii. 287.

2 Lamps with eyen fourteen wicks have been found at
Pompeii and Herculaneum.


454


.


BOOK XIV. xxxvii—x.iv


XXXVIII.—Bundles of Pens
Tue land of Memphis supplies reeds handy for
writing: let your roof be thatched with the reeds
from other marshes.


XXXIX.—A Bedroom Lamp


I am a lamp, privy to the pleasures of your couch:
you may do what you will, I shall be silent.


XL.—A Candle!


Tue lot has given you the lamp’s handmaid, which
is awake and dispels complete darkness.


XLL—A Lamp mith many Wicks


ActuoueH | illume whole entertainments with my
flames, and carry so many wicks,” I am called a single
lamp.


XLU.—A Taper


Tuis taper will afford you light by night, for your
lamp has been stolen from your slave.


XLIIL.—A Corinthian? Candelabrum


CaNDLEs gave me my name of old; the oil-lamp
had no knowledge of our thrifty sires.


XLIV.—A Wooden Candelabrum


You see I am wood; unless you guard the light, a
great lamp will be made of your candelabrum.*


3 According to Pliny (NV.H. xxxiv. 3), there were three
kinds of aes Corinthiwm, one in which silver was the
principal ingredient, another in which gold, and a third
with equal proportions of gold and silver.

4 The wicks will set fire to the wood.


455


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XLV.—Pila Paganica


_Haec quae difficili turget paganica pluma,
folle minus laxast et minus arta pila.


XLVI.—Pila Trigonalis


S1 me mobilibus scis expulsare sinistris,
sum tua. tu nescis? rustice, redde pilam.


XLVII.— Follis


Ire procul, iuvenes: mitis mihi convenit aetas:
folle decet pueros ludere, folle senes.


XLVIWI.—Harpasta


Haec rapit Antaei velox in pulvere draucus,
grandia qui vano colla labore facit.


XLIX.—Hatlteres


Quip pereunt stulto fortes haltere lacerti?
exercet melius vinea fossa viros.


L.—Galericulum


Ne lutet inmundum nitidos ceroma capillos,
hac poteris madidas condere pelle comas.


1 As to the balls mentioned in this and the three following


epigrams, cf. Iv. xix. 5 segq., and VII. xxxii. 7.
2


Cf. Wil. lxxiis 11. 3 t.e. cinaedus: cf. IX. xxvii. 10.
42.e. on the athletic ground. A. was a Libyan wrestler
vanquished by Hercules: cf. 1x. ci. 4. The development of
a short, muscular neck was aimed at by athletes: Juv. iii.
88 ; and see Plin. NV. H. xiv. 28 (pectorosa cervicis repandae


456


BOOK XIV. xtv-1


XLV.—A Feather-stuffed Ball
Tus ball which swells with tightly-crammed
feathers is less flaccid than the bladder-ball and
less compact than a hand-ball.!


XLVI.—A Ball for the Three-cornered Game


Ir you know how to bandy me with your nimble
left-handers,? I am yours. Don’t you know how?
You clown, give back the ball.


XLVIL.—The Bladder-ball


Go far off, you young men; unstrenuous age befits
me: with the bladder-ball it becomes boys to play,
with the bladder-ball old men.


XLVIII.—Scrimmage-balls


TueEseE the dissolute youth,’ who with empty labour
makes big his neck, swiftly catches at on the dusty
ground of Antaeus.*


XLIX.—Dumb-bells


Way is strength of arm wasted on the silly 5
_dumb-bell? Trenching a vineyard better employs
men.
L.—A Small Cap
That the wrestler’s dirty oil may not soil your
sleek locks, you may cover your moist hair with
this skin cap.®


ostentatio). In this case, says M., the labour is vain, for it
produces nothing. See the next epigram.

5 ** Stulta est occupatio exercendi lacertos et dilatandi
cervicem”:; Sen. Hp. 15. He speaks of ‘‘ manus plumbo
graves”: Ep, 56. Dumb-bells were also used by masculine
‘women at the baths: Juv. vi. 421, and Mart. vii. Ixvii. 6.

6 It was a skull-cap with the fur outside.


457


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LIL.—Strigiles


Percamon has misit. curvo destringere ferro:
non tam saepe teret lintea fullo tibi.


LIl.—Gutus Corneus


GestaviT modo fronte me iuvencus:
verum rhinocerota me putabas.


LIII.—Rhinoceros


Nuper in Ausonia domini spectatus harena
hic erit ille tibi cui pila taurus erat.
LIV.—Crepitacillum


S1 quis plorator collo tibi vernula pendet,
haec quatiat tenera garrula sistra manu.


LV.—Flagellum
Proricigs nihil hoc, caedas licet usque, flagello,
si tibi purpureo de grege currit equus.
LV1.—Dentifricitum


Quip mecum est tibi? me puella sumat:
emptos non soleo polire dentes.


1 4.e. they will not be sent to him so dirty: ¢f. x. xi. 6.
2-The horn was so big.  Oil-flasks made of rhinoceros
Kova were used at the baths by rich men: Juv. vii. 130.
3 of. Spect. ix. 45 X. Ixxxvi. 4,
* The sistrum was originally used in the rites of Isis.


458


BOOK XIV. u-tvi
LI.—Skin-scrapers
PrercaMmus sent these; scrape yourself with the
curved blade: the laundryman will not so often
wear out your towels.}


Ue om OF tak


A stTgeER bore me lately on his forehead: you
fancied me a real rhinoceros horn.?


LIW.—A_ Rhinoceros-horn Oil-flask


Tuis shall be for you, that horn, lately seen in our
Master’s Italian arena, to which a bull was as a
straw-dummy.?


LIV.—A Small Rattle


Ir any little home-born slave shall hang on your
neck in tears, let him shake this noisy rattle * with
his infant hand.


LV.—A Whip


You will make no way with this whip though you
may continually use the lash, if your courser be of
the Purple® faction.


LVI.—Dentifrice


Wuat have you to do with me?® Let a young
maid use me: I am not wont to polish purchased
teeth.

5 Which was not favoured by Domitian any more than the
Blues: ef. vi. xlyi., although it and the Gold had been added


by himself: Suet. Dom. vil.
6 According to Pliny (xxx. 8) dentifrice was made of the
ashes of dogs’ teeth mixed with honey. Pumice was also


used: xxxvi. 42.
459


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LVII.—Myrobalanum
Qvop nec Vergilius nec carmine dicit Homerus,
hoc ex unguento constat et ex balano.
LVIII.—A phronitrum


Rusticus es? nescis quid Graeco nomine dicar:
spuma vocor nitri. Graecus es? aphronitrum.


LIX.—Opobalsama
BatsaMa me capiunt, haec sunt unguenta virorum :
delicias Cosmi vos redolete, nurus.
LX.—Lomentum


Gratum munus erit scisso nec inutile ventri,
si clara Stephani balnea luce petes.


LXI.—Lanterna Cornea


Dox lanterna viae clusis feror aurea flammis,
et tuta est gremio parva lucerna meo.


1 The word would not go into the metre. Myrobalanum
is described by Pliny (.V.H. xii. 46) as the fruit of a tree
found in the Thebais and in Arabia with a leaf like that of a
heliotrope, the fruit being of the size of a filbert. From it
was extracted an oil used in compounding unguent. The
Encyclopaedia calls the tree the horse-radish tree (Moringa
pterygosperma), the oil being oil of ben used by perfumers.

2 Spuma nitrs was prized, and prescribed by doctors in
pills or pastilles: Plin. V.H. xxxi. 46 (3); and balls of it
were given as presents: Stat. Silv. rv. ix. 37. It was found


460


BOOK XIV. tvit-tx1


LVII.—Myrobalsam


Tus, which neither Virgil nor Homer mentions in
his poems,! is compounded of unguent and ben-nut.


LVIII.—Saltpetre


ARE you a countryman? You do not know what
I am styled by a Greek name: I am called the froth
of nitre. Are you a Greek? Aphronitrum.?


LIX.—Opobalsam


Batsams® attract me; these are the unguents of
men‘+; ye matrons, exhale the choice perfumes of
Cosmus.?


Te ri wees


*Twitt be a welcome gift, and one not without
use to a wrinkled belly, if in broad daylight you go
to Stephanus’ bath.®


LXI.—A Horn Lantern


Guipe of your way am I carried, a lantern golden
with fenced flame, and safe in my bosom is a small


light.


in Asia in caves called colycae as a distillation from the rock,
and was afterwards dried in the sun. The best was Lydian :
Pliny ibid.

3 The juice of the balsam-tree ; called balm of Gilead or
of Mecca, and found, according to Pliny (N.H. xii. 54) only
in Judaea. It appears to have become known in Rome in
the time of Pompey, who displayed the tree in one of his
triumphs. Pliny gives a detailed description.

4 Juv. (ii. 41) seems to have been of a different opinion.

. gf. i, lv. 13. Xt. viii. 9. 6 ef. 11. xiii. 1.


461


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXII.—Lanterna de Vesica


Cornea si non sum, numquid sum fuscior? aut me
vesicam, contra qui venit, esse putat?
LXII.— Fistula
Quip me conpactam ceris et harundine rides?
quae primum structa est fistula talis erat.
LXIV.— Tibiae
Esria nos madidis rumpit tibicina buccis :
saepe duas pariter, saepe monaulon habet.
LXY.——Soleae Lanatae
Derverirt si forte puer soleasque libebit
sumere, pro puero pes erit ipse sibi.
LXVI.—Mamillare


Taurino poteras pectus constringere tergo:
nam pellis mammas non capit ista tuas.


LXVII.—Muscarium Pavoninum


LambereE quae turpes prohibet tua prandia muscas,
alitis eximiae cauda superba fuit.


1 By the god Pan: ef. Verg. Hel. ii. 32.
2 Two pipes were sometimes played, and they were pares
or impares, the former being of the same length, the latter


462


BOOK XIV. vxiu-txvn


LXIIL.—A _ Lantern made of Bladder


Ir I be not of horn, am I the dimmer? or does he
that meets me think me a bladder?


LXIII.—A Pipe of Reed


Wuy do you laugh at me, compact of wax and
reed? The first pipe that was made! was such as I.


LXIV.—Flutes


Tue drunken flautist bursts our ears with her
bibulous cheeks; often she uses two pipes at once,
often only one.”


LXV.—Wool-lined. Slippers


Ir it happens your slave is not at hand, and you
want to put on your house-shoes, your foot will itself
be its own slave.®


LXVI.—A Bosom-band


«Wirn a bull’s hide” 4 you might well have
braced up your bosom; for this skin stomacher of
yours is too small for your breasts.


LXVII.—A Peacock’s Feather Fly-flap


Tuts which forbids foul flies to taste your meal was
the proud tail of a peerless bird.


of unequal length. The right-hand pipe was the bass or
manly pipe, the left-hand one the treble or womanly pipe.
3 ¢.e, it will slip easily into the slippers.
4 An allusion to Verg. Aen. i. 368 (Taurino quantum
possent circumdare tergo).
463


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXVIII.—Copta Ihodiaca
PeccanTis famuli pugno ne percute dentes :
clara Rhodos coptam quam tibi misit edat.
LXIX.—Priapus Siligineus
Si vis esse satur, nostrum potes esse Priapum ;
ipsa licet rodas inguina, purus eris.
LXX.—Porcus
Isre tibi faciet bona Saturnalia porcus,
inter spumantes ilice pastus apros.
LXXI.—Muscarium Bubulum
Sorpipa si flavo fuerit tibi pulvere vestis,
corrigat hoc! tenui verbere cauda levis.
LXXII.—Botulus
Qui venit botulus mediae tibi tempore brumae,
Saturni septem venerat ante dies.
LXXIT.— Psittacus


Psirracus a vobis aliorum nomina discam :
hoc didici per me dicere “ Caesar have.”


: cormtegt hoc Postgate, coll. Iuv. xiv. 67, colligat hunc
co


1 The Rhodian biscuit was very hard. There may be also
a play upon the name copia and the Greek «éarew (to beat).


464


BOOK XIV. vxvini-_xxm


LXVII.—Rhodian Pastry


Don’r strike with your fist the teeth of your
offending servant; let him eat the biscuit illustrious
Rhodes has sent you.!


LXIX.—A Priapus made from Flour


Ir you want to satisfy your hunger you can eat my
Priapus; you may gnaw his very appendage,? yet you
will be undefiled.


LXX.—A Pig


Turis pig will make you a “ Good Saturnalia”: he
was fed on acorns among the foaming boars.


LXXI—An Ox-tail Brush


Ir your dress has been soiled with yellow dust let
this light ox-tail emend this with a gentle flap.


LXXIL—A Sausage


Tue sausage that has reached you at the mid-
season of winter had reached me before Saturn’s


seven days.?
LXXIIL.—A Parrot


I, a parroT, will learn of you the names of others:
this I learned of my own accord to say, “ Caesar,
hail!” ¢


2 of vi. xlix.2. The Priapus was sometimes stuffed, e.g.
with apples and grapes: Petr. 60.

3 Dec. 17-23. The sender had received the sausage as a
present, and now passes it on to another person.
” 4 of. note to mI. xcv. 2.


465


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXIV:—Corvus


Corve salutator, quare fellator haberis?
in caput intravit mentula nulla tuum.


LXX V.—Luscinia


Fier Philomela nefas incesti Tereos, et quae
muta puella fuit, garrula fertur avis.


LXXVI.—Pica


Pica loquax certa dominum te voce saluto:
si me non videas, esse negabis avem.


LXXVII.—Cavea Eborea


Sr tibi talis erit, qualem dilecta Catullo
Lesbia plorabat, hic habitare potest.


LXX VIIIl.—WNarthecium


Artis ebur medicae narthecia cernis: habebis
munera quae cuperet Paccius esse sua.


LXXIX.—Flagra


Lunire lascivi, sed tantum ludite, servi:
haec signata mihi quinque diebus erunt.


1 Pliny (NV. H. x. 15) says: ‘‘ Ore eos parere aut coire vulgus
arbitratur... Aristoteles negat... sed illam osculationem,
quae saepe cernitur, qualem in columbis, esse.” See Arist.
De Gen. Anim. iii. 6, who traces the vulgar opinion to


Anaxagoras.


* 'T., king of Thrace, offered violence to Philomela, his
sister-in-law, and cut out her tongue to prevent her revealing


the crime. P. was changed into a nightingale.


466


BOOK XIV. txxiv-Lxx1x


LXXIV.—A Raven


O corvo salutatore, perché sei tu. tenuto un fella-
tore? Veruna mentola entrd nella tua bocca.!


LXXV.—A Nightingale


PuitomeLa laments the crime of incestuous Te-
reus :2 she who was a silent maiden is acclaimed as
a bird of song.


LXXVI.—A Magpie


A cHATTERING pie,’ I with intelligible voice salute
_ you, my master; did you not see me you will say I
am no bird.


LXXVII.—An Ivory Cage


Ir you shall have such a bird 4 as Lesbia, beloved
of Catullus, mourned, here it can dwell.


LXXVIII.—A Medicine Chest


_You see a medicine chest, the ivory equipment of
a doctor’s art: you will have a gift which Paccius®
would wish his own.


LXXIX.— Whips


Pray, ye jovial slaves, but play only ; I will keep
these sealed up for five days.®


3 of. vil. lxxxvii. 6; 1x. liv. 9. Petr. 28 describes a magpie
in a golden cage that saluted all who entered.

4 A sparrow: cf. Cat. ii. and iil. 5

5 A physician. Juv. (xii. 99) mentions a Paccius, an orbus,
who may be the same. The narthecium was, as its name
implies, made in the shape of a joint of the giant fennel
(vdpOnt).

6 Slaves during the Saturnalia were allowed a degree of
licence.


467


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXX.—Ferulae


Invisak nimium pueris grataeque magistris,
clara Prometheo munere ligna sumus.


LXXXI.—Pera


Ne mendica ferat barbati prandia nudi,
dormiat et tristi cum cane, pera rogat.


LXXXII.—Scopae


In pretio scopas testatur palma fuisse.
otia sed scopis nunc analecta dedit.


LXXXIII.—Scalptorium Eboreum


DeEFENDET manus haec scapulas mordente molesto
pulice, vel si quid pulice sordidius.


LXXXIV.—Manuale


NE toga barbatos faciat vel paenula libros,
haec abies chartis tempora longa dabit.


LXXXV.—-Lectus Pavoninus


Nomina dat spondae pictis pulcherrima pinnis
nunc lunonis avis, sed prius Argus erat.


1 Prometheus, according to the myth, brought fire from
Heaven in the stem of the giant fennel (ferula or vdpént),
and gave it to men.

2 Used as a pillow. The Cynics, in imitation of beggars,
equipped themselves with a staff and wallet: cf. Iv. liii, 3.

3 cf, Hor. Sat. u1.iv. 83. As to the analecta, cf. vit. xx. 17.

4 It was in the shape of a hand.


468


BOOK XIV. vxxx-Lxxxv


LXXX.—Ferules
Hatep much by boys and welcome to school-
masters, we are the wood made famous by Pro-
metheus’ gift.}
LXXXI.—A Wallet
~Tuat he may not carry the mendicant seraps of a_
half-clad bearded philosopher, nor sleep? with a sour
cynic, is the prayer of the wallet.


LXXXII.—Brooms
Tue palm-tree testifies that brooms were once
in demand,’ but the crumb-collector has now given
a rest to brooms.


LXXXIII.—An Ivory Scratcher
Tus hand‘ will protect your shoulder-blades when
an irritating flea is biting you, or any insect fouler
than a flea.


LX XXIV.—A Wooden Book-holder


To prevent your toga or cloak making your books
frayed, this fir-wood will give long life to your


paper.
LXXXV.—A Couch of Peacock-veined Citrus-wood


Tue bird, most lovely with its painted plumage,
gives its name to a couch;°® it is now the bird of
Juno, but once it was Argus.®


5 Couches of citrus wood variegated by wavy lines, as on a
peacock’s tail, were valued: Plin. NV.H. xiii. 30.

6 Argus had a hundred eyes, of which two only slept at a
time. Juno set him to watch Io, whom Jupiter had turned
into a heifer. Argus was afterwards turned into a peacock
with the eyes in the tail.

469


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


LXXXVI.—Ephippium


STRaGuLA succincti venator sume veredi:
nam solet a nudo surgere ficus equo.


LXXX VII —Stbadia


AccirE lunata scriptum testudine sigma.
octo capit ; veniat quisquis amicus erit.


LX XX VIII.—Gustatortum


FremineaM nobis cherson si credis inesse,
deciperis: pelagi mascula praeda sumus.


LX XXIX.—Mensa Citrea


AccipE felices, Atlantica munera, silvas:
aurea qui dederit dona, minora dabit.


XC.—Mensa Acerna


Non sum crispa quidem nec silvae filia Maurae,
sed norunt lautas et mea ligna dapes.


XCI.—Dentes Eborei


GranpiA taurorum portant qui corpora, quaeris
an Libycas possint sustinuisse trabes?


1 The ephippiwm was soft, being more like a cushion than
a saddle.

2 In the shape of the Greek s, which was often written in
the shape of a horse-shoe: cf. X. xlviii. 6.

8 Shell from the sea-tortoise (? turtle) was held superior to
that of the land-tortoise, and the male shell was superior to
the female. According to Pliny (NV.H. ix. 12) the land-
tortoises were called chersinue and were found in African
deserts, where they subsisted on dew.


470


BOOK XIV. txxxvi-xcr


LXXXVI—A Pad-saddle


Take, hunter, the housing of a nimble steed, for
from a bare-backed horse piles are wont to spring.}


LXXXVIL—-A Semi-circular Couch ©


Receive a horse-shoe couch? inlaid with crescent
lines of tortoise-shell. It takes eight: let everyone
come who shall be my friend.


LXXXVIIIl.—A Buffet
Ir you think shell of a female land-tortoise is part
of me, you are deceived: I am the male catch of
the sea.?
LXXXIX.—A Citrus-nood Table


Receive this wood of a fruitful tree, the offering
of Atlas: he who shall give you golden gifts will
give you less.*


XC.—A Maple Table


I am indeed not veined, nor the daughter of a
Moorish forest,5 but even my wood knows sumptuous
feasts.


XCI.—ILvory Tusks.
Tusks that upbear the huge bodies of bulls &—do
you ask whether they can uphold tables of Libyan
wood ?7 ;


4 The cetrus (a kind of cypress, Thuja articulata, the
Greek @va or @vov) came from Mauretania, in N.-W. Africa:
Plin. V.H. xiii. 29, 30. Round table tops (orbes) were made
of it, for which incredible sums were often paid.

5 7.e. neither veined (a feature greatly valued: Plin. N.H.
xiii. 30) nor cztrus. Maple was second to citrus: Plin. N.H.
xvi. 26 ; and one species was also peacock-veined : ibid.

8 of. Spect. xix.

7 7.e, the citrus table tops mentioned in lxxxix.

471


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCII.—Quinquepedal
Puncra notis ilex et acuta cuspide clusa
saepe redemptoris prodere furta solet.
XCII.—Pocula Archetypa
Non est ista recens nec nostri gloria caeli:


primus in his Mentor, dum facit illa, bibit.


XCIV.—Calices Audaces


Nos sumus audacis plebeia toreumata vitri,
nostra neque ardenti gemma feritur aqua.


XCV.—Phiala Aurea Caelata


Quamvis Callaico rubeam generosa metallo,
glorior arte magis: nam Myos iste labor.


XCVI.—Calices Vatinii


Vita sutoris calicem monimenta Vatini
accipe ; sed nasus longior ille fuit.


XCVII.—Lances Chrysendetae


Granpia ne viola parvo chrysendeta mullo:
ut minimum, libras debet habere duas.


1 A celebrated chaser in silver of the fourth century Bo. :
CM OGIG sAbis WA ING SO Se rey liy

EE natin IbSonig ot

8 of. vit. xxxiv. 1. He engraved the figures on the shield
of Athene Promachus in the Acropolis at Athens.


472


BOOK XIV. xcu—xcvm


XCIL—A Five-foot Rule


AN oaken rule, marked off into lengths and ending
in a sharp point, is often apt to detect a contractor's
fraud.


XCHI.—Antique Cups


Tuar is no recent work, nor pride of Roman chisel;
Mentor! made these cups and first drank from them.


XCIV.—Dreadnought Cups
We are plebeian chased cups of dreadnought ?
glass, and our ware is not cracked by boiling
water.


XCV.—A Chased Gold Bonl
TuovueH I am noble and ruddy with Gallician ore,


I glory more in my workmanship, for of Mys? was
the labour you see.


XCVI.—Vatinian Cups


‘Receive a cup, a cheap memento of cobbler
Vatinius,4 but that nose was longer.


XCVII.—Gold-inlaid Dishes


Do not insult large gold-inlaid dishes® with a small
mullet: at the least it ought to weigh two pounds.


4 Of Beneventum, who gave his name to glassware with
long spouts like noses: cf. X. iii. 3,4; and Juv. v. 46. He
was a buffoon and delutor in the time of Nero.

5 Chrysendeta appear to be silver dishes with gold orna-
ments inlaid or in relief: ef. 11. xliii. 11; vi. xciv. 1.


VOL, II. Q 473


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


XCVIII.—Vasa Arretina


ARRETINA nimis ne spernas vasa monemus:
lautus erat Tuscis Porsena fictilibus.


XCIX.—Bascauda


Barsara de pictis veni bascauda Britannis,
sed me iam mavolt dicere Roma suam.


C.—Panaca


Si non ignota est docti tibi terra Catulli,
potasti testa Raetica vina mea.


CI.—Boletaria


Cum mihi boleti dederint tam nobile nomen,
prototomis (pudet heu!) servio coliculis.


CIl.—Calices Surrentini


Accire non vili calices de pulvere natos,
sed Surrentinae leve toreuma rotae.


CILII.—Colum Nivarium


SETINOs, moneo, nostra nive frange trientes :
2 ch
pauperiore mero tinguere lina potes.


1 Harthenware: cf.1. liii.6. Pliny (W.H. xxxv. 46) speaks
of the nobilitas of the red Samian ware of Arretium.

2 King of Ktruria, who besieged Rome in the sixth century
B.C.

° Nothing is known of this. The Panaci seem to be a
Rhaetian people.


474


BOOK XIV. xcvui—cir


XCVIII.—Arretian Vases


We advise you not overmuch to despise Arretian !
vases: Tuscan earthenware was luxury to Porsena.?


XCIX.—A Basket

I HAVE come, a barbarian basket, from the woad-
stained Britons; but Rome now prefers to call me
her own.

C.—A Panacian Crock?

Ir the country of the elegant Catullus is not un-
known to you, you have drunk Rhaetian wine from
my crock.

CI.—Mushroom Boilers

ALTHOUGH mushrooms have given me so noble a
name, yet I am a slave—alas! I am ashamed to own
it—to early greens.


CII.—Surrentine Chalices
Receive chalices not sprung of common clay,
put the smooth embossed work of a Surrentine
potter’s-wheel.4


CIII.—A Strainer for Wine and Snow


Witu the snow I contain, I warn you, subdue your
cups of Setine :> in a poorer wine you may dip linen
bags.

4 Pliny classes Surrentine earthenware cups for excellence


with those from Asta and Pollentia, and from Saguntum in
Spain: WV.H. xxxv. 46.

5 of. v. lxiv. 2. The colum nivarium was a metal colander
in which a lump of frozen snow was placed, and the wine
was strained through it into the cup or other wine vessel.


475


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CIV.—Saccus Nivarius
ATTENUARE nives norunt et lintea nostra:
frigidior colo non salit unda tuo.
CV.—Urceoli Ministratori


Fricipa non derit, non derit calda petenti.
sed tu morosa ludere parce siti.


CVJ.—Urceus Fictilis


Hic tibi donatur panda ruber urceus ansa.
Stoicus hoc gelidam Fronto petebat aquam.


CVIL—Calathi


Nos Satyri, nos Bacchus amat, nos ebria tigris,
perfusos domini lambere docta pedes.


CVIII.—Calices Saguntini


Quak non sollicitus teneat servetque minister
sume Saguntino pocula facta luto.


CIX.—Calices Gemmati


Gemmatoum Scythicis ut luceat ignibus aurum
aspice. quot digitos exuit iste calix!


1 According to Pliny barley meal was sometimes put into
the saccus to mitigate the strength of the wine: V.H. xxiv. 1.

2 A calathus was a drinking vessel in the shape of a
woman’s workbasket.

3 Bacchus.


476


BOOK XIV. civ—cix


CIV.—A Bag for Straining through Snow


My linen also knows how to liquefy snow: no
colder spirts the water from your strainer.!


CV.—Small Jugs for Table-service
Co.p water will not be wanting; there will not be
wanting hot, if you ask for it; but do not you be
dainty with a craving thirst.


CVI.—An Earthenware Jug

Here is given you a red jug with a spreading
handle: Stoic Fronto. used to go to this for cold
water. j

CVII.—Tankards?

Tue Satyrs love us, Bacchus loves us; us, too, the
drunken tigress which has been taught to lick the.
wine-dabbled feet of her master.®


CVIII.—Saguntine Chalices


Take cups made of Saguntine clay, which without
anxiety4 your servant may handle and guard.


CIX.—Gemmed Chalices


Sez how the gold gleams, gemmed with the fire
of Scythian emeralds! How many fingers has that
chalice stripped ! ®


4 They are ‘‘dreadnought”: ef. xt. Ixxiv. 3, and Ep. xciv.
supra, M.speaks poorly of Saguntine clay-ware; cf. viii.
vi. 2; but Pliny praises it: NV.H. xxxv. 46.

5 Rich men often ornamented their cups with jewels from
their finger rings: of. Juv. v. 42,


477


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX.—Ampulla Potoria


Hac licet in gemma, servat quae nomina Cosmi,
luxuriose, bibas, si foliata sitis,


CXI.—Crystallina


Francere dum metuis, franges crystallina: peccant
securae nimium sollicitaeque manus.


CXII.—Nimbus Vitreus


A love qui veniet, miscenda ad pocula largas
fundet nimbus aquas: hic tibi vina dabit.


CXITL.—Murrina


S1 caldum potas, ardenti murra Falerno
convenit et melior fit sapor inde mero.


CXIV.—Patella Cumana


Hanc tibi Cumano rubicundam pulvere testam
municipem misit casta Sibylla suam.


1 i.e. the flask will flavour the wine. Nard and other per-
fumes were however often mixed with wine: Juv. vi. 303,
464; and /foliata alludes to this practice. The foliatum was
the same as nardinum, a mixture of spikenard and other
perfumes, a list of which is given in Pliny (V.H. xiii. 2).

2 A nimbus (lit. storm-cloud) is supposed to have been a
glass vessel with apertures for sprinkling wine, like a water-
ing-pot. ‘The name may have been derived from the cloud
on the glass caused by the snow-cooled wine.

3 Murra was perhaps a natural earth, and may have been


478


BOOK XIV. cx-cxiv


CX.--A Drinking-flask


In this jewelled flask that bears the name of
Cosmus you may drink, luxurious man, if your thirst
is for perfumed wine.!


CXI.—Crystal Cups


So long as you fear to break them, you will break
crystal cups: hands too careless and too anxious
alike offend.


CXII.—A Glass Sprinkler


Tue storm-cloud that comes from Jove will pour
you water in plenty to blend your cups: this one
will give you wine.?


CXIII.—Murrine Cups


Ir you drink your wine warm, murrine?® suits the
burning Falernian, and better flavour comes there-
from to the wine.


CXIV.—A Platter from Cumae


Tus platter, her own townsman, ruddy with the
soil of Cumae, the chaste Sibyl* has sent you.


spar: Plin. V.H. xxxvii. 8. See the authorities collected in
Mayor’s note to Juv. vii. 133. _Murrine vases have however
been regarded as porcelain, and porcelain vases agreeing with
Pliny’s description are said to have been found. These vases
were first brought to Rome by Pompey after his victory over
Mithridates in 8.c. 63. Enormous sums were paid for them,
Nero paying 300 talents (say £60,000) for a drinking cup.

4 of. 1x. xxix. 3. The ware in question is the red Arretian :
cf. xeviii.; which was made also at Capua and Cumae in the


first century.


479


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXV.—Calices Vitrei
Aspicis ingenium Nili: quibus addere plura
dum cupit, a quotiens perdidit auctor opus!
CXVI.—Lagona Niwvaria
Spoetina bibis vel Marsis condita cellis:
quo tibi decoctae nobile frigus aquae?
CXVII.—Jdem
Non potare nivem sed aquam potare recentem!
de nive commenta est ingeniosa sitis.
CXVIII.—Idem
MassiL1aEz fumos miscere nivalibus undis
parce, puer, constet ne tibi pluris aqua.
CXIX.—Matella Fictilis
Dom poscor crepitu digitorum et verna moratur,
o quotiens paelex culcita facta mea est!
CXX.—Ligula Argentea


Quamvis me ligulam dicant equitesque patresque,
dicor ab indoctis lingula grammaticis.


1 rigentem By.


1 Excessive ornamentation. The allusion appears to be to
diatreta, which were chalices made in one piece with a net-
work ornamentation: cf. x11. Ixx. 9.

2 These wines were inferior: cf. XIII. cxx. and cxxi.


480


BOOK XIV. cxv—cxx


CXV.—Glass Chalices
You observe the ingenuity of Egypt. Ah, how
often has the artist, in wishing to make additions,!
ruined his work !


CXVI—A Flagon for Iced Water
You drink Spoletine, or wine stored in Marsian 2
cellars : what is the use to you of the noble coolness
of boiled water ? 3 :


CX VII.—The Same


Tue drinking, not of snow, but of water fresh
from the snow, the ingenuity of thirst has devised.4


OXVIIL—The Same
Boy, forbear to mix Massilia’s smoke® with iced
water, that the water may not cost you more than
the wine.


CXIX.—An Earthen Chamber-utensil


Wuite I am called for by a snapping of the fingers,®
and the home-born slave lingers, oh, how often has a


pillow been made my rival!


CXX.—A Silver Spoon


However much both knights and senators may
call me ligula, I am called by ignorant grammarians?
lingula.

e
3 Decocta (as to which ef. 11. 1xxxv. 1) is wasted on them.


© Gf. Va:Ixiv. 2. 5 Cf Xn XXXVIe 15 XIII) CXXiLIL 2,

8 of. 111. Ixxxii. 15.

7 Who pedantically insist on the etymology from lingua,
and disregard use.


481


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX X1[.—Coclearia


Sum cocleis habilis sed nec minus utilis ovis.


numquid scis, potius cur cocleare vocer?


CX XII.—Anuh


AnTE frequens sed nunc rarus nos donat amicus.
felix cui comes est non alienus eques.


CXXIIL. —Dactyliotheca


Saepe gravis digitis elabitur anulus unctis ;


tuta mea fiet sed tua gemma fide.


CXXIV.—Toga


«‘ RoMANos rerum dominos gentemque togatam ’


ille facit, magno qui dedit astra patri.


CXXV.—Idem


St matutinos facilest tibi perdere somnos,
attrita veniet sportula saepe toga.


1 The cocleare was a spoon with a point at one end, and
smaller (cf. vit. 1xxi. 9, 10) than the ligula. The point was
used to pick snails (coclew) or shellfish out of their shells ;
hence the name. Petr. 33 speaks of coclearia of ‘‘not less
than half a pound” weight used for eating eggs, but then
they were Trimalchio’s spoons. Pliny (N.H. xxviii. 4) tells
us that it was a superstition to perforate empty egg-shells


as a defence against evil spells.


482


BOOK XIV. cxxi-cxxv


CXXI—A Snail-pick


I am convenient for eating snails, and no less use-
ful for eating eggs. Do you know why I am rather
called a snail-pick ?1


CXXII.—Rings


Formerty many a friend gave us as presents, but
now here and there a friend. Happy is he whose
comrade is a knight he himself has made !2


CXXIII—A Ring-case3


OrTEN a heavy ring slips from fingers moist with
unguent; but your gem will be made safe in my
faithful charge.


CXXIV.—A Toga


He makes the Romans “lords of the world and
the race that wears the toga,’* who granted his
mighty sire immortality.°


CXXV.—The Same


Ir it comes easily to you to lose your morning
sleep, by wearing out your toga® a dole will often
come to you.


2 4.e. whose qualification he has supplied (cf. v. xix. 10),
and whose gratitude he looks for. The ring was the mark
of a knight: ef. vill. v. 2. Sey ee EX ae,

4 A quotation from Verg. Aen. i. 282.

5 Domitian, who founded a temple to the Flavian family
(cf. 1x. i. 8), and also enjoined the use of the toga at
spectacles : cf. Iv. il. 4.

6 By constant attendance at levees: cf. 1x. c. 5.


483


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXX VI.—Endromes


Pauperis est munus sed non est pauperis usus :
hanc tibi pro laena mittimus endromida.


CXXVII.—Canusinae Fuscae


Hacc tibi turbato Canusina simillima mulso
munus erit. gaude: non cito fiet anus.


CX XVIIL—Bardocucullus


Gatuta Santonico vestit te bardocucullo.
cercopithecorum paenula nuper erat.


CX XIX.—Canusinae Rufae


Roma magis fuscis vestitur, Gallia rufis,
et placet hic pueris militibusque color.


CXXX.—Paenula Scortea


[NGrEpIARE viam caelo licet usque sereno,
ad subitas nusquam ! scortea desit aquas.
CXXXI.—Lacernae Coccineae


St veneto prasinove faves, quid coccina sumes?
ne fias ista transfuga sorte vide.


1 numquam BXV.


1 The endromis was not a garment, but a warm wrapper
of rough texture used by richer men for warmth after gym-


nastic exercises: cf. IV. xix.


2 of. 1x. xxii. 9. Canusium (now Canosa) was a town in
Apulia on the high road from Rome to Brundusium : ef. Hor.
Sat. 1. v.91. It was celebrated for its wool, which Pliny


(N.H. vitt. lxxiii.) calls fulous.


2 of. 1. liii. 5. The bardocucullus was a hooded cloak


484


covering the whole body, worn principally by common


BOOK XIV. exxvi-cxxxi


CXXVI.—A Warm Wrapper


"Tis a poor man’s offering but not a poor man’s
wear. This wrapper I send you in place of a cloak.!


CXXVIIL—A Brown Cloak of Canusian Wool
_ Tus cloak of Canusian ? wool, very like in colour
to turbid mead, shall be your present. Rejoice: it
will not quickly become old.


CXXVITI.—A Conled Cloak


Gaut clothes you in a Santonian cowled cloak.?
Formerly it was the frock of long-tailed monkeys.


CXXIX.—Red Cloaks of Canusian Wool
Rome is clad more in brown, Gaul in red, and this
colour pleases boys and soldiers.


CXXX.—A Leather Surtout 4


ALTHOUGH you may set out on your journey when
the sky is continuously serene, let a leather surtout
nowhere be wanting against sudden showers.


CXXXI.—A Scarlet Mantle
Ir you favour the Blue or the Green,® why will
you assume scarlet? See that by this lot® you do
not become a deserter.
people, and bearing some resemblance to the paenula, as to
which cf. cxxx. Hence the juxtaposition here of the two


names.
4 The paenula was a closed garment, fitting closely, with
an opening for the head and.a hood. It was an outer garment,
worn over the tunic in wet or cold weather, and was made
of frieze or leather.
5 Factions of the charioteers in the Circus.
6 cf. xiv. i. 5.


485


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXXXII.—Pilleum
S1 possem, totas cuperem misisse lacernas:
nunc tantum capiti munera mitto tuo.
CXXXII.—Lacernae Baeticae
Non est lana mihi mendax nec mutor aheno.
sic placeant Tyriae : me mea tinxit ovis.
CXXXIV.—Fascia Pectoralis
Fascia, crescentes dominae compesce papillas,
ut sit quod capiat nostra tegatque manus.
CXXXV.—Cenatoria
Nec fora sunt nobis nec sunt vadimonia nota:
hoc opus est, pictis accubuisse toris.
CXXXVI.—Laena
Tempore brumali non multum levia prosunt :
calfaciunt villi pallia vestra mei.
CXXXVII.—Lacernae Albae


AMPHITHEATRALI nos commendamus ab usu,
cum teget algentes! alba lacerna togas,


1 tegit By. albentes B.


1 The dacerna was a mantle fastened with a buckle, and
not closed in like the paenwa. It often had a hood, and was
ample, so that it could be worn over the toga (cf. Juv. ix. 29)


or other garment. 2 efs XIts xi: 4:


8 The fascza, like the mamillare in lxvi., was a bandage


486


BOOK XIV. cxxxi—cxxxvil


CXXXIL—A Cap


Ir I could, I should have wished to have sent a
mantle complete: now I send you a present only for
your head.!


CXXXIII.—A Baetic Mantle


My wool is not deceptive, nor am I transformed
in the vat. Let Tyrian mantles please you by such
means : my own sheep dyed me.?


CXXXIV.—A Stomacher


StromacuHER, compress the swelling breasts of my
mistress that there may be something for my hand
to seize and cover.’


CXXXV.—Dinner Suits


Nor courts are known to us, nor are bail bonds:
this is our business—to recline on inlaid couches.


CXXXVI.—A Warm Cloak +


In the winter season” smooth coverings do not
much avail: my wool makes warm your outer
garment.


CXXXVI.—White Maniles


We recommend ourselves by our use in the amphi-
theatre,> when a white mantle shall cover a chilly
toga.


usually meant to restrain development of the bust. Here it
is meant to give firmness and shape.

4 The laena was in winter often worn over the toga or
pallium : ef. X11. xxxvi. 2.

5 It was customary to wear white at public spectacles:
Cfe LV. 1.


487


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXXX VIII. —Mantele


Noniuius villosa tegant tibi lintea citrum:
orbibus in nostris circulus esse potest.


CXXXIX.—Cuculli Liburnict


IuNGERE nescisti nobis, o stulte, lacernas :
indueras albas, exue callainas.


CXL.—Udones Cilictt


Non hos lana dedit sed olentis barba mariti:
Cinyphio poterit planta latere sinu.


CXLI.-—Synthesis


Dom toga per quinas gaudet requiescere luces,
hos poteris cultus sumere iure tuo.


CXLII.—Focale


Sr recitaturus dedero tibi forte libellum,
hoe focale tuas adserat auriculas.


1 Made by wet, round-footed vessels. M.’s tables were
common ones, and not of citrus.

2 Callainas = the colour of the callais, a stone which,
according to Pliny (N.H. xxxvii. 56), sapphirum imitatur,
candidior, et literoso mari similis, i.e. a kind of sea-green.
The hood and mantle should have been of the same hue, as
the green hood, wetted by rain, would be apt to stain the
white mantle.

3 ¢.e. a he-goat’s: ef. Hor. Od. 1. xvii. 7, Olentis uxorea
marite.


488


BOOK XIV. exxxvii—cxiu


CXXXVIIL—A Tablecloth


Let woollen cloths cover your nobler citrus wood :
on my round tables a circular mark! may stand.


CXXXIX.—A Liburnian Hood


You have not known, O foolish fellow, how to
match your mantle with me: you put it on white;
take it off now green.?


CXL.—Cilician Socks


Woot did not supply these, but the beard of the
noisome husband :* your foot will be able to take
refuge in a Cinyphian ‘ nest.


CXLI.—A Holiday Garment


Wui_e the toga gladly rests for five days, you may
assume this garb as of right.5


CXLII.—A Comforter


Ir, meaning to recite, I shall perhaps have sent
you a note of invitation, Jet this comforter emanci-
pate your ears.®


4 Cilicium was a cloth made of goats’ hair, and garments
or other articles made of it were called cilicia: cf. Cic. Verr.
iii. 38; Liv. xxxviii. 7; even where, as here, the hair came
from Africa, Cinyps being the name of a river near the
Syrtes : cf. vir. xev. 13.

5 The synthesis was worn at the Saturnalia: cf. xiv. i. 1.
It was ordinarily a dinner dress: cf. v. Ixxix. 2.

6 From boredom: cf. Iv. xli. 2. Asserere in libertatem
was the regular phrase for setting a slave free: cf. 1. lii. 5.


489


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXLIII.—Tunicae Patavinae
VELLERA consumunt Patavinae multa trilices,
et pingues tunicas serra secare potest.
CXLIV.—Spongea
Haec tibi sorte datur tergendis spongea mensis
utilis, expresso cum levis imbre tumet.
OXLV.—Paenula Gausapina
Is mihi candor inest, villorum gratia tanta,


ut me vel media sumere messe velis.


CXLVI.—Cervical
TincuE caput Cosmi folio, cervical olebit :
perdidit unguentum cum coma, pluma tenet.
CXLVII.—Cubicularia Gausapina
SrraGcuta purpureis lucent villosa tapetis.


quid prodest, si te congelat uxor anus?


CXLVIII.—Lodices


Nupo stragula ne toro paterent,
iunctae nos tibi venimus sorores.


1 The triliz was where every weft-thread was passed over
one and then under three of the warp-threads, instead of
over one and under the next in regular succession, as in
ordinary weaving. The process is called twilling, and the
fabric would be triple-twilled. Verg. speaks of a breastplate


auro trilix : Aen. iii. 467; 2.e. chain-mail.


? Frieze garments were ordinarily worn in winter: ef. v1.


lhix. 2.
490


BOOK XIV. cxum—cxivit


CXLITI.—Patavian Tunics


Papuan garments of triple thread! use up many
fleeces, and only a saw can sever the thick tunics.


CXLIV.—A Sponge


Tuis sponge is given you by lot: it is useful for
wiping tables when it lightly swells after the water
has been squeezed out.


CXLV.—A Frieze Surtout


Sucu is my whiteness, the beauty of my wool is
such, that you would choose to wear me even in the
midst of harvest.?


CXLVI.—A Pillow


Anoint your head with Cosmus’ unguent, your
pillow will smell of it: when your hair has lost the
fragrance the feathers retain it.


CXLVIL—Frieze Coverlets 3


Your coverlet of wool is bright with purple bro-
cade. What is the use of it if an aged wife freeze


you?
CX LVIII.—Blankets


Tuat the sacking on your bare bed might not
show, we sisters, knit together, have come to you.*


3 Gausapum was woollen cloth having, like frieze, a thick
nap on one side only, as distinguished from amphimallum,
which had a nap on both. It was introduced into Rome in
the time of the Elder Pliny’s father: Plin. V.H. vii. Ixxiii.

4 The lodiz was a small shaggy blanket. Sometimes two
were sewed together to form a coverlet. The Emperor
Augustus used it as a wrap for warmth in the open air:
Suet. Aug. lxxxiii. Lodices came from Verona: cf. Ep. clii.


4gt


“ THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CX LIX.—Amictorium


Mammosas metuo; tenerae me trade puellae,
ut possint niveo pectore lina frui.


CL.—Cubicularia Polymita


Hac tibi Memphitis tellus dat munera: victa est
pectine Niliaco iam Babylonos acus.


CLI.—Zona


Longa satis nunc sum ; dulci sed pondere venter
si tumeat, fiam tunc tibi zona brevis.


CLII.—Gausapum Quadratum


Lopicgs mittet docti tibi terra Catulli:
nos Helicaonia de regione sumus.


CLIII.—Semicinctium


Det tunicam locuples: ego te praecingere possum.
essem si locuples, munus utrumque darem.


CLIV.—Lanae Amethystinae


Esrta Sidoniae cum sim de sanguine conchae,
non video quare sobria lana vocer,


1 Damask is a variety of twill (cf. cxliii.), and depends
upon thenumber of warp threads (generally four) intersected


by the weft, 2 A weaver’s reed.


® Babylon was celebrated for embroidery in colour; the
art of many-threaded work (polymita) came from Alexandria:


cf. Plin. N.H. viii. 74.
492


BOOK XIV. cxuiix—ctiv


CXLIX.—A Tucker


I surink from big-breasted women : hand me over
to some young girl, that my linen may enjoy a bosom
of snow. ;

CL.—Damask} Coverlets


Tuts present the land of Memphis makes you:
now has the needle of Babylon been surpassed by
the sley? of the Nile.’


CLJ.—A Female Girdle
Lone enough am I now; but if your shape should
swell under its grateful burden, then shall I become
to you a narrow girdle. ;


CLIT.—A Square Woollen Rug


Buankets the country of elegant Catullus will send
you: we are from the region of Helicaon.*


CLII.—An Apron


Let a rich man give a tunic: I can gird you in
front. Were I rich, I would give both gifts.


CLIV.—Amethyst-dyed Wool


Drunken as I am with the blood of Sidon’s shell-
fish, I do not see why I am called sober wool.®


4 Paduan: cf. x. xciii. 1.

5 « Amethyst” etymologically means ‘‘ unintoxicated,”
either, as Pliny says (V.H. xxxvii. 40), because it did not
approximate to the colour of wine, or because its possession
was supposed to be an antidote against inebriety. There are
similar Greek epigrams in Pal, Anth. ix. 748 and 752.


493


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLV.—Lanae Albae


Ve.iertsus primis Apulia, Parma secundis
nobilis: Altinum tertia laudat ovis.


CLVI.—Lanae Tyriae


Nos Lacedaemoniae pastor donavit amicae:
deterior Ledae purpura matris erat.


CLVII.—Lanae Pollentinae


Non tantum pullo lugentes vellere lanas,
sed solet et calices haec dare terra suos,


CLVIII.—Jdem


Lana quidem tristis sed tonsis apta ministris,
quales non primo de grege mensa citat.


CLIX.—Tomentum Leuconicum


OppressaE nimium vicina est fascia plumae ?
vellera Leuconicis accipe rasa sagis.


CLX.—Tomentum Circense


‘ToMENTUM concisa palus Circense vocatur.
haec pro Leuconico stramina pauper emit.


INCf Eline Nerve no


2 A municipium in Venetia on the road between Patavium


(Padua) and Aquileia (now Altino) : cf. Iv. xxv. 1.
3 Paris gave to Helen.


4 Laconian purple was the finest produced in Europe, that
of Tyre the finest in Asia: Plin. W.H. ix. 60. The latter


was superior to the former.


5 A town in Liguria, now Polenza. It was famed for its


wool, which was black: Plin. N.H. viii. 73.
494


BOOK XIV. civ—cix


CLV.—White Wool


Aputta is renowned for the finest wool,! Parma for
second quality; its sheep, third in rank, commend
Altinum.?

CLVI.—Tyrian Wools


Us the shepherd gave to his Lacedaemonian mis-
tress:® of less worth was the purple of her mother
Leda.

CLVII.—Wool from Pollentia®

Tuts land is wont to supply not only wool that
mourns with its black fleece: it supplies also its
native chalices.


CLVIIL—The Same


My wool is indeed sad in hue, but ’tis fit for close-
clipt attendants,6 such as—but not from the first
rank of slaves—the table summons.


CLIX.—Leuconian Bed-stuffing


Is the bed-girth” too near the feather pillow you
crush down? Accept fleeces shorn for Leuconian §
cloaks.

CLX.—Circensian Bed-stuffing

MarsH-rEED chopped up is called Circensian ?
stuffing. This litter the poor man buys in lieu of
Leuconian.


6 The smarter attendants often had their hair cre. cf.

Il. ee 53 111. lviii. 31.
1 cf. v. Ixil. 6.

8 Leuconicum was a wool much used as a stuffing: cf. x1.
xxi. 8 and lvi. 9. It came from the Leucones, a Gawulish
eople.

® So called because it was used in the circus on seats by
the common people: cf Sen. De Vit. Beat. xxv. 2.


495


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXI.—Pluma


Lassus Amyclaea poteris requiescere pluma,
interior cycni quam tibi lana dedit.


CLXII.—Faenum
Fravupata tumeat fragilis tibi culcita mula.
non venit ad duros pallida cura toros.
CLXUI.—Tintinabulum
Reppe pilam: sonat aes thermarum. ludere pergis?
Virgine vis sola lotus abire domum.
CLXIV.—Discus


SPLENDIDA cum volitant Spartani pondera disci,
este procul, pueri: sit semel ille nocens.


CLXV.—Cithara


ReppipiT Eurydicen vati: sed perdidit ipse,
dum sibi non credit nec patienter amat.


CLX VI.—Idem


De Pompeiano saepe est eiecta theatro
quae duxit silvas detinuitque feras.


1 A city of Laconia. The feathers are called Amyclaean
because Jupiter appeared to Spartan Leda in the shape of a
swa


n.
2 ef. Hor. Od. 11. i. 21 for a similar idea,


496


BOOK XIV. crixi—cuixw


CLXI.—Feathers


TiRED you may rest. on feathers of Amyclae !
which the swan’s inner down has given you.


CLXII.— Hay


Let your rustling mattress swell with thefts from
your mule: pale Care comes not to hard couches.?


CLXIIL—A Bell


Give up the ball: the bell of the warm baths is
sounding. Do you goon playing? You want to go
home after a bath in the Virgin water only.?


CLXIV.—A Quoit


Wuize the burnished weight of the Spartan quoit
is flying, keep far off, ye boys: let that quoit be
guilty only once.*


CLXV.—A Cithern


Ir restored Eurydice to her bard; but he him-
self lost her, trusting not himself, nor loving with
patience.


CLXVI.—The Same


Orten has that been driven® from Pompey’s
theatre, which drew after it woods and stayed wild


beasts.®


3 The hot baths will be full, or closed, and he will have
to content himself with a cold bath from the aqua Virgo:
Cys, Vie XX. 9. 4 cf. clxxiii. post.

5 7.e. hissed off by the audience.

8 j.e. when played by Orpheus: cf. Spect. xxi.


497


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXVII.—Plectrum
Fervipa ne trito tibi pollice pusula surgat,
exornent docilem candida plectra lyram.!
CLX VIiI.—Trochus


InpucENDA rota est: das nobis utile munus :
iste trochus pueris at mihi canthus erit.


CLXIX.—Jdem


Garrutus in laxo cur anulus orbe vagatur?
cedat ut argutis obvia turba trochis.


CLXX.—Signum Victoriae Aureum


Hagc illi sine sorte datur cui nomina Rhenus
vera dedit. deciens adde Falerna, puer.


CLXXI.—Bpovrov raidlov Fictile


Goria tam parvi non est obscura sigilli:
istius pueri Brutus amator erat.


1 garrula By.


1 An instrument for striking the strings.


2 Rings were often strung round the orbit of a boy’s hoop :
see a picture taken from a sepulchral bas-relief at Tivoli


reproduced in Rich’s Dict, Ant. s.v. ‘* Anulus.”


How the


hoop was able to run is very obscure. Perhaps loose rings
were supported in position by the cluvis, or hook, for
trundling the hoop. Or perhaps the rings were attached to


the inner circumference.


498


BOOK XIV. cixvu—cixx:


CLXVII—A Quill for Playing the Lyre


THat an angry blister may not arise on your
chafed thumb, let an ivory quill} embellish your
responsive lyre.


CLXVIII.—A Hoop


Tue wheel must be fitted with a tyre: you give
me a useful present; this to boys will be a hoop,
but to me a tyre.


CLXIX.—The Same


Wuy do noisy rings wander round the wide orbit?
That the crowd that meets them may give way to
tinkling hoops.?


CLXX.—A Golden Statue of Victory?


Sue is given without a drawn lot to him to whom
Rhine has given a true victor’s name. Ten times4
pour Falernian, boy.


CLXXI.—A Clay Image of “ Brutus’ Boy”


Tue renown of so small a statue ® is not unknown.
Of this boy was Brutus the lover.


8 This, and the following, describe sigilla (statuettes),
which were frequently given at the Saturnalia, z.e. on the
last two days, which were called Sigilaria: cf. Aus. De Fer.
Rom. v. 32 (festa sigillorum nomine dicta colwnt).

‘ To represent the letters of Germanicus (Domitian) : ef.
ms xcili. 7, 8.

5° ef. 11. lxxvii. 4 ; ; 1x.l. The statuette was by Strongylion,
a Greek sculptor of the fifth century b.c.: Plin. N.H. xxxiv.
19 (21).


499


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXXII.—Sauroctonos Corinthius
Ap te reptanti, puer insidiose, lacertae
parce; cupit digitis illa perire tuis.


CLXXIII.—Hyacinthus in Tabula Pictus


Fiectit ab inviso morientia lumina disco


Oebalius, Phoebi culpa dolorque, puer.


CLXXIV.—Hermaphroditus Marmoreus


Mascutus intravit fontis: emersit utrumque:
pars est una patris, cetera matris habet.


CLXXV.—Danae Picta


Cur a te pretium Danae, regnator Olympi,
accepit, gratis si tibi Leda dedit ?


CLXXVI.—Persona Germana


Sum figuli lusus russi persona Batavi.
quae tu derides, haec timet ora puer.


CLXX VII.—Hercules Corinthius


Exipit geminos infans nec respicit anguis.
iam poterat teneras hydra timere manus.


1 On a replica of a work of Praxiteles representing the
young Apollo with an arrow watching a lizard. It was
called Savpoxrdvos’: cf. Plin. N.H. xxxiv. 19 (10).

2 Apollo, when playing at quoits with Hyacinthus, killed
him by accident. From his blood sprang the hyacinth
inscribed with the Greek aia? (alas): cf. Milton’s ‘‘ Sanguine
flower inscribed with woe.” The picture alluded to may be
a copy of the one by Antidotus of the fourth century B.c.,
the original of which was transported to Rome by Augustus
on the capture of Alexandria: Plin. N.H. xxxv. 40 (28).


500


BOOK XIV. crxxiu-—cixxvir


CLXXII—The Lizard-slayer in Corinthian Bronse


Spare the lizard, treacherous boy, as it creeps up
to you; it longs to perish by your hands.}


CLXXIIIL—A Picture of Hyacinthus


From the hated quoit he turns his dying eyes,
the Oebalian boy, the reproach and sorrow of
Phoebus.”


CLXXIV.—A Marble Hermaphroditus


Mats, he entered the fount;? he came forth both
male and female: one part of him is his sire’s, all
else has he of his mother.


CLXXV.—A Picture of Danae


Wuy of you, Ruler of Olympus, did Danae4
receive her price, if Leda unbought was kind to


your
CLXXVI.—A German Mask


I am a freak of the potter, the mask of a red-
haired Batavian. This face you deride a boy dreads.5


CLXX VII.—Hercules in Corinthian Bronze


Tue infant throttles ® the two serpents, nor does
he glance on them. Already might the hydra’ fear
youthful hands.


8 Salmacis: cf. vi. lxviii. 9; and see Ovid, Met. iv. 285.

4 Possibly a copy of Artemon’s picture of Danae miran-
tubus eam praedonibus: cf. Plin. N.H. xxxv. 40 (32).

5 To him it is a bogey.

6 The Goddess Hera, jealous of Alemena the mother of
Hercules, sent two serpents to kill him in his cradle: ef.
Verg. Aen. viii. 289.

7 The Lernaean hydra, or water-snake, was one of the
monsters slain by Hercules: ef. Spect. xxvii. 5; 1x. ci. 9.

501


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXXVIIL—Hercules Fictilis


Sum fragilis: sed tu, moneo, ne sperne sigillum :
non pudet Alciden nomen habere meum,


CLX XIX.—Minerva Argentea


Dic mihi, virgo ferox, cum sit tibi cassis et hasta,
quare non habeas aegida. ‘Caesar habet.”


CLXXX.—Europe Picta


Mutari melius tauro, pater optime divum,
tunc poteras, Io cum tibi vacca fuit.


CLXXXI.—Leandros Marmoreus


CLaMaABAT tumidis audax Leandros in undis
*Mergite me, fluctus, cum rediturus ero.”


CLXXXII.—Sigillum Gibberi Fictile


Esruus haec fecit terris, puto, monstra Prometheus:
Saturnalicio lusit et ipse luto.


1 The statuette was called Hercules Fictilis: ef. Plin.
N.H. xxxv. 45. It was by Turianus of Fregellae in the time
of Tarquinius Priscus.

2 See the description of Domitian’s breastplate, vir. i. and ii.

§ The original was in the Porticus Pompeii, painted by
Antiphilus, the rival of Apelles: Plin. N.H. xxxv. 37.

4 As a bull J. would have escaped the hundred eyes of .
Argus set to watch Io: cf. Ixxxv. 2,


502


,


BOOK XIV. cruxxviti—cuxxxu


CLXXVIII.—A Hercules in Clay


Fracite am I, but do not you, I charge you,
despise my small statue: it shames not Alcides to
bear my name.!


CLXXIX.—A Minerva in Silver


TeLt me, gallant maid, whereas thou hast thy
helm and thy spear, why hast thou not thine aegis?
“¢ Caesar has it.” ?


CLXXX.—A Picture of Europa’


Better, most excellent Father of the Gods, couldst
thou have been changed into a bull when Io was to
thee a heifer.*


CLXXXI.—A Marble Leander


Darina Leander cried amid the swelling waters:
«Drown me, ye waves, when [ am turning home.’’5


CLXXXII.—A Clay Statuette of a Hunchback


’Twas a drunken Prometheus,® I fancy, made for
the earth this monster; he himself, too, played with
Saturnalian clay.’


5 Snect. xxv. B is on the same subject.

6 7.e, the potter: ef. Juv. iv. 133.

7 The original Prometheus (ipse) made men out of clay
(cf. x. xxxix. 4), and had a taste for making grotesque
figures. Statuettes of dwarfs and monstrosities were doubt-
less often made, and given as presents at the Saturnalia, the
taste for slaves of this type being common: cf. the Poly-
phemus and Scylla of vir. xxxviii.


593


.Y


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXXXII.—Homeri Batrachomachia
PeRLEGE Maeonio cantatas carmine ranas
et frontem nugis solvere disce meis.
CLXXXIV.—Homerus in Pugillaribus Membranis
It1as et Priami regnis inimicus Ulixes


multiplici pariter condita pelle latent.


CLXXXV.—Vergilt Culiax


Accipr facundi Culicem, studiose, Maronis,
ne nucibus positis “‘ Arma virumque”’ legas.
CLXXXVL—Vergilius in Membranis
Quam brevis inmensum cepit membrana Maronem!
ipsius vultus prima tabella gerit.
CLXXXVII—Merav8pov ®ats
Hac primum iuvenum lascivos lusit amores;
nec Glycera pueri, Thais amica fuit.
CLXXXVIUI.—Cicero in Membranis


Sr comes ista tibi fuerit membrana, putato
carpere te longas cum Cicerone vias.


1 ««Tf Homer can unbend, I can be excused.”
2 Culex, an early poem of Vergil’s.


hs which they gambled at the Saturnalia: cf. x1v.
i. 12.


504


BOOK XIV. cuxxxii—cLixxxvit


CLXXXIN.—Homer’s “ Battle of Frogs and Mice”


Reap through the story of the frogs sung in
Homer’s lay, and learn to smooth your brow by
means of my trifles.1


CLXXXIV.—Homer in Parchment Handybooks


Tue had and the tale of Ulysses, foe to Priam’s
realm, both lie stored in many-folded skins.


CLXXXV.—Virgil’s Gnat
Receive, studious reader, the Gnat? of eloquent
Maro; you need not then lay aside your nuts? to
read “ Arms and the Man.”


CLXXXVL—Virgil in “Parchment
How short a parchment‘ has comprised the mighty
Maro! The features of the man himself the first
leaf bears.


CLXXXVII.—The Thais of Menander


Wiru this first he lightly touched youth’s wanton
love, and Glycera was not the mistress of his boy-
hood : ’twas Thais.®


CLXXXVIII.—Cicero in Parchment


Ir this parchment shall be your travelling com-
panion, imagine you are taking a long journey with
Cicero.

4 Parchment being very expensive, books were often copied


in small characters: cf. cxc.
5 From this play came the line quoted by St. Paul,


POelpovoew HOn xpho Spusrtar Karad.
VOL. Il. R 5°95


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CLXXXIX.—Monobyblos Propertt


Cynruia, facundi carmen iuvenale Properti,
accepit famam; non minus ipsa dedit.


CXC.—Titus Livius in Membranis


Pe.uisus exiguis artatur Livius ingens,
quem mea non totum bybliotheca capit.


CXCI.—Sallustius


Hic erit, ut perhibent doctorum corda virorum,
primus Romana Crispus in historia.


CXCII.—Ovidi Metamorphosis in Membranis


Hacc tibi multiplici quae structa est massa tabella,
carmina Nasonis quinque decemque gerit.


CXCIII.— Tibullus


Ussir amatorem Nemesis lasciva Tibullum,
in tota iuvit quem nihil esse domo,


CXCIV.—Lucanus


Sunt quidam qui me dicant non esse poetam :
sed qui me vendit bybliopola putat.


CXCV.—Catullus


TaNnTum magna suo debet Verona Catullo,
quantum parva suo Mantua Vergilio.


‘ The first book of Propertius was published by him at the
age of twenty. It was called Cynthia, and in some MSS. is
headed ‘‘ Monobiblos.” But whether M. alludes to this is
uncertain.


506


BOOK XIV. cixxx1x—cxcv


CLXXXIX.—Propertius in a Single Volume


Cynruia,! the theme of eloquent Propertius’ youth-
ful song, won from him fame; no less she herself
bestowed.


CXC.— Titus Livius in Parchment


Narrowep into scanty skins is bulky Livy, the
whole of whom my library does not contain.?


CX CI.—Sallust


Here will be Crispus, first of Roman historians,
as the judgment of learned men declares.


CXCII.—Ovid’s “ Metamorphoses” in Parchment


Tuts bulk, that has been formed of many a leaf,
contains the fifteen books of Naso’s poems.


CXCIIl.—Tibullus


Wanton Nemesis? fired her lover Tibullus, whom
it pleased to be “of no account in his own house.”


CXCIV.—Lucan


Some are there that say I am no poet: but the
bookseller that sells me thinks I am.


CXCV.— Catullus


As much great Verona owes to her Catullus as
small Mantua owes to her Virgil.


2 It is too small to hold Livy in his ordinary shape. L.
wrote 142 books of annals.

3 It was Delia of whom Tib. (1. v. 30) writes ‘‘ At juvet in
tota me nihil esse domo”? Nemesis was his second love.


597


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CXCVI.—Calvi de Aquae Frigidae Usu


Hac tibi quae fontes et aquarum nomina dicit
ipsa suas melius charta natabit aquas.


CXCVIL—Mulae Pumilae


His tibi de mulis non est metuenda ruina:
altius in terra paene sedere soles.


CXCVIII.—Catella Gallicana


Deuictas parvae si vis audire catellae,
narranti brevis est pagina tota mihi.


CXCIX.—Asturco


Hic brevis ad numeros rapidum qui colligit unguem,
venit ab auriferis gentibus Astur equus.


CC.—Canis Vertragus


Non sibi sed domino venatur vertragus acer,
inlaesum leporem qui tibi dente feret.


CCI.—Palaestrita


Non amo quod vincat, sed quod succumbere novit
et didicit melius ryv émixAwordAnv.


1 Licinius Calvus, an orator and poet of the age of Cicero.
He is praised by Catullus, Propertius, and Ovid; but M.
suggests that this particular work is fit only to be thrown
away: cf. I. v. 2. 2 ef. M.’s description of Issa (1. eix.).

3 cf. Non vulgaris in cursu gradus, sed mollis alterno
crurum explicatu glomeratio: Plin. N.H. viii. 67. This trot
or amble was taught : ibid.


508


BOOK XIV. cxcvi-cc1


CXCVI—Caluus’! Poem on the Use of Cold Water


TuEseE sheets, that speak to you of fountains and
of the names of rivers, themselves will better swim
in the waters they tell of.


CXCVII.— Dwarf Mules


From these mules no fall is to be apprehended :
you are used to sit almost higher on the ground.


CXCVIL.—A Gallic Lapdog


Ir you wish to hear the tricks of a small lapdog,
for the telling a whole page of mine is too short.?


CXCIX.—A Jennet


Tuis little horse, that picks up its hurrying hoof
in measured time,’ has come from tribes rich in gold,
an Asturian steed.


CC.—A Greyhound *


Nor for himself, but for his master, hunts the keen
greyhound, who will bring you a hare unwounded by


his tooth.
CCI.—A Wrestler


I. po not like him because he -wins, but because
he knows how to yield, and has learned the better
art of recovering himself.°


4 The word is by some translated ‘‘tumbler,” a dog that
-inveigled game by careless gambols, or by rolling himself
into a heap, and so disguising his shape. It is alluded to
in Hudibras.

5 There is probably an obscene sense here: cf. Suet. Dom.
22 (assiduitatem concubiius velut exercitationis genus clinopalen
vocabat).


509


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CCIIL.—Simius


CaLLipus emissas eludere simius hastas,
si mihi cauda foret, cercopithecus eram,


CCIII.— Puella Gaditana


Tam tremulum crisat, tam blandum prurit, ut ipsum
masturbatorem fecerit Hippolytum.


CCIV.—Cymbala


Aerra Celaenaeos lugentia Matris amores
esuriens Gallus vendere saepe solet.


CCV.—Puer


Sir nobis aetate puer, non pumice, levis,
propter quem placeat nulla puella mihi.


CCVI.—Cestos


CoLto necte, puer, meros amores,
ceston de Veneris sinu calentem.


CCVII.— Idem


Sume Cytheriaco medicatum nectare ceston:
ussit amatorem balteus iste lovem.


1 The cercopithecus came from Aethiopia : Plin. N.H. viii
30. In Egypt it was asacred animal: Juv. xv. 4.

* Who rejected the advances of his stepmother, Phaedra,
the wife of his father Theseus,


510


BOOK XIV. ccu-ccvu


CCII.—A Monkey


A MoNKEY cunning to avoid darts hurled at me,
I should be a “ long-tailed ape’’! had J a tail.


CCIIL—A Girl from Gades


SALTEGGIA con si minuto tremito, ed eccita con
tanta lusinga, che Ippolito? stesso si masturberebbe.


CCIV.—Cymbals


Tue brazen cymbals that mourn for the boy of
Celaenae,? the darling of the Great Mother, her
priest is often wont to sell when hungry.


CCV.—A Young Slave


May I have a boy with a cheek smooth with youth,
not with pumice, for whose sake no maid would
please me.


COVI.—A Cestus


Rounp thy neck twine, boy, love’s very essence,
a cestus® warm from the bosom of Venus.


COVII.—The Same


Take thou the cestus imbued with Cytherea’s
nectar: this girdle fired® the lover Jove.


8 Attis, the love of Cybele: cf. 11. Ixxxvi. 4.

4 A phrase from Catullus xiii. 9.

5 of, Vi. xiii. 5.

6 Hera borrowed from Aphrodite her cestus to inflame the
ardour of Zeus: Hom. Jl. xiv. 214, 312,


511


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


COCVIII.—Notarius


Currant verba licet, manus est velocior illis:
nondum lingua suum, dextra peregit opus.


CCIX.—Concha


Lxvis ab aequorea cortex Mareotica concha
fiat: inoffensa curret harundo via.


CCX.—Morio


Non mendax stupor est nec fingitur arte dolosa.
quisquis plus iusto non sapit, ille sapit.
CCXI.—Caput Vervecinum


Mo tua Phrixei secuisti colla mariti.
hoc meruit, tunicam qui tibi, saeve, dedit ?


CCXII.—Pumilus


S1 solum spectes hominis caput, Hectora credas :
si stantem videas, Astyanacta putes.


CCXITI.— Parma


Harc, quae saepe solet vinci, quae vincere raro,
parma tibi, scutum pumilionis erit.


1 This epigram explains the small price at which M.’s
poems could be sold by Tryphon: cf. x1. iii. 2. A number
of slaves as shorthand writers could copy books cheaply.

2 Papyrus, Mareotis being a part of Egypt. Pliny (N.H.
xiii. 25) says that papyrus was smoothed by an instrument
or by a shell, but that the writing fades.

3 Cfo Via XXxI VINE. KU KIT. Xcite

‘The ram with the golden fleece that carried Phryxus


512


BOOK XIV. ccvii—ccxur


CCVIII.—A Shorthand Writer

AtseiT the words speed, the hand is swifter than
they: not yet has the tongue, the hand has finished
its work.) ~

CCIX.—A Sea-shell

Ler the rind of the Mareotic rush? be made
smooth by the sea-shell: the reed-pen will run on
an unimpeded path.


CCX.—A Natural?

His dulness is not assumed, or pretended by
crafty art. He that has wits no more than is enough
has his wits.

CCXI.—A Ram’s Head

You have cut the soft throat of the lord of the
flock, a ram of Phryxus;* did he deserve this who
gave you, cruel man, your tunic?


CCXII.—A Dwar;
Ir you regard the man’s head alone you would
believe him Hector; if you saw him standing you
would deem him Astyanax.°®


CCXIII.—A Small Shield


Tus, which is wont oft to be overcome, rarely to
win,® will be to you a small buckler, but a dwarf’s


great shield.


and Helle through the air, and whose fleece was afterwards
carried off by the Argonauts from Colchis: ef. vi. iii. 6;
viii. li. 9. 5 The young son of Hector: ef. vill. vi. 16.

6 Domitian favoured the scutarvi, gladiators who fought
with the ordinary large oblong shield, as against the gladia-
tors called ‘‘‘Thracians,” who wore a smaller shield of a round


shape: ef. 1x. Ixviil. 8
513


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


CCXIV.—Comoed: Pueri


Non erit in turba quisquam Mucovpevos ista:
sed poterit quivis esse Als éfararav.


CCX V.—Fibula


Dic mihi simpliciter, comoedis et citharoedis,
fibula, quid praestas? “Carius ut futuant.”


CCX VI.—Accipiter


Praepo fuit volucrum: famulus nune aucupis idem
deicit et captas non sibi maeret aves.


CCX VII.— Opsonator


Dic quotus et quanti cupias cenare, nec unum
addideris verbum: cena parata tibi est.


CCXVIII.—Auceps


Non tantum calamis sed cantu fallitur ales,
callida dum tacita crescit harundo manu.


CCXIX.—Cor Bubulum


Pauper causidicus nullos referentia nummos
carmina cum scribas, accipe cor, quod habes.


1 The two mentioned are comedies of Menander. In the
latter occurs the celebrated line dy of O€0: dirodow &modvhcKe
véos. ATC fepVilenl McKie Ol seOe

® The removal of the clasp has to be paid for: ef. Solvitur
his magno comoedi fibula (Juv. vi. 73).

_ * Birds are caught not only by a limed cane but also by an
imitation of their note, or by the note of a decoy bird. As


514


BOOK XIV. ccxtv—cexix


CCXIV.—Boy Comic Actors
In all this. troupe will be no one “The Hated’’;
but any one of them can be “The Double Deceiver.’’!


CCXV.—A Singer's Clasp
TeLt me candidly, O clasp, what do you guarantee
to comedians and harp-players?? “The greater
value of their favours.” 3


CCXVI.—A Hank
He preyed once upon birds; the servant of the
fowler now, he strikes them down, and is sad the
birds are not taken for his own behoof.


CCXVII.—A Caterer
Say with how many and at what cost you want to
dine, and do not add another word: your dinner is
ready for you.


CCX VIII.—Bird-catching Rods


Not only by canes, but by a bird’s note also is
the bird deceived while the cunning reed is’ being
lengthened by the noiseless hand.*


CCXIX.— A Bulloch’s Pluck


Srerne that you, a poor lawyer, write poems that
do not bring you in a penny, take from me pluck
like your own.®


to the cane, cf. 1x. liv. 3; and, as to the decoy, see the
engraved gem in Rich’s Dict. Antig. s.v. ‘* Arundo.”

5 There is a play on two meanings of the word cor, viz.
“heart” and ‘‘sense”: cf. vi. lxiv. 18. ‘* Pluck” is a
butcher’s name for the heart, liver and lights of an animal :
see Skeat’s Ltym. Dict. 8.v.; and also means ‘‘ courage.”


SES


THE EPIGRAMS OF MARTIAL


COX X.—Cocus


Non satis est ars sola coco: servire palatum
nolo: cocus domini debet habere gulam.


CCX XI.—Craticula cum Verubus


Rara tibi curva craticula sudet ofella;
spumeus in longa cuspide fumet aper.


CCX XII.—Pistor Dulciarius


Mitte tibi dulces operum manus ista figuras
extruet: huic uni parca laborat apis.


COXXITI.—Adipata


SurGiTE: iam vendit pueris ientacula pistor
cristataeque sonant undique lucis aves.


INCERTAE SEDIS EPIGRAMMA


. Fravia gens, quantum tibi tertius abstulit heres!
paene fuit tanti non habuisse duos.


Hoe epigramma extat apud scholiastam in Iuvenalem 8,


iv. 38. Vulgo in fine libri spectaculorum legitur, libro xi.
adsignatur a Friedl.


516


BOOK XIV. Perk ceruit


CCXX.—A Cook
INSUFFICIENT is his art alone for a cook: I would
not have his palate that of a slave; a cook ought


to possess the taste of his master.
'


CCXXI.—A Gridiron nith Spits
Ler your grated gridiron be unctuous with the
rounded cutlet; on the long pointed spit let a
foaming boar smoke.


CCXXIL—The Confectioner
A THOUSAND toothsome shapes of handiwork that
hand will construct for you; for him alone labours
the frugal bee.


CCXXIII.—Rich Dainties
Get up: already the baker is selling to boys their
breakfast, and the crested fowls of dawn are crowing
on all sides.


AN EPIGRAM OF UNCERTAIN POSITION


O Fravian family, of how much glory has thy third
heir robbed thee! Well nigh had it stood us in
stead not to have possessed the twain ! }

1 These lines (which are amplified by Ausonius, Caes. xii.)
mean that Domitian was so evil that it had been better
for Rome not to have had Flavian Emperors at all, even good
ones like Vespasian and Titus.


517


a


binaw Lf, ssfaoe &


“ »
SMe Vigoss :


aegis Ris Setbigt pe: ae
ht Aifae’ noes a, ott roa, fhetonry 1880
Bank sige hheataiogy. opal Pie “ae ae

“aeme ba a


‘ a - * .
\ oe 5 SO. se a


130 strostbires tee, eee nchi othe
Tal SSR, pales, OL Corts?


¥ « tA as os
: entre eee Xe 00 ns
ft} ayo, Gtnaiting gi ccasau, adh thowaln ia
BLVD. Oe inven) to ale Letemie ody. hen.
Bs BE aly So 76 es OD


meee ST wiz as
MOranOn EBS #5 HAY BO u


ritecanal nuily “Horret Wot ovcelibasth ARTY
ai au 4 Se a bedi: Wifi dies: rier

i ‘Gia ott hs pezoanory . eps
tiie wows 4 suindang 4, pad . ‘a
wahhet rend Mak i) tadd lieve preres auisimaeg
“Gh OR ts avo bla da coEe Ad aula dant on


’


+
—
¥, a
a
x
tik
i Sey
3
+*
- .
= Y
- ; a
fm 1
si


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO
MARTIAL


EPIGRAMMATA QUAEDAM
M. VAL. MARTIALI AFFICTA


I.—De Rusticatione


Rure morans quid agam, respondeo pauca, rogatus.


luce deos oro; famulos, post arva reviso,
partibus atque meis iustos indico labores,

inde lego, Phoebumque cio, Musamque lacesso.
hine oleo corpusque frico mollique palaestra
stringo libens, animo gaudens, ac foenore liber.
prandeo, poto, cano, ludo, lavo, coeno, quiesco.
dum parvus lychnus modicum consumat olivi,
haec dat nocturnis nox lucubrata Camoenis.


Il.—Jn Varum


Ap coenam nuper Varus me forte vocavit:
ornatus dives, parvula coena fuit.

auro, non dapibus, oneratur mensa: ministri
apponunt oculis plurima, pauca gulae.


tunc ego, “Non oculos, sed ventrem, pascere veni: 5


aut appone dapes, Vare, vel aufer opes.”’


1 These are partly gathered from MSS. and old glossaries,
partly embodied in his works by Hadrianus Junius and


others.


4
Hadr. Jun. (Adrien de Jonghe, 1512-1575) was a Dutch
physician and savant, one of the most learned men of the


520


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO
MARTIAL}


I.—Life in the Country


As you ask me what I do while staying in the
country I reply shortly. At daybreak I pray to the
gods; I visit my servants and afterwards my fields,
and to my staff I assign their proper tasks. Then
I read and call on Phoebus, and challenge the
Muses. After this I rub my body with oil, and with
mild gymnastics gladly brace myself, happy in my
mind and free from moneylenders. I lunch, drink,
sing, play, bathe, dine, go to bed. Provided my
small lamp consume but little oil, such lucubrations
as these night furnishes to the nocturnal Muses.


IIl.— Against Varus


Varus happened to invite me lately to dinner:
his appointments were rich, his dinner was scanty.
The table is loaded with gold plate, not with meats ;
the attendants set before us much to please the eye,
little to tickle the palate. Then I said: “I did not
come to stuff my eyes, but my stomach; either
provide your provender, Varus, or remove your
property.”
age. Among his works were commentaries on Plautus,
Horace, Petronius, Seneca, and Martial ; and a Philippid, or
Upithalamium on the marriage of Philip and Mary. He
was the Rector of the College of Harlem, and his library
was pillaged by the Spaniards.


521


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL


Ill.—Jn Ponticum


PontTice, per reges discurris, et omnia lustras :

magna quidem sequeris, Pontice : magnus homo es.
Pontice, si qua facis, sine teste facis, sine turba ;

non adhibes multos, Pontice: cautus homo es.
Pontice, te celebrem forma natura creavit : 5

dignus eras Helena, Pontice: pulcher homo es.
Pontice, voce tua posses adamanta movere :

vox tua dulce sonat, Pontice: dulcis homo es.
Pontice, sic alios, sic te quoque decipit error:

vis dicam verum, Pontice? Nullushomoes. 10


IV.— De Petula
Tacta places, audita places: si non videare,


tota places: neutro, si videare, places.


V.—De Milone


Mito domi non est: peregre Milone profecto
arva vacant: uxor non minus inde parit.

cur sit ager sterilis, cur uxor fertilis, edam:
quo fodiatur ager non habet, uxor habet.


VI.—De Histrionis Poena


Anre Iovis statuam crepuit satur histrio: poenam
luppiter indixit, vivere de proprio.


522


III-VI


[Meo gainst Ponticus


Ponticus, you run about among great lords, and
have an eye for everything going ; you pursue, in-
deed, great things, Ponticus; you are a great man.
Ponticus, if you do anything, you do it without a
witness, without a crowd round you; you don’t make
confidants of many, Ponticus; you are a cautious
man. Ponticus, nature has fashioned you of remark-
able beauty ; you would have been worthy of Helen,
Ponticus ; you are a handsome man. Ponticus, with
that voice of yours you might stir adamant; your
voice is sweet-toned, Ponticus ; you are a sweet man.
Ponticus, this error deceives you too as it does other
men. _Would- you have me tell you the truth,
Ponticus? You are not a man at all.


IV.—On an Old Woman


To the touch you are pleasing, listened to you
are pleasing ; if you are not seen, you are wholly
pleasing ; in neither way if you are seen are you
pleasing.

V.—On Milo

Mio is not at home; Milo has gone abroad, and
his fields are neglected; yet his wife is no less
fruitful since. Why his land is sterile, why his wife
is fertile, I will declare: his land has no cultivator,
his wife has.


VI.—On an Actor's Punishment
A FULL-FED actor broke wind before Jove’s statue.
Jupiter declared the penalty, to live at his own
expense.!
1 x1. Ixxvii. is an epigram on the same subject.


52:3


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL


VII.—In Effrontem


Os atavi, patris nasum, duo lumina patris,
et matris gestus dicis habere tuae.

cum referas priscos, nullamque in corpore partem
mentiris; frontem, dic mihi, cuius habes?


VIII.—Ad Mattum


Qui negat esse domi se, tunc cum limina pulsas,
quid dicat, nescis? Dormio, Matte, tibi.


IX.—Ad Milonem


Tura, piper, vestes, argentum, pallia, gemmas,
vendere, Milo, soles; cum quibus emtor abit.

coniugis utilior merx est : quae vendita saepe,
vendentem nunquam deserit aut minuit.


xX


Nec volo me summis fortuna nec applicet imis,
sed medium vitae temperet illa gradum.
invidia excelsos, inopes iniuria vexat :
quam felix vivit, quisquis utroque caret !


1 4.e. whose ‘‘cheek”? The forehead was the seat of
shame: cf. Pers. v. 103 (frontem perisse de rebus) and Shak.
18, and J. 11. ii, 91, “‘upon his brow Shame is ashamed
to sit.


524


VII-x


VII.— Against a Shameless Person


You say you have your fourth grandfather's mouth,
your father’s nose, both your father’s eyes, and your
mother’s carriage. Since you recall your ancestors
—and do not describe incorrectly any part of your
body—tell me, whose forehead + have you?


VIIIl.—To Mattus


Don’t you know what he says who denies himself
just when you knock at his door? “To you, Mattus,
I am asleep.”’?


IX.—To Milo


FRANKINCENSE, pepper, garments, silver plate, cloaks,
jewels you are accustomed to sell, Milo, and the buyer
goes off with them. Your wife is as merchandise
more useful to you: she, though often sold, never
leaves the seller or diminishes his estate.


X.—On a Middle Station


I woutp not have Fortune set me in the highest
' or in the lowest place; rather let her moderation
grant life’s middle station. Envy assails the high,
wrong the weak: how happy does he live who
escapes both !


2 An allusion to the proverb ‘‘ Non omnibus dormio,” said


of those that are willing to be blind to the doings of some
others, but not of everybody: Fest. xii. 487; Cic. Hp. vii. 24.
Erasmus (Adag. 8.v.) tells the story of one Galba, who pre-
tended to sleep while Maecenas toyed with his wife, but
woke up when a slave began to steal his wine.


525


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL


XI.—Ad Scaevolam


ScagvoLa, tu coenas apud omnes, nullus apud te:
alterius siccas pocula, nemo tua,

aut tu redde vices, aut desine velle vocari:
dedecus est semper sumere, nilque dare.


XIL.—Ad- Auctum


Exigis a nobis, quem nulli solvis, amorem:
quam nulli praestas, exigis, Aucte, fidem.
exigis a nobis, quem non merearis, honorem :

mirum est, quod non das, id tibi velle dari.


XIUI.—De Filo


Patuia Filus habet, digitos circumligat auro:
sed tamen est Filus paupere pauperior.

sunt Tyriae chlamydes, mille instrumenta, clientes
Filo: sed tamen est paupere pauperior.

atria sunt Filo regali consita cultu : 9)
sed tamen est Filus paupere pauperior.

esurit atque sitit, gemmis instructus et auro ;
Cyclade vestitus esurit atque sitit.

pondus adesse famis, pallor maciesque loquuntur :
aurea bulla negat pondus adesse famis. 10

ergo miser se servitio pro pane locabit ;
sed ne sit servus aurea bulla facit.

si vero quenquam pulsabit supplice voto,
ut non exoret, serica vestis adest.


Ch. Tl. SXvlh.

* The epigram is on a miserly rich man.

3 The bulia was an ornament in the shape of a heart worn
by children np to the age of seventeen, and then consecrated


526


XI-XIII


XI.—To Scaevola


ScaEvoLa, you dine with everybody, no one with
you; another man’s cups you drain, no one drains
yours. Either make return, or give over looking for
invitations: it is a disgrace always to take and give
nothing.!


XIL.—To Auctus


You claim from us what you pay to no one, love;
what you accord to no man you claim, Auctus, trust.
You claim from us what you don’t deserve, honour;
it is wonderful that what you don’t give you expect
to be given you.


XITI.—On Filus


Fitus possesses cloaks, he surrounds his fingers
with gold, but yet Filus is poorer than the poor.?
Filus has Tyrian mantles, a thousand appointments,
clients, but yet he is poorer than the poor. Filus
has a hall furnished in royal style, but yet Filus is
poorer than the poor. He hungers and thirsts while
he is arrayed in jewels and gold ; though he is clad
in an embroidered robe he hungers and thirsts. His
pallor and emaciation bespeak a load of hunger; his
gold brooch says there is no load of hunger. The
wretched man will then hire himself out in slavery
for bread, but his gold amulet prevents him being a
slave.2 If, indeed, he assails any man with suppliant
prayers, his silken garb is at hand to prevent him
to th® Lares, or Household Gods. It was gold in the case of

children of free birth, leather in the case of children of freed-
men. It enclosed an amulet (a phallus) against the evil eye ;
hence it was worn by a victorious general during a triumph:
Macrob. Sat. i. 6.


527


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL


ergo ne pereat, fiat de divite pauper: 15
pauper enim factus ditior esse potest.


XIV.—Ad Aulum


Non sanguis, non oris honor, non gloria census,
non gravitas morum proderit, Aule, tibi.

pauper enim tu semper eris, quia pauper es: et te
colligit ulterior ulteriore gradus.


XV.—Ad Regulum


PraepicaT Hermagoras, non omnibus esse placendum.
elige de multis, Regule, cui placeas.


XVI.—Ad Aulicum


Mutta mihi donas, vereor ne multa requiras.
nolo mihi dones, Aulice, si repetas.


XVII.—Ad Germanicum


Exa.ras in lite tuam, Germanice, vocem,
ut furias mentis vox furiosa sonet.


XVITI.—Ad Bassum


Omnis amicus amat, sed non qui amat omnis amicus:
sed quem, Basse, tu ames, esto et amicus ei.


1 vy, Ixxxi. has a similar sentiment.
2 A Greek rhetorician who caine to Rome in the time of
Augustus,


528


XIT-XVIII


prevailing. So, that he may not perish, let him from
rich become poor; for a man become poor may acquire
riches.


XIV.—To Aulus


Nor blood, not beauty of face, not proud estate,
not weight of character will avail you, Aulus. For
you will be always poor because you are poor:! and
a grade lower than the lowest includes you.


XV.—To Regulus


Hermagoras? preaches that one need not please
everybody. Choose, Regulus,’ some one out of many
to please.


XVI.—To Aulicus


You make me many presents: I am afraid you will
require many in return. I don’t want you, Aulicus,
to give me anything if you claim an equivalent.


XVII.—To Germanicus


You raise your voice, Germanicus, in court that a
furious voice may echo to the fury of your mind.


XVIII.—To Bassus


Every friend loves, but not every man who loves
is a friend: but do you, Bassus, be also a friend to
the man you love.


3 An eminent advocate, many times alluded to by Martial,
but in more complimentary terms: cf. Iv. xvi. 6.


529


EPIGRAMS ASCRIBED TO MARTIAL


XIX.—In Turgidum


In noctem prandes, in noctem, Turgide, coenas,
multimodoque mades nocte dieque mero.

cumque cuti studeas, uxorem ducere non vis:
cum nolis, dicis, Vita pudica placet.

Turgide, mentiris. Non est haec vita pudica.
vis dicam, quae sit vita pudica? Modus.


XX.—In Chloen


Lasctvo Ganymede cales: te quilibet intrat :
Hippolytos etiam reddis amore graves.

plurimus interea tibi limen servat adulter:
exposita es cuivis: quam populare sapis !

Demophilem cuperem te dicere, te nisi mater
esse Chloen vellet. Non sapit atque sapit.


XXI.—In Laidem


Formosissima Lai feminarum,

dum noctis pretium tibi requiro,
magnum continuo petis talentum:
tanti non emo, Lai, poenitere.


XXIL—/n Macrinum


Derunat fungis homines, Macrine, negabas:
boleti leti causa fuere tui.


Av oft Vitt. xlvil 2. 2 i.e, loved by the people.
3 The point of the epigram is very obscure.
4 The Attic talent of 60 minae of silver, about £240.


539


XIX-XXII


XIX.—A gainst Turgidus


Titi nightfall you lunch, till nightfall, Turgidus,
you dine, and with all sorts of wine day and night
you reek. And, although you are careful of your
person, you are unwilling to take a wife; your un-
willingness says: ‘A chaste life pleases me.” Tur-
gidus, you lie; this is not a chaste life. Would you
have me tell you what is a chaste life? Moderation.


XX.—Against Chloe


You are hot for a wanton Ganymede; you are
every man’s goods; even Hippolytuses! you make
heavy with lust. In the meantime many an adulterer
hangs about your threshold; you are exposed for
sale to anyone: how popular is your taste! I should
have wished to have called you Demophile,? had not
your mother wished you should be Chloe: she is
unwise and wise.?

XXI.—Against Lais

Lats, mostebeautiful of women, when I ask you
what is the price of your favours, you at once require
a great‘ talent. At such a cost, Lais, I do not buy
repentance.°®


XXII.— Against Macrinus
You used to deny, Macrinus, that men could be-


come defunct through funguses: mushrooms made
room for your heirs ! ®

5’ This is the answer said to have been made by Demos-
thenes to Lais, the Corinthian courtesan: Gell. i.8. Perhaps


the epigram is put in the mouth of D.
6 The pun on let? and bolet: can only be paraphrased.


534


/)


~25 f — °: Awe B
¥ i. > - : 4+
oe) wpa ia bad nang b, Gt; ae
Jniit finia Hi u, anu ro. at ais
Jity, fh Gunn To 2 toe tha Ws Sieh ks ey
410 Shas Unt Ugo ak” Meo uot


in aSS ue aes "Od yotibiatitl 4s" ‘dom
wat ; sti eis aot sit ii) alo aes Ce et
tone Dincw: — Si-stanpen pit at yah toy
showy $s Ts walls bai bade


nid) hbase Se


By SOU 3 Laban aoe vba is tes
to Agearh uate A esas ogg} Ce
WOOT Sate ar Peel Shi ity ates Beds ue Fg neq
Gh; Daas cri LO: vidlopenty aM sauna
cant i laaape eh tlegurp wer!
Soen Dak Lestislgo esti (on Tetling seasbeg fy
Bega sob? ae bivesttp aay soa in
j Kgl


* Bod ta soba i ox ines
» lh. Pa Bi ier ett Sith ow” + Tettieeed E ;
avis pat Sang "ha UGY toed pte 26


ae
Nowe iG Ob be sud, Huns b tine” ih a


peat


bea
= ml F


‘


: in
wh ach. engi
bios imate “aay einen


. 4
Ani iagirey eink § ay sare


re


g i re AK her mms mac of
Ma TAS 4
. ri Chi th
Den As be: iG
‘ ® : ; :
whee
4 4
4 Aye
* 7


Auctus,


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


\


Apicius, M. Gabius, a noted
gourmand of the time of Tiberius.
According to Seneca (Ad Helv.
x.) after spending in gluttony
one hundred million sesterces
(£800,000), he found himself op-
pressed by debt, looked into his
accounts, and, discovering he
had remaining only ten millions
committed suicide. Martial
alludes to this (111. xxii.), giving
the sums as sixty millions and
ten respectively. Pliny (N.H.
ix. 30) speaks of him-as ad omne
luxus ingenium mirus, and (N.H.
x. 68) calls him nepotum omnium
altissimus  gurges. Athenzeus
(i. 12) tells how that, hearing
lobsters were very large in Libya,
he set off at once, but finding
from samples.that they were of
ordinary size, he returned with-
out landing
Apollinaris, Domitius, a learned
friend of M. and a favourable
critic of his epigrams (Ivy. Ilxxvi;
vil. xxvi.). M. (x. Xxx.) describes
his villa at Formiae. He is
perhaps the A. alluded to by
Pliny (Zp. ix. 13) as consul
designatus in A.D. 97
Pomponius, a learned
lawyer, and admirer of Martial,
wee works he knew by_ heart,
vin
Avitus, Stertinius, Consul A.D. 92.
He placed a bust of M. in his
library, of which M. writes
(1x. Introd. Ep.) the inscription.
M. addresses to him an epigram
(x: xcvi.) on the charms of
country life in Spain


Baetis, the Guadalquivir, the prin-


cipal river Hispania Baetica,
according to Pliny (iii. 8) the
most fertile province in Spain.
It flows past Corduba and
Hispalis (Cordova and Seville)
and falls into the Atlantic N. of
Gades (Cadiz). The district was
renowned for olives (XII. Ixiii. 2 ;
XII. xceviii. 1), which Martial
thinks superior to those of
Venafrum: vil. xxviii. 3; and
Statius to Attic, Silv. 11. vii. 29;
whereas Pliny (xv. 3) thinks the
olives of Venafrum superior to
those of Baetica and Istria.
The province of Baetica was also
celebrated for its wool, to which
the waters of the Baetis gave a
golden hue, often alluded to by
Martial


Biilbilis, the second city of Hispania


Tarraconensis, on the high road
between Emerita and Caesar
Augusta (Merida and Saragossa).
Was a municipium in Imperial
times. It stood on a rocky
height surrounded by the Salo,
a river famed for tempering
iron. Its site is at or near
Bambola, near Calatayud, a
Moorish City built by Ayub, the
nephew of Musa, the Governor
of N.W. Africa at the time of the
Arab invasion, who used the
remains of Bilbilis as a quarry.
Bilbilis was also the scene of a
battle between A. Metellus and
the insurgent Sertorius in B.o. 74


Castricus, some friend of Martial,


who is addressed in several


535


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


epigrams. It would appear from
Vil. xlii. that he was a poet
Cerialis, a friend of Martial, whom
the poet invites to dinner in two
epigrams, X. xlviii. and XI. lii.
He was a poet and imitator of
Virgil, and wrote bucolics and a
poem on the war of the Giants,
XI. lii, 17, 18. Pliny (Zp. ii. 19)
addresses one of his letters to


him

Claudia Rufina, a lady of British

birth, whose refinement Martial
raises as equal to that of a
oman or a Greek, XI. lili. She
may be the same as the Claudia
that married Pudens, whose
marriage the poet celebrates,
Iv. xiii.

Crispinus, a low upstart who came
from Kgypt and hawked salt
fish in Rome, Juv. iv. 33. He
was raised to the Senate by
Nero, and was made a knight by
Domitian. Juvenal calls him
(i. 26) verna Canopi, and (iv. 31)
purpureus scurra Palaii; and
speaks of him as matutino sudans
amomo, iv. 108. He was com-
mander of the Emperor’s body-
guard (praefectus praetorio), an
office summus equester gradus:
Suet. Galb. 14. Martial alludes
to him in two epigrams, VII. xcix.
and VIII. xlviii.


Decianus, of Emerita, another
friend of Martial. He was a
Stoic, and is praised for not
following the example of suicide,
1 Marat His literary works
conferred distinction on his
birthplace, I. lxi. 10. Martial
speaks of his learning, sim-
plicity, and rectitude, I. xxxix. ;
and addresses to him the Intro-
ductory Epistle of his second
book. In II. v. he is rallied on
the distance M. has to go to
call on him, and the difficulty of
finding him at home


Earinos, the page of Domitian, on
whose name M, plays in three


536


Entellus, a freedman,


Etruscus,


Faustinus,


epigrams, IX. xi-—xiii.; and
whose dedication of his hair to
Aesculapius M. celebrates, IX. xvi.
and xvii.; see also IX. xxxvi. 3.
Statius (S7v. 111. iv.) has a long
poem on the latter subject
Domitian’s
secretary a libeliis (petitions).
Was privy (with Parthenius) to
the Emperor’s assassination. M.
praises his greenhouses, VIII.
Ixviii.


Erotion, a little slave girl, whose


death M. laments in three of his
finest epigrams, V. xxxiv. and
Exxvilc) Sa Ed _But.cing ihe
second epigram mentioned the
harmony of the poem is somewhat
spoilt by the sarcastic touch at


the end

Claudius, father and
son. The father came originally
as a slave from Smyrna, and was
emancipated by ‘Tiberius, in
whose household he was. He
was successively in the service
of Caligula, Claudius, Nero, and
Domitian, being under Nero the
head of the Imperial treasury.
By Domitian he was banished to
Campania: Stat. Silv. mi. iii.
164, who describes him as
hospes, non exul. He married
a rich wife, and lived to a great
age. His son accompanied his
father into exile. M. has epi-
grams on the father’s exile and
recall, VI. Ixxxiii.; and on his
death, VII. xl.; and on the son’s
baths, VI. xlii., which are also
eulogised by Statius (Silv. I. v.)
who also writes a lament on the
father’s death, Silv. m1. iii.


Julius, a friend fre-
quently addressed, and a poet
whom M, (I. xxv.) advises to
publish, and to whom (mI. ii. 6)
he sends his third book, and (tv.
x.) his fourth. He had villas at
Anxur (xX. li.), Tibur (Iv. lvii.)
and Baiae, the latter of which M.
(m1. lviii.) elaborately describes.
M. appeals to him (vil. xii.) on
the question of the unmalicious


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


character of his epigrams. Nothing
more is known of him

Festus, a friend of the Emperor,
who died of a cancer in the
face, I. Ixxviii. If he be the
same as the Valerius Festus,
spoken of by Pliny (Zp. iii. 7)
as guilty per summum facinus of
the murder in A.D. 69 of Piso
the proconsul of Africa (see
Tac. Hist. iv. 49) M. is hardly
justified in speaking of his
wndignas fauces and pia ora.
Tacitus, swpra, describes him as
sumptuosae adulescentiae, neque
modica cupiens

Flaccus, a native of Patavium, is
addressed by Martial in many
epigrams; he is a guest in
xeextvilic. and: in Xit. -ixxiv.
Martial makes him a present of
“dreadnought ” glass, He
appears to have been a poet,
I. lxi. and Ixxvi. Some commen-
tators, on the strength of the
two epigrams mentioned, have
identified him with Valerius
Flaccus, the epic poet of the
Argonautica, But it is not certain
that Valerius Flaccus was born
at Patavium; Setia in Campania
contends for the honour of being
his birthplace, and the Vatican
MS. has appended the words
*Setinus Balbus.” And Quin-
tilian says (X. i. 90) multum in
Valerio Flacco nuper amisimus ;
consequently V. Flaccus must
have died before A.D. 90 or 91,
the probable date of Quintilian’s
great work, in which case none
of Martial’s last six books at
least can refer to him. The
notes to IX. lv. 2 and XI. lxxx.
8 should be corrected. It is
noticeable also that Martial
never refers—as might have been
expected—to the Argonautica, as
he does to the Punica of Silius.
Frontinus, Sextus Julius, succeeded
Petilius Cerealis, and was ‘suc-
ceeded by Agricola, as Governor
of Britain. Tacitus (Ag. 17)
describes him as ‘‘a great man
so far as he was permitted to


MART, II,


be,” ie. by the Emperor’s
jealousy. He subdued the
powerful and warlike Silures in
South Wales in spite of the
difficulties of the country (Tac.
supra), In A.D. 97 he was
curator aquarum, and in 98
Consul (according to M.) for the
second time; but his name does
not appear in the Fasti (Hoffm.
Lex, Univ.). He had _ been
Praetor Urbanus in 70 (Tac. Hist.
iv. 39), an office he resigned to
Domitian, not then Emperor. He
wrote a treatise on the art of war
called Strategemata, and a work
on the Roman aqueducts, both of
which are extant. He died in
106, saying in his will impensa
monumenti supervacua est; me-
moria nostri durabit si vita
meruimus

Fronto, described by M, (I. lv.) as
a distinguished lawyer and soldier.
Perhaps the same as T. Catius
Fronto, consul in 96, and alluded
to by Pliny (Zp. iv. 9 and vi. 13)
as an orator

Fuscus, apparently a lawyer of
some eminence and wealth whom
Martial (VII. xxviii) begs to read
and criticise his seventh book.
He is not the Cornelius Fuscus
who fell in the Dacian war, VI.
Ixxvi; and perhaps not the
Fuscus whom M. courts in I. liv.


Ianthis, or Violentilla, the wife of
Stella the poet. Martial (VI. xxi.)
as well as Statius (Silv. 1. ii.)
celebrates her marriage. The
name is taken from tov, the
Greek form of viola. Statius
calls her Asteris


Latinus, a celebrated mime, or
comic actor. He was a favourite
of Domitian, and a _ delator,
Schol on Juv. iv. 53. Martial
writes an epigram (IX. xxviii). on
his portrait. Suetonius (Dom.
15) tells a story how Latinus,
when dining with Domitian
before the murder of the latter,
had disturbed the Emperor, who
had been alarmed by various


Si Goa


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


ominous occurrences, by report-
ing the fulfilment of a prophecy
by Ascletarion, the astrologer, of
the manner of his own death,
i.é€., being torn by dogs, whereas
Domitian to prevent this had
commanded him to be buried.


Licinianus was born like Martial at


Bilbilis. He is spoken of highly
by the poet as bringing glory to
Spain, 1. xlix and 1. lxi. He
is perhaps the Lucius mentioned
in Iv. lv. The epigram I. xlix.
seems to show he was a lawyer.
Licinus, was originally a Gaulish
prisoner taken by Julius Caesar,
who gave him his freedom, and
made him his steward. Augustus
appointed him, in B.o. 15,
Governor of Gaul. By extortion
during his government he


spirators. He denounced his
own mother Atilla. But this
did not save him, for he was
forced by Nero to commit suicide
by opening his veins in a bath:
Tac. An. xv. 70. Martial, who
regarded him as next to Virgil,
laments his death in three
epigrams; VII. xxi-xxiii.; as
also does Statius, Silv. U. vii.
His first work was on the death
of Hector and Priam’s recovery
of the body, Stat. Silv. I. vii.
54; and his last the Pharsalia ;
but, according to Martial (x.
lxiv.) he did not confine himself
to grave subjects. Juvenal (vii.
79) says he was a rich man;
and Tacitus (Ann. xvi. 17) that
Nero was greedy for his wealth


Macer, a friend of Martial, and at
one time curator of the Appian
Way (x. xvii.), and afterwards
propraetor of Dalmatia (x.
Ixxviii.). Martial in two _ epi-
grams (vy. xxviii. 5, and x.
Ixxviii. 2) speaks of his honesty
and uprightness. He is probably
not the Macer who was Governor
of Baetica (XI1. xcviii.)

Marcella, a Spanish lady from

fraternal affection, I. xxxvi. Bilbilis, to whom M. addresses

and v. xxviii. 3, and Martia two epigrams, in one (XII. xxi.)

(Ix. li.) compares them to praising her mind as_ truly

Castor and Pollux. He died


acquired enormous wealth; and
Juvenal (i. 109) couples him
with Claudius’ freedman Pallas
as the typical rich man. The
magnificence of his tomb on the
Via Salaria (as of that of
Messalla) was proverbial, VIII.
iii. 5, 6

Incanus, Cn. Domitius Curvius, the
brother of Cn. Domitius Tullus.
The two brothers were types of


before his brother, after havin

held high office under Nero an

Domitian. Both are alluded to
by Pliny, Hp. viii. 18


oman, and in the other (xm.
xxxi.) acknowledging the gift of
the country house she gave him
when he returned to Spain.
Some have supposed she was


his wife
Marcellinus served in the Sarmatian
campaign, Vi. XXxv., VI. Ixxx;
and in the Caucasus, Ix. xlv.
Martial sends him his seventh
book, VII. Ixxx.; and writes on
his father’s birthday, I. vi.
: ; He also warns him against over-
peror’s jealousy of his literary rash valour: he should consider
ability, fell into disfavour, and his father, as well as his Em-
was forbidden to recite in public. peror, VI. xxv. That father is
From pique he joined the supposed to have been Faustinus.
Pisonian conspiracy of A.D. 65, Marcellinus himself is called
and was offered a pardon if he boni suboles sincera parentis,
would betray his fellow-con- VI. XXV.


538


Incanus, M. Annaeus, the poet of
the Pharsalia, was the son of
Lucius Annaeus Mela, the geo-
grapher, and the nephew of
Seneca, the philosopher, and was
born at Corduba in Spain. At
first he was in favour with Nero,
but afterwards, from the Em-


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


Marsus, Domitius, a poet of the
Augustan age, frequently men-
tioned by Martial, together with
Pedo and Catullus, with whom
he. compares himself, v. v. 63
vn. xcix. 7. He wrote epics.
Ov.. Lz. .P.- Iv. xvi. 5; - and
Martial alludes to an Amazonis
(Iv. xxix. 8) which, however, he
regards as inferior to the
satires of Persius. Marsus_ is
chiefly distinguished fer his
epigrams, which were licentious
and biting, one of his books being
called cicuta (hemlock). An epi-
taph of his on Tibullus is extant
Martialis, Julius, a friend for 33
years of the poet, by whom he is
addressed in some of the finest
epigrams, I. XV.; V. XX. X.
xlvii, and XII. xxxiv. Martial
also describes his villa on the
Janiculum, Iv. lxiv; and his
library, Vil. xvii. Paley identi-
fies him with the Julius Martialis
mentioned by Tacitus (Hist.
i. 28 and 82) as tribunus legionis,
when Otho was aspiring to the
purple, and as being suspected
of complicity with the plot. He
appears to have been a good
critic, VI. i; and Martial sends
him his sixth book, ibid.; and
he is probably also the Martialis
to whom is sent the third book
from Forum Cornelii, M1. v.
Maternus, a jurisconsult, whom
Martial describes as a fellow-
townsman of Bilbilis, and an old
friend, X. xxxvii. 1, 3. In the
same epigram M. compares the
charm of life in Spain with life
in a Roman villa

Melior, Atedius, a bon vivant of the
time, called nitidus, Iv. liv. 8.
Martial praises him (VIII. xxxviii)
for his liberality to the Guild of
Scribes in memory of his friend
Blaesus; and both Martial
(vi. xxviii and xxix), and
Statius (Silv. 11. i.) have written
on the death of his freedman
Glaucias

Messalla Corvinus, M, Valerius, the
friend of Horace and patron of


Tibullus. Was Consul 8.0. 31
and Praefectus Urbi in 27. He
was a patron of learning and
the arts, and was himself a poet,
a@ grammarian, historian, and
orator. He took the side of
Brutus and Cassius in the civil
war, but was afterwards recon-
ciled to Augustus. His tomb
(alluded to by Martial, vil. iii.
5 and X. ii. 9) was, like that of
Licinus, celebrated for its splen-
dour


Nomentum, now La Mentana, a


town in the Sabine Country,
144 Roman miles N.E. of Rome.
Originally a Latin town, a colony
from Alba, it was taken by
Tarquinius Priscus, the fifth
king of Rome. Martial, and
also Seneca, had a house here,
vi. -xliii. 4, Ix. xviii. 2; and
here M. retired when he wanted
quiet, x1. lvii. 27. Nomentum
was celebrated for its wine,
which, when it was old, a
praises, I. cv., and offers to his
guests in xX. xlviii. 19; but the
oet in other respects depreciates
is property, xX. xciv. His
fields, he says (VII. xxxi. 8)
“ produced nothing but himself ”


Ovidius, Q., Martial’s friend and


neighbour at Nomentum. He
had accompanied Caesonius
Maximus into exile when the
former was banished by Nero, for
which Martial (VII. xliv. and xlv.)
praises him, In his old age he
accompanied a friend to Britain,
apparently in fulfilment of a
promise, or from affection, x.
xliv. Martial writes two epi-
grams (Ix. lii. and liii) on his
birthday


Paris, a mime or comic actor, for


whom Martial writes an epitaph
(XI. xiii). He had great influence
at Court, and was the darling of
the Roman people. Domitian,
on suspicion of his intrigue with


539


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


the Empress Domitia, caused
him to be murdered on the
Flaminian Way

Parthenius, a freedman, and Secre-
tary or chamberlain to Domitian.
Though he had been privy to the
murder of that Emperor, the
mildness of Nerva retained him
for a time in his place, but was
unable to protect him against
the infuriated praetorians who
put him to death with nameless
indignities in A.D. 97. He seems
to have been something of a poet,
XE/i. 63 xa. xi,.2, and iseon-
stantly flattered by Martial, to
whom he gave the celebrated
toga described in VI. xxviii.

Paulus, some rich acquaintance of
Martial, apparently a lawyer,
vil. Ixxii. Martial quizzes him
on the tenuity of the bowl Paulus
had sent him, VIII. xxxiii.;


great men, although he is him-
self consul, X. x.; and his false
antiques and equally false friends,
XII. lxix.; and complains of
the trouble of calling upon him
at a distance only to tind him
“not at home,” v. xxii. He
seems to have been a man of
wit, Vv. xxviii. 6

Pedo, Albinovanus, a poet and
epigrammatist of the Augustan
age, and a friend of Ovid, who
addresses him in one of the
Epistles from the Pontus: Ep.
ex P. Iv. x.3; and alludes to
his poem on the exploits of
Theseus. Martial compares him-
self with him and with Marsus
and Catullus, v. v. 6

Plinius, Caius Caecilius, Secundus,
the nephew and adopted son
of the historian, born A.D. 61
or 62, probably at Comum.,
An orator, advocate and man of
letters. He studied under Quin-
tilian, and practised before the
Centumviral Court, and filled
several offices, being Consul in
100 (in which year he delivered
his Panegyric on Trajan), and


540


Propraetor of Pontica in 103.
His works consist of the Pane-
gyricon Trajan above mentioned,
and ten books of Epistles, of
which the tenth consists of letters
to Trajan and the Emperor’s
replies, two of which (97 and 98)
are especially interesting by
their allusion to the Christians.
He was one of the most learned
men ofthe age. Martialaddressed
an epigram (X. xix.) to him;
but the Secundus alluded to in
VII. lxxxiv. (where the note
should be corrected) chronology
shows not to be the same
Primus, Marcus Antonius,was born
at Tolosa in Gaul (IX. xcix. 3),
took a leading part in the Civil
war that made Vespasian Em-
peror, and was the first to enter
Rome after the second battle of
Bedriacum against the Vitellians,
He bore the nickname in his
youth of Beccus (beak of a
cock, gallus); and Suetonius
(Vit. 28) mentions the prophecy
that Vitellius would fall into
the hands Gallicani hominis.
He perhaps gave Martial a toga
(xX. Ixxiii. 2), and he admired
his poetry, Ix. xcix. 1. M.
calls him Tolosae gloria, 1x.
xcix. 3; and in a fine epigram
congratulates him on his well-
spent life, x. xxiii.; and in
another praises his portrait as a
youth, xX. xxxii. But Tacitus
gives a different account of his
character. ‘‘ Though an offender
against the laws, and condemned
for forgery in the time of Nero,
amongst the other evils of war,
he had recovered his place in
the order of senators. Though
he had been appointed by Galba
to the command of the seventh
legion, he was believed to have
written to Otho, offering himself
as an adherent to his party.
When the fortunes of Vitellius
were tottering he attached him-
self to the party of Vespasian,
and brought to it a great acces-
sion of strength, He was


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


energetic In action, ready of
tongue, a master of the art of
sowing the seeds of suspicion
against other men, influential in
discords and seditions, a plun-
derer, a briber, in peace most
vile, in war not to be despised,”’
Hist. ii. 86. ‘‘He had a ready
audacity,” Ann. xiv. 40; and
“‘glibness of speech, and skill
and influeace in soothing the
common herd,’’ Hist. iii. 10. ‘‘ He
was of an arrogance impatient
of an equal, much more of a
superior,’’ Hist.iv. 80; ‘‘ success
in the case of such a character
laid bare his avarice, his inso-
lence, and his other hidden
vices,”” Hist. iii. 49

Priscus, Terentius, a fellow-country-
man of Martial, to whom he
dedicates, on Priscus’ return to
Spain, the twelfth book. In
xu. lxii. he addresses Saturn on
the same subject. Martial calls
him (xi. iv.) his Maecenas. In
vill. xlv. he celebrates Priscus’s
return from Sicily; and in
another epigram (XII. xiv.) warns
him against the danger of too
reckless hunting

Proculus, G. Julius, a friend of
Martial, to whom he_ sends
(1. lxx.) his first book, and whose
recovery from illness he com-
memorates, XI, xxxvi.

Pudens, Aulus, of Sassina in
Umbria, a friend of Martial, and
a centurion. He served in
Pannonia. Martial celebrates
his marriage with Claudia, Iv.
xiii; and prays (VI. lviii. 10)
that he may return from his
campaigns with primipilar rank
and the rank of a knight. It
may be inferred from 1. xxxi. 3,
as compared with v. xlviii. 1,
that he attained the former
honour at least


Quintianus, some rich friend of M.
(v. xviii. 9) to whom M., says
that, being poor, he will only
send his books. In I. lii. M.


appeals to him against a

plagiarist

Quintilianus, M. Fabius, was born
at Calagurris (Calahorra) in
Spain. He was the most cele-
brated of Roman rhetoricians.
Educated at Rome, he returned
to Spain, and came back with
Galba in 68. He practised at
the Bar, but is chiefly known as
a teacher of eloquence, the
younger Pliny (£p. ii. 14;
vi. 6) being one of his pupils.
He held the chair of rhetoric
founded by —Vespasian; and
was granted by Domitian the
insignia of a consul, to which
Juvenal (vii. 197) may per-
haps sarcastically allude. After
twenty years’ tenure of the chair
he retired about 89 A.D., and in
two years had completed the
work for which he is principally
known, the Institutiones Oratoriae
in twelve books. He advised
Martial to take up a profession,
Il, xe.


Rabirius, the architect of Do-
mitian’s palace, VII. lvi. Martial
has an epigram on the death of
R.’s_ parents, and praises his
filial piety, x. Ixxi.

Regulus, M, Aquillius, a celebrated
advocate. He was a delator
under Nero and Domitian, and
attained great wealth. He is
disliked by Pliny, but is flattered
by Martial, who praises his
character (I. cxi.). Pliny ridicules
even his oratorical power (Zp.
iv. 7), and his extravagant
grief for the death of his son,
“‘a boy of a quick but inscrutable
disposition, who yet might have
followed the right, had he not
been like his father,’ Ep. iv. 2.
M. congratulates him in two
epigrams (I. xii. and Ixxxii,) on
his escape from death. Pliny
describes him as ‘‘rich, factious,
courted by many, feared by
more; and fear is generally
stronger than love,’”’ Ep. i. 5;


541


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


and remarks his chastened aiti-
tude after Domitian’s death,
‘under whom he had committed
no smaller infamies than under
Nero, but more covert ones,”’ ibid,
Pliny also (Zp. ii. 20) tells a
story of his legacy-hunting even
in the case of his enemy’s wife

Rufus, Camonius, of Bononia, a
friend of M. He died at the
age of 20 in Cappadocia,
vI. Ixxxv. M. alludes in two
epigrams (Ix. Ixxiv. and lxxvi.)
to his portrait as a child, and
writes an epigram (VI. 1xxxv.) on
his death

Rufus, Canius, of Gades, a poet
(i, lxi. 9) and friend of Martial,
who alludes (I. lxix.; III. xx.)
to his geniality, and to his
versatility as an author. He
married the accomplished Theo-
phila, on whom M. (vil. Ixix.)
writes an epigram

Rufus, Instantius, a friend of M.,
to whom he presented the
famous cup elaborately described
in vil. li. M. speaks of his
sincerity, VIII. Ixxiii. 1. Perhaps
he may be identified with the
proconsul of Baetica mentioned
in XII. xevili. 5


Sabinus, Caesius, of Sassina in
Umbria, where he built a temple
to the Nymph of the Lake,
Ix. lviii. M. sends him (VII.
xevii. 13) his seventh book, and
on another occasion a wreath of
roses, Ix, lx.

Scorpus, a famous charioteer on
whose death Martial writes two
epitaphs, x. 1. and liii.; and
of whose immense earnings he


speaks, Iv. Ixvii.; xX. Ilxxiv.;
and gilt statue, Vv. xxv.
Seneca, L. Annaeus, the Stoic


philosopher, was born at Corduba
in Spain, 1. lxi. 7. He was the
brother of Annaeus Mela, the
geographer, and of Gallio of the
New Testament, and uncle of
Lucanthe poet. He was banished
by the Emperor Claudius, but
was afterwards tutor to Nero,


542


whose quinguennium, or first
five years of good government,
was attributed to his teaching.
He, however, stained his reputa-
tion by condoning Nero’s murder
of his mother Agrippina. He
was implicated in the conspiracy
of Piso in A.D. 65, and, together
with his wife, committed suicide,
Tac. Ann. xv. 63. He was a man
of great wealth @#


Severus, a critic to whom Martial


submits his poems, Y. Ixxx.;
XI. lvii. As in the last epigram
he is called doctus, he may have
been himself a poet. In Il. vi.
M. chaffs him for his hurried
reading of Martial’s slender
volume, although he professed
to be a great admirer of his
poems. There isalso an epigram
(VII. xxxviii.) on two hideous
slaves of his; and Martial
frequently addresses him. In
VII. xlix. he sends him a gift of
eggs and apples fromthecountry.
It is not certain whether this
Severus is identical with the
younger son of Silius, for whom
the poet (vil. lxvi.) solicits the
consulship; and whose death
(ix. Ixxxvi.) he laments :
Silius, C., surnamed  Italicus,
orator, lawyer, and poet, was
born about A.D. 25. Pliny (Zp.
iii. 7) gives an account of his life.
He was consul in 68, the last of
Nero’s consuls, and proconsul
of Asia, where he served with
distinction. He lost his younger
son, for whom Martial solicits
(vill, Lxvi.) the consulship, and
whose death he laments, rx,
ixxxvi.; but left the elder a
consular. In later life he retired
to Campania, where he possessed
many villas, including Cicero’s
house at Puteoli and Virgil’s
house at Naples, XI. xlviii. and
xlix. These villas were richly
furnished with books, statues,
and busts, among which he
especially venerated that of
Virgil, whose birthday he kept
more religiously than his own,


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


and whose tomb he regarded as
atemple. He committed suicide
by voluntary starvation in his
seventy-sixth year because of
an incurable cancer. As a
poet Martial (vil. Ixiii.) calls
him immortal, but Pliny says
that his works showed more
scholarly care than genius. He
is known by his Punica, an epic
on the second Punic war in
seventeen books, of which Prof.
Mackail says: ‘‘ His Punic War
InMay fairly contend for the
distinction of being the worst
epic ever written . . . its author
the most striking instance in
Latin literature of the incorrigible
amateur . . . without any in-
ventive or constructive power of
his own. Silius copies with
tasteless pedantry all the out-
worn traditions of the heroic
epic.”’” He is only once referred
to in the fifth century ; then he
fell into complete oblivion till he
was discovered in the fifteenth
Stella, L. Arruntius, of Patavium,
a patron and friend of Martial
and Statius, who dedicates to
him the first book of the Silvae.
Both Martial (VI. xxi.) and
Statius (Silv. i. 2) write epi-
thalamia. on Stella’s marriage
with Violentilla, whom M. calls
Ianthis, and Statius Asteris.
Stella gave games to celebrate
the conclusion of the Sarmatian
war, VIII. Ixxvili.; and was
consul A.D. 101; an honour for
which M, (1x. xlii.) had solicited
Apollo. Statius (Silv. 1. ii. 177)
also says that he was a quin-
decimvir librorum sibyllinorum.
He was also a poet. M. alludes
to his Columba, a poem on the
death of Ianthis’ pet dove,
I. vii. 1; vil. xiv. 5; and writes
several epigrams (¢.g. VI. xlvii.)
on a spring in Stella’s house
Sulpicia, a poetess of the time, of
whom nothing is known, X. xxxv.
She was the wife of Calenus,
X. xxxviii. She is mentioned b
__ Ausonius and by Sidonius Apolli-


naris; and a satirical poem on
the expulsion by Domitian of
the philosophers from Rome is
commonly attributed to her.
Paley ascribes to her the poems
often contained in the editions
of Tibullus

Sura, Licinius, of Hispania Tarra-
conensis, held offices under
Nerva and Trajan, being under
the latter three times consul.
Martial speaks (VII. xlvii. 1) of
his learning, and (VI. lxiv. 13)
appreciation of M.’s poems, and in
the first epigram, one of the best,
of his unexpected recovery from
severe illness. He would seem
to have been a natural philo-
sopher, for Pliny (Zp. Iv. xxx.)
consultshim as totheunex plained
ebb and flow of a spring. On
his death Trajan gave him a
public funeral, and built baths
in his memory. He is perhaps
the Sura of_1. xlix. 40, but this
Sura may be Palfurius Sura, who
was removed from the Senate
by Vespasian, became a Stoic,
was a delator under Domitian,
and was after his death con-
demned by the Senate, Schol. in
Juv. iv. 53


Tullus, Cn. Domitius Curvius, the
brother of Lucanus (q.v.). He
held high office under Vespasian
and Domitian. He wasarich man
like his brother, and Pliny (Zp,
viii. 18) speaks of the disappoint-
ment of the caplatores when his
will was opened, and says of the
two brothers that it seemed
ordained by fate that they
should be enriched even against
the will of the donors. He had
played upon the expectations
of legacy-hunters (se captandum
praebuisset) during his life, and
by his will left his property to
his relations, thus showing him-
self longe melior morte quam
vita. He was a cripple, unable
even to brush his own teeth
complaining that ‘‘ he daily licked


543


INDEX OF PROPER NAMES


the fingers of hig slaves,”’ Pliny,
l.c. Pliny speaks of the devo-
tion of his wife


Vestinus, perhaps the Lucius V.
described by Tacitus (Hist. iv.
53) as equestris ordinis virum, sed
auctoritate famaque inter pro-
ceres, to whom  Vespasian
gave the duty of restoring the
Capitol; and perhaps also the
son of the consul Vestinus who,
being marked for death by Nero,
committed suicide by opening
his veins in a bath (Tac. Ann. xv.
69). Martial praises him (Iv.
Ixxiii.) for dividing his property
amongst his friends when he
was on the point of death. Paley
suggests that his motive was to
avoid making the Emperor his
heir, or joint heir; and cites
the example of Agricola (Tac.
Ag. 43), who had made Domitian
joint heir with his own wife and
daughter


544


Zoilus, an anonymous person
frequently attacked by M., and
to whom is attributed every vice.
He had been a slave (III. xxix.)
and a runaway one (XI. liv.), and
had afterwards become a knight
(a1. xxix.) It is not improb-
able that M. borrowed the name
from the original Zoilus, a
grammarian of Amphipolis who
flourished in the time of Philip of
Macedon and AlexandertheGreat,
and whose name, because of his
attacks on Homer, Plato, and
others, became one synonymous
with malignant criticism, Ov.
Rem. Am. 366. He was called
KU@Y ‘pntopikds, and opunpouacreé,
and remains, in the words of
Swinburne (Cont. of Shak. 1.)
“eternally alive (or in Brown-
ing’s characteristically audacious
phrase) ‘immortally immerded.’”
Aelian (V.H. xi. 10) reports a
remark of his that he always
spoke evilly of men because he
could not do them evil


INDEX OF FIRST


A


A latronibus esse te fututam .

A servo scis te genitum blandeque fateris”
A Sinuessanis conviva Philostratus undis .
Abscisa servum quid figis, Pontice, lingua ?
Abstulerat totam temerarius institor urbem
Accidit infandum nostrae scelus, Aule, puellae
Accipe belligerae crudum thoraca Minervae . .
Accola iam nostrae Degis, Germanice, ripae . .
Ad cenam invitant omnes te, Phoebe, cinaedi .
Ad cenam si me diversa vocaret in astra. . .
Ad lapidem Torquatus habet praetoria quartum
Ad natalicias dapes vocabar. .

Ad populos mitti qui nuper ab urbe solebas

Ad primum decima lapidem quod venimus hora .
Addat cum mihi Caecubum minister .

Addere quid cessas, puer, immortale Falernum 2
Addixti, Labiene, tres agellos .

Addixti servum nummis here mille ducentis
Aedes emit Aper, sed quas nec noctua vellet
Aegrotas uno decies aut saepius anno. .
Aemiliae gentes et Apollineas Vercellas .
Aemula Baianis Altini litora villis .
Aeolidos Canace iacet hoc tumulata sepulcro
Aera domi non sunt, superest hoc, Regule, solum
Aéra per tacitum delapsa sedentis in ipsos 5

_ Aestivo serves ubi piscem tempore quaeris ? .
Aetherias aquila puerum portante per auras. .
Alcide,-Latio nunc agnoscende Tonanti . . .
‘Alcides modo Vindicem rogabam .

Alcime, guem raptum domino crescentibus annis
Allatres licet usque nos et usque  . 2
Alphius ante fuit, coepit nunc Olphius™ esse ede
Amisit pater unicum Salanus . 3
Amissum non flet cum sola est Gellia patrem. Q
Amphitheatrales inter nutrita magistros . . .
Amphora vigessi, modius datur aere quaterno .
An possim vetulam quaeris, Matronia: possum .
Ancillariolum tua te vocat uxor, et ipsa SEO


“ee we


ia), Sis Coot ©


S: eae cee
0) @ 1a. LO" eda e


Annorum nitidique sator pulcherrime mundi .
Antiqui rex magne poli mundique prioris. .
Antoni Phario nil obiecture Pothino . .
Anxuris aequorei placidos, Frontine, recessus |


LINES


Oe aye ere oe at) 0) Tal, Cries OH eee ey one.


"ee eo @


ali s* ep ee RL er eyte: erie) ee e: eve Ve Tetherndi_e seu ema am tele ery


0) 6! MRne ly Od em bin OL veh et oll eleven altars om ok, soe a) le


C1 eee. Grete eC Ge en's © Sao 6,6


XII. xxvii
I. Ixxxi
XI. Ixxxii
1. lxxxii
vit. Ixi
VIL. xiv
Vil. i

V. iii

IX. Ixiii
IX. xci
XlExix
Vil. Ixxxvi
XII. iii
XI. Ixxix
X. xeviii
IX. xciil
XII. xvi
.€>.9.0.4|
XI. xxxiv
XI. vi
X. xii

IV. XXv
XI xel
VII. xvi
VII. xxxii
I. lxxviii
I. vi

Ix. Ixv
IX, xliv
I, Ixxxviii


XI. Ixxvi
Il. xxxii
XII. lviii
X. xxviii

XI. Lxii
vy. Ixix
X. lviii


545


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Apollinarem conveni meum, Scazon_ . a eet Vil. xxvi
Appia, quam simili venerandus in Hercule Caesar . . Ix. ci
Archetypis vetuli nihil est odiosius Eucti. . . . . . vin. vi
Archetypum Myos argentum te dicis habere Pate tac le ag) VIII. xxxiv
Arctoa de gente comam tibi, Lesbia, misi Be rr cack yc cme vy. lxviii
Ardea solstitio Castranaque rura petantur Pramisahe Noe ad Iv. lx
Argenti genus omne comparasti. Nae Ry Cage Cho IV. XXxix
Argenti libram mittebas ; facta selibra est Stee ae a xX. lvii
Argenti libras Marius tibi quinque reliquit *.~ . 2. =" 3 0. Ixxvi
Argiletanas mavis habitare tabernas . . . . .. .- I. iii
Arrectum quotiens Marulla penem ite One oko X. Iv
Arrigis ad vetulas, fastidis, Basse, puellas. Arh OC Seth M1. Ixxvi
Artemidorus habet puerum, sed vendidit agrum. . . . TX. xxi
Artibus his semper cenam, Philomuse, mereris sis) =f << IX, XXXV
Artis Phidiacae toreuma clarum . title: ey Til. XXXv
Aspice quam densum tacitarum vellus aquarum , im Ceaser Iv. iii
Aspice quam placidis insultet turba iuvencis. . . . . V. xxxi
Aspicis hunc uno contentum lumine, cuius sate nal 2s VIII. lix
Aspicis, inbelles temptent quam fortia dammae mie is Iv. lxxiv
Aspicis incomptis illum, Deciane, capillis. . . . . . 1 xxiv
Aspicis, ut parvus nec adhuc trieteride plena ooh | eats VI. Xxxviii
Astra polumque dedit, quamvis obstante noverca . . . Vv. xv
Astra polumque pia cepisti mente, “Rabitit tc: sy ecimielt. s vil, lvi
Atreus Caecilius cucurbitarum . Svbwithec prs XI, xxxi
Atria Pisonum stabant cum stemmate “toto © Rho Mitt ethics Iv. xl
Attice, facundae renovas qui nomina gentis . . .. . VII. xxxii
Audet facundo qui carmina mittere Nervae . . ... IX. xxvi
Audieris in quo, Flacce, balneo plausum at peabesee bt IX. xxxiii
Auditur quantum Massyla peravia murmur. ... . VI. lv
Augusti labor hic fuerat committere classes . . . «. . Ep. xxviii
Augusto pia tura victimasque Sint erase! Slettyietr st © Vu. Ixvi
Aureolis futui cum possit Galla duobus. Ces icmice io Tx. iv
Auriculam Mario graviter miraris olere . . . ... Il. xxviii
B
Baetis olivifera crinem redimite corona . . . .« . « XII. xevilti
Baiana nostri villa, Basse, Faustini .-.. . . . 2. Hi. !viii
Baiano procul a lacu, monemus Boer eo TV, XXX
Barbara pyramidum sileat miracula Memphis ro Oats Spect. i
Barbatus rigido nupsit Callistratus Afro . art: haps fe XI. xlii
Basia da nobis, Diadumene, pressa. ‘‘ Quot > inquis ? 4 VI. xxxiv
Basia das aliis, aliis das, Postume, dextram . . .. . ll, xxi
Basia dum nolo nisi quae luctantia carpsi. x toa 3 V. xivi
Bella es, novimus, et puella, verum est wot wer btmeds I. lxiv
Belliger invictis quod Mars tibi servitin armis . . . . Spect. vi
Bellus homo et magnus, vis idem Cotta, videri . . . . T1%
Bis Cotta soleas perdidisse se questus . . oalrelur XI. Ixxxvii
Bis quinquagenis domus est tibi milibus empta er ican XII. Ixvi
Bis tibi triceni fuimus, Mancine, vocati banister an 1. xliii
Bis vicine Nepos—nam tu quoque proxima F lorae che supe VI. xxvii
Boletos et aprum si tanquam vilia ponis . . . .« e« « XI. xlviii
Bruma est et riget horridus December. . . . . .. VII. Xcv
Brumae diebus feriisque Saturni . . . .« » « « XI. Ixxxi


540


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Cc


Caelatus tibi cum sit, Anniane . . Lee Bus, Bein oa VI. xcii
Caesaris alma dies et luce sacratior illa. Da ang a ml ei 4 Iv.i
Caesaris Augusti lascivos, livide, versus . . . . . . 5.4 te: 8.8
Callidus effracta nummos fur auferet arca . . V. xiii
Callidus imposuit nuper mihi copo Ravennae. a TI. lvii
Calliodorus habet censum—dquis nescit 2—equestrem C V. xxxviii
Campis dives Apollo sic Myrinis : IX. xlif


Cana est barba tibi, nigra est coma: tinguere barbam | c IV. xxxvi


Candidius nihil est te, Caeciliane : notavi 5 dopa. Spa Ate I. [xxi
Cantasti male, dum fututa es, Aegis. seo. GHEC Monks T. xciv
Capena grandi porta qua pluit gutta . . . Api Salt mi. xlvii
Cappadocum saevis Antistius occidit oris. . c A TX) Xxx
Capto tuam, pudet heu, sed capto, Maxime, cenam. ; 5 Il. xviii
Carmina nulla probas molli quae limite currunt . ee con XTX.
Carmina Paulus emit, recitat sua carmina Paulus . . . I. xx
Carpere causidicus fertur mea carmina : quis sit Pbtrred omc V. xxxiii
Casta nec antiquis cedens Laevina Sabinis’) . . ans I. lxii
Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto. . . . . I. xiii
Castora de Polluce Gabinia fecit Achillan Bin Agee near vit. Ivii
Cedere de nostris nullite dicis amicis . . . .. .. Moxy:
Cedere maiori virtutis fama secundaest . . . . . . Spect. xxxii
Cenabis belle, Tuli Cerialis, apud me... ..... X1. lii
Cenes, Canthare, cum foris libenter = .° . 2-3. Xx. x
Ceno domi quotiens, nisi te, Charopine, vocavi . . . . v.1
Censor maxime principumque princeps ...... VI. iv
Centenis quod emis pueros et saepe ducenis . . .. . WI. Ixii
Centum Coranus et ducenta Mancinus CAF ie hiker, nc Tv. xxxvii
Centum miselli iam valete quadrantes Cp ike) ur. vii
Cernere Parrhasios dum te iuvat, Aule, trioes |) . : VI. lviii
Cessatis, pueri, nihilque nostis . py asl Ae, mm. Ixvii
Chirurgus fuerat, nunc est vispillo Diaulus sata Men Tex
Cinctum togatis post et ante’'Saufeiumy (3 = ss Ir. Ixxiv
Cinnam, Cinname, te iubes vocari . ota at eet ts mee VI. xvii
Circumlata diu mensis scriblita secundis . bore tlineos! demnan mI. xvii
Clarus fronde Iovis, Romanifamacothurni . . .. . XI. ix
Claudia caeruleis cum sit Rufina Britannis . . .. . Xt. liii
Claudia, Rufe, meo nubit Peregrina Pudenti. . . . . Iv. xiii
Clinicus Herodes trullam subduxerat aegro . .... IX. xevi
Coccina famosae donas et ianthina moechae. . .. . Il, Xxxix
Coepit, Maxime, Pana quisolebat : << . 2)... I. Ixix
Cogis me calamo mManuque nostra. . . .... . vil. xi
Cogit me Titus actitare causas . conapei ae ics I. xvii
Colchida quid scribis, quid scribis, amice, "Thyesten tog ates tO V. liii
Commendare meas, Instanti Rufe, Camenas . oenitehien vit. Ixviii
Commendare tuum dum vis mihicarmine munus .. . Vil. xlvi
Commendo tibi, Quintiane, nostros  . . . . «=. . I, lii
Communis tibi cum viro, Magulla . . badd ttic XI. xci
Comoedi tres sunt, sed amat ‘tua Paula, Luperce. meno VI. vi
Concita veloces fugeret cum damma Molossos . swt; Spect. Xxx
Condita cum tibi sit iam sexagesima messis . . . . . Iv. Ixxviii
Conditus hic ego sum Bassi dolor, Urbicusinfans . . . Vil. xevi
Coniugis audisset fatum cum Porcia Bruti . . . . . I, xlii
Consilium formae speculum dulcesque capillos . . . . Ix, xvi


547


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Constituit, Philomuse, pater tibi milia bina .
Consule te Bruto quod iuras, Lesbia, natam .
Consumpta est uno si lemmate pagina, transis
Contigeris nostros, Caesar. si forte libellos a
Contigeris regina meos si Pola libellos . .
Contigit ‘Ausoniae procerum mitissimus aulae
Continuis vexata madet vindemia nimbis 5
Contulit ad saturas ingentia pectora Turnus
Conviva quisquis Zoili potestesse. . . .
Coponem laniumque balneumque . .
Cosconi, qui longa putas epigrammata nostra.
Costes esse tibi, Semproni Tucca, videris .
Cotile. bellus homo es: dicunt hoc, Cotile, multi
Cras te victurum, cras dicis, Postume, semper .
Credi virgine castior pudica ‘ .
Credis ob haec me, Pastor, opes fortasse rogare A
Creta dedit Inagnum, maius dedit Africa nomen .
Crine ruber, niger ore, brevis pede, lumine laesus
Crinitae Line paedagoge turbae 3 %
Crispulus iste quis est, uxori semper adhaeret |
Cui legisse satis non est epigrammata centum .
Cui tradas, Lupe, fillum magistro. . . . .
Cuius vis fieri, libelle, munus . ;
Cum cathedralicios portet tibi raeda ministros S
Cum clamant omnes, loqueris tunc, Naevole, solus
Cum coleret puros pauper Telesinus amicos . .
Cum comes Arctois haereret Caesaris armis .


COR TS eee OMORT YH OMe


Cum dare non possim quod poscis, Galla, rogantem


Cum data sint equiti bis quina nomismata, quare
Cum depilatos, Chreste, coleos portes F

Cum dicis ‘‘ Propero, fac si facis,” Hedyle, languet
Cum dixi ficus, rides quasi barbara verba G
Cum dubitaret adhuc belli civilis Enyo .
Cum duo venissent ad Phyllida mane fututum a
Cum facias versus nulla non luce ducenos me
Cum faciem laudo, cum miror crura manusque .


Cum futuis, Polycharme, soles in fine cacare .
Cum gravis extremas Vestinus duceret horas .
Cum luvenale meo quae me committere temptas.
Cum me captares, mittebas munera nobis. .
Cum me velle vides tentumque, Telesphore, sentis
Cum mensas habeat fere trecentas. .

Cum mittis turdumve mihi quadramve placentae
Cum peteret dulces audax Leandros amores .


Cum peteret pars haec Myrinum, pars illa Triumphum


Cum peteret patriae missicius arva Ravennae
Cum peteret regem, decepta satellite dextra .
Cum peteret seram media iam nocte matellam
Cum placeat Phileros tota tibi dote redemptus .
Cum pluvias madidumque Iovem perferre negaret
Cum potes amethystinos trientes


.


a 6) Set 6) Ye) fee ce. Sees


um


vite a; ce, be he


Cum rogo te nummos sine pignore, “ non habeo,” inquis


Cum Saxetani ponatur cauda lacerti . .


Cum sene communem vexat spado Dindymus Aegien


Cum sexaginta numeret Cascellius annos .


548


Ill. Ixxxii

I. xlviii

It. xxvii

vil. xli

Il. Ixiii

Vv. lviii.

Iv. vi

IX. xxii

é 1, ii
XII. liv

XI. xlix

vy. lxi

1. exviii

Vv. lvi

Wi. ti

X. xiii

I. xcvii

vi. 1

IX. xxxi

HI. liv

I. Xd

IX, xxvii

I. xlvi

1, lxv

VI. Xxxii

by boo. |

Vill. xx

Tit. li

5 IX. lxix
A Tv. Lxxiii
VII. xxiv

Ix, Ixxxviii

3 XI, lviii
Vil. xlviii

a VI. Ixxv
Spect. xxv b
Spect. XX

Il. xci

' 1, 3
. VI. Ixxxix
Il. Xxxiv
Vu. xxxvi
« .X. xix
XII. Xxv
Vu. xxviii
XI. Ixxxi

* VU. ix


Palen et tal vale


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Cum sint-crura tibi, simulent quae cornua lunae Sa oka) Tl. XxXxv
Cum sis ipsa domi mediaque ornere Subura . . . . IX. xxxvii
Cum sis nec rigida Fabiorum gente creatus . . . .. VI. Ixiv
Cum sis tam pauper,.quam nec miserabilis Iros . . . VI. Ixxvii
Cum sitis similes paresque vita aetie Cand ra MK amass OH VIII. XXxv
Cum te municipem Corinthiorum . . pnb i Xx. Ixv
Cum te non nossem, dominum regemque vocabam Pash Sees I. exii
Cum tibi non Ephesos nec sit Rhodos aut Mytilene. . . xX. lxviii
Cum tibi non essent sex milia, Caeciliane. . . . . . Iv. li
Cum tibi nota tui sit vita fidesque mariti. . . nah i XII. xevi
Cum tibisit facies, de qua nec femina possit. . . . . VII. xviii
Cum tibi sit sophiae par fama et curalaborum , . . . I. exi
Cum tibi tam crassae sint, Artemidore, lacernae. . . . VIII. lviii
Cum tibi trecenti consules, Vetustilla SG eS Pee Ill. xciii
Cum tibi vernarent dubia lanugine malae PLS, OF, Spee fl I. Ixi
Cum traheret Priscus, traheret certamina Verus. . . . Spect. xxix
Cum tu, laurigeris annum qui fascibus intras Se Sat EX.
Cum tua non edas, carpis mea carmina, Laeli . . . . I. xci
Cum tua sacrilegos contra, Norbane, furores. . . . . 1X. Ixxxiv
Cum vocer ad cenam non iam venalis utante . . . . Tu. lx
Cum voco te dominum, noli tibi, Cinna, placere. . . . y. vii
Cunarum fueras motor, Charideme, mearum. . ,. . . XI, Xxxix
Cur here quod dederas, hodie, puer Hylle, negasti a fe IV. vii
‘Cur non basio te, Philaeni? calvaes . SU ae Salant Tl. xxxiii
Cur non mitto meos tibi, Poutiliane, likellos? . Heey Vil. iii
Cur-saepe sicci.parva rura Nomenti-.... 2. 0k XI lvii
Cur spleniato saepe prodeam mento . 5 A) ARS X. xxii
Cur tantum eunuchos habeat tua Caelia, quaeris" RB PL VI. Ixvii
Cur tristiorem cernimus Saleianum. eta weet 5 IL. Ixv
Curandum penem commisit Baccara Raetus apeetar PRED oaeres XI. xxiv
Cursorem sexta tibi, Rufe. remisimus hora . . . . . Ill. ¢
Custodes das, Polla, viro, non accipisipsa . . . . . X. Ixix
Cyllenes caelique decus, facunde minister. . .. . . VII. Ixxiv
D Z
Da veniam subitis : non displicuisse meretur LIS Ae Be Spect, xxxi
Daedale, Lucano cum sic lacererisab urso . ... . Spect. viii
Dante tibi turba querulos, Auguste, libellos . . Fi enc Vul. Ixxxii
Dantem vina tuum quotiens aspeximus Hyllum . Cs sable IX. XXv
Daphnonas, platanonas et aerios pityonas  . . . . . xi
Das gladiatores, sutorum regule, cerdo . lah e leCa Til. xvi
Das nunquam, semper promittis, Galla, roganti Rar) Fi Il. XXV
Das Parthis, das Germanis, das, Caelia, Dacis . . . . VII. Xxx
Dat Baiana mihi quadrantes sportula centum . . , . I. lix
De cathedra quotiens surgis (iam saepe notavi) . . . . XI. xcix
De nostro facunde tibi Iuvenalis agello oP BEET SIGE, RAS VII. xci
De nullo loqueris, nulli maledicis, Apici . . . 1... Ti. 1xxx
De praetoricia folium mihi, Paule, corona. . . . . . VIII. XXxiii
Declamas belle, causas agis, Attice,, belle? eg Faia ce; Il. vii
Declamas in febre, Maron: hanc esse phrenesin. . . , Iv. Ixxx
Dederas Apici, bis trecenties ventri . . . . etal 3S Tl. xxii
Delicias, Caesar, lususque iocosque llonum . . . . . I. xiv
Democritos, Zenonas inexplicitosque Platonas . . . . Ix. xlvii


549


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Denaris tribus invitas et mane togatum . . . . . . IX. ¢
Dentibus antiquas solitus producere pelles . . . . . TX, Ixxiii
Dentibus atque comis, nec te pudet, uterisemptis . . XU. xxiii
Deprensum in puero tetricis me vocibus, uxor . . . XI. xliii


Derisor Fabianus hirnearum . XU. Ixxxiii


Di tibi dent et tu, Caesar, quaecunque mereris 8 eae VI. Ixxxviii
Di tibi dent quidquid, Caesar Traiane, mereris iehas X, xxxiv
Dic mihi. quem portas, volucrum regina? “ Tonantem” . vy. lv
Dic mii, quis furor est ? turba spectante vocata . . . Io xx!
Dic, Musa, quid agat Canius meus Rufus. . . . . .- Il. xx
Dic, toga, "facundi gratum mihi munus amici Stee VII. xxviii
Dic verum mihi, Marce, dic amabo . Sibel Viste MS Vill. Ixxvi
Dicere de Libycis reduci tibi gentibus, After ech s.r “oe re Ix. vii
Dicis amore tui bellas ardere puellas . . . . ... Ti. Ixxxvii
Dicis formosam, dicis te, Bassa, puellam . . . . . - v. xlv
Dicit se vetulam, cum sit Caerellia pupa... .. . Iv. xx
Difficilis facilis, iucundus acerbus es idem gh Gita The a XM. xivii
Digna tuo cur sis indignaque nomine, dicam. . .. . Il. xxxiv
Dimidium donare Lino quam credere totum. . .. . I. xxv
Discursus varios vagumque mane . . ais, Ca ee VII. xxxix
Disticha qui scribit, puto, vult brevitate placere Bod ttt aL VIII. xxix
Dives eras quondam : sed tunc paedico. fuisti . .« 2. « XI. Ixxxvii
Dixerat astrologus periturum te cito, Munna sth: Geipanes IX. lxxxii
Dixerat ‘‘o mores! o tempora!” Tullius olim ete, 2S TX. lxx
Do tibi naumachiam, tu das epigrammata nobis Ay eves Lv

Doctorum Licini celeberrime Sura virorum . . . . . Vil. xivii
Donasse amicum tibi ducenta, Mancine . . . ... Iv. lxi
Donasti, Lupe, rus sub urbe nobis,<if< «0 Sa XI. xviii
Donasti tenero, Chloe, Luperco oy CAINS STAC Iv. xxviii
Donavi tibi multa, quae rogasth: <7 #4. . 1) ks XI. Ixxix
Dormis cum pueris mutuniatis. . . . 2. . 2. . I. lxxiii
Dotatae uxori cor harundine fixit acuta . . . .. . X. XV
Drauci Natta sui vocat pipinnam . patel cE Bz XI, xxii
Ducit ad auriferas quod me Salo Celtiber oras ee ee x<yox
Dulce decus scaenae, ludorum fama, Latinus ep ten eure IX. xxviii
Dulcia cum tantum scribas epigrammata semper . . . VII. XXV
Dum donas, Macer, anulos puellis . el OME emery eS VII. v
Dum Janus hiemes, Domitianus autumnos . . . . 2 Ix. i
Dum levis arsura struitur Libitina papyro . . ... X. xevii
Dum mea Caecilio formatur imago Secundo . Cele we vil. ixxxiv
Dum modo causidicum, dum te modo rhetora fingis on tits It. lxiv
Dum nimium vano tumefactus nomine gaudes . . . . Iv, xi
Dum non vis pisces, dum non vis carpere pullos. . . . I. xiii
Dum nos blanda tenent lascivistagna Lucrini . . . . Ty. lvii
Dum nova Pannonici numeratur gloria belli. . . . . VIII. xv
Dum novus est nec adhuc rasa mihi fronte libellus . . . Iv. x
Dum petit a Baulis mater Caerellia Baias isin. Pt sihes, Iv. lxiii
Dum Phaethontea formica vagaturinumbra. . . . . VI. XV
Dum proavos atavosque refers et nomina magna . . . Vv. xvii
Dum repetit sera conductos nocte penates . . . . . VI. Ixxv
Dum sibi redire de Patrensibus fundis hats, geEE SRR ESD V. XXXV
Dum te prosequor et domum reduco . ... . . . XI. xxiv
Dum tibi felices indulgent, Castrice, Baiae . . . . . VI. xiii
Dum tibi Niliacus portat crystalla Hi CEL AGA GL as XII. Ixxiv
Dum Tiburtinis albescere solibus audit aM cfel ted, GFeRONS Vil. xiii


559


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Dum tu forsitan inquietus Brrasteecil on: ehPe yt te
Dum tu lenta nimis diuque quaeris . oF ee
Duxerat esuriens locupletem pauper anumque aaerts


E


Ecquid Hyperboreis ad nos conversus ab oris .
Ede tuos tandem populo, Faustine, libellos
Edere lascivos ad Baetica crusmata gestus
Edictum domini deique nostri .

Edita ne brevibus pereat mihi cura libellis
Editur en sextus sine te mihi, Rufe Camoni
Effert uxores Fabius, Chrestilla maritos .
Effigiem tantum pueri pictura Camoni_.
Effugere in thermis et circa balnea non est
Effugere non est, Flacce, basiatores

Egi, Sexte, tuam, pactus duo milia, causam
Egisti vitam semper, Line, municipalem 2
Elysio redeat si forte remissus ab agro.
Emi seu puerum togamve pexam . . .
Emit lacernas milibus decem Bassus. .
Empta domus fuerat tibi, Tongiliane, ducentis
Encaustus Phaethon tabula tibi pictus in hac est
Epigramma nostrum cum Fabulla legisset . . .
Erras meorum fur avare librorum . 4
Esquiliis domus est, domus est tibi colle Dianae . 5
Esse negas coctum leporem poscisque flagella .
Esse nihil dicis quidquid petis, improbe Cinna . .
Esse quid hoc dicam, quod olent tua basia myrrham
Esse quid hoc dicam, vivis quod fama negatur .
Esse tibi videor saevus nimiumque gulosus . . .
Esset, Castrice, cum mali coloris . 5
Est mihi (sitque precor longum te praeside, Caesar)
Est tibi (sitque precor multos crescatque per annos)
Et delator es et calumniator . Sane
Et dolet et queritur, sibi non contingere trigus acme
Et iudex petit et petit patronus  . tine
Et latet et lucet Phaethontide condita. gutta. é 4
Et vultu poteram tuo carere . . 2. « « «
Etrusci nisi thermulis lavaris . . Lorne ole
Eutrapelus tonsor dum circuit ora Luperei geateay iis
Exigis a nobis operam sine fine togatam . oe
Exigis, ut donem nostros tibi, Quinte, libellos
Exigis, ut nostros donem tibi, Tucca, libellos
Explicitum nobis usque ad sua cornua librum =.
Extemporalis factus est meus rhetor . . . . .
Exulat Ausonia profugus delatorab.urbe . . .


@ deine) Jor ow


eee cere se ee eo ee


or 6 ete “et ie: Me


F


Fabricio iunctus fido requiescit Aquinus .-. . .
Facere in Lyciscam, Paule, me iubes versus . .
Facundi Senecae potens amicus ... .


a. 5 one


XII. xviii ©
Iv, xxiii
Ix, Ixxx


vit. vi

I. xxv

VI. Ixxi
V. viii

I. xlv

VI. Ixxxv
Vu, xliii
Ix. lxxiv
XU. Ixxxii
XI. xeviii


I. lxvi
vil. lxxiii
Ill. xciv
I. 1xi


VII. xxiii
Vil. iv

TX. xviii

I. eviii

xi. Ixvi
vi. lix

Ii. xiii

Iv. xxxii
mI. liii

VI. xiii
VII. lxxxiii
Ut. xlvi
Iv. lxxii
Vil. Ixxvii
XI. cevii

Vv. liv
Spect. iv. b


I. xelli
Iv. xvii
Vil. xlv


551


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Facundos mihi de libidinosis’  .

Fama refert nostros te, Fidentine, libellos.
Famae non nimium bonae puellam aCe
Fastorum genitor parensque Janus cle hee
Felicem fieri credis me, Zoile, cena

Felices, quibus urna dedit spectare coruscum.
Femina praeferri potuit tibi nulla, Lycori
Ferreus es, si stare potest tibi mentula, Flacce
Fertur habere meos, si vera est fama, libellos
Festinat Polytimus "ad puellas . .
Festinata prior decimi mihi cura libellineane


oe eee
se ewe


Festinata sui gemeret quod fata Severi .
Festive credis te, Calliodore, iocari Pee oc
Ficosa est uxor, ficosus et ipse maritus E
Flavia gens, quantum tibi tertius abstulit heres 5
Flectere te nolim, sed nec turbare capillos
Flentibus Heliadum ramis dum vipera repit . .
Flete nefas vestrum, sed toto flete Lucrino .
Florida per varios ut pingitur Hybla colores .
Foedasti miserum, marite, moechum . .
Foetere multo Myrtale solet vino 5

Fons dominae, regina loci quo gaudet Janthis
Formosa Phyllis nocte cum mihitota. .
Formosam faciem nigro medicamine celas
Formosam Glyceran amat Lupercus . .
Formosam sane, sed caecus diligit Asper .
Formosissima quae fuere vel sunt id.
Fragmentum quod vile putas et inutile lignum O
Frangat Idumaeas tristis Victoria palmas- Syn t
Frontibus adversis molles concurrere dammas_
Frustra Blanditiae venitis ad me

Fugerit an Phoebus mensas cenamque “Thyestae
Funera post septem nupsit tibi Galla virorum .
Fur notae nimium rapacitatis . . . .. .


see ee


G


Gaius hance lucem gemma mihi Iulius alba.
Galla, nega: satiatur amor, nisi gaudia torquent
Garris in aurem semper omnibus, Cinna . . .
Gellius aedificat semper: modo limina ponit. .
Gentibus in Libycis uxor tua, Galla, male audit .
Genus, Aucte, lucri divites habentiram . . .
Gestari iunctis nisi desinis, Hedyle, capris ba Be
Gratis qui dare vos iubet, puellae .


sreeve el Te ats


Gratum est, quod Celeri nostros legis, Aucte, | libellos


Gratus sic tibi, Paule, sit December . ...


H


Habere amicam nolo, Flacce, subtilem . . .
Habet Africanus milies, tamen captat 5


552


Site. fe! alte! @


ose ee 6


XI. xliii
ToXkix
VI. Ixvi
Vil. ii

Ul. xix

X. vi

VI. xl

XI. xxvii
Vil. Ixxxviii
XIL. Ixxv
Sit

TX. Ixxxvi
VI. xli¥
VII. Ixxi
XIV. sub fin.
I, xxxvi
Iv. lix

VI. xviii
Il. xlvi

I. Ixxxiii
Vv. iv

vi. 1

XII. lxv
II. iii

XI. xl
Vin. xlix
Vill. liii


IX, Ixxviii
VI. lxxii


I. Ixxvi


XI. ¢
x, x


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Haec est illa dies, quae magni conscia partus. . . . . VII. xxi
Haec est illa meis multum cantata libellis Pek ike TX. xlix
Haec est illa tibi promissa Theophila, Cani . i VIT. Ixix
Haec mihi quae colitur violis pictura rosisque . . . . X. xxxil
Haec quae pulvere dissipata muito a err I. Ixxxii
Haec quae tota patet tegiturque et marmore ‘et auro Roget IX. XxX
Haec sunt illa mei quae cernitis ora Camoni . eee tomes Ix. Ixxvi
Haec tibi, non alia, est ad cenam causa vocandi. . . . m1. 1


Haec tibi, Palladiae seu collibus uteris Albae Eiucaeeaeue v.i
Haec tibi pro nato plena dat laetus acerra ot Iv. xlv


Haedina tibi pelle contegenti . Shee 6 XII. xlv
Hane tibi, Fronto pater, genetrix Flaccilla, puellam a Vv. xxxiv
Hanc tibi Sequanicae pinguem textricis ainiat ‘ 3 Iv. xix
Hane volo, quae facilis, quae palliolata vagatur. . i IX. xxxii
Has cum gemina compede dedicat catenas . . . S Ill. xxix
Have, mi Torani, frater carissime . . . a? Dee?) ees IX. praef.
Herbarum fueras indutus, Basse, colores . ate m Vv. xxiii
Herculis in magni vultus descendere Caesar anys A IX. lxiv
Heredem cum me partis tibi, Garrice, quartae . . s IX. xl viii
Heredem Fabius Labienum ex asse reliquit . . . 5 vu. Ixvi
Heredem tibi me, Catulle, dicis ‘; rivhot Re we baler one” XI. Lxxiii
Heredes, nolite brevem sepelire colonum, ello" ep es XI. xiv
Hermes Martia saeculi voluptas . porns Vv. xxiv
Hermogenes tantus mapparum, ft Pontice, furest |. és XI. xxix
Hesterna factum narratur, Postume, cena . ... . Il. lxxii
Hesterna tibi nocte dixeramus . . eee ett TAN I. xxvii
Hesterno foetere mero qui credit Acerram pie. I, xxviii
““ Hexametris epigramma facis ” scio dicere Tuccam : VI. Ixv
Hiberna quamvis Arctos et rudis Peuce . . . . . . Vu. vii
Hibernos peterent solito cum more recessus . . . . . V. Ixvii
Hic est pampineis viridis modo Veshius umbris . . é Ivy. xliv
Hic est quem legis ille, quem requiris. . ... . 16a
Hic festinata requiescit Erotion umbra . . . . X. lxi
Hic iacet ille senex, Augusta notusinaula . . . vil. xl
Hic quem videtis gressibus vagis lentum . . . . I. Ivii
Hic qui dura sedens porrecto saxa leone . . . . 4 Ix. xliii
Hic qui libellis praegravem geritlaevam . . . .. . v. li
Hic ubi Fortunae Reducis fulgentia late . . . . 4 Vill. Ixv
Hic ubi sidereus propius videt astra colossus. . . ; Spect, ii
Hoc agere est causas, hoc dicere, Cinna, diserte . . , Vul, vii
Hoc, Fortuna, tibi videtur aequum? . aS AS ‘ X. Ixxvi
Hoc iacet in tumulo raptus puerilibus annis . aaa A VI. lii
Hoc nemus aeterno cinerum sacravit honori . 5 y I. exvi
Hoc nemus, hi fontes, haec textilis umbra supini. é XII. xxxi
Hoc tibi quidquid id est longinquis mittit ab oris . 5 mi. i

6 vill. Ixxiv


Hoplomachus nunc es, fueras ophthalmicus ante. sae
Horas quinque puer nondum tibi nuntiat,ettu. . . . VII. lxvii


Hortatur fieri quod te Lupus, Urbice, patrem SOS Se aS XI. lv
Hos quoque commenda Venuleio, Rufe, libellos . . . Iv. lxxxii
Hos tibi, Phoebe, vovet totos a vertice'crines’? >... 8. T.xxxt
Hos tibi- vicinus, Faustine, Telesphorus hortos . . 4 I. cxiv
Hospes eras nostri semper, Matho, Mmipiréinkes. dele eee, Iv. lxxix
Hostem cum fugeret, se Fanniusipse peremit . . . . II. Ixxx
Huc est usque tibi scriptus, matrona, libellus . . . . WI. Ixviii


Hune quem mensa tibi, quem cena paravit amicum eG IX. xiv


553


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Hune quem saepe vides intra penetralia nostrae. . . . Iv. liii
Hune qui femineis noctesque diesque cathedris . . . . Xi. XXxXviili
Hystericam vetulo se dixerat esse marito. . . .. - XI. lxxi
I

J, felix rosa, mollibusque sertis staked Washi Ak ae SES VIL. Ixxxix
I nostro comes, i libelle si 1aviOl.. mits: eisueare aici on emule ene X. civ
I nunc, edere me iube libellos . SP PSR es I. vi
Jactat inaequalem Matho me fecisse libellum | . . 3 VII. xc
Iam certe stupido non dices, Paula, marito ok aot A XI. vii
Iam nisi per somnum non arrigis et tibiy Maext, arc) acc XI, xivi
Jam numerat placido felix Antonius aevo SS en ee X. xxiii
Jam parce lasso, Roma, gratulatori . . oh RAIA PE X. Ixxiv
Iam prope desertos cineres et sancta Maronise 9 ete XI. xlix
Iam senior Ladon Tiberinae nauta carinae . . . . . X. xxxv
Iam sex aut septem nupsisti, Galla, cinaedis. . . . . Vil. lviii
Tamtristis nucibus puer relictis, .. . 2. . @ « «= « V. lxxxiv
Ibis litoreas, Macer, Salonas__. PERS Le SS X. Ixxviii
Icta gravi telo confossaque vulneremater . . . . (tt Spect. xiii
Ignotos mihi cum voces trecentos .. sia chats cree <eiiant XL Xk
lliaco similem puerum, Faustine, ministro PRT a OF Ill. XXxix
Illa manus quondam studiorum fidameorum. . . . . I. ci
Illa salax nimium nec paucis nota puellis. . . . . . XI, Xxv
Ille ego sum Scorpus, clamosi gloria Circi He Aes Are X. lili
Ile sacri lateris custos Martisque togati . . . ... VI. Ixxvi
Improba Massiliae quidquid fumaria cogunt. . . . . X. XXxvi
In matutina nuper spectatus harena . . . . «©... e X. XXV
In Nomentanis, Ovidi, quod nascitur arvis . .. . . I. ev
In omnibus Vacerra quod conclavibus in Fevai ite Wiest bea’ tetee XI. xxvii
In Pompeiano dormis, Laevine, theatro . . . .°. . VI. ix
In Saeptis Mamurra diu multumque vagatus 58 thei aioli 3! Ix. lix
In Tartesiacis domus est notissima terris. . . . . . TX, lxi
In tenebris luges amissum, Galla, maritum . . ... Iv. lviii
In thermis sumit lactucas, ova, lacertum. . . .. . XII. xix
Incideris quotiens in basiafellatorum. . . .... XI. x¢v
Incustoditis et apertis, Lesbia, semper . . . .. . . I. xxxiv
Indignas premeret pestis cum tabida fauces 5a ves hate nt I. Ixxviii
Indulget pecori nimium dum pastor Amyntas . .. . Xx
Infantem secum semper tua Bassa, Fabulle . . . . . Iv. lxxxvii
Infantem tibi vir, tibi, Galla, remisit adulter trie) a cuaers X. xcev
Infusum sibi nuper a patrono BAS SFrasedrs Gogpere v. lxx
Ingenium mihi, Gaure, probas sic esse pusillum Siecho Scien xe}
Ingenium studiumque tibi moresque genusque . . . . Vv. xxvii
Ingenuam malo, sed si tamenillanegetur. . . .. . TI. xxxili
Inguina succinctus nigra tibiservus aluta. .° . . . . VII. XXXV
Inscripsit tumulis septem scelerata virorum . . . . . IX. Xv
Insequeris, fugio ; fugis, insequor ; haec mihi mens est 2 V. Ixxxiii
Inserta phialae Mentoris manu ducta. . ued dv el ne TI. xIl
Instanti, quo nec sincerior alter habetur . . . .. . Vu. Ixxiii
Intactas quare mittis mihi, Polla, coronas? . . . . . IX. Ixxxix
Inter Caesareae discrimina saeva Dianae. . . .. , Spect. xii
Inter tanta tuae miracula, Caesar, harenae . . . . . IX, lxxxiii
Interponis aquam subinde, Rufe . . . . . . « I. ovi


554


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Intrasti quotiens inscriptae limina cellae . . . . . . XI. xlv
Intres ampla licet torvilepus oraleonis . . . . . . 1. Ix
Invasit medici Nasica phreneticus Eucti . . . . . XI. xxviil
Invia Sarmaticis domini lorica sagittis aoe metic ofl A ss Vil. ii
Invitas ad aprum, ponis mihi, Gallice, prcum . . . . VII. xxii
Invitas centum quadrantibus et bene cenas . . . . Iv. lxviii
Invitas nullum nisi cum quo, Cotta, lavaris . . ... . I. xxiii
Invitas tune me, cum scis, Nasica, vocasse . . eaaee I. [xxix
Invitum cenare foris te, Classice, Micis \isitne is aicae Tl. lxix
Ipsarum tribadum tribas, Philaeni pete vitsetet iv <M ie Vil. Ixx
Irasci nostro non debes, cerdo, libello. . 2. . «. « « Ill. xcix
Trasci tantum felices nostis amici Oe ee TI. xxxvii
Iratus tanquam populo, Charideme, lavaris Site ies as eBvie VI. ixxxi
Issa est passere nequior Catulli eiirte EY ere Sy iviele— © I. cix
Itur ad Herculeas gelidi qua Tiburis arces. aese herystie 4 core I. xii
Iugera mercatus prope busta latentis agelli . . . . . XI. Ixxii
Tuli iugera pauca Martialis . . Oe bested: Asua ee Iv. lxiv
Iulia lex populis ex quo, Faustine, renata estilis pine howe VI. vii
Tunctam Pasiphaen Dictaeo credite tauro CEE “eb asvicce Spect. v
Tuno labor, Polyclite, tuus et gloria felix . . 5 ccanaeatn X. Ixxxix
Tuppiter Idaei risit mendacia busti. . . . Sank oh Se IX, xxxiv
Jura trium petiit a Caesare discipulorum . . pitieaoaae Xalx
Turat capillos esse, quos emit, suos. teh) “Wercecoe-yep asin VI. xii
Ture tuo nostris maneas licet, hospes, inhortis. ........ V. lxii
luris et aequarum cultor sanctissime JOSUM re Hieterrs -tene X, Xxxvii
lus tibi natorum vel septem, Zoile, detur. . ... . XI. xii
K
Kowa pidwy haec sunt, haec sunt tua, Candide, Kovéd . . Tr, xiili
L
Laeserat ingrato leo perfidus ore magistrum . . .. . Spect. x
Laevia sex cyathis, septem Fustina DibAgMT ose a. 60 fe ecvetine I. Ixxi
Lambere securi dextram consueta MAGEE ccaggriewy oy) mia) lice Bide “xviii
Languebam : sed tu comitatus protinusad me . . . . V. ix
Languida cum vetula tractare virilia dextra. . . . . XI, xxix
Languidior noster si quando est Paulus, Atili . . . . 1X. Ixxxv
Lapsa quod externis spirant opobalsama truncis ihe te pra) XI. viii
Lascivam tota possedi nocte puellam . . . . . . « IX, Ixvii
Lascivos leporum cursus lususque leonum Aisteayj-apieie I, xliv
Latonae venerande nepos, qui mitibus herbis. : aes IX, xvii
Laudantem Selium cenae cumretiatendit . . ... I, xxvii
Laudas balnea versibus trecentis . COM IX. xix
Laudat, amat, cantat nostros mea Roma libellos 2): VI. Ixi
Laudatur nostro quidam, Faustine, libello . . . «-. Vv. xxxvi
Laurigeros domini, liber, intrature ‘penates wits 5 vul. i


Laxior hexaphoris. tuaisitlecticashcebites os ton 1c itenrr6 jie TI. Ixxxi
Lector et auditor nostros probat, Aule, libellos . . . IX. Ixxxi
Lege nimis dura convivam scribere versus . . . ‘ 1X, Ixxxix
Leniat ut fauces medicus, quas aspera vexat. . . . XI. Ixxxvi
Lesbia se lurat gratis nunquam esse fututam . . XI. Ixii


555


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Liber, amicorum dulcissima curatuorum. . . . . . Vill. Ixxvii
Liber, Amyclaea frontem vittate corona . ad etiaks IX. Ixxii
Liber homo es nimium, dicis mihi, Ceryle, semper Pae 1. [xvii
Libertus Melioris ille notus aa ne ee ke VI. xxviii
Libras ‘quattuor aut duasiamico eae ves ee XII, xxxvi
Lingis, non futuis meam puellam 7s" 9 cs et ene Ill. xevi
Lingua maritus, moechus ore Nanneius rt Pie ee XI. bs
Lintea ferret Apro vatius cum vernulanuper. . . . . XH. lex
Lis mihi cum Balbo est, tu Balbum offendere non vis . . Thx
Lis te bis decimae numerantem frigora brumae . . . . VII. Ixv
Litigat et podagra Diodorus, Flacce, laborat. . . . . I. xeviii
Littera facundi gratum mihi pignus amici ip SIS X. [xxiii
Litus beatae Veneris aureum Baias . . . . .. ~. XI. xxx
Livet Charinus, rumpitur, furit, plorat . . .... VIII. lxi
Lomento rugas uteri quod condere temptas . . .. . Il. xlii
Longior undecimi nobis decimique libelli. . . . . . XEON,
Lotus nobiscum est, hilaris cenavitetidem . . . . . VI. liii
Luce propinquorum, qua plurima mittitur ales . . . . Ix. lv
Lue, gloria temporum tuorum . 2) se. Bae Iv. lv
Ludi magister, parce simplici turbae . . . . .. . X. [xii
Lusistis, satis est: lascivi nubite cunni . . ... . VI. xlv
Lusit Nereidum docilis chorus aequore toto . . .. . Spect. xxvi
Lusus erat sacrae conubia falleretaedae . . . .. . VI. ii
Lux tibi post Idus numeratur tertia Maias . . .. . Ut. vi
Lydia tam laxa est, equitis quam culus aheni . . . . XI, xxi
M

Magna licet totiens tribuas, maiora daturus . . .. . vill. liv
Maiae Mercurium creastis Idus. . eos Ky XI. Ixvii
Mammas atque tatas habet Afra, sed ipsa. tatarum mae io Ic
Mane domi nisi te volui meruique videre. . . .. . V. xxii
Mane salutavi vero te nomine casu SMe cet mia. cain. ony are VI. Ixxxviii
Marcelline, boni suboles sincera parentis eee earn VI. XXV
Marcia, non Rhenus, salit hic, @ermane: quid obstas . . XI. xevi
Marcus amat nostras Antonius, Attice, Musas . . . . IX, xciz
Mari, quietae cultor et comes vitae . . eae XTKCL
Marmora parva quidem, sed non cessura, viator SAPS FN cts X. xii
Martis alumne dies, roseam quo lampada primum . . . XII, lx
Massyli leo fama iugi pecorisque maritus. . . . . . x. at
Matronae puerique virginesque é Sheena | F

Matutine cliens, urbis mihi causa relictaeiili cin teonnes, XII. xviii
Maximus ille tuus, Ovidi, Caesonius hic Gabieieels adie, wees Vu. xliv
Medio recumbit imus ille qui lecto 3 ef oo Ten Roe VI. Ixxiv
Menophili penem tam grandis fibula vestit Lk ROL hare Vil. ixxxii
Mensas, Ole, bonas ponis, sed ponis opertas fh. CANS X. liv
Mense novo Iani veterem, Proculeia, maritum .°. . . x. xii
Mentiris, credo: recitas mala carmina, laudo. . . . . XI. xl
Mentiris fictos unguento, Phoebe, capillos. oR Seas VI. lvii
Mentiris iuvenem tinctis, Laetine, capillis Sete Chae Wi. xliii
Mentitur, qui te vitiosum, Zoile, dicit. . . . . . « XI. xcii
Mentula cum doleat puero, tibi, Naevole, culus . . . . Ti. lxxi
Mentula tam magna est, quantus tibi, Papile, nasus. . . VI. xxxvi
Mercari nostras si te piget, Urbice, nugas SLR SEM g Vu. li


556


INDEX OF FIRST


Mica vocor: quid sim, cernis, cenatio parva .
Miles Hyperboreos modo, Marcelline, triones .
Milia misisti mihi sex bis sena petenti we hes
Milia pro puero centum me mango poposcit
Milia viginti quondam me Galla poposcit .
Mille tibi nummos hesterna luce roganti .
Minxisti currente semel, Pauline, carina .
Miraris, docto quod carmina mitto Severo
Miraris, quare dormitum non eat Afer? .
Miraris veteres, Vacerra, solos. . . .
Mittebas libram, quadrantem, Garrice, mittis
Moechum Gellia non habet nisi unum. .


oe ee eo


Moechus erat: poteras tamen hoc tu, Paula, negare |


Moechus es Aufidiae, qui vir, Scaevine, fuisti
Mollia quod nivei duro teris ore Galaesi es
Mollis erat facilisque viris Poeantius heros .
Morio dictus erat: viginti milibusemi . .
Mulio viginti venit modo milibus, Aule . .
Multis dum precibus Jovem salutat . . .
Multis iam, Lupe, posse se diebus . . ...
Munera qui tibi dat locupleti, Gaure, senique
Munera quod senibus viduisque ingentia mittis
Muneribus cupiat si quis contendere tecum .
Municipem rigidi quis te, Marcella, Salonis .
Municipes, Augusta mihi quos Bilbilis acri_ .
Musaei pathicissimos libellos pete pied Sele
Mutua quod nobis ter quinquagena dedisti .
Mutua te centum sestertia, Phoebe, rogavi .
Mutua viginti sestertia forte rogabam. . .


N


i (0 Ne Se XS) eo) eure e 0 Ke 0 Le Ns Te


Narnia, sulphureo quam gurgite candidus amnis
Narrat te, Chione, rumor nunquam esse fututam


Narratur belle quidam dixisse, Marulle . .
Nascere Dardanio promissum nomen Iulo. .
Nasutus nimium cupis videri . . .. .
Nasutus sis usque licet, sis denique nasus .
Natales mihi Martiae Kalendae. . .. .
Natali, Diodore, tuo convivasenatus . . .
Natali tibi, Quinte, tuo dare parva volebam .
Natorum mihi ius trium roganti . BES
Ne gravis hesterno fragres, Fescennia, vino .
Ne laudet dignos, laudat Callistratus omnes .


Wy En) 0 ene. re


Ne legat hunc Chione, mando tibi, Rufe, libellum


Ne legeres partem lascivi, casta, libelli . .
Ne toga cordylis et paenula desit olivis . .
Ne valeam, si non totis, Deciane, diebus . .
Nec doctum satis et parumseverum . . .
Nec mullus nec te delectat, Baetice, turdus .
Nec toga nec focus est nec tritus cimice lectus
Nec vocat ad cenam Marius nec munera mittit
Nemo habitat gratis nisi dives et orbus apud te
Nemo nova caluit sic inflammatus amica. .


2.0 '¢ ee @ 3 6 “os


% (0 <0 1ge © Gh, jo Senge Fee \e Welles Yam oh hee


© “e 0 4e “ee Me: Ye Ue Me! Ye ce he


rs


i. Je 6 see 6:0 te ei ne “ee


i men Ow nee Oe ae re as) Oh) Polite ew


a we Ee de re ne ele, Fete. a, fa.


cece ee we ee


IV. Xv

1. [xxviii
XI. lvii

X. Ixxxiv
Vill. lxix
XI. cv

VI. xc

I, Ixxiv
Ti. xx
XI. xxii
HW. Ixxxiv
Vl. xiii
XI. xxxviil
XII. xxvii
XI. Ixxxviii
VIII. xxvii
Iv. lvi

vil. xiii
XI. xxi

X. ciii

XII. xcev
i. xl

VI. xx

TI, Xxx


Vil. xcili
WI. lxxxvii
v. Ixxvii
VI. ili

XI. lxxiii
XIU. ii

X. xxiv
X. xxvii
Ix. liii

I. xcii

I. Ixxxvii
XII. xxx
ti. xevii
I, Ixxxvi
xi. i

II. v

X. xix

Wi. Ixxvii
XI. xxxii
X. xviii
XI. Ixxxiii
X. Ixxxvi


557


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Nequius a Caro nihil unquam, Maxime. factumest . . . X. lxxvil
Nescio quid de te non belle, Bento, fateris sc eioee a Bane Vill. xxxi
Nescio tam multis quid scribas, Fauste, DUGHiSt een a eteremere XI. lxiv
Nescit, crede mihi, quid sint epigrammata, RIACCOn mash one IV. xlix
Nescit, cui dederit Tyriam Crispinus abollam. . . . . Vil. xl viii
Nihil Ammiano praeter aridam restem . A an Tv. lxx
Nihil est miserius neque gulosius Santra . . .. . . VIL. xx
Nil aliud loqueris quam Thesea Pirithoumque . .. . X. xi
Nilest: tritius Hedyli lacernissss" "Soo ee Ix, lvii
Nil in te scripsi, Bithynice. Crederenonvis ... . XII. Ixxviii
Nil intemptatum Selius, nil linquitinausum . . .. . II. xiv
Nil lascivius est Charisiano . PES A OE ee, VI. xxiv
Nil mihi das vivus ; dicis post fata daturum . <iaieu gaa XI. lxvii
Nil miserabilius, Matho, peedicone’Sabpello” 7) se sue oe VI. Xxxiii
Nil non, Lygde, mihi negas roganti . ...... XI. Ixxi
Nil recitas et vis, Mamerce, poeta videri. . . . . . Il. Ixxxviii
Nil tibi legavit Fabius, Bithynice, cuitu. . . . . . Ix, ix
Nolueram, Polytime, tuos violare capillos CR SA cry XII. Ixxxiv
Nomen Athenagorae, quaeris, Callistrate, verum? . . . Ix. xcv b.
Nomen cum violis rosisque natum . Pearce es, IX. xi
Nomen habes teneri quod tempora ‘nuncupat ‘anni ean ale IX. xiii
Non amo te, Sabidi, nec possum dicere quare . . . . I. xxxii
Non cenat sine apro noster, Tite, Caecilianus . . . . VII. lix
Non de plebe domus, nec avarae verna catastae. . . . VI. xxix
Non de vi neque caede nec veneno . . .... . VI. xix
Non dicam, licet usque me rogetis. . . . . . . . Il. xxiii
Non dixi, Coracine, tecinnedum . . . 2. . tt a IV. xliii
Non donem tibi cur meos libellos . . . 5. 1 kt Vv. Ixxiii
Non est in populo nec urbe tota_. cee” Weeklies Iv. Ixxxiv
Non est mentitus, quite mihi dixithabere | > 2? iS XI. cii
Non est, Tucca, satis, quod es gulosus vin Oe ee XI. xli
Non facit ad saevos cervix, nisi prima, leones . . . . Ili
Non horti neque palmitis beati se PR Sones pes aide, posh dekscmina vil. xl
Non mea Massylus servat pomaria serpens SP rey X. xciv
Non miror, quod potat aquam tua Bassa, Catulle Pikes Ag Vi. Ixix
Non omnis nostri nocturna est pagina libri . . | : XI. xvii
Non per mystica sacra Dindymenes rns bee er oieada ve Vii. Ixxxi
Non plenum modo vicies habebas . be Deg th Tei
Non quemcunque focum nec fumum caseus omnem . ere, | XXII ocx
Non rudis indocta fecit me falce colonus . . . . 4 VI. xxiii
Non silice duro structilive caemento AA ane pseh on eae IX. Ixxv
Non sum de fragili dolatus ulmo_. Reteiagerain Mig wee) Vi. xlix
Non sum de primo, fateor, trifolina Lyaeo Sit ae ee XII. xiv
Non tot in Eois timuit Gangeticus arvis . . . . . VU. xxvi
Non totam mihi, si vacabis, horam . . . . 4. yy V. Ixxx
Non vis in solio prius lavari. Sin tae ene rat lxx
Non urbana mea tantum Pimpletde gaudent Sy Aicamcoues OMea XI. iii
Nondum murice cultus asperoque . oe aa Vil, Ixxii
Norica quam certo venabula dirigit ictu | 2 °° - « — Spect, xxiii
Nos bibimus vitro, tu murra, Pontice. Quare?. | °° Iv, Ixxxv
Nosses iocosae dulce cum sacrum Florae igs eave ranean shDTaen, xix sqq
Nosti mortiferum quaestoris, Castrice, signum?. . . , Vil. xxxvii
Nosti si bene Caesium, libelle Aa datirg. ee ees eea tax Sees Re VII xcvii
Nostris versibus esse te poetam ee vienay Werte =, 1. Ixxil
Note, licet nolis, sublimi pectore vates eL Uiee te ie ate marS IX. init


558


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Novit loturos Dasius numerare: poposcit. . . . . . wu. lii
Nubere Paula cupit nobis, ego ducere Paulams 260 ' mie: X. viii
Nubere Sila mihi nulla non lege parata esti). ae) XI. xxiii
Nubere vis Prisco, non miror, Paula: sapisti ot) aOR TE Ae Ty
Nulla est hora tibi qua non me, Phylli,furentem . . . xi. |
Nulla remisisti parvo promunere dona ...... Iv. Ixxxviii
Nulli munera, Chreste, si remittis . SO LI ao GIGS Vil. Iv
Nulli, Thai, negas, sed si te non pudet ‘istud ; ULope pee: & Ty. xii
Nullos esse deos, inane caelum. . FIO SEI I% chy “Iv. xxi
Nullus in urbe fuit tota qui tangere vellep |: Seger I. Lxxiii
Nummi cum tibi sint opesque tantae . . 6 5 XII. liii
Nunc hilares, si quando mihi, nunc ludite, Musae aioe eer Vit. viii
Nunquam dicis have, sed reddis, N: aevole, pemmper 2°. II. xev
Nunquam divitias deos rogavi . 2 eeiiues Iv. Ixxvii
Nunquam me revocas, venias cum saepe vocatus . MW. xxvii
Nunquam se cenasse domi Philo iurat, et hocest . . . Vv. xivii
Nuntiat octavam Phariae sua turbaiuvencae . . ie X. xiviii
Nuper erat medicus, nunc est vispillo Diaulus 5 5 I. xl vii
Nympha, mei Stellae quae fonte domestica puro. 3 VI. xlvii
Nympha sacri regina lacus, cui grata Sabinus eohe TOT, IX. lviii
Nympharum pater amniumque, Rhene . ..... X. vii
oO
O cui Tarpeias licuit contingere quercus . . . .. . Iv. liv
O cui virgineo flavescere contigit auro . .... . IX, xxiii
O felix animo, felix, Nigrina, marito . . . . . . . Iv. Ixxv
@lucunda, covinne, solitudo Qui. 2c) 20+ Pos cigling 41% XII. xxiv
O Iuliarum dedecus Kalendarum . . Sree Gey 2 4 lt XII. xxxii
O mihi curarum pretium non vile mearum Bee ee eos I. Ixxvi
O mihi grata quies, o blanda, Telesphore, cura . . . . XI. xxvi
O mihi post nullos, Inli, memorande sodales 4505  siiher' 4 I, Xv
O molles tibi quindecim, Calene .°.°.  . 0%. ee X. xxxviii
O quam blandus es, Ammiane, matri. . . .... Il. iv
O temperatae dulce Formiae litus . ET Hs X. Xxx
Obstat, care Pudens, nostris sua turba libellis a wat A Iv. xxix
Occurris quocunque loco mihi, Postume, clamas. . . . I. levii
Occurris quotiens, Luperce, nobiseadt Mie b o Tea oe I. exvii
Occurrit tihi nemo quod libenter . EEE Rg ated g Ill. xliv
Octaphoro sanus portatur, Avite Philippus GASES TSE Ng ee, VI. Ixxxiv
Octobres age sentiat Kalendas . . «2. 6 2 6 X. Ixxxvii
Oculo Philaenis semper altero plorat . . Be Wie abl gh ae Iv. Ixv
Oderat ante ducum famulos turbamque priorem FATS IX. Ixxix
Odi te, quia bellus es, Sabelle . 2. . 2. 1 6 6 ew XII. xxxix
Ohe, iam satis est, ohe, livelle eu etealh Mirai tect gi medtat Cs Iv. Ixxxix
Omnes aut vetulas habes amicas . Wt Mier: Has vill. xxix
Omunes eunuchos habet Almo nec arrigit ipse EY itrit pyhalsg xX. xci
Omnes persequeris praetorum, Cotta, libellos LE Ht) X. Ixxxviii
Omnes quas habuit, Fabiane, Ly coris AMMICAS Hee 5 TPs IV. xxiv
Omnes quidem libelli mel, domingmuly GH ele ere VIII. praef.
Omnes Sulpiciam legant puellae ering alg X. XXXV
Omnia, Castor, emis: sic fiet, ut omnia vendas . . . vil. xeviii
Omnia cum retro pueris obsoniatradas . a ee, Ul. xxiii
Omnia femineis quare dilecta catervis ae Bes OF he BIR NG XI. xlvii


399


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Omnia misisti mihi Saturnalibus, Umber. . . . - - vil. liii
Omnia promittis, cum tota nocte Dibistiet: cose weiter Siar XII. xii
Omnia quod scribis castis epigrammata verbis_ . 5 Ti. Ixix


Omunia vis belle, Matho, dicere. Dicaliquando. . . x. xlvi
Omnis in hac gracili XENIORUM turba libello a MS XIII. iii


Orbus es et locuples et Bruto consule natus . iF aera XI. xliv
Orphea quod subito tellus emisit hiatu . . . . «. . Spect. xxi. b
Os et labra tibi lingit, Mancia, catellus ut =td. Ta cheats: tits I. lxxxiii
Os male causidicis ét dicis olere POCtiSu.= <, peti meNuCunstn es XI, Xxx
i
Paedicat pueros tribas Philaenis . 07 oes Vil. xvii
Paedicatur Eros, fellat Linus: Ole, quid adte . . Vincx
Paediconibus os olere dicis . . te ae XI. Ixxxv
Pallida ne Cilicum timeant pomaria brumam- Ro eee. VIII. xiv
Palma regit nostros, mitissime Caesar, Hiberos . . . XI. ix
Par scelus admisit Phariis Antonius armis . . . . 1. xvi
Parcius utaris, moneo, rapiente veredo . et XI. xiv
Pars maxillarum tonsa est tibi, pars tibi rasa “est, wie. vill. xlvii
Parthenio dic, Musa, tuo nostroque salutem . 5 Be 1S |


Gb oo, © 8 6 ef ey o> Bros) 0) 30


Parva rogas magnos ; sed non dant haec quoque “magni XI. xviii
Parva suburbani munuscula mittimus horti. . . . Vil. xlix
Pater ex Marulla, Cinna, factusesseptem . . . . VISE,
Pauca Iovem nuper cum milia forte rogarem Lieiceh a VI. x
Pauper amicitiae cum sis, Lupe, nones amicae . . . XI. ii
Pauper videri Cinna vult; etest pauper. . . . . Vill. xix
Pauperis extruxit cellam, sed vendidit Olus . . . . . Tl. xlviii
Percidi gaudes, percisus, Papile, ploras Foes COOL Gre ir Iv. xl viii
Perfrixisse tuas questa est praefatio fAlUlCeS? "oars ees SF Ti. xviii
Periclitatur capite Sotades noster . aes ait aE VI. xxvi
Perpetuam Stellae dum iungit Ianthida vati ; eh tee ss VI. xxi
Perpetui nunquam moritura volumina Sili P-tetoet aie Vil. lxiii
Pervenisse tuam iam te scit Rhenusin urbem . .. . Vill. xi
Petit Gemellus nuptias Maronillae. . . . .... TeX
Pexatus pulchre rides mea, Zoile, trita ere I. lviii
Phoebe, veni, sed quantus eras, cum bella Tonanti cal Pages VI. xxiii


Phosphore, redde diem : quid gaudia nostra Moraris? . . VIII. xxi
Picto quod iuga delicata collo . . .


sit ae Oe I. civ
Pierios vatis Theodori flamma penates . See we XI. xciii
Pinxisti Venerem, colis, Artemidore, Minervam it & Tale VWicx!
Pistor qui fueras diu, Cypere . 5 nc eee VII. xvi
Plena laboratis habeas cum scrinia libris SOs Sates IV. xxxili
Plorat Eros, quotiens maculosae pocula murrae. . . . XJIxxx
Plus credit nemo tota quam Cordus in urbe NY ee Ras Il. xv
Pompeios iuvenes Asia atque Europa, sedipsum . . . Vv. Ixxiv
Pontice, quod nunquam futuis, sed paelicelaeva . . . Ix, xli
Ponuntur semper chrysendeta ‘Calpetiano Ai ied Sertit eae VI. xciv
Potavi modo consulare vinum . , eid ah wees Vil. xxix
Poto ego sextantes, tu potas, Cinna, deunces” ol Te Hee XII. xxviii
Potor nobilis, Aule, lumine uno. a Sats Oe Vi. [xxviii
Praeceps sanguinea dum se rotat ursus harena eld. WER Spect. xi
Praecones duo, quattuor tribuni . Sh era y tee: VI. viii
Praedia solus habes et solus, Candide, nummos SLL SHY MI. xxvi


560


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Praestitit exhibitus tota tibi, Caesar, harena. .
Praetorem pauper centum sestertia Gaurus. . . .
Prima Palatino lux est haec orta Tonanti ce Gen j2
Prima salutantes atque altera conterit hora . . .
Primos passa toros et adhuc placanda marito . .
Primum est, ut praestes, si quid te, Cinna, rogabo .

“ Primus ubi est ’”’ inquis ‘‘ cum sit liber iste secundus ?
Principium des, Iane, licet velocibus annis . . .
Priscus ab Aetnaeis mihi, Flacce, Terentius oris
Privignum non esse tuae te, Galle, novercae .
Pro sene, sed clare, votum Maro fecit amico
Profecit poto Mithridates saepe veneno .
Proscriptum famulus servavit fronte notata
Prostratum vasta Nemees in valle leonem
Proxima centenis ostenditur ursa coiumnis
Psilothro faciem levas et dropace calvam .
Puella senibus dulcior mihi cygnis. . .
Pulchre valet Charinus, et tamen pallet . ae d
Pyrrhae.filla, Nestoris noverca .~ <6 %) NS) eins


”


° .


°
° . .
.


or 6.0, @) 6, eye 6:


. Q


Qua factus ratione sit requiris . ... .. .
Qua moechum ratione basiaret. . . . . .
Qua vicina pluit Vipsanis porta columnis. . .
Quadrantem Crispus tabulis, Faustine, supremis
Quadringenta tibi non sunt, Chaerestrate : surge
Quadringentorum reddis mihi, Phoebe, tabellas . .
Quae legis causa nupsit tibi Laelia, Quinte Zab
Quae mala sunt domini, quae servi commoda, nescis
Quae mihi praestiteris memini semperque tenebo

Quae modo litoreos ibatis carmina Pyrgos . . .
Quae nova tam similes genuit tibi, Leda, ministros? .
Quae tam seposita est, quae gens tam barbara, Caesar .
Quae te causa trahit vel quae fiducia Romam

Quae tibi non stabat praecisa est mentula, Glypte .
Quaecunque lusi iuvenis et puerquondam . . .
Quaedam me cupit, invide Procille. . . .. .
Quaeris, cur nolim te ducere, Galla? Disertaes .
Quaero diu totam, Safroni Rufe, per urbem . .. .
Qualem, Flacce, velim quaeris nolimve puellam? .
Qualiter Assyrios renovant incendia nidos_ .
Qualiter in Scythica religatus rupe Prometheus
Quam mihi mittebas Saturni tempore lancem
Quam sit lusca Philaenis indecenter . .
Quamvis tam longo possis satur esse libello
Quanta Gigantei memoratur mensa triumphi
Quanta quies placidi, tanta est facundia Nervae
Quanta tua est probitas, tanta est infantia formae
Quantum iam superis, Caesar, caeloque dedisti .
Quantum sollicito fortuna parentis Etrusco e
Quantus, io, Latias mundi conventus ad aras_.
Quare non habeat, Fabulle, quaeris . . . . .
Quare tam multis a te, Latine, diebus a eet te


: (0 nee. et \akew'as ea RE crs


bet es es ©


Sh.S5 Otel @ oem ato ai st eluek ay ot Siva ve


Spect. ix
Iv. lxvii
IX, xxxix
IV, viii
Iv. xxii
Vu. xiiii
Il. xoiii
Vill. viii
VIII. xlv
Iv. xvi
XII. xe
Vv. Ixxvi
TI. xxi
Spect. vi. b
Ul. xix
Wl. Ixxiv
V. Xxxvii
I. [xxvii
X. Ixvii


x. cli
XII. xciii
Iv. xviii
V. xxxii
Vv. XXV
IX. cii

Vv. xxv
IX, xcii
V. lii
XI. ii
IX. ciii
Spect. iii
II. xxxviii
Il. xlv

I. exiii
I. cxv
XI, xix
Iv. lxxi
I. lvii

V. vii
Spect. vii
X. xxix
XII. xxii
XI. eviii
vu. |
vul. Ixx
VIII. xlvi
IX, ili
VI. Ixxxiii
Vil. iv
Xl. xx
XI, xvii


561


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Quatenus Odrysios iam pax Romana triones. . . . . Vil. xxx
Quattuor argenti libras mihi tempore brumae . .. . vin. Ixxi
Quem recitas, meus est, o Fidentine, libellus. . . . I. xxxviii
Qui Coreyraei vidit pomaria regis .  . eae S Vu. Lxviii
Qui ducis vultus et non legis ista libenter . oo, I, xl
Qui gravis es nimium, potes hinc iam, lector, abire . XI. xvi
Qui legis Oedipoden caligantemque Thyesten. ROOs ys Rey
Qui modo per totam flammis stimulatus harenam . . . Spect. xix
Qui nondum Stygias quaerit descendere ad umbras. . . XI. Ixxxiv
Qui nunc Caesareae lusus spectatur harenae. . . . . VU. xxx
Qui Palatinae caperet convivia mensae . .... . VIII, xxxix
Qui pinxit Venerem tuam, Lycori. . 6 OMAN TINe I. cii
Qui potuit Bacchi matrem dixisse Tonantem . . . . Vv. xxii
Qui praestat pietate pertinaci .  . SRE, A. AVI eexviill
Qui recitat lana fauces et colla revinctus . sues ae VI. a
Qui tecum cupis esse meos ubicunque libellos Ae) i

Qui tonsor tota fueras notissimus urbe. Sarge, tema vil. ae
Quid cum femineo tibi, Baetice Galle, barathro? +. . Wi. Ixxxi
Quid de te, Line, suspicetur uxor - Bertha Il. liv
Quid faciat vult scire Lyris : quod sobria : fellat Pe Acie te T. lxxiii
Quid factum est, rogo, quid repente factum est SG, AA Vv. xliv
Quid me, Thai, senem subinde dicis ? . Pahar Iv. 1
Quid mihi reddat ager quaeris, Line, Nomentanus? . ui I. xxxviii
Quid mihi vobiscum est, o Phoebe novemque sorores?. . Il. xxii
Quid narrat tua moecha? Non puellaniy.. Vayte ies ae ceee Ill. Ixxxiv
Quid nobis, inquis, cum epistola?. . o foil te Il. praef.
Quid non cogit amor ? secuit nolente capillos eet SD See V. xlviii
Quid non saeva fugis placidi lepus ora leonis ?.,. . . . I. xxii
Quid promittebas mihi milia, Gaure,ducenta . . . . Y. Ixxxii
Quid recitaturus circumdas vellera collo ?. Hr Iv. xli
“ Quid sentis ” inquis “ de nostris, Marce, libellis? > A Vy. Lxiii
Quid, stulte, nostris versibus tuos misces piak gee A oEaS xX.¢
Quid’ te, Tucca, iuvat vetulo miscere Falerno. . . . . I. XViii
Quid tibi nobiscum est, ludi scelerate magister . . . . IX. lxviii
Quid vellis vetulum, Tigia, CUNNUMP AS aac 00. Se ee X. xc
Quidam me modo, Rufe, diligenter . Rebs? erage VI. Ixxxii
Quidquid agit Rufus, nihil est nisi N aevia Rufo Tey toe 1. Lxviii
Quidquid in Orpheo Rhodope spectasse theatro. . . . Spect. xxi
Quidquid Parrhasia nitebat aula . . . ..... XI. XV
Quidquid ponitur hinc et inde verris . ate de Ceara Tl, xxxvii
Quinque satis fuerant : nam sex septemve libelli SUS sie VIII. iii
Quinte Caledonios Ovidi visure Britannos. . . . . . X. xliv
Quintiliane, vagae moderator summe iuventae 5 MIS 6 I. xe
Quintum pro Decimo, pro Crasso, Regule, Macrum. . . v. xxi
Quintus nostrorum liber est, Auguste, iocorum a NWSE Vv. xv
Quis labor in phiala ? docti *Myos anne Myronos? . , , vin. li
Quis negat esse satum materno funere Bacchum? . . , Spect. xiii
Quis Palatinos imitatur imagine vultus . . . . .., IX. xxiv
Quis puer hic nitidis absistit Ianthidos undis ot PO Veh Tag Vil, XV
Quis, rogo, tam durus, quis tam fuit illesuperbus . . . X. ixvi
Quis te Phidiaco formatam, Iulia, caelo ee SOSH Vi. xiii
Quis tibi persuasit nares abscidere moechor?s0. ey), Ee Ill, [xxxv
Quisquis Flaminiam teris, viator . Ap ers eae XI, xiii
Quisguis laeta tuis et sera parentibus optas ain voteAtst tl he ite X. lxxi
Quisquis stolaeve purpuraeve contemptor. . . . . »« xX.Vv


562


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Quo possit fieri modo, Severe . . .. ..... Vu. xxxiv
Quo tu, quo, liber otiose,-tendis . «2.0 sb ke xhi
Quo vis cunque loco potes hunc finire libellum . 5 XIV. ii

5 Vv. xxvi


Quod alpha dixi, Corde, paenulatorum . . ot. leur rvs
Quod Caietano reddis, Polycharme, tabellas . . - «VIL, xxxvii


Quod clamas semper, quod agentibus obstrepis, Aeli . . : I, xcv
Quod convivaris sine me tam saepe, Luperce Reta Satda Mex 08s VI. li
Quod cupis in nostris dicique legique libellis . . . . . IV, Xxxi
Quod fellas et aquam potas, nil, Lesbia, peccas . . . . u. 1
Quod Flacco Varioque fuit summoque Maroni - XII. iv
Quod fronte Selium nubila vides, Rufe . M. xi
Quod lana caput alligas, Charine . . . .. . A XII. Ixxxix
Quod magni Thraseae consummatique Catonis . . . . I. viii
Quod mihi vix unus toto liberexeatanno .... . X. Ixx
Quod nec carmine glorior supino . ..... 1. Ixxxvi
Quod nimio gaudes noctem producere vino . . . H. Ixxxix

eotite XI. xciv


Quod nimium lives nostris et ubique libellis .


Quod nimium mortem, Chaeremon Stoice, laudas . . . XI, Ivi
Quod nocturna tibi, Leandre, peperceritunda . . . . Spect. xxv
Quod non argentum, quod non tibi mittimus aurum “ V. li
Quod non insulse scribis tetrasticha quaedam . . . . VII. Ixxxv
Quod non sit Pylades hoc tempore, non sit Orestes... VI. xi
Quod novus et nuper factus tibi praestat amicus . . . Ul. xxxvi
Quod nubis, Proculina, concubino. . . . . .. . VI. xxii
Quod nulli calicem tuum propinas. . . . . .. . Il. xv
Quod nunquam maribus iunctam te, Bassa, videbam . . I. xe
Quod nutantia fronte perticata Po la asa apiats Moai hs v. xii
Quod optimum sit disputat convivium . . ... , IX. Ixxvii
Quod pectus, quod crura tibi, quod brachia velis . . . I. lxii
Quod pius et supplex elephas te, Caesar, adorat. . . . Spect. xvii
Quod quacunque venis Cosmum Imigrare putamus . . . Ii. lv
Quod querulum spirat, quod acerbum Naeviatussit . . Il. xxvi
Quod semper casidque cinnamoque . . . . . . » VI. lv
Quod semper superos invito fratre rogasti . . aS x. li
Quod siccae redolet paluslacunae. . . . ... . Iv. iv
Quod spirat tenera malum mordente puella . . . . . I. lxv
Quod tam grande sophos clamat tibi turba togata . . . Vi. xi viii
Quod te diripiunt potentiores . . . . . 2. « « Vu. Ixxvi
Quod te mane domitoto non vidimus anno. ... . IV. xxvi
Quod te nomineiamtuosaluto. . . . 2. 2. « + W. xviii
Quod tibi crura rigent saetis et pectora villis VS eter a VI. lvi
Quod tibi Decembri mense, quo volant mappae. .. . V. xviii
© 6 « « VIII. [xxviii


Quos cuperet Phlegraea suos victoria ludos_ .


R


Raptus abit media quod ad aethera taurus harena C Spect. xvi


Raros colligis hinc et hinc capillos. . . . . .6 « . X. Lxxxili
Raucae chortis aves et ova matrum . . . athe: tls Vil. xxxi
Reclusis foribus grandes percidis, Amille . . secs Vil. xii
Regia pyramidum, Caesar, Miracularide. . . . . . VIII. xxxvi
Rem factam Pompullus habet, Faustine: legetur . . . VI. Ix
Rem peragit nullam Sertorius, inchoatomnes’ . . . .« mm. poe

litte: a6 Il. xci


Rerum certa salus, terrarum gloria, Caesar . .


563


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Retia dum cessant latratoresque Molossi .
Rictibus his tauros non eripuere magistri .
Ride, si sapis, o puella, ride :

Rideto multum gui te, Sextille, cinaedum
Romam petebat esuritor Duecivstesas.
Romam vade, liber : si, veneris unde, requiret
Rufe, vides illum subsellia prima terentem @
Rumpitur invidia quidam, carissime Juli. .
Ruris bibliotheca delicati . . .

Rustica mercatus multis sum praedia nummis


o2e eo @ ©
e. 6) ot eke (ere: 1 5 6
a Wet Neca) oe) ge) (el tay le mre,
a, (ai Yelvict ot sede ve Oe


8


Sacra laresque Phrygum, quos Troiae maluit heres .
Saecula Carpophorum, Caesar, si prisca tulissent. .
Saecula Nestoreae permensa, Philaeni, senectae . .
Saepe ego Chrestinam futui. Det quam bene quaeris ?
Saepe loquar nimium gentes quod, Avite, remotas .
Saepe meos laudare soles, Auguste, libellos .
Saepe mihi dicis, Luci carissime Iuli . . .
Saepe mihi queritur non siccis Cestos ocellis .
Saepe rogare soles, qualis sim, Prisce, futurus
Saepe salutatus nunquam prior ipse salutas =
Saepius ad palmam prasinus post fata Neronis
Sancta ducis summi prohibet censura vetatque
Sancta Salonini terris requiescit Hiberis . .
Sanctorum nobis miracula reddis avorum .
Sardonica medicata dedit mihi pocula virga .
Sardonychas, zmaragdos, adamantas, a u
Saturnalia divitem Sabellum . . jmoes
Saturnalicio Macrum fraudare tributo. ; fe
Scio me patrocinium debere contumacissimae
Scis te captari, scis hunc qui. captat avarum .
Scribebamus epos ; coepisti scribere: cessi_ .
Scribere me quereris, Velox, epigrammata longa
Scribere te quae vix intellegat ipse Modestus
Scribit in aversa Picens epigrammata charta .
Scripsi, rescripsit nil Naevia, non dabit ergo .


7 or .6 fe) teWiap is, cee


.
.


Oo


eoteoees Bee eveeteovnves


Secti podicis usque ad umbilicum Rue va é
Securo nihil est te, Naevole, peius ; eodem .
Sedere primo solitus in gradu semper RP Nts


Semper agis causas et res agis, Attale, semper
Semper cum mihi diceretur esse.

Semper mane mihi de me mala somnia narras
Semper pauper eris, si pauper es, Aemiliane .
Senos Charinus omnibus digitis gerib . << %
Septem clepsydras magna tibi voce petenti .
Septem post calices Opimiani ere

Septima iam, Phileros, tibi conditur uxor in agr
Seria cum possim, quod delectantia malo. .
Sescenti cenant a te, Iustine, vocati . .
Setinum dominaeque nives densique trientes
Seu tu Paestanis genita es seu Tiburis arvis
Sex sestertia si statim dedissegs. . .»


564


By tay, ey iw ade 1S) WS e) 10. ta) 0) 10 Tw ei®) 0) \.Sy al Tarver cna: com ky Uw, iat fe)
OF Kelige' gone te. oo as, wh og, io sa) SENS Ral Te? San el con rar eh ie) 1a) 100 dS dome) Ye


Sis epvat nie) Dey iste) ohio. et tee ey OF eT eh 8


aT Ke ae te We 0 OF nse ee. 0 Mente


xii. i

I, xlviii
uu. xli
Il, xxviii
Ill. xiv
Ill. iv
Il, xxix
IX. xevii
VII. xvii
VI. Vv


XI. iv
Spect. xxvii
TX
Il. xxxi
X. xevi
Iv. xxvii
I. cvii
Toxcis
XII. xcii
Vv. lxvi
XI. xxxiii
VI. xci
VI. xviii
Vu. xxx
IX. xciv


X. xvii


VI. Lxiii


vil. Ixii
Il. ix

VI. Xxxvii
IV. lxxxiii


VI. XXXV
Tx, Ixxxvii
X. xiii

Vv. xvi

XI. lxv

VI. Ixxxvi
IX. Ix

VI. xxx


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Sexagena teras cum limina mane senator. . . . . . - XII. xxvi
Sexagesima, Marciane, messis . irq eto Raa VI. [xx
Sextantes, Calliste, duos infunde Falerni . Reds Serene ais v. lxiv
Sexte, nibil debes, nil debes, Sexte, fatemur ERE ARIUL, BK II. iii
Sexte, Palatinae cultor facunde Minervae BN SSG Vv. Vv
Sextiliane, bibis quantum subsellia quingue . . . . . I, xxvi
Sextus mittitur hic tibi libellus es glare ttre, weg Wt ey lie igh MRE VI. i
Si credis mihi, Quinte, quod mereris . . a IS Ix. lii
Si daret autumnus mihi nomen, Oporinos essem . USE, wees IX. xii
Si dederint superi decies mihi milia centum . . . . I. ciii
Si desiderium, Caesar, populique patrumque. . . . . VII. v
Si det iniqua tibi tristem fortuna reatum. . . . . , TI. xxiv
Si donare vocas promittere nec dare, Gai. . . . . . X. xvi
Si Lucane, tibi vel si tibi, Tulle, darentur Panes ALCS I, xxxvi
Si memini, fuerant tibi quattuor, Aelia, dentes a I, xix
Si meus aurita gaudet lagalopece Flaccus Set AIR =5 Maton, VI. Ixxxvii
§i mihi Picena turdus palleret oliva . . . . 9... Ix. liv
Si nimius videor seraque coronide longus, . G2 Oi). x.i
Si non est grave nec nimis mojestum Se eS ART ty vV. vi
Si non molestum est teque non piget, scazon % MHDS toby I. xevi
Si prior Euganeas, Clemens, Helicaonisoras . . . . . X. xciii
Si qua fides veris, praeferri, maxime Caesar . . . . . V. xix
Si qua videbuntur chartis tibi, lector, in istis Fea Ae as SUE Tl, viii
Si quando leporem mittis mihi, Gellia, dicis. . . . . V. xxix
Si quid forte petam timido gracilique libello. . >. LO Pe VIII. xxiv
Si quid, Fusce, vacas adhuc amari ELS Sk ae aired Fame I. liv
Si quid lene mei dicunt et dulce lbellige! hee coco 0t agste X. xlv
Si quid nostra tuis adicit vexatio rebus  . PLL totes X, Ixxxii
Si quid opus fuerit, scis me nonesse rogandum . . . . Vil. xcii
Si quis ades longis serus spectator ab oris sR oes, WEG Re Spect. xxiv
Si quis erit raros inter numerandus amicos . . . . . I, xxxix
Si quis forte mihi possit praestare roganti . . . . . Iv. xlii
Si Romana forent haec Socratis ora, fuissent eh eee x. xeix
Si sine carne voles ientacula sumere frugi S Leh a atthe XII. xxxi
Site sportula maior ad beatos . .%. 2 2 1 ew ww VIL. xiii
Speecnm mini care Martialiss ssi. eu eae ee Vv. xx
Si temperari balneum cupisfervens . . . .. .. Il, XXxv
Si tibi Mistyllos cocus, Aemiliane, vocatur . . . .. rei
Si tristi domicenio laboras . Oe ase IVS Vv. lxxviii
Si tua, Cerrini, promas epigrammata yulgo SIREN SANS has RS Vil. xviii
Si tua nec Thais nec lusca est, Quinte,” eels abel ABO Hie MI. xi
Si vis auribus Atticis probari . . Sinw AL 2 Iv. Ixxxvi
Sic in gramine floreo reclinis _. ie: fered atte IX. xc
Sic me fronte legat dominus, Faustine, serena ere [i985 VII, xii
Sic placidum videas semper, Crispine, ‘Tonantem ly de VII. xcix
Sic tanquam tabulas scyphosque, Paule . . . 2. 6 XU. lxix
Sic Tiburtinae crescat tibi silva Dianae . . . . . . VII. xxviii
Siccus, sobrius est Aper: quidad me? . . Sy ALIRS XII. XXX
Sidera iam Tyrius Phrixei respicit agni STS See BMS x. li
Sidere percussa est subito tibi, Zoile, lingua. . . . . XI. Ixxxv
Sili, Castalidum decus sororum 5 Riv aaahien ES hive Iv. xiv
Silius haec magni celebrat monumenta Maronis . . a XI. xlviii
Simplicior priscis, Munati Galle, Sabinis . . . 1. we xX. xxxiil
Sirenas hilarem navigantium poenam.. . Peige scien Il. lxiv
Sit cisterna mihi, quam vinea, malo Ravennae aber eR 7s: mm. Ivi


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Sit culus tibi quam macer requiris? . 8 wee mi. xeviir
Sit Phlogis an Chione Veneri magis apta, requiris Te dine cei sts XIolx
Sola tibi fuerant sestertia, Miliche, centum . ... . Ti. Ixiii
Sollicitant pavidi dum rhinocerota MACISECT SE. seeuas cere rere Spect. xxii
Solvere dodrantem nuper tibi, Quinte, svolebati.s) yatuct << VIII. ix
Solvere, Paete, decem tibi me sestertia cogis . lie’ ts ae XI. Ixxvi
Sordida cum tibi sit, verum tamen, Attale dixit. | . TV. Xxxiv
Sordidior caeno cum sit toga, calceus autem. . . a VII. xxxiii
Sotae filia clinici, Fabnlla- . . . .=. . ' 5 Ty.j1x
Spadone cum sis eviratior fluxo . . .. . s Wem
Spectabat modo solusinteromnes. . . 2... . « Iv, ii
Spectas nos, Philomuse, cum lavamur / ees XI. Lxiii
Spendophorns Libycas domini petit armiger acbesieeneay bE: Ix. lvi
Spero me secutum in libellis meis . . RE mER Few abe 3 I. praef.
Sportula, Cane, tibi suprema nocte petita ‘est. us (ohh Tears I, Ixxx
Sportula nulla ‘datur ; gratis conviva recumbis . . . Ill. XXX
Stare iubes nostrum semper tibi, Lesbia, penem. . . . VI. xxiii
Stare, Luperce, tibi iam pridem ‘mentula desit . . . Ul, xxv
Stellae delicium mei columba . . ths eee BF I, vii
Subdola famosae moneo fuge retia moechae . = vee I. xlvii
Sum, fateor, semperque fui, Callistrate, pauper . 5 Vv. xiii
Summa licet velox, Agathine, periculaludas. . sure IX. xxxviii
Summa Palatini poteras aequare colossi . . . aa es Vill. lx
Summa tuae, Meleagre, fuit quae gloria famae aAs Spect. xv
Sunt bona, sunt quaedam mediocria, sunt mala plura A? os I. xvi
Sunt chartae mihi, quas Catonis uxor. . CUP et alee ce XT.
Sunt gemini fratres, diversa sed inguina lingunt te Deities Be Ill. xeviil
Sunt tibi, confiteor, diffusiiugeracampi . . . .. . Il. xxxi
Supremas tibi tricies, incatino:hmmele “ce eis ete ees 4) ne V. xxxix
Sus fera iam gravior maturi pignore ventris . . . . . Spect. xiv
Sutor cerdo dedit tibi, culta Bononia, munus. . . . . Ill. lix
Synthesibus dum gaudet eques dominusque senator bitte XIV. i
T ;
Tam dubia est lanugo tibi, tam mollis, utillam . . . . x. xlii
Tam male Thais olet, quam non fullonisavari . . . . vi. xciii
Tam saepe nostrum decipi Fabullinum . a Teal ales xu. li
Tanquam parva foret sexus iniuria nostri $9, SOIR e s IX. viii
Tanquam simpliciter mecum, Callistrate, vivas . . . . XII. XXxXV
Tanta est quae Titio columna pendet . ST he XI. li
Tanta tibi est animi probitas orisque, Safroni CES caer 5 XI. ciii
Tanta tib, est recti reverentia, Caesar, et aequi. . . . XI. Vv
Tantos et tantas si dicere Sextilianum. . . . . . . VI. liv
Tantum dat tibi Koma basiorum . SNS oe PORN Gs Xi. lix
Tantus es et tatts nostri, Polypheme, Severi > 2 2 0) 0) ym. xxxviii
Tarpeiae venerande rector ESEY Ro eee be meem sein, vu. Ix
Larpelas Diodorus:ad-coronas’ . 2. ity eb ceriiend cues xx!
Tempora Pieria solitus redimire corona . . . . . . XI. lit
Temporibus nostris aetas cum cedat avorum. . . . . Vill. lvi
Ter centena quidem poteras epigrammata ferre. . . . Wi
Terrarum dea gentiumque Roma OPLALT Dine ese XI. viii
Thaida Quintus amat: quam Thaida? Thaida luscam - il. viii
Thaida tam tenuem potuisti, Flacce, videre? ., . . .« XI. ci


566


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Thais habet nigros, niveos Laecania dentes . . .. . v. xliii
Theca tectus ahenea lavatur . . . .. . a hats XI. Ixxv
Thelyn viderat intogaspadonem . ... . alas x, lii
Thestyle, Victoris tormentum dulce Voconi Melee pis pode VII. xxix
Thestylon Aulus amat, sed nec minus ardet Alexin. . . VIII. xiii
Tibi, summe Rheni domitor et parens orbis eiacsrcecés IX. Vi
Tiburin Herculeum migravit nigra Lycoris . . . . . Iv. Ixii
Tinctis murice vestibus quod omni. cans canbe as IX, lxii
Titulle, moneo, vive : semper hoc serum est . rie VIII. xliv
Tolle, puer, calices tepidique toreumata Nili. . . . . XI. xi
Tongilianus habet nasum: scio,nonnego. Sediam . . XuII.Ixxxviii
Tonsorem puerum, sed artetalem. . ...... VIII. lii
Tonstrix Suburae faucibus sedet primis . . Kare Il. xvii
Totis, Galle, iubes tibi me servire diebus . a ee xX. lvi
Motowertice quot gerit:capillos; 7) =i i. om oo te oo XU. vii
Tres habuit dentes, pariter quosexpuitomnes . . . . vill. lvii
Triginta mihiquattuorque messes. . . . . . «6 . XII. xxxiv
Triginta tibi sunt pueritotidemque puellae . . . . . XII. lxxxvii
Trigintatoto malasuntepigrammatalibro . . . . . VII. Ixxxi
Tristesupercilium duriqueseveraCatonis. . . . . . X1.ii
Tristis Athenagoras non misit muneranobis» . . . . VII. xli
Tristis es et felix ; sciat hoc Fortunacaveto. . . . . VI. Ixxix
Tu qui pene viros terres et falce cinaedos TES heyaicion > VI xvi
Tu Setina quidem semper vel Massica ponis. . . . . Tv. lxix
Turba gravis paci placidaequeinimica quieti eta ee < Spect.iv
Tuscae glandis aper populatoretilicemulta. . . . . VII. xxvii
Us.Y:
Vade salutatum pro me, liber: ireiuberis . . . ©. . 1. 1xx
Vapulat adsidue veneti quadriga flagello. . . . . . VI. xivi
Vare, Paraetonias Latia modo vite per urbes . . . . .% X.. xxvi
‘Varro, Sophocleo non infitiande cothurno . cigars hms V. XXX
Vatis Apollinei magno memorabilisortu . . . . . . VII. xxii
Veientana mihi misces, ubi Massica potas He oat y 2 a eS Til. xlix
Vendere, Tucca, potes es ctenis milibus emptos?. eas XI. lxx
Venderetexcultos collcus um praeco facetus . ine I. Ixxxv
VenduntcarminaGallnecet Lupercus. . . . . ° XII. xlvi
Ventris onus misero, nec te pudet,excipisauro . . “i I. XxxVii
Venturum iuras semper mihi, Lygde,roganti . .. . XI. [xxiii
Verbera securisolitusleo ferre magistri . . . . . « II, Ixxv
Vernaculorum dicta,sordidnmdentem ..... .« X. iii
Verona doctisyllabas amat vatis . . . . . +. + « I. lxi
Versiculosin me narraturscribereCinna. . ... . III. ix
Versuset breve vividumque carmen . . ..... XII. Ixi
Versusscribere me parum severos. . . . 2. «6 « « I, XXXV
Versus scribere posse te disertos . . . . . . «6 « VI, xiv
Vexerat Europenfraterna peraequorataurus . . « Spect.xvi.b
Vibi Maxime, sivacashavere . .... . pee XI. evi
Vicinus meusest manuquetangi . . . . . ... I, Ixxxvi
Viderat Ausonium posito modo crine ministrum. . . . IX. xxxvi
Vidissem modo fortecumsedentem . .. . . . « v. xlix
Vidistisemel, Oppiane,tantum. . . ..... -» VIII, XXV
Vimine clusa levi niveae custodia coctae . . . . « e II. 1Xxxv


567


INDEX OF FIRST LINES


Vincentem roseos facieque comaque Ministros . . . .- XII. xiv
Vindemiarum non ubique proventus . . Pie a Ix, xeviii
Vir bonus et pauper linguaque et pectore verus Fehon ey ooh Iv. Vv
Vir Celtiberisnon tacende gentibus §. . . . « .». « Toxlix
Viscommendarisine mecursurusinurbem . ... . Ill. v
Vis fieriliber ? mentiris, Maxime,nonvis .... . Ii. liii
Vis futuigratis,cum sisdeformisanusque . . .. . VII. xxv
Vis futui nec vis mecum, Saufeia,lavari . . . .. . Ill. lxxii
Vis te, Sexte, coli: volebamamare =: . . +. . « « Il. lv
Vitam quae faciant beatiorem . . <4 ra ate Xe KV
Vite nocens rosa stabat moriturus ad area ee 5 III. xxiv
Vivida cum poscas epigrammata, mortuaponis. . . . XI. xlii
Umida qua gelidas submittit Trebulavalles. . . . . Vv. Ixxi
Una est in nostristua, Fidentine, libellis. . . . . . I. liti
Una nocte quater possum: sed quattuorannis . . . . XI. xcvii
Unetisttalciterisenis diebus a s.00 sess lenses XI. vi
Uncto Corduba laetior Venafro Ofer iG 6S BS ney At te XII. lxiii
Undecies una surrexti, Zoile, cena. . . . . . .« « V. xxix
Undenis pedibusque syllabisque ea ee Cte o ie X. ix
Unguenta et casias et olentem funera myrrham Ae, Se XI. liv
Unguentum, fateor, bonum dedisti. . . Gogh bas. He III. xii
Unguentum fuerat, quod onyx modo parva gere ebat tise VII. xciv
Unice, cognato iunctum mihisanguine nomen ... . XII. xliv
Unus de toto peccaverat orbe comarum . .... . I. Ixvi
Unus saepe tibi tota denarius arca PAU BS kd ibe 46 Be oy Ir. li
Vota tui breviter si vis cognoscere Marci. . . .. . I. lv
Urbanus tibi, Caecili, videris  . eo re tae es ate Oe I. xli
Uri Tongilius male dicitur Homitrtacone cue ieee tna ci I. xl
Ut bene loquatur sentiatque Mamercus . SOS RSs Vv. xxviii
Ut faciam breviora mones epigrammata, Gorde eco a U1. Ixxxiii
Ut nova dona tibi, Caesar, Nilotica tellus helene “ise ape. Ne VI. Ixxx
Ut patiar moechum, rogat uxor, Galle,sedunum . . . TH. xcii
Ut poscas, Clyte, munus exigasque . bce bernie oles. Atty Vill. lxiv
Ut pueros emeret Labienus, vendidit hortos | | Pub thet hae XII. xxxiii
Ut recitem tibi nostra rogas epigrammata. Nolo . . . I. lxiii
Utere femineis complexibus, utere, Victor ete ag ci. XI. ixxviii
Utere lactucis et mollibus utere malvis . . Bi acta N Il, Ixxxix
Vult, non vult dare Galla mihi, nec dicere possum Geen 00 ll. xe
Uxor cum tibi sit formosa, pudica, puella Te Ae deco aes IX. lxvi
Uxor cum tibi sit puella, qualem . . Ful eee tiie XII. xevii
Uxor, vade foras, aut moribus utere nostris 1 | rE 6 XI. civ
Uxorem armati futuis, puer Hylle, tribuni . . . . . Tr. lx
Uxorem, Charideme, tuam seis ipse sinisque’= = s-" ‘ VI. xxxi
Uxorem habendam non putat Quirinalis . . . . . . I. Ixxxiv
Uxorem nolo Telesinam ducere: quare?. . ....,. Il. xlix
Uxorem quare locupletem ducere nolim . , Espen VIII. xii
Z
Zoile, quid solium subluto podice perdis?. . . ... Il. xlii
Zoile, quid tota gemmam praecingere libra . . . . , XI, Xxxvii
Zoilus aegrotat: faciunt hanc stragulafebrem . . ,. , Il. xvi
