Harriet Martineau's Autobiography, Vol. II (Harriet Martineau (Maria Weston Chapman, ed.), 1877)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: scan of the 1877 Smith, Elder edition, Vol. II (https://archive.org/details/harrietmartineau00mart_0). Martineau's autobiography, Vol. II — the deaf reformer-novelist on abolition, political economy, and Victorian letters.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

S.  G.  &  E.  L.  ELBERT 


I 


Digitized  by 

the  Internet  Archive 

in  2014 

https://archive.org/details/harrietmartineauOOmart_0 


HARRIET  MARTINEAU'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY, 

EDITED  BY 

MARIA  WESTON  CHAPMAN; 

AND 

MEMORIALS  OF  HARRIET  MARTINEAU, 

By  MARIA  WESTON  CHAPMAN. 


■I 

/•/fa 


HARRIET  MARTINEAU'S 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


"Etiam  capillu3  unus  habet  urabram  suam."  —  Proverb. 

"  And  this  dear  freedom  hath  begotten  me  this  peace,  that  I  mourn  not  that  end 
which  must  be,  nor  spend  one  wish  to  have  one  minute  added  to  the  uncertain  date 
of  my  years. "  —  Bacon. 


EDITED  BY 


MARIA  WESTON  CHAPMAN. 


VOLUME  TWO. 


BOSTON: 
JAMES  R.  OSGOOD  AND  COMPANY, 

Late  Ticknob  &  Fields,  and  Fields,  Osgood,  &  Co. 

1877. 


Copyright,  1877. 
By  JAMES  R.  OSGOOD  &  CO. 


University  Press:  Welch,  Bigelow,  &  Co., 
Cambridge 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


PERIOD   VI.  {Continued.) 

Page 

Section  IV.  —  Chartism  in  1848.  Whig  notions  of  popular  manage- 
ment. Official  whig  mind  and  manners.  "Lake  District." 
Lectures.  Building  Society.  Three  invitations.  Death  of  my 
mother.    "  History  of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace  "  1 

Section  V.  — Currer  Bell.  "Household  Words."  "Letters  on  the 
Laws  of  Man's  Nature  and  Development."  Convictions  as  to  the 
source  of  wisdom.     Science  of  Human  Nature.     Articles  for 


"  Household  Words."  For  Sartain's  Magazine.  "  Sketches  from 
Life."  Mr.  Jerrold.  Mr.  Fonblanque.  "  Letters  on  Cow  Keep- 
ing."   Farming  experiment       .       .       .       .       .       .  .21 

Section  VI.  —  Anticipations  of  the  results  of  the  Atkinson  Letters. 
Necessity  of  avowal  of  opinions  in  my  case.  Preparation  of  the 
volume.    Its  reception  36 

Section  VII. — Scheme  of  translating  Comte's  "Positive  Philoso- 
phy." Summer  journey.  Mr.  Thackeray.  Mr.  Dickens.  Abor- 
tive scheme.  Mr.  Lombe's  gift.  More  work.  Completion  of  my 
version.  Method  of  working.  Ignorance  of  critics  of  the  "  Posi- 
tive Philosophy."    Letter  of  Mr.  Atkinson        .       .       .  .57 

Section  VIII. — Introduction  to  "Daily  News."  Irish  journey. 
Servant's  wedding.  "  Daily  News."  Visit  to  London.  Settle- 
ment at  home.  Troubles  and  pleasures  of  the  summer.  Death 
of  Mr.  Frederick  Knight  Hunt  82 


vi 


CONTENTS  OF  VOL.  II. 


Section  IX.  —  Fatal  illness.  Home  and  preparation.  Mistake  of 
life-long  dwelling  on  prospect  of  death.  Its  proximate  aspect. 
Interest  of  the  position.  Its  pleasures.  View  of  the  world  from 
the  horizon.  Political  state  of  England.  Of  the  civilised  world. 
Prospects  of  the  Human  Race     .       .       .       .       .       .  .101 


LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

Page 

Portrait  of  Harriet  Martineatl  1850  Frontispiece 
The  Knoll,  Ambleside.    1856    102 


HARRIET  MARTINEAU'S  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


SIXTH  PEEIOD. 


SECTION  IV. 

The  same  mail  which  brought  back  my  M.  S.  from  Mr.  Murray- 
brought  the  news  of  the  flight  of  Louis  Philippe.  My  petty 
interests  seemed  unworthy  of  mention,  even  to  myself,  in  the 
same  day  with  that  event.  Mine  were  re-arranged  in  three  days, 
while  the  affairs  of  the  Continent  became  more  exciting  from 
hour  to  hour.  Towards  the  end  of  March,  when  my  book  was 
finished,  and  nearly  ready  for  publication,  letters  came  in,  in 
increasing  numbers,  appealing  to  me  for  help,  in  one  form  or 
another,  for  or  against  popular  interests,  so  far  as  they  were 
supposed  to  be  represented  by  Chartism.  Of  these  letters,  one 
was  from  the  wife  of  a  Cabinet  Minister,  an  old  acquaintance, 
who  was  in  a  terrible  panic  about  Feargus  O'Connor  and  the 
threatened  Chartist  outbreak  of  the  tenth  of  April,  then  approach- 
ing. She  told  me  that  she  wrote  under  her  husband's  sanction, 
to  ask  me,  now  that  they  saw  my  book  was  advertised  for  pub- 
lication, to  use  my  power  over  the  working-classes,  to  bring 
them  to  reason,  &c,  &c.  The  letter  was  all  one  tremor  in 
regard  to  the  Chartists,  and  flattery  to  myself.  I  replied  that  I 
had  no  influence,  as  far  as  I  knew,  with  the  Chartists ;  and  that, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  I  agreed  with  them  in  some  points  of  doctrine' 
while  thinking  them  sadly  mistaken  in  others,  and  in  their  pro- 
posed course  of  action.    I  told  her  that  I  had  seen  something 

VOL.  II. 


2 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1848. 


in  the  newspapers  which  had  made  me  think  of  going  to  Lon- 
don :  and  that  if  I  did  go,  I  would  endeavour  to  see  as  many 
political  leaders  (in  and  out  of  parliament)  as  possible,  and 
would,  if  she  pleased,  write  her  an  account  of  what  should  seem 
to  me  the  state  of  things,  and  the  best  to  be  done,  by  myself 
and  others.  It  was  an  advertisement  in  the  newspapers  which 
had  made  me  think  of  going ;  —  the  advertisement  of  a  new 
periodical  to  be  issued  by  Mr.  Knight,  called  "  The  Voice  of  the 
People."  It  was  pointed  out  to  me  by  several  of  my  friends, 
as  full  of  promise  in  such  hands  at  such  a  time.    The  day  after 

my  letter  to  Lady  was  sent,  I  heard  from  Mr.  Knight. 

He  desired  to  see  me  so  earnestly  that  he  said,  if  I  could  not  go 
to  town,  he  would  come  to  me,  —  ill  as  he  could  just  then  spare 
the  time  :  or,  he  would  come  and  fetch  me,  if  I  wished  it.  Of 
course,  I  went  immediately;  and  I  helped  to  the  extent  Mr. 
Knight  wished,  in  his  new  periodical.  But  I  saw  immediately, 
as  he  did,  that  the  thing  would  never  do.  The  Whig  touch 
perished  it  at  once.  The  Whig  officials  set  it  up,  and  wished  to 
dictate  and  control  its  management  in  a  way  which  no  literary 
man  could  have  endured,  if  their  ideas  and  feelings  had  been  as 
good  as  possible.  But  the  poverty  and  perverseness  of  their 
ideas,  and  the  insolence  of  their  feelings  were  precisely  what 
might  be  expected  by  all  who  really  knew  that  remarkably 
vulgar  class  of  men.  They  proposed  to  lecture  the  working- 
classes,  who  were  by  far  the  wiser  party  of  the  two,  in  a  jejune, 
coaxing,  dull,  religious-tract  sort  of  tone,  and  criticised  and  dep- 
recated every  thing  like  vigour,  and  a  manly  and  genial  tone 
of  address  in  the  new  publication,  while  trying  to  push  in,  as 
contributors,  effete  and  exhausted  writers,  and  friends  of  their 
own  who  knew  about  as  much  of  the  working-classes  of  England 
as  of  those  of  Turkey.  Of  course,  the  scheme  was  a  complete 
and  immediate  failure.  On  the  insertion  of  an  article  by  a 
Conservative  Whig,  (which  was  certainly  enough  to  account  for 
the  catastrophe,)  the  sale  fell  to  almost  nothing  at  all ;  and  Mr. 
Knight,  who  had  before  stood  his  ground  manfully  against  the 
patrons  of  the  scheme,  threw  up  the  business. 

Meantime,  the  tenth  of  April  arrived  (while  I  was  near  Lon- 
don) and  passed  in  the  way  which  we  all  remember.  Lady 


Aged  46.] 


BELGRAVIAN  WAYS. 


3 


 wrote  to  me  in  a  strain  of  exultation,  as  vulgar,  to  say  the 

least,  as  Feargus  O'Connor's  behaviour,  about  the  escape  of  the 
government.  She  told  of  O'Connor's  whimpering  because  his 
toes  were  trodden  on ;  and  was  as  insolent  in  her  triumph  about 
a  result  which  was  purely  a  citizen  work  as  she  had  been  abject 
when  in  fear  that  the  Chartists  would  hold  the  metropolis.  I 
felt  the  more  obliged  to  write  the  promised  letter,  when  I  had 
seen  several  leading  politicians  of  the  liberal  party ;  and  I  did 
it  when  I  came  home.  I  did  it  carefully ;  and  I  submitted  my 
letter  to  two  ladies  who  were  judges  of  manners,  as  well  as  of 
politics  ;  and  they  gave  it  their  sanction,  —  one  of  them  copying 

it,  with  entire  approbation.    Lady  's  reply  was  one  of  such 

insolence  as  precluded  my  writing  to  her  again.  She  spoke  of 
the  "  lower  classes  "  (she  herself  being  a  commoner  by  birth)  as 
comprising  all  below  the  peerage ;  so  that  she  classed  together 
the  merchants  and  manufacturers  with  "  cottagers "  and  even 
paupers ;  and,  knowing  me  to  be  a  manufacturer's  daughter,  she 
wrote  of  that  class  as  low,  and  spoke  of  having  been  once  obliged 
to  pass  a  week  in  the  house  of  a  manufacturer,  where  the  gov- 
erness was  maltreated  with  the  tyranny  which  marks  low  people. 
My  two  consultees  reddened  with  indignation  at  the  personal  in- 
solence to  myself;  which  I  had  overlooked  in  my  disgust  at  the 
wrong  to  my  "order,"  and  to  the  "cottagers"  with  whom  she 
classed  us.  By  their  advice,  I  wrote  a  short  note  to  this  lady's 
husband,  to  explain  that  my  letter  was  not  a  spontaneous  ad- 
dress, as  his  lady  now  assumed,  but  written  in  answer  to  her 
request.  This  little  transaction  confirmed  the  impression  which 
I  had  derived  from  all  my  recent  intercourse  with  official 
Whigs ;  —  that  there  was  nothing  to  be  expected  from  them 
now  that  they  were  spoiled  by  the  possession  of  place  and 
power.  I  had  seen  that  they  had  learned  nothing  by  their 
opportunities :  that  they  were  hardened  in  their  conceit  and 
their  prejudices,  and  as  blind  as  bats  to  the  new  lights  which 
time  was  introducing  into  society.  I  expected  what  became 
apparent  in  the  first  year  of  the  war,  when  their  incapacity  and 
aristocratic  self-complacency  disgraced  our  administration,  and 
lowered  our  national  character  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  and 
cost  their  country  many  thousands  of  lives  and  many  millions  of 


4 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1843. 


treasure.  I  have  seen  a  good  deal  of  life  and  many  varieties  of 
manners ;  and  it  now  appears  to  me  that  the  broadest  vulgarity 
I  have  encountered  is  in  the  families  of  official  Whigs,  who  con- 
ceive themselves  the  cream  of  society,  and  the  lights  and  rulers 
of  the  world  of  our  empire.  The  time  is  not  far  off,  though  I 
shall  not  live  to  see  it,  when  that  coterie  will  be  found  to  have 
brought  about  a  social  revolution  more  disastrous  to  themselves 
than  any  thing  that  could  have  been  rationally  anticipated  from 
poor  Feargus  O'Connor  and  his  Chartist  host  of  April  10th, 
1848. 

What  Mr.  Knight  wanted  of  me  at  that  time  was  not  mainly 
my  assistance  in  his  new  periodical,  but  to  carry  on  an  old 
enterprise  which  had  been  dropped.  The  "  History  of  the 
Thirty  Years'  Peace"  had  been  begun  long  before;  but  diffi- 
culties had  occurred  which  had  brought  it  to  a  stand  for  two 
years  past.  That  his  subscribers  should  have  been  thus  ap- 
parently deserted,  and  left  with  the  early  numbers  useless  on 
their  hands,  was  a  heavy  care  to  my  good  friend ;  and  he  pro- 
posed to  me  to  release  him  from  his  uncomfortable  position  by 
undertaking  to  finish  the  work.  I  felt  tempted  ;  but  I  did  not 
at  all  know  whether  I  could  write  History.  Under  his  encour- 
agement, I  promised  to  try,  if  he  could  wait  three  months.  I 
was  writing  "  Household  Education,"  and  I  had  promised  him 
an  account  of  the  Lake  District,  for  the  work  he  was  publishing, 
called  "  The  Land  we  live  in."  It  was  on  or  about  the  1st  of 
August  that  I  opened,  for  study,  the  books  which  Mr.  Knight 
had  been  collecting  and  forwarding  to  me  for  the  sources  of  my 
material. 

This  year  was  the  beginning  of  a  new  work  which  has  afforded 
me  more  vivid  and  unmixed  pleasure  than  any,  except  author- 
ship, that  I  ever  undertook  j  —  that  of  delivering  a  yearly  course 
of  lectures  to  the  mechanics  of  Ambleside  and  their  families. 
Nothing  could  have  been  further  from  my  thoughts,  at  the  out- 
set, than  such  an  extension'  of  the  first  effort.  On  my  return 
from  the  East,  I  was  talking  with  a  neighbour  about  the  way  in 
which  children,  and  many  other  untravelled  persons,  regard  the 
Holy  Land.  When  Dr.  Carpenter  taught  me  in  my  youth, 
among  his  other  catechumens,  the  geography  of  Palestine,  with 


Aged  46.] 


LECTURES. 


5 


notices  from  Maimdrell's  travels  there,  it  was  like  finding  out 
that  a  sort  of  fairy  land  was  a  real  and  substantial  part  of  our 
everyday  earth ;  and  my  eagerness  to  learn  all  about  it  was  ex- 
treme, and  highly  improving  in  a  religious  sense.  I  remarked 
now  to  my  neighbour  that  it  was  a  pity  that  the  school-children 
should  not  learn  from  me  something  of  what  I  had  learned  in 
my  youth  from  Maundrell.  She  seized  upon  the  idea,  and  pro- 
posed that  I  should  give  familiar  lectures  to  the  monitors  and 
best  scholars  of  the  national  school,  —  sometimes,  when  con- 
venient, to  escape  visitation,  called  the  Squire's  school.  I  was 
willing,  and  we  went  to  the  school-mistress,  whose  reception  of 
the  scheme  amused  us  much.  She  said  she  knew,  and  had 
taught  the  children,  "  all  about  the  sources  of  the  Nile ; "  but 
that  she  should  be  glad  to  hear  any  thing  more  that  I  had  to 
tell.  We  could  hardly  refrain  from  asking  her  to  teach  us  "  all 
about  the  sources  of  the  Nile  : "  but  we  satisfied  ourselves  with 
fixing  the  plan  for  my  addressing  the  children  in  the  school- 
house.  I  was  more  nervous  the  first  time  than  ever  after, — 
serious  as  was  the  extension  of  the  plan.  After  the  first  lecture, 
which  was  to  two  or  three  rows  of  children  and  their  school- 
mistress, a  difficulty  arose.  The  incumbent's  lady  made  a  speech 
in  School  Committee,  against  our  scheme,  saying  that  the  incum- 
bent had  found  so  much  discontent  in  the  parish  from  a  dissenter 
having  been  allowed  to  set  foot  in  the  school-house,  that  its  doors 
must  be  closed  against  me.  She  added  some  compliments  to  me 
and  the  lectures,  which  she  expressed  a  great  wish  to  hear,  and 
so  on.  My  neighbour  immediately  took  all  the  blame  on  her- 
self, saying  that  I  had  not  even  known  where  the  school-house 
was  till  she  introduced  me  to  it ;  and  that  what  I  had  done  was 
at  her  request.  She  went  straight  to  the  authorities  of  the  chapel 
which  stands  at  the  foot  of  my  rock,  and  in  an  hour  obtained 
from  them  in  writing  an  assurance  that  it  would  give  them  "  the 
greatest  pleasure"  that  I  should  lecture  in  their  school-rooms. 
Armed  with  this,  and  blushing  all  over,  my  neighbour  came,  and 
was  relieved  to  find  that  I  was  not  offended  but  amused  at  the 
transaction.  I  proposed  to  have  the  children  in  my  kitchen, 
which  would  hold  them  very  well ;  and  that  we  should  invite 
the  incumbent's  lady  to  be  present.    My  neighbour  said  "  No, 


6 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1848; 


no  :  she  does  liot  deserve  that,"  and  produced  the  Methodists' 
gracious  letter.  I  may  add  here  that  last  year  the  incumbent's 
lady  said,  in  a  railway  carriage,  in  the  hearing  of  a  friend  of 
mine,  that  there  was  great  alarm  among  the  clergy  when  I  first 
came  to  live  at  Ambleside  :  but  that  it  had  died  away  gradually 
and  completely  (even  after  the  publication  of  the  Atkinson 
Letters)  from  their  finding  that,  while  I  thought  it  right  to  issue 
through  the  press  whatever  I  thought,  I  never  meddled  with  any 
body's  opinions  in  private.  I  may  add,  too,  that  I  have  been 
treated  with  courtesy  and  kindness,  whenever  occasion  brought 
us  together. 

It  occurs  to  me  also  to  add  an  anecdote  which  diverted  me 
and  my  friends  at  the  time,  and  which  seems  more  odd  than 
ever,  after  the  lapse  of  a  few  years.  There  is  a  Book-club  at 
Ambleside,  the  members  of  which  are  always  complaining  to 
outsiders  of  the  dullness  of  the  books,  and  the  burdensomeness 
of  the  connexion.  I  had  had  hints  about  the  duty  of  neighbours 
to  subscribe  to  the  Book-club  ;  and  when  one  or  two  books  that 
I  wished  to  see  were  circulating,  I  told  a  member  that  I  was  not 
anxious  to  join,  at  an  expense  which  could  hardly  be  compen- 
sated,—  judging  by  what  I  heard  about  the  choice  of  books  : 
but  that,  if  I  ever  joined,  it  should  be  then.  She  mentioned  this 
to  another  member  ;  and  it  was  agreed  that  I  should  be  proposed 
and  seconded.  But  the  gentleman  she  spoke  to  —  always  a 
friendly  neighbour  to  me,  —  called  on  her  to  communicate,  with 
much  concern,  his  apprehension  that  I  might  possibly  be  black- 
balled. He  was  entirely  uncertain  ;  but  he  had  some  notion  that 
it  might  be  so.  The  lady  came,  very  nervous,  to  ask  whether  I 
would  proceed  or  not.  I  had  half  a  mind  to  try  the  experiment, 
—  it  would  have  been  such  a  rich  joke,  —  so  voluminous  a  writer, 
and  one  so  familiar  in  literary  society  in  London,  being  black- 
balled in  a  country  book-club  !  But  I  thought  it  more  consider- 
ate not  to  thrust  myself  into  any  sort  of  connexion  with  any 
body  who  might  be  afraid  of  me.  I  profited  by  an  invitation  to 
join  a  few  families  in  a  subscription  to  a  London  library,  by 
which,  for  less  money,  I  got  a  sight  of  all  the  books  I  wished  to 
see,  —  and  no  others  ;  for  my  friends  and  I  are  of  the  same  mind 
in  our  choice  of  reading. 


Aged  46.] 


LECTURES. 


7 


At  the  second  lecture,  some  of  the  parents  and  elder  brothers 
and  sisters  of  the  children  stole  in  to  listen ;  and  before  I  had 
done,  there  was  a  petition  that  I  would  deliver  the  lectures  to 
grown  people.  I  saw  at  once  what  an  opportunity  this  was, 
and  nerved  myself  to  use  it.  I  expanded  the  lectures,  and  made 
them  of  a  higher  cast ;  and  before  another  year,  the  Mechanics 
of  Ambleside  and  their  families  were  eager  for  other  subjects.  I 
have  since  lectured  every  winter  but  two ;  and  with  singular 
satisfaction.  The  winter  was  the  time  chosen,  because  the  ap- 
prentices and  shop-keepers  could  not  leave  their  business  in  time, 
when  the  days  lengthened.  No  gentry  were  admitted,  except 
two  or  three  friends  who  took  tea  with  me,  and  went  as  my  staff, 
—  in  order  to  help  me,  if  any  difficulty  arose,  and  to  let  me  know 
if  I  spoke  either  too  loud  or  too  low ;  a  matter  of  which,  from 
my  deafness,  I  could  not  judge.  It  is  rather  remarkable  that, 
being  so  deaf,  and  having  never  before  spoken  in  any  but  a  con- 
versational tone,  I  never  got  wrong  as  to  loudness.  I  placed  one 
of  my  servants  at  the  far  end  of  the  room  ;  and  relied  on  her  to 
take  out  her  handkerchief  if  she  failed  to  hear  me  ;  but  it  always 
went  well.  I  made  notes  on  half-a-sheet  of  paper,  of  dates  or 
other  numbers,  or  of  facts  which  might  slip  my  memory;  but 
I  trusted  entirely  to  my  power  at  the  time  for  my  matter  and 
words.  I  never  wrote  a  sentence  ;  and  I  never  once  stopped  for 
a  word.  —  The  reasons  why  no  gentry  were  admitted  were,  first, 
because  there  was  no  room  for  more  than  the  "  workies  : "  and 
next,  that  I  wished  to  keep  the  thing  natural  and  quiet.  If 
once  the  affair  got  into  the  newspapers,  there  would  be  an  end 
of  the  simplicity  of  the  proceeding.  Again,  I  had,  as  I  told  the 
gentry,  nothing  new  to  tell  to  persons  who  had  books  at  home, 
and  leisure  to  read  them.  —  My  object  was  to  give  rational 
amusement  to  men  whom  all  circumstances  seemed  to  conspire 
to  drive  to  the  public-house,  and  to  interest  them  in  matters 
which  might  lead  them  to  books,  or  at  least  give  them  some- 
thing to  think  about.  My  lectures  were  maliciously  misrepre- 
sented by  a  quizzer  here  and  there,  and  especially  by  a  lawyer  or 
two,  who  came  this  way  on  circuit,  and  professed  to  have  been 
present :  but  they  were  welcome  to  their  amusement,  as  long  as 
it  was  an  indisputable  matter  that  they  had  not  been  present. 


8 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1843. 


The  second  course  was  on  Sanitary  matters ;  and  it  was  an 
effectual  preparation  for  my  scheme  of  instituting  a  Building 
Society.  In  a  place  like  Ambleside,  where  wages  are  high,  the 
screw  is  applied  to  the  working  men  in  regard  to  their  dwellings. 
The  great  land-owners,  who  can  always  find  room  to  build  man- 
sions, have  never  a  corner  for  a  cottage :  and  not  only  are  rents 
excessively  high,  but  it  is  a  serious  matter  for  a  working  man  to 
offend  his  landlord,  by  going  to  chapel  instead  of  church,  for 
instance,  when  he  may  be  met  by  the  threat  —  "  If  you  enter 
that  chapel  again,  I  will  turn  your  family  out  of  your  cottage ; 
and  you  know  you  can't  get  another."  When  the  people  are 
compelled  to  sleep,  ten,  twelve,  or  fourteen  in  two  rooms,  there 
can  be  little  hope  for  their  morals  or  manners ;  and  one  of  the 
causes  of  the  excessive  intemperance  of  the  population  is  well 
known  to  be  the  discomfort  of  the  crowded  dwellings.  When 
the  young  men  come  home  to  bad  smells  and  no  room  to  turn, 
they  go  off  to  the  public-house.  The  kind-hearted  among  the 
gentry  tend  the  sick,  and  pray  with  the  disheartened,  and 
reprove  the  sinner  j  but  I  have  found  it  singularly  difficult  to 
persuade  them  that,  however  good  may  be  wine  and  broth,  and 
prayers  and  admonition,  it  is  better  to  cut  off  the  sources  of  dis- 
ease, sin  and  misery  by  a  purer  method  of  living.  My  recourse 
was  to  the  "  workies "  themselves,  in  that  set  of  lectures ;  in 
which  I  endeavoured  to  show  them  that  all  the  means  of  healthy 
and  virtuous  living  were  around  them,  —  in  a  wide  space  of 
country,  slopes  for  drainage,  floods  of  gushing  water,  and  the 
wholesomest  air  imaginable.  I  showed  them  how  they  were 
paying  away  in  rent,  money  enough  to  provide  every  head  of 
a  household  with  a  cottage  of  his  own  in  a  few  years ;  and  I 
explained  to  them  the  principle  of  such  a  Building  Society  as  we 
might  have,  —  free  from  the  dangers  which  beset  such  societies 
in  large  towns,  where  the  members  are  unknown  to  each  other, 
and  sharp  lawyers  may  get  in  to  occasion  trouble.  They  saw  at 
once  that  if  twenty  men  lay  by  together,  instead  of  separately,  a 
shilling  a  week  each,  they  need  not  wait  twenty  weeks  for  any 
one  to  have  the  use  of  a  pound ;  but  the  twentieth  man  may 
have  his  pound,  just  the  same,  while  the  other  nineteen  will 
have  had  earlier  use  of  theirs,  and  be  paying  interest  for  it. 


Aged  46.] 


LECTURES. 


9 


Hence  arose  our  Building  Society ;  the  meeting  to  form  it  being 
held  in  my  kitchen.  A  generous  friend  of  mine  advanced  the 
money  to  buy  a  field,  which  I  got  surveyed,  parcelled  out, 
drained,  fenced,  and  prepared  for  use.  The  lots  were  immedi- 
ately purchased,  and  paid  for  without  default.  Impediments  and 
difficulties  arose,  as  might  be  expected.  Jealousy  and  ridicule 
were  at  work  against  the  scheme.  Some  who  might  have  helped 
it  were  selfish,  and  others  timid.  Death  (among  a  population 
where  almost  every  man  drinks)  and  emigration,  and  other  causes 
impeded  an  increase  of  members  ;  and  the  property  was  less  held 
by  working  men,  and  more  by  opulent  persons,  than  I  had 
desired  and  intended ;  but  the  result  is,  on  the  whole,  satisfac- 
tory, inasmuch  as  thirteen  cottages  have  arisen  already;  and 
more  are  in  prospect :  and  this  number  is  no  small  relief  in  a 
little  country  town  like  Ambleside.  The  eye  of  visitors  is  now 
caught  by  an  upland  hamlet,  just  above  the  parsonage,  where 
there  are  two  good  houses,  and  some  ranges  of  cottages  which 
will  stand,  as  the  builders  say,  "  a  thousand  years,"  —  so  sub- 
stantial is  the  mode  of  building  the  gray  stone  dwellings  of  the 
district.  I  scarcely  need  add  that  I  made  no  reference,  in  the 
lectures  or  otherwise,  to  the  form  of  tyranny  exercised  by 
the  owners  of  land  and  houses.  My  business  was  to  preclude 
the  tyranny,  by  showing  the  people  that  their  own  interests 
were  in  their  own  hands,  and  by  no  means  to  excite  angry 
feelings  about  grievances  which  I  hoped  to  mitigate,  or  even 
extinguish. 

The  generous  friend  who  enabled  me  to  buy  the  land  declined 
to  receive  the  money  back.  She  is  the  proprietress  of  two  of  the 
cottages  and  their  gardens  ;  and  she  placed  the  rest  of  the  money 
at  my  disposal,  for  the  benefit  of  the  place,  as  long  as  it  was 
wanted.  Since  my  illness  began,  three  months  ago,  I  have 
transferred  the  trust  to  other  hands ;  and  there  is  reason  to  hope 
that  the  place  will  be  provided  with  a  good  Mechanics'  Institute, 
and  Baths,  —  which  are  now  the  next  great  want. 

In  the  two  last  lectures  of  the  Sanitary  course,  there  was  an 
opportunity  for  dealing  with  the  great  curse  of  the  place,  —  its 
intemperance.  Those  two  lectures  were  on  the  Stomach  and 
Brain.    I  drew  the  outline  of  the  stomach  on  a  large  expanse  of 


10 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1848. 


paper,  which  was  fixed  in  front  of  the  desk ;  and  I  sent  round 
the  coloured  prints,  used  in  Temperance  Societies,  of  the  appear- 
ances of  progressive  disease  in  the  drunkard's  stomach,  —  from 
the  first  faint  blush  of  inflammation  to  the  schirrous  condition.  It 
was  a  subject  which  had  long  and  deeply  engaged  my  attention  ; 
and  my  audience,  so  closely  packed  as  that  the  movement  of  one 
person  swayed  the  whole,  were  as  much  interested  as  myself;  so 
that  my  lecture  spread  out  to  an  hour  and  twenty  minutes,  with- 
out my  being  at  all  aware  of  the  time.  The  only  stir,  except 
when  the  prints  were  handed  round,  was  made  by  a  young  man 
who  staggered  out,  and  fainted  at  the  door.  He  was  a  recent 
comer  to  the  place,  and  had  lately  begun  to  tipple,  like  his 
neighbours.  After  that  night,  he  joined  my  Building  Society, 
that  he  might  have  no  money  for  the  public-house.  Many  told 
me  afterwards  that  they  were  sick  with  pain  of  mind  during  that 
lecture ;  and  I  found,  on  inquiry,  that  there  was  probably  hardly 
a  listener  there,  except  the  children,  who  had  not  family  reasons 
for  strong  emotion  during  an  exposure  of  the  results  of  intem- 
perate habits. 

The  longest  course  I  have  given  was  one  of  twenty  lectures  on 
the  History  of  England,  from  the  earliest  days  of  tradition  to 
the  beginning  of  the  present  century.  Another  was  on  the 
History  of  America,  from  its  discovery  by  Columbus  to  the 
death  of  Washington.  This  was  to  have  been  followed  by  a 
course  which  I  shall  not  live  to  offer ;  —  the  modern  History  of 
the  United  States,  —  with  a  special  view  to  recommend  the 
Anti-slavery  cause.  Last  November  and  December,  I  addressed 
my  neighbours  for  the  last  time,  —  On  Eussia  and  the  AVar. 
At  the  close,  I  told  them  that  if  I  were  alive  and  well  next 
winter,  we  would  carry  on  the  subject  to  the  close  of  the  cam- 
paign of  1855.  I  should  be  happy  to  know  that  some  one 
would  take  up  my  work,  and  not  allow  my  neighbours  to  suffer 
by  my  departure.  I  found  myself  fatigued  and  faint  during 
the  two  last  lectures ;  and  I  spoke  seriously  when  making  my 
conditional  promise  for  another  season ;  but  I  had  no  clear 
notion  how  ill  I  was,  even  then,  and  that  I  should  never  meet 
that  array  of  honest,  earnest  faces  again. 


Aged  46.] 


POLITICAL  INVITATIONS. 


11 


There  was  some  fear  that  the  strong  political  interests  of  the 
spring  of  1848  would  interfere  with  the  literary  prosperity  of 
the  season.  Whether  they  did  or  not,  I  do  not  know.  For  my 
own  part  I  cared  more  for  newspapers  than  books  in  that  excit- 
ing year;  but  my  own  book  had  an  excellent  sale.  The  re- 
membrance of  the  newspaper  reading  of  those  revolutionary 
times  recalls  a  group  of  circumstances  in  my  own  experience 
which  may  be  worth  recording,  —  to  show  how  important  a 
work  it  is  to  give  an  account  of  the  constitution  and  politics  of 
a  foreign  nation.  —  Ten  years  before  this,  —  (I  think  it  was  the 
year  before  my  long  illness  began)  a  gentleman  was  brought 
to  a  soiree  at  my  mother's  house,  and  introduced  to  me  by  a 
friend,  who  intimated  that  the  stranger  had  a  message  to  deliver 
to  me.  The  gentleman  had  been  for  some  time  resident  in 
Sweden,  where  he  was  intimately  acquainted  with  the  late 
Prime  Minister.  The  Crown  Prince  Oscar  of  that  day  (the  pres- 
ent King)  was  earnestly  desirous  of  introducing  constitutional 
reforms  on  a  large  scale,  many  of  which,  as  we  all  know,  he  has 
since  achieved.  The  retired  Prime  Minister  desired  my  guest 
of  that  evening  to  procure  an  introduction  to  me,  and  to  be  the 
bearer  of  an  invitation  to  me  to  spend  a  Swedish  summer  at 
the  Minister's  country-house,  where  his  lady  and  family  would 
make  me  welcome.  His  object  was,  he  said,  to  discuss  some 
political  topics  of  deep  interest  to  Sweden;  and  he  conceived 
that  my  books  on  America  showed  me  to  be  the  person  whom 
he  wanted ;  —  to  be  capable,  in  fact,  of  understanding  the  work- 
ing of  the  constitutions  of  foreign  nations.  He  wanted  to  talk 
over  the  condition  and  prospects  of  Sweden  in  the  light  of  the 
experiments  of  other  countries.  I  could  not  think  of  going; 
and  I  forgot  the  invitation  till  it  was  recalled  to  memory  by  an 
incident  which  happened  in  April  1839.  I  was  then  going  to 
Switzerland  with  three  friends,  and  our  passage  to  Eotterdam 
was  taken,  when  a  friend  of  my  family,  the  English  representa- 
tive of  an  Irish  county,  called  on  me  with  an  earnest  request 
that  I  would  suspend  my  scheme,  for  reasons  which  he  would 
assign  in  a  few  days.  I  explained  that  I  really  could  not  do  so, 
as  I  was  pledged  to  accompany  a  sick  cousin.    In  a  day  or  two, 


12 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1843. 


my  friend  called,  to  insist  on  my  dining  at  his  house  the  next 
"Wednesday,  to  meet  Mr.  O'Connell  on  business  of  importance. 
Mr.  O'Connell  could  not  be  in  town  earlier,  because  the  freedom 
of  some  place  (I  forget  what)  was  to  be  presented  to  him  on 
Tuesday ;  and  travelling  all  night  would  bring  him  to  London 
only  on  Wednesday  afternoon.  I  could  not  meet  him,  as  we 
were  to  go  on  board  the  packet  on  Wednesday  evening.  —  My 
friend,  hoping  still  to  dissuade  me,  told  me  what  Mr.  O'Connell 
wanted.  He  had  private  reasons  for  believing  that  "  Peel  and 
the  Tories "  would  soon  come  into  power  :  (in  fact,  the  Bed- 
chamber Question  occurred  within  a  month  after)  and  he  feared 
more  than  ever  for  the  liberties  of  Ireland,  and  felt  that  not  a 
day  must  be  lost  in  providing  every  assistance  to  the  cause  that 
could  be  obtained.  He  had  long  been  convinced  that  one  of  the 
chief  misfortunes  of  Ireland  was  that  her  cause  was  pleaded  in 
print  by  authors  who  represented  only  the  violent,  and  vulgar 
and  factious  elements  of  Irish  discontent;  by  Irish  people,  in 
fact,  who  could  not  speak  in  a  way  which  the  English  were 
willing  to  listen  to.  He  considered  that  my  American  books 
established  my  capacity  to  understand  and  represent  the  political 
and  social  condition  of  another  country ;  and  what  he  had  to 
request  was  that  I  would  study  Irish  affairs  on  the  spot,  and 
report  of  them.  He  offered  introductions  to  the  best-informed 
Catholic  families  in  any  or  every  part  of  Ireland,  and  besought 
me  to  devote  to  the  object  all  the  time  I  thought  needful,  — 
either  employing  twelve  months  or  so  in  going  over  the  whole 
of  Ireland,  or  a  shorter  time  in  a  deeper  study  of  any  particular 
part,  —  publishing  the  results  of  my  observations  without  inter- 
ference from  any  body,  or  the  expression  of  any  desire  from 
any  quarter  that  my  opinions  should  be  of  one  colour  rather 
than  another. 

It  was  impossible  for  me  to  say  any  thing  to  this  scheme  at 
the  time  :  but  my  family  and  friends  were  deeply  impressed  by 
it.  It  was  frequently  discussed  by  my  comrades  and  myself 
during  our  continental  journey;  and  one  of  them, — the  same 
generous  friend  to  whom  I  have  had  occasion  to  refer  in  con- 
nexion with  my  Ambleside  schemes,  —  offered  to  accompany 


Aged  46.] 


POLITICAL  INVITATIONS. 


13 


me,  with  a  servant,  to  help  and  countenance  me,  and  hear  for 
me,  and  further  the  object  in  every  possible  way  :  and  she  was 
not  the  only  one  who  so  volunteered.  It  stood  before  my  mind 
as  the  next  great  work  to  be  undertaken  :  but,  in  another  month, 
not  only  were  "  Peel  and  the  Tories  "  sent  to  the  right-about  for 
the  time,  but  I  was  prostrate  in  the  illness  which  was  to  lay  me 
aside  for  nearly  six  years.  On  our  return  from  Italy,  we  fell  in 
with  the  family  of  Lord  Plunket,  to  whom,  in  the  course 
of  conversation  about  Ireland,  we  related  the  incident.  Miss 
Plunket  seemed  as  much  struck  with  the  rationality  of  the 
scheme  as  we  were ;  and,  after  some  consultation  apart,  Miss 
Plunket  came  to  me  with  an  express  offer  of  introductions  from 
Lord  Plunket  to  intelligent  Protestants,  in  any  or  every  part  of 
Ireland  where  this  business  might  carry  me.  My  illness,  how- 
ever, broke  up  the  scheme. 

This  incident,  again,  was  recalled  to  my  memory  by  what 
happened  the  next  time  I  was  abroad.  It  occurred  in  the  spring 
of  1847.  Our  desert  party  agreed,  at  Jerusalem,  to  make  an 
excursion  of  three  days  to  the  Jordan  and  the  Dead  Sea.  On 
the  eve  of  the  trip,  three  European  gentlemen  sent  a  petition 

to  Lady  Harriet  K  ,  that  they  might  be  allowed  to  ride 

with  our  party,  on  account  of  the  dangerous  state  of  the  road  to 
Jericho.  They  joined  our  troop  in  the  Valley  of  Jehoshaphat, 
and  rode  among  us  all  day.  It  did  not  occur  to  me  to  ask  who 
they  were.  In  the  course  of  the  next  morning,  when  the  ladies 
of  the  party  were  going  through  the  wood  on  the  bank  of  the 
Jordan,  to  bathe  northwards,  while  the  gentlemen  went  south- 
wards, we  met  one  of  these  strangers ;  and  I  told  him  where 
he  might  find  his  companions.  I  never  doubted  his  being 
English,  —  he  looked  so  like  a  country  squire,  with  his  close- 
cropped,  rather  light  hair,  and  sunburned  complexion.  He 
appeared  to  be  somewhere  about  five-and-thirty.  On  leaving  the 
Jordan,  we  had  to  traverse  an  open  tract,  in  excessive  heat,  to 
the  margin  of  the  Dead  Sea.  The  hard  sand  looked  trust- 
worthy ;  and  I  put  my  horse  to  a  gallop,  for  the  sake  of  the 
wind  thus  obtained.  I  soon  heard  other  horses  coming  up  j  and 
this  gentleman,  with  two  others,  appeared  :  and  he  rode  close  by 


14 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1848. 


my  side  till  an  accident  to  one  of  the  party  obliged  him  to  dis- 
mount and  give  help.  I  was  among  those  who  rode  on  when 
we  found  that  no  harm  was  done ;  and  presently  after  I  was 

asked  by  Lady  Harriet  K          whether  I  would  allow  Count 

Porro  to  be  introduced  to  me,  —  he  being  desirous  of  some  con- 
versation with  me.  For  Silvio  Pellico's  sake,  as  well  as  Count 
Porro's  father's  and  his  own,  I  was  happy  to  make  his  acquaint- 
ance ;  and  I  supposed  we  should  meet  at  our  halting  place,  — 
at  Santa  Saba.  But  Count  Porro  and  his  companions  were  to 
strike  off  northwards  by  the  Damascus  road ;  and  they  were 
gone  before  I  was  aware.  —  A  few  weeks  afterwards,  when  we 
four,  of  the  Xile  party,  rode  up  to  our  hotel  at  Damascus,  Count 
Porro  was  awaiting  us ;  and  he  helped  us  ladies  down  from  our 
horses.  He  had  remained  some  days,  in  order  to  see  me.  He 
desired  some  conversation  with  me  at  a  convenient  time ;  and 
that  convenient  time  proved  to  be  the  next  morning,  when  he 
joined  me  on  the  divan,  in  the  alcove  in  the  quadrangle.  He 
was  so  agitated  that  he  could  scarcely  speak.  His  English, 
however,  was  excellent.  He  told  me  that  in  what  he  was  going 
to  say  he  was  the  mouth-piece  of  many  of  his  countrymen,  as 
well  as  of  his  own  wishes ;  and  especially  of  several  fellow- 
citizens  of  Milan.  What  he  said  was  as  nearly  as  could  be  a 
repetition  of  O'Connell's  plea  and  request.  He  said  it  was  the 
misfortune  of  his  country  to  be  represented  abroad  by  injured 
and  exasperated  patriots,  who  demanded  more  than  the  bulk  of 
the  people  desired,  and  gave  forth  views  which  the  citizens  in 
general  disclaimed.  It  was  believed  by  the  leading  men  in 
Lombardy  that  the  changes  which  were  really  most  essential 
might  be  obtained  from  Austria,  if  sought  in  a  temperate  and 
rational  manner;  and  that  the  best  way  of  obtaining  these 
changes  would  be  by  means  of  a  report  on  the  condition  of 
affairs  by  some  traveller  of  reputation,  who  had  shown,  as  they 
considered  that  I  had  done  by  my  work  on  the  United  States, 
a  capacity  to  understand  and  report  of  a  foreign  state  of  society. 
He  was  therefore  authorised  to  request  that  I  would  reside  in 
Milan  for  six  months  or  a  year,  and  to  say  that  every  facility 
should  be  afforded  for  my  obtaining  information,  and  all  possi- 


Aged  46.] 


DEATH  OF  MY  MOTHER. 


15 


ble  respect  shown  to  my  liberty  of  judgment  and  representation. 
All  they  wanted  was  that  I  should  study  their  condition,  and 
report  it  fully,  on  my  return  to  England.  He  told  me  (in  con- 
sideration of  my  deafness,  which  disabled  me  for  conversation, 
though  not,  of  course,  for  reading,  in  a  foreign  language)  that 
every  educated  Milanese  speaks  English ;  and  that  every  thing 
should  be  done  to  render  my  abode  as  pleasant  as  possible ;  and 
so  forth.  —  I  positively  declined,  being,  in  truth,  heartily  home- 
sick, —  longing  for  my  green,  quiet  valley,  and  the  repose  of 
my  own  abode.  My  duties  there  seemed  more  congenial  and 
natural  than  investigating  the  politics  of  Lombardy ;  and  I  did 
not  therefore  think  it  selfish  to  refuse.  With  increasing  agita- 
tion, Count  Porro  declared  that  he  would  take  no  refusal.  He 
asked  how  much  time  these  home  duties  would  occupy;  said, 
in  spite  of  all  my  discouragements,  that  he  should  go  to  England 
the  next  spring ;  and  declared,  when  taking  his  leave  next  day, 
that,  on  landing  at  Southampton,  his  first  step  would  be  to  put 
himself  into  the  train  for  Ambleside,  whence  he  would  not 
depart  without  my  promise  to  go  to  Milan. 

"When  that  "  next  spring  "  arrived,  —  the  anniversary  of  those 
conversations  of  ours  at  Damascus,  —  Count  Porro  was  a  mem- 
ber of  the  Provisional  Government  at  Milan,  telling  Austria  by 
his  acts  and  decrees  what  it  was  that  Lombardy  required.  The 
mention,  in  my  narrative,  of  the  revolutions  of  1848  brought  up 
these  three  stories  at  once  to  my  recollection  ;  and  their  strong 
resemblance  to  each  other  seems  to  show,  that  there  must  be 
something  in  them  which  makes  them  worth  the  telling. 

I  began  my  great  task  of  the  History  under  much  anxiety  of 
mind.  My  mother  was  known  to  be  dying  from  the  spring  on- 
wards ;  and  she  died  in  August.  She  was  removed,  while  yet 
able,  to  the  house  of  her  eldest  surviving  son,  at  Edgbaston  ;  and 
there,  amidst'  the  best  possible  tendance,  she  declined  and  died. 
Her  life  hung  upon  perfect  quiet ;  and  therefore,  as  all  her 
children  had  seen  her  not  long  before,  it  was  considered  best  to 
leave  her  in  the  good  hands  of  one  of  the  families.  I  saw  her 
at  Liverpool,  on  my  return  home  from  the  East.    By  evil  offices, 


16 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1848. 


working  on  her  prejudice  against  mesmerism,  she  had  been  pre- 
vented from  meeting  me  after  my  recovery  :  but  such  a  cause 
of  separation  was  too  absurd  to  be  perpetual.  I  knew  that  the 
sound  of  my  voice,  and  my  mere  presence  for  five  minutes,  would 
put  to  flight  all  objections  to  my  mode  of  recovery  :  and  we  did 
meet  and  part  in  comfort  and  satisfaction.  I  did  hope  to  have 
had  the  pleasure  of  a  visit  from  her  that  summer,  though  I  pro- 
posed it  with  much  doubt.  She  was  now  blind  ;  and  she  could 
not  but  be  perpetually  hearing  of  the  charms  of  the  scenery. 
She  could  walk  only  on  smooth  and  level  ground  ;  and  walking 
was  essential  to  her  health  :  and  it  is  not  easy  to  find  smooth 
level  ground  in  our  valley.  Yet,  as  one  main  inducement  to  my 
building  and  settling  here  was  that  there  might  be  a  paradise  for 
any  tired  or  delicate  members  of  my  family  to  rest  in,  I  did  wish 
that  my  mother  should  have  tried  it,  this  first  practicable  sum- 
mer :  but  she  was  too  ill  to  do  more  than  go  to  Edgbaston,  and 
find  her  grave  there.  She  was  in  her  seventy-sixth  year.  —  I 
have  never  felt  otherwise  than  soundly  and  substantially  happy, 
during  this  last  term  of  my  life  :  but  certainly  those  months  of 
July  and  August  1848  were  the  most  anxious  of  the  whole  ten 
years  since  I  left  Tynemouth.  The  same  faithful  old  friend  to 
whom  I  have  often  referred,  must  come  into  my  history  again 
here.  She  came  to  me  when  I  was  becoming  most  anxious,  and  re- 
mained above  two  months,  —  saving  me  from  being  overwhelmed 
with  visits  from  strangers,  and  taking  me  quiet  drives,  when  my 
work  was  done  ;  —  a  recreation  which  I  have  always  found  the 
most  refreshing  of  all.  Some  of  my  own  family  came  before  the 
event,  and  some  after  ;  and  a  few  old  and  dear  friends  looked  in 
upon  me,  in  the  course  of  the  season. 

When  I  had  laid  out  my  plan  for  the  History,  and  begun  upon 
the  first  portion,  I  sank  into  a  state  of  dismay.  I  should  hardly 
say  "  sank  ; "  for  I  never  thought  of  giving  up  or  stopping  ;  but 
I  doubt  whether,  at  any  point  of  my  career,  I  ever  felt  so  op- 
pressed by  what  I  had  undertaken  as  during  the  first  two  or 
three  weeks  after  I  had  begun  the  History.  The  idea  of  publish- 
ing a  number  of  my  Political  Economy  series  every  month  was 
fearful  at  first :  but  that  was  only  the  quantity  of  work.  The 


Aged  46.] 


"HISTORY  OF  THE  PEACE." 


17 


Discontented  Pendulum  comforted  me  then,  —  not  only  because 
every  month's  work  would  have  its  own  month  to  be  done  in, 
but  because  there  was  a  clear,  separate  topic  for  each  number, 
which  would  enable  the  work  to  take  care  of  itself,  in  regard 
to  subject  as  well  as  time.  In  America,  I  was  overwhelmed 
with  the  mass  of  material  to  be  dealt  with  ;  but  then,  I  was  not 
engaged  to  write  a  book;  and  by  the  time  I  had  made  up 
my  mind  to  do  so,  the  mass  had  become  classified.  Now,  the 
quantity  and  variety  of  details  fairly  overpowered  my  spirits,  in 
that  hot  month  of  August.  I  feel  my  weakness,  —  more  in  body 
than  (consciously)  in  mind  —  in  having  to  deal  with  many  de- 
tails. The  most  fatiguing  work  I  ever  have  to  do  is  arranging 
my  library ;  and  even  packing  my  trunks  for  a  journey,  or  dis- 
tributing the  contents  when  I  come  home,  fatigues  me  more  than 
it  seems  to  do  other  people.  In  this  case,  I  fear  I  afflicted  my 
friend  by  my  discouragement,  —  the  like  of  which  she  had  never 
seen  in  me.  At  times,  she  comforted  me  with  assurances  that 
the  chaos  would  become  orderly ;  but,  on  the  whole,  she  desired 
that  I  should  throw  up  the  work,  —  a  thing  which  I  could  not 
even  meditate  for  a  moment,  under  the  circumstances  in  which 
Mr.  Knight  found  himself.  No  doubt,  the  nervous  watching  of 
the  post  at  that  time  had  much  to  do  with  my  anxiety.  My 
habit  was  to  rise  at  six,  and  to  take  a  walk,  —  returning  to  my 
solitary  breakfast  at  half-past  seven.  For  several  years,  while  I 
was  strong  enough,  I  found  this  an  excellent  preparation  for 
work.  My  household  orders  were  given  for  the  day,  and  all 
affairs  settled,  out  of  doors  and  in,  by  a  quarter  or  half-past 
eight,  when  I  went  to  work,  which  I  continued  without  inter- 
ruption, except  from  the  post,  till  three  o'clock,  or  later,  when 
alone.  While  my  friend  was  with  me,  we  dined  at  two ;  and 
that  was,  of  course,  the  limit  of  my  day's  work.  The  post  came 
in  at  half-past  ten  j  and  my  object  was  to  keep  close  to  my  work 
till  the  letters  appeared.  When  my  mother  became  so  ill  that 
this  effort  was  beyond  my  power,  I  sent  to  meet  the  coach,  and 
got  my  letters  earlier ;  but  the  wear  and  tear  of  nerve  was 
very  great.  One  strong  evidence  of  the  reality  of  my  recovery 
was  that  my  health  stood  the  struggle  very  well.    In  a  few 


IS 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1849. 


weeks,  I  was  in  full  career,  and  had  got  my  work  well  in  hand. 
My  first  clear  relief  came  when  I  had  written  a  certain  passage 
about  Canning's  eloquence,  and  found  in  the  course  of  it  that  I 
really  was  interested  in  my  business.  Mr.  Knight,  happily,  was 
satisfied  j  and  I  was  indebted  to  him  for  every  kind  of  encourage- 
ment. By  the  1st  of  February,  the  last  M.S.  of  the  first  volume 
was  in  the  hands  of  the  printer.  I  mention  this  because  a  con- 
temporary review  spoke  of  "  two  years  "  as  the  time  it  had  occu- 
pied me,  —  calling  it  very  rapid  work ;  whereas,  from  the  first 
opening  of  the  books  to  study  for  the  History  to  the  depositing 
of  the  M.S.  of  the  first  volume  at  press  was  exactly  six  months. 
The  second  volume  took  six  months  to  do,  with  an  interval  of 
some  weeks  of  holiday,  and  other  work.  I  delivered  the  last 
sheets  into  Mr.  Knight's  hands  in  November  1849. 

During  the  year  1849,  the  dismal  cholera  year,  —  I  found  that 
I  had  been  overworking;  and  in  the  autumn  I  accepted  Mrs. 
Knight's  invitation  to  join  their  family  at  St.  Leonards  for  a 
month,  and  then  to  stay  with  them  for  the  remaining  weeks 
which  were  necessary  to  finish  the  History.  The  Sunday 
when  I  put  the  last  batch  of  M.S.  into  Mr.  Knight's  hands  was 
a  memorable  day  to  me.  I  had  grown  nervous  towards  the  end ; 
and  especially  doubtful,  without  any  assignable  reason,  whether 
Mr.  Knight  would  like  the  concluding  portion.  To  put  it  out 
of  my  mind,  I  went  a  long  walk  after  breakfast  with  Mr.  Atkin- 
son, to  Primrose  Hill  (where  I  had  never  been  before)  and  Re- 
gent's Park.  My  heart  fluttered  all  the  way ;  and  when  I  came 
home,  to  meet  a  farewell  family  party  at  lunch,  I  could  not  eat. 
Mr.  Knight  looked  at  me,  with  an  expression  of  countenance 
which  I  could  not  interpret ;  and  when  he  beckoned  me  into  the 
drawing-room,  I  was  ready  to  drop.  I  might  have  spared  myself 
the  alarm.  His  acknowledgments  were  such  as  sent  me  to  my 
room  perfectly  happy ;  and  I  returned  to  my  Knoll  with  a  light 
heart.  I  was  soon  followed  by  an  invitation  from  Mr.  Knight 
to  write  the  introductory  period,  from  the  opening  of  the  century 
to  the  Peace,  to  be  followed  by  the  four  years  to  1850,  if  we 
should  live  to  see  the  close  of  that  year,  so  as  to  make  a  com- 


Aged  47.] 


INTRODUCTORY  HISTORY. 


19 


plete  "  History  of  the  Hajf  Century."  The  work  would  be  com- 
paratively light,  from  the  quantity  of  material  supplied  by  the 
Memoirs  of  the  statesmen  now  long  dead.  I  was  somewhat  dis- 
appointed in  regard  to  the  pleasure  of  it  from  Mr.  Knight's  fre- 
quent changes  of  mind  as  to  the  form  in  which  it  was  to  be  done. 
I  imagine  he  had  become  somewhat  tired  of  the  scheme ;  for, 
not  only  was  I  kept  waiting  weeks,  and  once  three  months,  for 
a  promised  letter  which  should  guide  me  as  to  space  and  other 
particulars  ;  but  he  three  times  changed  his  mind  as  to  the  form 
in  which  he  should  present  the  whole.  He  approved,  as  cor- 
dially as  ever,  what  I  wrote ;  but  finally  decided  to  print  the 
portion  from  1800  to  the  Peace  as  an  Introductory  volume, 
relinquishing  the  project  of  completing  the  Half  Century  by  a 
History  of  the  last  four  years.  I  state  these  facts  because  it  was 
afterwards  believed  by  many  people,  who  quoted  his  authority, 
that  he  broke  off  the  scheme,  to  his  own  injury,  from  terror  at 
the  publication  of  the  Atkinson  Letters,  —  as  if  he  had  been 
taken  by  surprise  by  that  publication.  I  can  only  say  that  it 
was  as  far  as  possible  from  being  my  intention  to  conceal  our 
plan  of  publishing  those  Letters.  I  not  only  told  him  of  it 
while  at  his  house  in  the  autumn  of  1849,  and  received  certain 
sarcasms  from  him  on  our  "  infidel  "  philosophy ;  but  I  read  to 
Mrs.  Knight  two  of  the  boldest  of  Mr.  Atkinson's  letters  :  and 
it  was  after  this  that  Mr.  Knight  invited  me  to  write  the  Intro- 
ductory volume.  Moreover,  it  was  after  some  of  his  changes  of 
plan  that  he  staid  at  my  house  (May  1850)  with  Mr.  Atkinson 
and  Mr.  Jerrold,  and  considerately  took  Mr.  Jerrold  for  a  walk, 
on  the  last  day  of  their  visit,  to  leave  Mr.  Atkinson  and  me  at 
liberty  to  read  our  manuscript.  He  was  certainly  panic-stricken 
when  the  volume  appeared,  in  January,  1851 ;  but,  if  he  was 
surprised,  it  was  through  no  fault  of  mine,  as  the  dates  show. 
In  July,  1851,  half-a-year  after  the  "Letters"  appeared,  when 
he  paid  me  for  my  work  at  his  own  house,  he  expressed  himself 
more  than  satisfied  with  the  Introductory  History,  and  told  me 
that,  though  the  Exhibition  had  interfered  with  the  publishing 
season,  he  had  sold  two  thirds  of  the  edition,  and  had  no  doubt 
of  its  entire  success  in  the  next.    Before  the  next  season  opened, 


20 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1849. 


however,  he  sold  off  the  whole  work.  With  his  reasons  for  doing 
so  I  have  no  concern,  as  the  preceding  facts  show.  In -regard  to 
him,  I  need  only  say,  —  which  I  do  with  great  pleasure,  —  that 
he  has  continued  to  show  me  kindness  and  affection,  worthy  of 
our  long  friendship.  In  regard  to  the  History,  —  it  has  passed 
into  the  hands  of  Messrs.  Chambers  of  Edinburgh,  who  invited 
me,  last  summer,  to  bring  the  History  of  the  Peace  down  to  the 
"War.  I  agreed  to  do  so ;  and  the  scheme  was  only  broken  off 
by  my  present  illness,  which,  of  course,  renders  the  execution  of 
it  impossible. 


SECTION  V. 


On  the  last  evening  of  my  stay  at  Mr.  Knight's  a  parcel 
arrived  for  me,  enclosing  a  book,  and  a  note  which  was  examined 
as  few  notes  ever  are.  The  book  was  "  Shirley ; "  and  the  note 
was  from  "  Currer  Bell."    Here  it  is. 

"  Currer  Bell  offers  a  copy  of  "  Shirley  "  to  Miss  Martineau's  accept- 
ance, in  acknowledgment  of  the  pleasure  and  profit  she-  [sic]  he  has 
derived  from  her  works.  When  C.  B.  first  read  "  Deerbrook "  he 
tasted  a  new  and  keen  pleasure,  and  experienced  a  genuine  benefit. 
In  his  mind,  "  Deerbrook  "  ranks  with  the  writings  that  have  really 
done  him  good,  added  to  his  stock  of  ideas,  and  rectified  his  views  of 
life." 

"November  7th,  1849." 

We  examined  this  note  to  make  out  whether  it  was  written 
by  a  man  or  a  woman.  The  hand  was  a  cramped  and  nervous 
one,  which  might  belong  to  any  body  who  had  written  too  much, 
or  was  in  bad  health,  or  who  had  been  badly  taught.  The 
erased  "  she  "  seemed  at  first  to  settle  the  matter ;  but  somebody 
suggested  that  the  "  she  "  might  refer  to  me  under  a  form  of 
sentence  which  might  easily  have  been  changed  in  the  penning. 
I  had  made  up  my  mind,  as  I  had  repeatedly  said,  that  a  certain 
passage  in  "  Jane  Eyre,"  about  sewing  on  brass  rings,  could  have 
been  written  only  by  a  woman  or  an  upholsterer.  I  now  ad- 
dressed my  reply  externally  to  "  Currer  Bell,  Esq.,"  and  began  it 
"  Madam." — I  had  more  reason  for  interest  than  even  the  deeply- 
interested  public  in  knowing  who  wrote  "  Jane  Eyre ; "  for,  when 
it  appeared,  I  was  taxed  with  the  authorship  by  more  than  one 
personal  friend,  and  charged  by  others,  and  even  by  relatives, 
with  knowing  the  author,  and  having  supplied  some  of  the  facts 
of  the  first  volume  from  my  own  childhood.  When  I  read  it,  I 
was  convinced  that  it  was  by  some  friend  of  my  own,  who  had 


22 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1849. 


portions  of  my  childish  experience  in  his  or  her  mind.  "  Currer 
Bell "  told  me,  long  after,  that  she  had  read  with  astonishment 
those  parts  of  "  Household  Education "  which  relate  my  own 
experience.  It  was  like  meeting  her  own  fetch,  —  so  precisely 
were  the  fears  and  miseries  there  described  the  same  as  her  own, 
told  or  not  told  in  "  Jane  Eyre." 

A  month  after  my  receipt  of  "  Shirley,"  I  removed,  on  a  cer- 
tain Saturday,  from  the  house  of  a  friend  in  Hyde  Park  Street 
to  that  of  a  cousin  in  Westbourne  Street,  in  time  for  a  dinner 
party.  Meanwhile,  a  messenger  was  running  about  to  find  me, 
and  reached  my  cousin's  when  we  were  at  dessert,  bringing  the 
following  note. 

December  8th,  1849. 

"  My  dear  Madam,  —  I  happen  to  be  staying  in  London  for  a  few 
days  ;  and  having  just  heard  that  you  are  likewise  in  town,  I  could 
not  help  feeling  a  very  strong  wish  to  see  you.  If  you  will  permit 
me  to  call  upon  you,  have  the  goodness  to  tell  me  when  to  come. 
Should  you  prefer  calling  on  me,  my  address  is   

"  Do  not  think  this  request  springs  from  mere  curiosity.  I  hope  it 
has  its  origin  in  a  better  feeling.  It  would  grieve  me  to  lose  this 
chance  of  seeing  one  whose  works  have  so  often  made  her  the  subject 
of  my  thoughts. 

"  I  am,  my  dear  Madam, 

"  Yours  sincerely, 

"CURRER  BELL." 

My  host  and  hostess  desired  me  to  ask  the  favour  of  C.  B.'s 
company  the  next  day,  or  any  subsequent  one.  According  to 
the  old  dissenting  custom  of  early  hours  on  Sundays,  we  should 
have  tea  at  six  the  next  evening  :  —  on  any  other  day,  dinner 
at  a  somewhat  later  hour.  The  servant  was  sent  with  this  in- 
vitation on  Sunday  morning,  and  brought  back  the  following 
reply. 

"  My  dear  Madam,  —  I  hope  to  have  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  at 
six  o'clock  today  :  —  and  I  shall  try  now  to  be  patient  till  six  o'clock 
comes." 

"I  am,  &c,  &c." 

"  That  is  a  woman's  note,"  we  agreed.  We  were  in  a  certain 
state  of  excitement  all  day,  and  especially  towards  evening. 


Aged  47.] 


"CURRER  BELL." 


23 


The  footman  would  certainly  announce  this  mysterious  personage 
by  his  or  her  right  name  ;  and,  as  I  could  not  hear  the  announce- 
ment, I  charged  my  cousins  to  take  care  that  I  was  duly  in- 
formed of  it.  A  little  before  six,  there  was  a  thundering  rap  :  — 
the  drawing-room  door  was  thrown  open,  and  in  stalked  a  gen- 
tleman six  feet  high.  It  was  not  "  Currer,"  but  a  philanthropist, 
who  had  an  errand  about  a  model  lodging-house.  Minute  by 
minute  I,  for  one,  wished  him  away ;  and  he  did  go  before  any 
body  else  came.  Precisely  as  the  time-piece  struck  six,  a  car- 
riage stopped  at  the  door ;  and  after  a  minute  of  suspense,  the 
footman  announced  "  Miss  Brogden  ; "  whereupon,  my  cousin 
informed  me  that  it  was  Miss  Bronte ;  for  we  had  heard  the 
name  before,  among  others,  in  the  way  of  conjecture. —  I  thought 
her  the  smallest  creature  I  had  ever  seen  (except  at  a  fair)  and 
her  eyes  blazed,  as  it  seemed  to  me.  She  glanced  quickly 
round ;  and  my  trumpet  pointing  me  out,  she  held  out  her  hand 
frankly  and  pleasantly.  I  introduced  her,  of  course,  to  the  fam- 
ily ;  and  then  came  a  moment  which  I  had  not  anticipated. 
When  she  was  seated  by  me  on  the  sofa,  she  cast  up  at  me  such 
a  look,  —  so  loving,  so  appealing,  —  that,  in  connexion  with  her 
deep  mourning  dress,  and  the  knowledge  that  she  was  the  sole 
survivor  of  her  family,  I  could  with  the  utmost  difficulty  return 
her  smile,  or  keep  my  composure.  I  should  have  been  heartily 
glad  to  cry.  We  soon  got  on  very  well ;  and  she  appeared  more 
at  her  ease  that  evening  than  I  ever  saw  her  afterwards,  except 
when  we  were  alone.  My  hostess  was  so  considerate  as  to  leave 
us  together  after  tea,  in  case  of  C.  B.  desiring  to  have  private 
conversation  with  me.  She  was  glad  of  the  opportunity  to  con- 
sult me  about  certain  strictures  of  the  reviewers  which  she  did 
not  understand,  and  had  every  desire  to  profit  by.  I  did  not 
approve  the  spirit  of  those  strictures ;  but  I  thought  them  not 
entirely  groundless.  She  besought  me  then,  and  repeatedly 
afterwards,  to  tell  her,  at  whatever  cost  of  pain  to  herself,  if  I 
saw  her  afford  any  justification  of  them.  I  believed  her,  (and 
I  now  believe  her  to  have  been)  perfectly  sincere  :  but  when  the 
time  came  (on  the  publication  of  "  Villette,"  in  regard  to  which  she 
had  expressly  claimed  my  promise  a  week  before  the  book  arrived) 


24 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1350. 


she  could  not  bear  it.  There  was  never  any  quarrel,  or  even  misun- 
derstanding between  us.  She  thanked  me  for  my  sincere  fulfilment 
of  my  engagement ;  but  she  could  not,  she  said,  come  "at  pres- 
ent "  to  see  me,  as  she  had  promised  :  and  the  present  was  alas  ! 
all  that  she  had  to  dispose  of.  She  is  dead,  before  another  book 
of  hers  could  (as  I  hoped  it  would)  enable  her  to  see  what  I 
meant,  and  me  to  re-establish  a  fuller  sympathy  between  us.  — 
Between  the  appearance  of  "  Shirley  "  and  that  of  "  Villette,"  she 
came  to  me  ;  —  in  December,  1850.  Our  intercourse  then  con- 
firmed my  deep  impression  of  her  integrity,  her  noble  conscien- 
tiousness about  her  vocation,  and  her  consequent  self-reliance  in 
the  moral  conduct  of  her  life.  I  saw  at  the  same  time  tokens  of 
a  morbid  condition  of  mind,  in  one  or  two  directions ;  —  much 
less  than  might  have  been  expected,  or  than  would  have  been 
seen  in  almost  any  one  else  under  circumstances  so  unfavourable 
to  health  of  body  and  mind  as  those  in  which  she  lived ;  and 
the  one  fault  which  I  pointed  out  to  her  in  "  Villette "  was  so 
clearly  traceable  to  these  unwholesome  influences  that  I  would 
fain  have  been  spared  a  task  of  criticism  which  could  hardly  be 
of  much  use  while  the  circumstances  remained  unchanged.  But 
she  had  exacted  first  the  promise,  and  then  the  performance  in 
this  particular  instance  ;  and  I  had  no  choice.  "  I  know,"  she 
wrote  (January  21st,  1853)  "  that  you  will  give  me  your  thoughts 
upon  my  book,  —  as  frankly  as  if  you  spoke  to  some  near  rela- 
tive whose  good  you  preferred  to  her  gratification.  I  wince 
under  the  pain  of  condemnation  —  like  any  other  weak  struc- 
ture of  flesh  and  blood ;  but  I  love,  I  honour,  I  kneel  to  Truth. 
Let  her  smite  me  on  one  cheek  —  good  !  the  tears  may  spring  to 
the  eyes  ;  but  courage  !  There  is  the  other  side  —  hit  again  — 
right  sharply  !  "  This  was  the  genuine  spirit  of  the  woman.  She 
might  be  weak  for  once  ;  but  her  permanent  temper  was  one  of 
humility,  candour,  integrity  and  conscientiousness.  She  was  not 
only  unspoiled  by  her  sudden  and  prodigious  fame,  but  obviously 
unspoilable.  She  was  somewhat  amused  by  her  fame,  but  often- 
er  annoyed ;  —  at  least,  when  obliged  to  come  out  into  the  world 
to  meet  it,  instead  of  its  reaching  her  in  her  secluded  home,  in 
the  wilds  of  Yorkshire.    There  was  little  hope  that  she,  the  frail 


Aged  47.] 


A  PROJECT. 


25 


survivor  of  a  whole  family  cut  off  in  childhood  or  youth,  could 
live  to  old  age ;  but,  now  that  she  is  gone,  under  the  age  of 
forty,  the  feeling  is  that  society  has  sustained  an  unexpected,  as 
well  as  irreparable  loss. 

I  have  often  observed  that,  from  the  time  I  wrote  the  Prize 
Essays,  I  have  never  come  to  a  stand  for  work ;  —  have  never 
had  any  anxiety  as  to  whether  there  would  be  work  for  me ;  — 
have,  in  short,  only  had  to  choose  my  work.  Holiday  I  have 
never  had,  since  before  that  time,  except  in  as  far  as  my  foreign 
travels,  and  a  few  months  of  illness  could  be  called  such :  and 
it  had  now  been  a  weight  on  my  mind  for  some  years  that  I  had 
not  got  on  with  my  autobiography,  —  which  I  felt  to  be  a  real 
duty.  I  find  that  I  wrote  this  to  Mr.  Atkinson,  when  under 
uneasiness  about  whether  Murray  would  hold  to  his  engagement 
to  publish  "Eastern  Life"  (February  1848.)  "It  is  a  very 
great  and  pressing  object  with  me  to  go  on  with  my  own  Life  ; 
lest  it  should  end  before  I  have  recorded  what  I  could  trust  no 
one  to  record  of  it.  I  always  feel  this  a  weight  upon  my  mind, 
as  a  duty  yet  undone ;  and  my  doing  it  within  a  moderate  time 
depends  on  my  getting  this  book  out  now."  It  was  got  out ; 
but  then  came  the  History,  which  could  not  be  delayed,  and 
which  I  should  have  done  wrong  to  refuse.  Now  that  those 
three  great  volumes  were  nearly  done,  Mr.  Dickens  sent  me  an 
invitation  to  write  for  "  Household  Words."  That  kind  of  work 
does  not,  in  my  own  opinion,  suit  me  well ;  and  I  have  refused 
to  write  for  Magazines  by  the  score ;  but  the  wide  circulation 
of  "  Household  Words  "  made  it  a  peculiar  case ;  and  I  agreed 
to  try  my  hand,  —  while  I  was  yet  a  good  way  from  the  end 
of  my  History.  I  did  this  with  the  more  ease  because  a  scheme 
was  now  rising  to  the  light  which  would  relieve  me  of  much  of 
the  anxiety  I  felt  about  recording  the  later  experiences  of  my 
life.    The  Atkinson  Letters  were  by  this  time  in  preparation. 

The  publication  of  those  letters  was  my  doing.  Having  found, 
after  some  years  of  correspondence  with  Mr.  Atkinson,  that  my 
views  were  becoming  broader  and  clearer,  my  practice  of  duty 
easier  and  gayer,  and  my  peace  of  mind  something  wholly 

VOL.  II. 


2G 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1850. 


unlike  what  I  had  ever  had  experience  of  before;  and,  being  able 
to  recognize  and  point  out  what  fundamental  truths  they  were 
that  I  had  thus  been  brought  to  grasp,  I  thought  that  much 
good  might  be  done  by  our  making  known,  as  master  and  pupil, 
what  truths  lay  at  the  root  of  our  philosophy.  If  I  had  known 
—  what  I  could  not  know  till  the  reception  of  our  volume 
revealed  it  to  me,  —  how  small  is  the  proportion  of  believers 
to  the  disbelievers  in  theology  to  what  I  imagined,  —  I  might 
have  proposed  a  different  method ;  or  we  might  have  done  our 
work  in  a  different  way.  In  regard  to  disbelief  in  theology, 
much  more  had  already  taken  place  than  I,  at  least,  was  aware 
of.  But  there  is  an  essential  point,  —  the  most  essential  of 
all,  —  in  regard  to  which  the  secular  and  the  theological  worlds 
seem  to  need  conviction  almost  equally :  viz.,  the  real  value  of 
science,  and  of  philosophy  as  its  legitimate  offspring.  It  seems 
to  us,  even  now,  the  most  impossible,  or,  speaking  cautiously, 
the  rarest  thing  in  the  world  to  find  any  body  who  has  the  re- 
motest conception  of  the  indispensableness  of  science  as  the  only 
source  of,  not  only  enlightenment,  but  wisdom,  goodness  and 
happiness.  It  is,  of  course,  useless  to  speak  to  theologians  or 
their  disciples  about  this,  while  they  remain  addicted  to  the- 
ology, because  they  avowedly  give  their  preference  to  theology 
over  the  science  with  which  it  is  incompatible.  They,  in  the 
face  of  clear  proof  that  science  and  theology  are  incompatible, 
embrace  theology  as  the  foundation  of  wisdom,  goodness  and 
happiness.  They  incline,  all  the  while,  to  what  they  call  phi- 
losophy ;  —  that  is,  to  theologico-metaphysics,  from  which  they 
derive,  as  they  say,  (and  truly)  improvement  in  intellectual 
power,  and  confirmation  of  their  religious  faith  in  one  direction, 
nearly  equivalent  to  the  damage  inflicted  on  it  in  another.  The 
result  must  be,  when  the  study  is  real  and  earnest,  either  that 
the  metaphysics  must  dwindle  away  into  a  mere  fanciful  adorn- 
ment of  the  theology,  or  the  theology  must  be  in  time  stripped 
of  its  dogmatic  character,  exhausted  thereby  of  its  vitality,  and 
reduced  to  a  mere  name  and  semblance.  Examples  of  the  first 
alternative  are  conspicuous  in  the  argumentative  preachers  and 
writers  of  the  Church  of  England,  and  other  Christian  sects; 


Aged  48.] 


RESTLESSNESS  IN  PHILOSOPHY. 


27 


and,  we  may  add,  in  the  same  functionaries  of  the  Bomish 
Church,  who  thus  unconsciously  yield  to  the  tendencies  of  their 
age  so  far  as  to  undermine  the  foundations  of  their  own  "  ever- 
lasting" church.  Examples  of  the  second  alternative  are  con- 
spicuous, in  our  own  country  and  in  America,  in  the  class  of 
metaphysical  deists,  —  who  may  be,  by  courtesy,  called  a  class 
because  they  agree  in  being  metaphysical,  and,  in  one  way  or 
another,  deists;  but  who  cannot  be  called  a  sect,  or  a  body, 
because  it  is  scarcely  possible  to  find  any  two  of  them  who  agree 
in  any  thing  with  any  approach  to  precision.  One  makes  the 
Necessarian  doctrine  his  chief  reliance,  while  another  denounces 
it  as  atheistic.  One  insists  on  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  while 
another  considers  a  future  life  doubtful,  and  a  matter  of  no  great 
consequence.  Others  belong,  amid  an  unbounded  variety  of 
minor  views,  to  one  or  another  of  the  five  sorts  of  pantheism. 
All  these  claim  to  be  philosophers,  and  scientific  in  the  matter 
of  mental  philosophy;  while  observers  discover  that  all  are 
wandering  wide  of  the  central  point  of  knowledge  and  convic- 
tion,—  each  in  his  own  balloon,  wafted  in  complacency  by 
whatever  current  he  may  be  caught  by,  and  all  crossing  each 
other,  up  and  down,  right  or  left,  all  manner  of  ways,  hopeless 
of  finding  a  common  centre  till  they  begin  to  conceive  of,  and 
seek  for,  a  firm  standpoint. 

The  so-called  scientific  men,  who  consider  themselves  philoso- 
phers, are,  for  the  most  part,  in  a  scarcely  more  promising  con- 
dition. Between  their  endless  subdivision  as  labourers  in  the 
field  of  research,  before  they  have  discovered  any  incorporating 
principle  ;  and  the  absorbing  and  blinding  influence  of  exclusive 
attention  to  detail;  and  some  remaining  fear  of  casting  them- 
selves loose  from  theology,  together  with  their  share  of  the  uni- 
versal tendency  to  cling  to  the  old  notions  even  in  their  own 
department,  —  the  men  of  science  are  almost  as  hopelessly  astray, 
as  to  the  discovery  of  true  wisdom,  as  the  theologians.  Well 
read  men,  who  call  themselves  impartial  and  disinterested,  as 
they  stand  aloof  and  observe  all  these  others,  are  no  nearer  to 
the  blessed  discovery  or  conviction.  They  extol  philosophy, 
perhaps ;  but  it  is  merely  on  the  ground  that  (conceiving  meta- 


28 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1850. 


physics  to  be  philosophy)  it  is  a  fine  exercise  of  the  subtle  powers 
of  the  intellect.  As  to  science,  they  regard  it  either  as  a  grave 
and  graceful  pastime,  or  they  see  no  use  in  it,  or  they  consider  it 
valuable  for  its  utilitarian  results.    As  for  the  grand  conception, 

—  the  inestimable  recognition,  —  that  science,  (or  the  knowledge 
of  fact,  inducing  the  discovery  of  laws)  is  the  sole  and  the  eternal 
basis  of  wisdom,  —  and  therefore  of  human  morality  and  peace, 

—  none  of  all  these  seem  to  have  obtained  any  view  of  it  at  all. 
For  my  part,  I  must  in  truth  say  that  Mr.  Atkinson  is  the  only 
person,  of  the  multitude  I  have  known,  who  has  clearly  appre- 
hended this  central  truth.  He  found  me  searching  after  it ;  and 
he  put  me  in  clear  possession  of  it.  He  showed  me  how  all 
moral  evil,  and  much,  and  possibly  all,  physical  evil  arises  from 
intellectual  imperfection,  —  from  ignorance  and  consequent  error. 
He  led  me  to  sympathise  in  Bacon's  philosophy,  in  a  truer  way 
than  the  multitude  of  Bacon's  theological  and  metaphysical  pro- 
fessed adorers  ;  and  to  see  how  a  man  may  be  happier  than  his 
fellows  who  obeys  Bacon's  incitements  to  the  pursuit  of  truth,  as 
the  greatest  good  of  man.  There  is  plenty  of  talk  of  the  honour 
and  blessedness  of  the  unflinching  pursuit  of  truth,  wherever  it 
may  lead ;  but  I  never  met  any  one  else  who  lived  for  that 
object,  or  who  seemed  to  understand  the  nature  of  the  apostle- 
ship.  I  have  already  told  where  I  was  in  (or  in  pursuit  of)  this 
path  when  Mr.  Atkinson  found  me.  Learning  what  I  could 
from  him,  and  meditating  for  myself,  I  soon  found  myself  quite 
outside  of  my  old  world  of  thought  and  speculation,  —  under  a 
new  heaven  and  on  a  new  earth ;  disembarrassed  of  a  load  of 
selfish  cares  and  troubles;  with  some  of  my  difficulties  fairly 
solved,  and  others  chased  away,  like  bad  dreams;  and  others, 
again,  deprived  of  all  power  to  trouble  me,  because  the  line  was 
clearly  drawn  between  the  feasible  and  the  unknowable.  I  had 
got  out  of  the  prison  of  my  own  self,*  wherein  I  had  formerly 
sat  trying  to  interpret  life  and  the  world,  —  much  as  a  captive 

*  "  Fear  only  has  its  seat,"  says  Schiller,  "where  heavy  and  shapeless  masses 
prevail,  and  the  gloomy  outlines  waver  between  uncertain  boundaries.  Man 
rises  superior  to  every  terror  of  Nature  as  soon  as  he  is  able  to  give  it  a  form, 
and  can  make  it  a  definite  object.  When  he  begins  to  assert  his  independence 
against  Nature  as  an  appearance,  he  also  asserts  his  dignity  against  Nature  as  a 


» 

Aged  48.]  DESIDERATUM  IN  PHILOSOPHY. 


29 


might  undertake  to  paint  the  aspect  of  Mature  from  the  gleams 
and  shadows  and  faint  colours  reflected  on  his  dungeon  walls. 
I  had  learned  that,  to  form  any  true  notion  whatever  of  any  of 
the  affairs  of  the  universe,  we  must  take  our  stand  in  the  external 
world,  —  regarding  man  as  one  of  the  products  and  subjects  of 
the  everlasting  laws  of  the  universe,  and  not  as  the  favourite 
of  its  Maker ;  a  favourite  to  whom  it  is  rendered  subservient  by 
divine  partiality.  I  had  learned  that  the  death-blow  was  given 
to  theology  when  Copernicus  made  his  discovery  that  our  world 
was  not  the  centre  and  shrine  of  the  universe,  where  God  had 
placed  man  "  in  his  own  image,"  to  be  worshipped  and  served 
by  all  the  rest  of  creation.  I  had  learned  that  men  judge  from 
an  inverted  image  of  external  things  within  themselves  when 
they  insist  upon  the  Design  argument,  as  it  is  called,  —  ap- 
plying the'  solution  from  out  of  their  own  peculiar  faculties  to 
external  things  which,  in  fact,  suggest  that  very  conception  of 
design  to  the  human  faculty.  I  had  learned  that  whatever  con- 
ception is  transferred  by  "  instinct "  or  supposition  from  the 
human  mind  to  the  universe  cannot  possibly  be  the  true  solution, 
as  the  action  of  any  product  of  the  general  laws  of  the  universe 
cannot  possibly  be  the  original  principle  of  those  laws.  Hence 
it  followed  that  the  conceptions  of  a  God  with  any  human  attri- 
butes whatever,  of  a  principle  or  practice  of  Design,  of  an  ad- 
ministration of  life  according  to  human  wishes,  or  of  the  affairs 
of  the  world  by  the  principles  of  human  morals,  must  be  mere 
visions,  —  necessary  and  useful  in  their  day,  but  not  philo- 
sophically and  permanently  true.  I  had  learned,  above  all,  that 
only  by  a  study  of  the  external  and  internal  world  in  conjunction 
can  we  gather  such  wisdom  as  we  are  qualified  to  attain ;  and 
that  this  study  must  be  bond  fide,  —  personal  and  diligent,  and 
at  any  sacrifice,  if  we  would  become  such  as  we  hint  to  ourselves 
in  our  highest  and  truest  aspirations.  The  hollowness  of  the 
popular  views  of  philosophy  and  science,  —  as  good  intellectual 
exercise,  as  harmless,  as  valuable  in  a  utilitarian  sense,  and  even 

power,  and  in  all  freedom  stands  up  boldly  before  his  gods.  He  tears  away  the 
masks  from  the  spectres  which  terrified  his  childhood  ;  and  they  surprise  him 
with  his  own  image;  for  they  are  merely  his  own  imaginations." 


30  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  [1850. 

as  elevating  in  their  mere  influence,  —  was,  by  this  time,  to  me 
the  clearest  thing  I  ever  saw :  and  the  opposite  reality,  —  that 
philosophy  founded  upon  science  is  the  one  thing  needful,  — 
the  source  and  the  vital  principle  of  all  intellectuality,  all 
morality,  and  all  peace  to  individuals,  and  good  will  among 
men,  —  had  become  the  crown  of  my  experience,  and  the  joy 
of  my  life. 

One  of  the  earliest  consequent  observations  was,  of  course,  that 
the  science  of  Human  Nature,  in  all  its  departments,  is  yet  in  its 
infancy.  The  mere  principle  of  Mental  Philosophy  is,  as  yet, 
very  partially  recognized  ;  and  the  very  conception  of  it  is  new. 
It  is  so  absolutely  incompatible  with  theology  that  the  remaining 
prevalence  of  theology,  circumscribed  as  it  is,  sufficiently  testifies 
to  the  infant  state  of  the  philosophy  of  Man.  I  have  found  Mr. 
Atkinson's  knowledge  of  Man,  general  and  particular,  physical, 
intellectual  and  moral ;  theoretical  and  practical,  greater  than  I 
ever  met  with  elsewhere,  in  books  or  conversation ;  and  I  im- 
mediately discovered  that  his  superior  knowledge  was  due  to  his 
higher  and  truer  point  of  view,  whereby  he  could  cast  light  from 
every  part  of  the  universe  upon  the  organisation  and  action  of 
Man,  and  use  and  test  the  analogies  from  without  in  their  ap- 
plication to  the  world  within.  I  had  long  desired  that  the  years 
should  not  pass  over  his  head  without  the  world  being  the  better, 
as  I  felt  myself,  for  his  fresh  method  of  thought,  and  conscientious 
exercise  of  it.  I  wished  that  some  others  besides  myself  should 
be  led  by  him  to  the  true  point  of  view  which  they  were  wander- 
ing in  search  of;  and  I  therefore  went  as  far  as  I  dared  in  urging 
him  to  give  the  world  a  piece  of  his  mind.  At  length  he  con- 
sented to  my  scheme  of  publishing  a  set  of  "  Letters  on  Man's 
Nature  and  Development."  Certainly  I  have  reason  to  con- 
gratulate myself  on  my  pertinacity  in  petitioning  for  this.  I 
do  not  often  trouble  my  friends  with  requests  or  advice  as  to 
their  doings :  and  in  this  case,  I  was  careful  not  to  intrude  on 
my  friend's  independence.  But  I  succeeded ;  and  I  have  re- 
joiced in  my  success  ever  since,  —  seeing  and  hearing  what  that 
book  has  done  for  others,  and  feeling  very  sensibly  what  a  bless- 
ing it  has  been  to  myself. 


Aged  48.] 


MISCELLANIES. 


31 


Once  embarked  in  the  scheme,  my  friend  was  naturally  anxious 
to  get  on  ;  but  he  was  wonderfully  patient  with  the  slowness  to 
which  the  pressure  of  my  other  work  condemned  us.  I  have 
mentioned  that  I  read  two  of  his  letters  to  my  hostess  in  the 
autumn  of  1849.  The  book  did  not  appear  till  January  1851. 
My  literary  practice  indicated  that  I  ought  to  copy  out  the  whole 
of  Mr.  Atkinson's  portion  in  proper  order  for  press ;  and  this  was 
the  more  necessary  because  Mr.  Atkinson's  hand-writing  is  only 
not  so  bad  as  Dr.  Parr's  and  Sydney  Smith's.  When  I  began,  I 
supposed  I  must  alter  and  amend  a  little,  to  fit  the  expression  to 
the  habit  and  taste  of  the  reading  world;  but,  after  the  first 
letter,  I  did  not  alter  a  single  sentence.    The  style  seems  to  me, 

—  as  it  does  to  many  better  judges  than  myself,  —  as  beautiful 
as  it  is  remarkable.  Eminent  writers  and  readers  have  said  that 
they  could  not  lay  the  book  down  till  they  had  run  it  through, 

—  led  on  through  the  night  by  the  beauty  of  the  style,  no  less 
than  by  the  interest  of  the  matter.  Such  opinions  justify  my 
decision  not  to  touch  a  sentence.  (I  speak  of  the  volume  with- 
out scruple,  because,  as  far  as  its  merits  are  concerned,  it  is 
Mr.  Atkinson's.  The  responsibility  was  mine,  and  a  fourth  or 
fifth  part  of  its  contents  ;  but  my  letters  were  a  mere  instigation 
to  his  utterance.) 

It  appears,  by  the  dates  above,  that  nearly  the  whole  of  1850 
elapsed  during  my  copying.  I  was  writing  the  Introductory- 
Volume  of  the  History,  and  was  in  the  midst  of  a  series  of 
papers,  (the  title  of  which  I  cannot  recal)  for  an  American 
periodical,  whereby  I  wanted  to  earn  some  money  for  the  Abo- 
lition cause  there.  I  sent  off  the  last  of  them  in  April.  By 
that  time,  my  season  guests  began  to  arrive ;  and  my  evenings 
were  not  at  my  own  disposal.  I  had  engaged  myself  to  "  House- 
hold Words "  for  a  series  of  tales  on  Sanitary  subjects ;  and  I 
wrote  this  spring  the  two  first,  —  "Woodruffe  the  Gardener" 
and  "  The  People  of  Bleaburn." 

I  spent  a  fortnight  at  Armathwaite,  a  beautiful  place  between 
Penrith  and  Carlisle;  (departing,  I  remember,  on  the  day  of 
Wordsworth's  funeral)  and,  though  I  carried  my  work,  and  my 
kind  friends  allowed  me  the  disposal  of  my  mornings,  I  could 


32 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1850. 


not  do  any  work  which  would  bear  postponement.  I  looked 
forward  hopefully  to  a  ten  weeks'  sojourn  at  a  farm-house  near 
Bolton  Abbey,  where  I  went  to  escape  the  tourist-season ;  and 
there  I  did  get  on.  My  house  had  been  full  of  guests,  from 
April  till  the  end  of  July,  with  little  intermission  :  and  the 
greater  the  pleasure  of  receiving  one's  friends,  the  worse  goes 
one's  work.  Among  the  guests  of  that  spring  were  three  who 
came  together,  and  who  together  made  an  illustrious  week, — 
Mr.  Charles  Knight,  Mr.  Douglas  Jerrold,  and  Mr.  Atkinson. 
Four  days  were  spent  in  making  that  circuit  of  the  district 
which  forms  the  ground-plan  of  my  "Complete  Guide:"  and 
memorable  days  they  were.  We  were  amused  at  the  way  in 
which  some  bystander  at  Strands  recorded  his  sense  of  this  in 
a  Kendal  paper.  He  told  how  the  tourists  were  beginning  to 
appear  for  the  season,  and  how  I  had  been  seen  touring  with  a 
party  of  the  elite  of  the  literary  world,  &c,  &c.  He  declared 
that  I,  with  these  elite,  had  crossed  the  mountains  "  in  a  gig  "  to 
Strands,  and  that  wit  and  repartee  had  genially  flowed  through- 
out the  evening ;  —  an  evening,  as  it  happened,  when  our  con- 
versation was  rather  grave.  I  was  so  amused  at  this  that  I 
cut  out  the  paragraph,  and  sent  it  to  Mr.  Jerrold,  who  wrote 
back  that,  while  the  people  were  about  it,  they  might  as  well 
have  put  us  into  a  howdah  on  an  elephant.  It  would  have 
been  as  true  as  the  gig,  and  far  grander.  —  I  owed  the  pleasure 
of  Mr.  Jerrold's  acquaintance  to  Mr.  Knight ;  and  I  wish  I  had 
known  him  more.  My  first  impression  was  one  of  surprise,  — 
not  at  his  remarkable  appearance,  of  which  I  was  aware ;  —  the 
eyes  and  the  mobile  countenance,  the  stoop,  and  the  small  figure, 
reminding  one  of  Coleridge,  without  being  like  him,  —  but  at 
the  gentle  and  thoughtful  kindness  which  set  its  mark  on  all 
he  said  and  did.  Somehow',  all  his  good  things  were  so  dropped 
as  to  fall  into  my  trumpet,  without  any  trouble  or  ostentation. 
This  was  the  dreaded  and  unpopular  man  who  must  have  been 
hated  (for  he  was  hated)  as  "  Punch "  and  not  as  Jerrold,  — 
through  fear,  and  not  through  reason  or  feeling.  His  wit  always 
appeared  to  me  as  gentle  as  it  was  honest,  —  as  innocent  as  it 
was  sound.    I  could  say  of  him  as  of  Sydney  Smith,  that  I 


Aged  48.] 


BOLTON  ABBEY. 


33 


never  heard  him  say,  in  the  way  of  raillery,  any  thing  of  others 
that  I  should  mind  his  saying  of  me.  I  never  feared  him  in 
the  least,  nor  saw  reason  why  any  but  knaves  or  fools  should 
fear  him.  —  The  other  witty  journalist  of  my  time,  Mr.  Fon- 
blanque,  I  knew  but  little,  having  met  him  only  at  Mr. 
Macready's,  I  think.  I  once  had  the  luck  to  have  him  all  to 
myself,  during  a  long  dinner ;  and  I  found  his  conversation  as 
agreeable  for  other  qualities  as  for  its  wit.  The  pale  face,  the 
lank  hair,  the  thin  hands,  and  dimmed  dark  eye,  speaking  of 
ill  health,  made  the  humour  of  his  conversation  the  more  im- 
pressive, as  recommended  by  patience  and  amiability. 

But  to  return  to  my  summer  of  1850.  At  Bolton  I  was  not 
by  any  means  lonely ;  for  tourists  came  there  too  ;  and  relations 
and  friends  gave  me  many  a  pleasant  day  and  evening.  But, 
on  the  whole,  the  History  got  on  very  well  in  the  mornings, 
and  the  transcribing  of  the  Letters  in  the  evening ;  and,  but  for 
the  relaxing  air  of  the  place,  which  injured  my  health,  that 
Bolton  sojourn  would  have  been  a  season  of  singular  enjoyment. 
With  the  same  dear,  faithful  old  friend  whom  I  have  so  often 
referred  to,  I  saw  Ilkley  and  Benrhydding,  and  some  of  the 
finest  parts  of  the  West  of  Yorkshire.  I  found  time  to  write 
another  long  story  for  "  Household  Words,"  ("  The  Marsh  fog 
and  the  Sea  breeze")  and  engaged  to  make  my  subscription 
to  the  new  weekly  journal,  "  the  Leader "  (which  has  lagged 
terribly,  instead  of  leading)  in  the  form  of  twelve  "  Sketches 
from  Life,"  which  I  began  before  the  Atkinson  Letters  were  well 
off  my  hands.  Another  small  piece  of  authorship  which  inter- 
posed itself  was  really  no  fault  of  mine.  In  1848  (I  think  it 
was)  I  had  begun  an  experiment  of  very  small  farming,  which 
I  never  intended  to  become  an  affair  of  public  interest.  My 
field,  let  to  a  neighbour,  was  always  in  such  bad  condition  as  to 
be  an  eye-sore  from  my  windows.  I  found  myself  badly  and 
expensively  served  with  cream  and  butter,  and  vegetables,  and 
eggs.  In  summer,  there  was  no  depending  on  the  one  butcher 
of  the  place  for  meat,  even  though  joints  had  been  timely  ordered 
and  promised,  —  so  great  and  increasing  was  the  pressure  of 
the  tourist  multitude.    In  winter,  when  I  was  alone,  and  did 


34 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1850. 


not  care  what  came  to  table,  I  could  have  what  I  liked : 
but  in  summer,  when  my  house  was  full,  it  was  frequently  an 
anxiety  how  to  get  up  a  dinner  when  the  butcher  was  so  set 
fast  as  to  have  to  divide  the  promised  joint  between  three  houses. 
All  the  while,  I  had  to  pay  an  occasional  gardener  very  high,  to 
keep  the  place  in  any  order  at  all,  —  over  and  above  what  my 
maids  and  I  could  do.  A  more  serious  consideration  was  the 
bad  method  of  farming  in  the  Lake  District,  which  seemed  to 
need  an  example  of  better  management,  on  however  humble  a 
scale.  My  neighbours  insisted  on  it  that  cows  require  three 
acres  of  land  apiece  ;  whereas  I  believed  that,  without  emulating 
Cobbett,  I  could  do  better  than  that.  I  procured  an  active, 
trustworthy  married  labourer  from  Norfolk,  and  enlisted  his 
ambition  and  sympathy  in  the  experiment.  We  have  since 
kept  about  a  cow  and  a-half  on  my  land,  with  the  addition  of 
half  an  acre  which  I  rent  from  the  adjoining  field;  and  the 
purchase  of  a  fourth  part  of  the  food  is  worth  while,  because  I 
am  thus  kept  constantly  supplied  with  milk,  while  able  to  sell 
the  surplus ;  besides  that  the  stable  may  as  well  hold  a  second 
cow ;  and  that  two  cows  are  little  more  trouble  than  one.  My 
whole  place  is  kept  in  the  highest  order :  I  have  the  comfort 
of  a  strong  man  on  the  premises  (his  cottage  being  at  the  foot 
of  the  knoll)  for  the  protection  of  my  household  and  property ; 
and  I  have  always  had  the  satisfaction  of  feeling  that,  come  who 
may,  there  are  at  all  times  hams,  bacon  and  eggs  in  the  house. 
The  regular  supply  of  fresh  vegetables,  eggs,  cream  and  butter  is 
a  substantial  comfort  to  a  housekeeper.  A  much  greater  bless- 
ing than  all  these  together  is  that  a  plentiful  subsistence  for  two 
worthy  people  has  been  actually  created  out  of  my  field ;  and 
that  the  spectacle  has  certainly  not  been  lost  on  my  neighbours. 
At  first,  we  were  abundantly  ridiculed,  and  severely  condemned 
for  our  methods ;  and  my  good  servant's  spirits  were  sometimes 
sorely  tried  :  but  I  told  him  that  if  we  persevered  good-hu- 
mouredly,  people  would  come  round  to  our  views.  And  so  they 
did.  First,  I  was  declared  deluded  and  extravagant :  next,  I 
was  cruel  to  my  live  stock ;  then,  I  petted  them  so  that  they 
would  die  of  luxury  ;  and  finally,  one  after  another  of  our  neigh- 


Aged  48.] 


SMALL  FARMING. 


35 


bours  admitted  the  fine  plight  of  my  cows ;  and  a  few  adopted 
our  methods.  At  the  end  of  a  year's  experience,  I  wrote  a 
letter,  by  request,  to  an  Assistant  Poor-law  Commissioner,  who 
was  earnest  in  his  endeavours  to  get  workhouses  supplied  with 
milk  and  vegetables,  by  the  labour  of  the  inmates  on  the  land. 
To  my  amazement,  I  found  my  letter  in  the  "  Times,"  one  day 
while  I  was  at  Bolton.  How  it  got  there,  I  know  not.  Other 
papers  quoted  portions  of  it  which,  separated  from  the  rest,  gave 
rise  to  wrong  impressions ;  so  that  I  found  it  necessary  to  write 
a  second  letter,  giving  the  result  of  the  second  year's  tillage ; 
and  to  issue  the  two  as  a  small  pamphlet.  I  need  say  nothing 
here  about  our  method  of  farming,  as  the  whole  story  is  told  in 
that  pamphlet.  I  may  simply  add  that  we  go  on  with  it,  very 
comfortably;  and  that  my  good  farm-servant  is  a  prosperous 
man.  Strangers  come  every  summer  to  see  the  place  as  a  cu- 
riosity; and  I  am  assured  that  the  invariable  remark  is  that 
not  a  foot  of  ground  is  lost,  and  not  a  sign  of  neglect  appears 
in  any  corner.  I  have  added  a  little  boiling-house,  a  root- 
house,  and  a  capital  manure-pit,  since  those  letters  were  written ; 
and  I  have  put  up  a  higher  order  of  fences,  —  to  the  improve- 
ment at  once  of  the  appearance  and  the  economy  of  my  little 
estate.  All  this,  with  the  growth  of  the  shrubs  and  little  copses, 
and  the  spread  of  roses  and  evergreen  climbers  over  the  house, 
makes  my  Knoll  dwelling,  to  say  the  truth,  a  charming  spec- 
tacle to  visitors;  —  though  not  half  so  much  as  to  me.  Some 
have  called  it  "  a  perfect  poem  : "  and  it  is  truly  that  to  me  : 
and  so,  speaking  frankly,  is  the  life  that  I  have  passed  within  it. 


SECTION  VI. 


"With  all  the  writing  that  I  have  particularised  on  my  hands, 
it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  November  arrived  before  Mr. 
Atkinson  was  wanted,  to  finish  off  our  work  for  press :  and  by 
that  time,  my  winter  course  of  lectures  was  due.  So  much  for 
the  "  leisure,"  and  the  "  dulness  "  which  distant  friends  have 
attributed  to  my  life  at  the  Lakes.  This  winter's  course  was  the 
arduous  one  of  twenty  lectures  on  the  History  of  England,  —  the 
first  of  which  was  delivered  on  the  fifth  of  November,  and  the 
last  on  the  first  of  April,  1851.  Amidst  the  undeniable  overwork 
of  that  winter,  I  had  a  feeling,  which  I  remember  expressing  to 
one  friend  at  least,  that  this  might  probably  be  the  last  season 
of  work  for  me.  It  seemed  to  me  probable  that,  after  the  plain- 
speaking  of  the  Atkinson  Letters,  I  might  never  be  asked,  or 
allowed,  to  utter  myself  again.  I  had,  on  four  previous  occa- 
sions of  my  life,  supposed  the  same  thing,  and  found  myself 
mistaken ;  but  the  "  audacity,"  (as  a  scientific  reader  called  my 
practice  of  plain  avowal)  was  so  much  greater  in  appearance 
(though  not  in  reality)  in  the  present  case  than  ever  before,  that 
I  anticipated  excommunication  from  the  world  of  literature,  if 
not  from  society.  This  seems  amusing  enough,  now,  when  I 
have  enjoyed  more  prosperity  since  the  publication  of  that 
volume,  realised  more  money,  earned  more  fame  of  a  substantial 
kind,  seen  more  of  my  books  go  out  of  print,  and  made  more 
friendships  and  acquaintance  with  really  congenial  people  than 
in  any  preceding  four  years  of  my  life.  But  the  anticipation 
was  very  sincere  at  the  time  ;  and  I  took  care  that  my  comrade 
in  the  work  knew  what  my  anticipation  was.  —  There  was  to 
me,  I  must  observe,  no  choice  about  making  known,  in  this 
form  or  some  other,  my  views  at  this  period.  From  the  time 
when,  in  my  youth,  I  uttered  my  notions  and  was  listened  to, 


Aged  48.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTEES. 


37 


I  had  no  further  choice.  For  a  quarter  of  a  century  past  I  had 
been  answerable  to  an  unknown  number  of  persons  for  a  declara- 
tion of  my  opinions  as  my  experience  advanced ;  and  I  could 
not  stop  now.  If  I  had  desired  it,  any  concealment  would  have 
been  most  imprudent.  A  life  of  hypocrisy  was  wholly  impracti- 
cable to  me,  if  it  had  been  endurable  in  idea ;  and  disclosure  by 
bits,  in  mere  conversation,  could  never  have  answered  any  other 
purpose  than  misleading  my  friends,  and  subjecting  me  to  mis- 
conception. So  much  for  the  necessity  and  the  prudence  of  a 
full  avowal.  A  far  more  serious  matter  was  the  duty  of  it,  in 
regard  to  integrity  and  humanity.  My  comrade  and  I  were 
both  pursuers  of  truth,  and  were  bound  to  render  our  homage 
openly  and  devoutly.  We  both  care  for  our  kind ;  and  we  could 
not  see  them  suffering  as  we  had  suffered  without  imparting  to 
them  our  consolation  and  our  joy.  Having  found,  as  my  friend 
said,  a  spring  in  the  desert,  should  we  see  the  multitude  wan- 
dering in  desolation,  and  not  show  them  our  refreshment  1  We 
never  had  a  moment's  doubt  or  misgiving;  though  we  anticipated 
(or  I  did,  for  I  ought  only  to  speak  for  myself)  all  manner  of 
consequences  which  never  ensued. 

Just  as  I  am  writing  on  this  subject,  an  old  letter  of  mine  to 
Mr.  Atkinson  is  put  before  my  eyes.  It  was  written  before  the 
publication  of  "  Eastern  Life ; "  and  I  will  insert  a  part  of  it, 
both  because  it  indicates  the  kind  of  difficulty  I  had  to  deal 
with,  on  these  occasions,  and  because  it  is  an  honest  comfort  to 
see  what  I  had  gained  in  courage,  strength  and  cheerfulness  in 
the  three  years  which  intervened  between  the  publication  of  the 
two  books. 

"  I  am  not  afraid  of  censure,"  I  wrote  in  February  1848, 
"  from  individuals  or  from  the  world.    I  don't  feel,  at  present, 
any  fear  of  the  most  thorough  pulling  to  pieces  that  I  suppose 
can  ever  befal  me.    The  book  once  out,  I  am  in  for  it,  and  must 
and  will  bear  every  thing.        ...        ...        ...       The  fact 

is,  however,  —  this  book  is,  I  believe,  the  greatest  effort  of  cour- 
age I  ever  made.  I  only  hope  I  may  not  fail  in  the  proof. 
Some  people  would  think  the  Population  number  of  my  Political 
Economy,  and  the  Women  and  Marriage  and  Property  chapters 


3S 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1850. 


in  my  American  books,  and  the  Mesmerism  affair,  bolder  feats : 
but  I  know  that  they  were  not.  I  was  younger  and  more  ardent 
then ;  and  now  the  forecast  and  love  of  ease  belonging  to  age 
are  coming  upon  me.  Then,  I  believed  in  a  Protector  who 
ordered  me  to  do  that  work,  and  would  sustain  me  under  it : 
and,  however  I  may  now  despise  that  sort  of  support,  I  had  it 
then,  and  have  none  of  that  sort  now.  I  have  all  that  I  want,  I 
believe,  in  the  absolute  necessity  of  saying  what  I  really  believe, 
if  I  speak  at  all  on  those  Egyptian  and  Mosaic  subjects  j  and  I 
would  not  exchange  my  present  views,  imperfect  and  doubtful  as 
they  are,  —  I  had  better  say,  I  would  not  exchange  my  freedom 
from  old  superstition,  if  I  were  to  be  burned  at  the  stake  next 
month,  for  all  the  peace  and  quiet  of  orthodoxy,  if  I  must  take 
the  orthodoxy  with  the  peace  and  quiet.  ]STor  would  I,  for  any 
exemption,  give  up  the  blessing  of  the  power  of  appeal  to 

thoughtful  minds.    There  was  ,  the  other  day,  at  the 

reading  of  the  Sinai  part  of  my  book.  I  should  have  expected 
her  to  be  purely  shocked  at  so  much  of  it  as  to  carry  away  a  bad 
impression  of  the  whole  :  but  she  was  beyond  all  measure  inter- 
ested, —  beyond  any  thing  ever  seen  in  her.  So  I  would  not 
have  any  thing  otherwise  than  as  it  is,  as  to  my  fate  in  conse- 
quence of  my  opinions,  or  absence  of  belief.  What  I  dread  is 
being  silenced,  and  the  mortification  and  loss  of  the  manner  of 
it :  (from  a  refusal  to  publish  the  book.)  Yet,  if  it  happens,  I 
dare  say  it  will  become  clear  to  me  what  I  ought  to  do ;  and 

that  is  the  only  really  important  thing  

"Well :  I  have  had  plenty  of  painful  enterprises  to  go  through, 
and  found  support  from  the  two  considerations  that  I  could  not 
help  being  so  circumstanced,  and  that  I  believed  myself  right. 

I  will  tell  you  of  a  terrible  pain  I 
have  had  about  this  matter  of  religious  opinion.    When  I  was 

at    in  September,  I  was  told  about  a  Town  Missionary, 

Mr.  ,  who  desired  particularly  to  see  me.    He  came  to  the 

house,  when  it  appeared,  ( —  no,  we  knew  it  before ;  but,  how- 
ever,) he  had  formed  himself  upon  my  books,  —  the  more  serious 
ones  particularly,  —  and  we  found,  had  taken  up  that  notion  of 
me  which  we  know  to  be  idealism,  —  all  but  idolatry.    In  every 


Aged  48.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


39 


thing  else  he  seemed  a  rational,  as  he  certainly  was  a  very  inter- 
esting young  man.  Such  a  face  !  so  full  of  life  and  happiness, 
—  all  made  up  of  benevolence.  He  was  delicate ;  and  so  was 
his  young  wife.  He  was  then  thinking  of  undertaking  the 
 City  Mission.  He  did  so  :  and  soon  sank ;  —  had  influ- 
enza, and  fell  into  rapid  consumption.  A  friend  of  his  at  Bir- 
mingham wrote  me  that  he  declared  himself  dying,  in  his  letter 
to  her  received  that  day  :  and  she  immediately  wrote  to  suggest 
to  me  that  a  letter  from  me  would  gratify  him.  There  was 
scarcely  any  thing  I  would  not  rather  have  done  :  but  it  was 
impossible  to  refuse.  I  wrote  at  once ;  and  every  word  was  as 
true  to  my  own  state  of  mind  as  what  I  write  to  you  now  :  but 
I  feared  it  would  be  taken  for  a  Christian  letter.  There  was  not 
a  word  about  the  future,  or  of  God,  or  even  Christ.  It  was  a 
letter  of  sympathy  in  his  benevolent  and  happy  life,  and  also, 
of  course,  in  his  present  weakness.  It  reached  him  on  the  last 
day  of  his  life.  It  was  read  to  him.  When  a  little  revived,  he 
asked  for  it,  and  read  it  himself ;  and  then  desired  his  wife  to 
tell  all  who  loved  him  of  '  this  last  flush  on  his  darkness.'  This 
is  dreadful  pain  to  me.  I  feel  as  if  I  had  told  him  a  lie  for  my 
last  words  to  him.  I  cannot  now  see  how  I  could  have  acted 
otherwise.  It  would  have  been  hard  and  unkind  not  to  write  : 
and  it  was  impossible  to  disturb  his  life  at  the  last.  Yet  I  feel 
that  that  letter  did  not  carry  my  real  mind  to  him,  and  does  not 
to  the  many  who  are  reading  it.  His  poor  delicate  young  widow 
is  strong  in  heart ;  but  she  has  two  young  infants  to  maintain, 
and  not  a  shilling  in  the  world.  But  missionaries'  widows  are, 
I  believe,  always  cared  for,  —  as  I  am  sure  they  ought  to  be." 

It  is  cheering  to  read  this  letter  now,  and  feel  how  much 
clearer  and  stronger  my  mind  had  become  before  the  time  arrived 
for  the  far  greater  enterprise  which  caused  me  so  much  less  ap- 
prehension, and  which  was  to  release  me  for  ever  from  all  danger 
of  misleading  missionaries,  or  any  body  else,  by  letters  of  sym- 
pathy under  solemn  circumstances,  which  they  would  interpret 
by  their  preconceptions.  I  can  write  such  letters  now  to  all 
kinds  of  sufferers,  in  full  assurance  that,  whether  they  satisfy  or 
not,  they  are  not  misapprehended. 


40 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


On  the  nineteenth  of  November,  my  friend  and  I  revised  his 
last  letter,  I  wrote  my  preface,  and  we  tied  up  our  M.S.  for 
press  ;  and  on  the  twentieth,  he  went  away.  As  we  were  going 
to  the  coach  he  said,  "  I  am  glad  we  have  done  this  work. 
We  shall  never  repent  it."  We  next  met  in  London,  in  the 
summer,  when  our  book  had  run  the  gauntlet  of  all  the  re- 
views, and  we  found  ourselves  no  worse  for  the  venture  we 
had  made,  and  well  satisfied  that  we  had  borne  our  testimony 
to  the  truth,  —  not  in  vain  for  many  who  had  sorely  needed  the 
support  and  blessing  which  our  philosophy  had  long  afforded  to 
ourselves. 

When  Mr.  Atkinson  was  gone,  the  printing  began;  and  I 
highly  enjoyed  the  proof-correcting.  That  is  always  the  time 
when  I  begin  to  relish  any  book  that  I  have  part  in.  The  con- 
ception I  enjoy,  of  course,  or  I  should  not  write  the  book ;  but 
during  the  work  I  am  doubtful,  and  the  manuscript  disgusts  me. 
Then  come  the  proofs,  when  one  sees  exactly,  and  in  order,  what 
one  has  really  said  ;  and  the  work  appears  to  advantage.  What 
my  pressure  of  business  was  at  that  time  is  shown  by  a  sad  piece 
of  weakness  of  mine,  which  I  have  sorely  repented  since ;  — 
trusting  to  the  printing-office  the  proof-correcting  of  the  Ap- 
pendix. Almost  three-fourths  of  the  Appendix  being  sent  in 
print  to  the  office,  and  the  rest  in  the  remarkably  good  hand- 
writing of  a  helpful  neighbour,  I  did  hope  that  errors  might  be 
avoided  ;  and  I  inquired  about  it,  and  was  assured  that  I  might 
trust  the  printer.  But  never  did  I  see  such  a  shameful  mess  as 
those  sheets ;  and  never  could  I  have  conceived  of  such  an  igno- 
rant sort  of  blunders  being  allowed  to  pass.  I  have  never  for- 
given myself  for  my  laziness  in  letting  any  part  of  the  business 
out  of  my  own  hands. 

The  neighbour  who  helped  me  kindly  in  getting  up  the  Ap- 
pendix was  a  sickly  retired  clerk  living  close  by  my  gate,  —  a 
man  of  good  tastes  and  fond  of  reading.  I,  as  I  thought,  hired 
him  for  a  succession  of  evenings  to  write  for  me  ;  and,  by  work- 
ing together,  we  soon  finished  the  business.  He  would  not  have 
supper,  nor  any  refreshment  whatever  ;  and,  to  my  consternation, 
(and  admiration  too)  he  declined  all  remuneration  in  such  a  way 


Aged  48.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


41 


that  I  could  only  accept  his  gift  of  his  time  and  labour.  Since 
that  time  he  has  had  the  loan,  daily,  of  my  newspaper :  —  his 
wife  buys  milk  of  my  dairy  ;  and  he  sends  me  many  a  dish  of 
trout ;  and  I  lend  books  to  his  good  son.  Thus  we  go  on ;  and 
very  pleasant  it  is. 

It  was  while  our  evenings  were  thus  filled  up,  that  Mr.  Quill- 
inan,  Wordsworth's  son-in-law,  called  one  day,  full  of  kindly 
pleasure,  to  tell  me  that  I  must  dine  with  him  next  Thursday ; 
and  sadly  blank  he  looked  when  I  told  him  I  was  engaged  every 
evening  that  week.    Could  I  not  put  off  my  engagement  ?  —  No  : 
Miss  Bronte  was  coming  on  Monday ;  and  I  had  business  which 
must  be  finished  first.    His  disappointment  was  great ;  for  he 
had  a  benevolent  scheme  of  bringing  me  into  the  favourable 
acquaintance  of  certain  clergy  of  the  neighbourhood,  and  of  a 
physician  whose  further  acquaintance  I  by  no  means  desired.  I 
have  before  mentioned  that,  from  the  first,  I  avoided  visiting 
among  all  my  neighbours,  except  a  very  few  intimates ;  and  of 
course,  I  had  no  intention  of  beginning  now,  when  a  book  was 
in  the  press  which  would  make  them  gnash  their  teeth  at  me  in 
a  month  or  two.    Mr.  Quillinan  had  ascertained  from  the  whole 
party  that  they  should  be  happy  to  meet  me  ;  and  he  enjoyed, 
as  he  told  me,  "  bringing  neighbours  together,  to  like  each  other." 
It  had  never  occurred  to  him  that  I  might  not  like  to  meet  them  ; 
and  sadly  disconcerted  he  was.    However,  I  promised  to  take 
Miss  Bronte  with  me,  one  day,  if  he  would  dine  early  enough  to 
enable  my  delicate  guest  to  return  before  nightfall.    That  was 
a  truly  pleasant  day,  —  no  one  being  there,  in  addition  to  the 
family,  but  Mr.  Arnold,  from  Fox  How,  and  ourselves.  And 
when  "  Currer  "  and  I  came  home,  there  were  proof-sheets  lying  ; 
and  I  read  her  Mr.  Atkinson's  three  letters  about  the  distribution 
of  the  brain.    She  was  exceedingly  impressed  by  what  she  called 
"  the  tone  of  calm  power  in  all  he  wrote  ; "  moreover,  she  insisted 
on  having  the  whole  book,  when  it  came  out ;  and  no  one,  so 
little  qualified  by  training  to  enter  into  its  substance  and  method, 
did  it  more  generous  justice.    She  was  very  far  indeed  from 
sympathising  in  our  doctrine ;  and  she  emphatically  said  so  ;  but 
this  did  not  prevent  her  doing  justice  to  us,  under  our  different 


42 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


view.  In  a  preceding  letter,  she  had  said  "  I  quite  expect  that 
the  publication  of  this  book  will  bring  you  troublous  times. 
Many  who  are  beginning  to  draw  near  to  you  will  start  away 
again  affrighted.  Your  present  position  is  high.  Consequently 
there  are  many  persons,  very  likely,  precisely  in  the  mood  to  be 
glad  to  see  it  lower.  I  anticipate  a  popular  outcry  which  you 
will  stand  much  as  the  Duke  of  Wellington  would ;  —  and  in 
due  time,  it  will  die  round  you  ;  but  I  think  not  soon."  A 
month  afterwards  she  wrote,  "  Having  read  your  book,  I  cannot 
now  think  it  will  create  any  outcry.  You  are  tender  of  others  : 
—  you  are  serious,  reverent  and  gentle.  Who  can  be  angry  1 " 
This  appreciation,  from  one  who  declared  (as  she  did  to  me)  that 
our  doctrine  was  to  her  "  vinegar  mingled  with  gall,"  was  honour- 
able to  her  justice  and  candour.  And  so  was  the  readiness  with 
which  she  admitted  and  accepted  my  explanation  that  I  was 
an  atheist  in  the  vulgar  sense,  —  that  of  rejecting  the  popular 
theology,  —  but  not  in  the  philosophical  sense,  of  denying  a 
First  Cause.  She  had  no  sympathy  whatever  with  the  shallow 
and  foolish  complaint  that  we  were  "taking  away  people's  faith." 
She  thought  that  nobody's  faith  was  worth  much  which  was  held, 
more  or  less,  because  I  held  it  too  ;  and  of  course  she  saw  that 
truth  and  Man  would  never  advance  if  they  must  wait  for  the 
weak,  who  have  themselves  no  means  of  progression  but  by  the 
explorations  of  the  strong,  or  of  those  more  disposed  for  specu- 
lation than  themselves.  As  I  have  had  occasion  to  say  to  some 
people  who  seem  to  have  forgotten  all  they  knew  of  the  history 
of  Opinion,  and  as  Luther,  and  many  others  greater  than  I  have 
had  to  say,  "  If  your  faith  is  worth  any  thing,  it  does  not  depend 
on  me  :  and  if  it  depends  on  me,  it  is  not  worth  any  thing." 
This  reminds  me  of  an  incident  perhaps  worth  relating,  in  con- 
nexion with  this  absurd  plea  for  standing  still,  which,  under  the 
laws  of  the  mind,  means  retrogression. 

When  I  was  publishing  "Eastern  Life,"  I  rather  dreaded  its 
effects  on  two  intimate  friends  of  mine,  widows,  both  far  removed 
from  orthodoxy,  and  zealous  all  their  lives  long  for  free  thought, 
and  an  open  declaration  of  it.  If  I  might  judge  by  their  pro- 
fession of  principle,  I  should  become  more  dear  to  them  in 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


43 


proportion  to  my  efforts  or  sacrifices  in  the  discovery  and  avowal 
of  truth  :  but  I  knew  that  they  could  not  be  so  judged,  because 
neither  of  them  had  encountered  any  serious  trial  of  their  princi- 
ple. They  bore  "  Eastern  Life  "  better  than  I  expected,  —  not 
fully  perceiving,  perhaps,  the  extent  of  the  speculation  about 
belief  in  a  future  life.  In  the  "  Atkinson  Letters,"  the  full  truth 
burst  upon  them ;  and  it  was  too  much  for  them.  They  had 
been  accustomed  to  detail  to  me  their  visions  of  that  future  life, 
which  were  curiously  particular,  —  their  "  heaven  "  being  filled 
with  the  atmosphere  of  their  respective  homes,  and  framed  to 
meet  the  sufferings  and  desires  of  their  own  individual  minds. 
I  never  pretended  to  sympathise  in  all  this,  of  course ;  but 
neither  had  I  meddled  with  it,  because  I  never  meddle,  except 
by  invitation,  with  individual  minds.  After  "Eastern  Life," 
they  must  have  been  thoroughly  aware  that  they  had  not  my 
sympathy  ;  but,  while  they  insisted  (against  my  wish)  in  reading 
the  "  Atkinson  Letters,"  which  was  altogether  out  of  their  way, 
they  blamed  me  excessively,  —  wholly  forgetting  their  professions 
in  favour  of  free-thought  and  speech.  One  partially  recovered 
herself :  the  other  had  not  power  to  do  so.  She  went  about 
every  where,  eloquently  bemoaning  my  act,  as  a  sort  of  fall,  and 
doing  me  more  mischief  (as  far  as  such  talk  can  do  damage)  than 
any  enemy  could  have  done  ;  and,  by  the  time  she  began  to  see 
how  she  stood,  she  had  done  too  much  for  entire  reparation,  — 
earnestly  as  I  believe  she  desires  it.  As  for  the  other,  an  anec- 
dote will  show  how  considerable  her  self-recovery  was.  The 
very  woman  who  had  taken  on  herself  to  inform  me  that  God 
would  forgive  me  was  not  long  in  reaching  the  point  I  will  show. 

—  She  came  to  stay  with  me  a  year  afterwards  ;  and  when  she 
departed,  I  went  down  to  the  gate,  to  put  her  into  the  coach, 
when  an  old  acquaintance  greeted  me,  —  an  aged  lady  living 
some  miles  off.  The  two  fellow-passengers  talked  me  over,  and 
the  aged  one  related  how  fierce  an  opinionated  old  lady  of  the 
neighbourhood  was  against  me,  —  without  having  read  the  book  \ 

—  the  narrator  confessing  that  she  herself  thought  I  was  "  ex- 
ceedingly wrong  to  take  away  people's  faith."  Did  not  my 
friend  think  so  %   She  replied  that  if  I  was  wrong  on  that  ground, 


44  AUTOBIOGRAPHY.  [1851. 

—  in  seeking  truth,  and  avowing  it  in  opposition  to  the  popular 
belief,  so  was  every  religious  reformer,  in  all  times,  —  mounting 
up  through  Luther  to  St.  Paul.  "  Why,  that 's  true  !  "  cried  the 
old  lady.  "  I  will  remember  that,  and  tell  it  again."  "  And  as 
to  the  moral  obligation  of  the  case,"  continued  my  friend,  "  we 
must  each  judge  by  our  own  conscience  :  and  perhaps  Harriet  is 

as  able  to  judge  as  Mrs.   ."    "  Yes,  indeed,  and  a  great  deal 

better,"  was  the  reply. 

I  certainly  had  no  idea  how  little  faith  Christians  have  in 
their  own  faith  till  I  saw  how  ill  their  courage  and  temper  can 
stand  any  attack  upon  it.  And  the  metaphysical  deists  who  call 
themselves  free-thinkers  are,  if  possible,  more  alarmed  and  angry 
still.  There  were  some  of  all  orders  of  believers  who  treated  us 
perfectly  well ;  and  perhaps  the  settled-orthodox  had  more  sym- 
pathy with  us  than  any  other  class  of  Christians.  They  were 
not  alarmed,  —  safely  anchored  as  they  are  on  the  rock  of  author- 
ity ;  and  they  were  therefore  at  leisure  to  do  justice  to  our  inten- 
tions, and  even  to  our  reasoning.  Having  once  declared  our 
whole  basis  to  be  wrong,  —  their  own  being  divine,  —  they  could 
appreciate  our  view  and  conduct  in  a  way  impossible  to  persons 
who  had  left  the  anchorage  of  authority,  and  not  reached  that 
of  genuine  philosophy.  Certainly  the  heretical,  —  from  reform- 
ing churchmen  to  metaphysical  deists,  —  behaved  the  worst. 
The  reviews  of  the  time  were  a  great  instruction  to  us.  They 
all,  without  one  exception,  as  far  as  we  know,  shirked  the 
subject-matter  of  the  book,  and  fastened  on  the  collateral,  anti- 
theological  portions.  In  regard  to  these  portions,  the  reviewers 
contradicted  each  other  endlessly.  We  had  half  a  mind  to  col- 
lect their  articles,  and  put  them  in  such  juxtaposition  as  to  make 
them  destroy  one  another,  so  as  to  leave  us  where  they  found  us. 
It  is  never  worth  while,  however,  to  notice  reviews  in  their 
bearing  upon  the  books  they  discuss.  When  we  revert  to  re- 
views, so-called,  it  is  for  their  value  as  essays;  for  it  is,  I  believe, 
a  thing  almost  unknown  for  a  review  to  give  a  reliable  account 
of  the  book  which  forms  its  text,  if  the  work  be  of  any  substance 
at  all.  This  is  not  the  place  for  an  essay  on  reviewing.  I  will 
merely  observe  that  the  causes  of  this  phenomenon  are  so  clear 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


45 


to  me,  and  I  think  them  so  nearly  unavoidable,  that  I  have 
declined  reviewing,  except  in  a  very  few  instances,  since  the  age 
of  thirty;  and,  in  those  few  instances,  my  articles  have  been 
avowedly  essays,  and  not,  in  any  strict  sense,  reviews. 

As  for  the  "  outcry  "  which  "  Currer  Bell "  and  many  others 
anticipated,  I  really  do  not  know  what  it  amounted  to,  —  out- 
side of  the  reviewing  world.  If  I  knew,  I  would  tell :  but  I 
know  very  little.  To  the  best  of  my  recollection,  we  were  down- 
right insulted  only  by  two  people ;  —  by  the  opinionated  old 
lady  (above  eighty)  above  referred  to,  and  by  one  of  my  nearest 
relations ;  —  the  former  in  a  letter  to  me  (avowing  that  she  had 
not  seen  the  book)  and  the  latter  in  print.  Another  old  lady 
and  her  family,  with  whom  I  was  barely  acquainted,  passed  me 
in  the  road  thenceforth  without  speaking,  —  a  marriage  into  a 
bishop's  family  taking  place  soon  after.  Others  spoke  coldly, 
for  a  time;  and  one  family,  from  whom  more  wisdom  might 
have  been  expected,  ceased  to  visit  me,  while  continuing  on 
friendly  terms.  I  think  this  is  all,  as  regards  my  own  neighbour- 
hood. My  genuine  friends  did  not  change ;  and  the  others, 
failing  under  so  clear  a  test,  were  nothing  to  me.  When,  in  the 
evenings  of  that  spring,  I  went  out  (as  I  always  do,  when  in 
health)  to  meet  the  midnight  on  my  terrace,  or,  in  bad  weather, 
in  the  porch,  and  saw  and  felt  what  I  always  do  see  and  feel  there 
at  that  hour,  what  did  it  matter  whether  people  who  were  nothing 
to  me  had  smiled  or  frowned  as  I  passed  them  in  the  village  in  the 
morning  1  When  I  experienced  the  still  new  joy  of  feeling  my- 
self to  be  a  portion  of  the  universe,  resting  on  the  security  of  its 
everlasting  laws,  certain  that  its  Cause  was  wholly  out  of  the 
sphere  of  human  attributes,  and  that  the  special  destination  of 
my  race  is  infinitely  nobler  than  the  highest  proposed  under  a 
scheme  of  "  divine  moral  government,"  how  could  it  matter  to 
me  that  the  adherents  of  a  decaying  mythology,  —  (the  Christian 
following  the  heathen,  as  the  heathen  followed  the  barbaric- 
fetish)  were  fiercely  clinging  to  their  Man-God,  their  scheme  of 
salvation,  their  reward  and  punishment,  their  arrogance,  their 
selfishness,  their  essential  pay-system,  as  ordered  by  their  my- 
thology 1    As  the  astronomer  rejoices  in  new  knowledge  which 


46 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


compels  him  to  give  up  the  dignity  of  our  globe  as  the  centre, 
the  pride,  and  even  the  final  cause  of  the  universe,  so  do  those 
who  have  escaped  from  the  Christian  mythology  enjoy  their 
release  from  the  superstition  which  fails  to  make  happy,  fails  to 
make  good,  fails  to  make  wise,  and  has  become  as  great  an  obsta- 
cle in  the  way  of  progress  as  the  prior  mythologies  which  it  took 
the  place  of  nearly  two  thousand  years  ago.  For  three  centuries 
it  has  been  undermined,  and  its  overthrow  completely  decided,* 
as  all  true  interpreters  of  the  Reformation  very  well  know.  To 
the  emancipated,  it  is  a  small  matter  that  those  who  remain 
imprisoned  are  shocked  at  the  daring  which  goes  forth  into  the 
sunshine  and  under  the  stars,  to  study  and  enjoy,  without  leave 
asked,  or  fear  of  penalty.  As  to  my  neighbours,  they  came  round 
by  degrees  to  their  former  methods  of  greeting.  They  could  do 
no  more,  because  I  was  wholly  independent  of  all  of  them  but 
the  few  intimates  on  whom  I  could  rely.  As  one  of  these  last 
observed  to  me, —  people  leave  off  gossip  and  impertinence  when 
they  see  that  one  is  independent  of  them.  If  one  has  one's 
own  business  and  pleasure  and  near  connexions,  so  that  the 
gossips  are  visibly  of  no  consequence  to  one,  they  soon  stop  talk- 
ing. "Whether  it  was  so  in  my  case,  I  never  inquired.  I  am 
very  civilly  treated,  as  far  as  I  see ;  and  that  is  enough. 

As  to  more  distant  connexions,  I  can  only  say  the  same 
thing.  I  had  many  scolding  letters ;  but  they  were  chiefly  from 
friends  who  were  sure  to  think  better  of  it,  and  who  have  done 
so.  For  a  time  there  was  a  diminution  of  letters  from  mere 
acquaintances,  and  persons  who  wanted  autographs,  or  patron- 
age, or  the  like :  but  these  have  increased  again  since.  I  went 
to  London  the  summer  after  the  publication  of  the  book,  and 
have  done  so  more  than  once  since ;  and  my  friends  are  very 
kind.  I  think  I  may  sum  up  my  experience  of  this  sort  by 
saying  that  this  book  has  been  an  inestimable  blessing  to  me  by 
dissolving  all  false  relations,  and  confirming  all  true  ones.  No 

*  As  Comte  pithily  puts  it,  the  three  reformers  who  were  all  living  at  the 
same  time,  provided  among  them  for  the  total  demolition  of  Christianity,  — 
Luther  having  overthrown  the  discipline,  Calvin  the  hierarchy,  and  Socinus 
the  dogma. 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


47 


one  who  would  leave  me  on  account  of  it  is  qualified  to  be  my 
friend ;  and  all  who,  agreeing  or  disagreeing  with  my  opinions, 
are  faithful  to  me  through  a  trial  too  severe  for  the  weak  are 
truly  friends  for  life.  I  early  felt  this ;  and  certainly,  no  ardent 
friendships  of  my  youthful  days  have  been  half  so  precious  to 
me  as  those  which  have  borne  unchanged  the  full  revelation  of 
my  heresies.  As  to  my  fortunes,  —  I  have  already  said  that 
my  latest  years  have  been  the  most  prosperous  since  the  publica- 
tion of  my  Political  Economy  series. 

When  my  friends  in  Egypt  and  I  came  down  from,  and  out 
of,  the  Great  Pyramid,  we  agreed  that  no  pleasure  in  the  recol- 
lection of  the  adventure,  and  no  forgetfulness  of  the  fatigue 
and  awfulness  of  it  should  ever  make  us  represent  the  feat  as 
easy  and  altogether  agreeable.  For  the  sake  of  those  who  might 
come  after  us,  we  were  bound  to  remember  the  pains  and  pen- 
alties, as  well  as  the  gains.  In  the  same  way,  I  am  endeavour- 
ing now  to  revive  the  faded  impressions  of  any  painful  social 
consequences  which  followed  the  publication  of  the  "  Atkinson 
Letters,"  that  I  may  not  appear  to  convey  that  there  is  no  fine 
to  pay  for  the  privilege  of  free  utterance.  I  do  not  remember 
much  about  a  sort  of  pain  which  was  over  so  long  ago,  and 
which  there  has  been  nothing  to  revive ;  but  I  am  aware  in  a 
general  way,  that  the  nightly  mood  which  yields  me  such  lofty 
pleasure,  under  the  stars,  and  within  the  circuit  of  the  solemn 
mountains,  was  not  always  preserved;  and  that,  if  I  had  not 
been  on  my  guard  in  advance,  and  afterwards  supported  by  Mr. 
Atkinson's  fine  temper,  I  might  have  declined  into  a  state  of 
suspicion,  and  practice  of  searching  into  people's  opinion  of  me. 
To  renew  the  impressions  of  the  time,  I  have  now.  been  glancing 
over  Mr.  Atkinson's  letters  of  that  spring,  which  I  preserved  for 
some  such  purpose  :  and  I  am  tempted  to  insert  one  or  two,  as 
faithful  reflexions  of  his  mood  at  the  time,  which  was  the  guide 
and  aid  of  mine.  This  reminds  me  that  one  of  our  amusements 
at  the  time  was  at  the  various  attempts,  —  in  print,  in  letters, 
and  in  conversation,  —  to  set  us  at  variance.  One  of  our  literary 
magnates,  who  admires  the  book,  said  that  this  was  the  first 
instance  in  history  of  an  able  man  joining  a  woman  in  author- 


43 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


ship  j  and  the  novelty  was  not  likely  to  be  acquiesced  in  with- 
out resistance.  In  print,  Mr.  Atkinson  was  reproached,  —  in 
the  face  of  my  own  preface,  —  with  drawing  me  into  the  busi- 
ness, and  making  me  his  "  victim,"  and  so  forth,  by  persons 
who  knew  perfectly  well  that,  so  far  from  wanting  any  aid  in 
coming  forward,  he  had  lectured,  and  published  his  lecture, 
containing  the  same  views,  both  physiological  and  anti-theo- 
logical, before  we  had  any  acquaintance  whatever  :  and,  on  the 
other  hand,  I  was  scolded  for  dragging  forth  a  good  man  into 
persecution  which  I  had  shown  I  did  not  myself  care  for.  On 
this  sort  of  charge,  which  admitted  of  no  public  reply,  (if  he 
had  replied  to  any  thing)  Mr.  Atkinson  wrote  these  few  words, 
—  after  reading  the  one  only  review  which  stooped  to  insult,  — 
insult  being,  in  that  instance,  safe  to  the  perpetrator  by  accident 
of  position.  "The  thing  that  impressed  me,  in  reading  that 
review  was,  —  how  ingenious  men  are  in  seeking  how  to  poison 
their  neighbours,  and  how  men  themselves  do  just  what  they 
accuse  others  of  doing.  Honest  scorn  I  don't  at  all  mind :  but 
I  don't  like  a  wrong  or  undue  advantage  being  taken.  I  don't 
like  a  cabman  to  charge  a  shilling  extra  when  one  is  with  ladies, 
thinking  you  won't  dispute  it.  All  our  principles  of  honour 
and  justice  and  benevolence  seem  to  me  to  be  implicated  in 
questions  of  truth ;  and  in  this,  I  certainly  feel  firm  as  a  rock, 
and  with  the  courage  of  the  lion  :  —  that  the  position  is  to  be 
maintained,  and  the  thing  to  be  done,  and  there 's  an  end  of 
it,  —  be  the  consequences  what  they  may."  Then  came  a  letter 
to  him,  "  candidly  advising  "  him  to  do  himself  justice,  as  speed- 
ily as  might  be,  by  publishing  something  alone,  to  repair  the 
disadvantage  of  having  let  a  woman  speak  under  the  same  cover: 
and  on  the  same  day,  came  a  letter  to  me,  gently  reproving 
my  good-nature  in  lending  my  literary  experience  to  any  man's 
objects.  Sometimes  the  volume  was  all  mine,  and  sometimes  all 
his,  —  each  taking  the  advantage  of  the  other's  name.  There 
was  a  good  deal  of  talk  to  the  same  purpose ;  and  Mr.  Atkinson's 
comment  on  this  policy  was,  —  "  the  aim  is  evident,  —  to  stir 
up  jealousy  between  us.  But  it  won't  do.  They  don't  know 
the  man,  — nor  the  woman  either." 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


4\) 


The  following  morsel  may  serve  to  show  our  view  of  the  large 
class  of  censors  who,  believing  nothing  themselves,  of  theology 
or  any  thing  else,  were  scandalised  at  our  "  shaking  the  faith  " 
of  other  people.  A  lawyer  of  this  class,  avowing  that  he  had 
not  read  the  book,  launched  "  a  thunderbolt "  at  me,  —  possibly 
forgetting  how  many  "thunderbolts"  I  had  seen  him  launch 
at  superstitions,  like  that  of  a  future  life,  and  at  those  who  teach 
them.    Mr.  Atkinson's  remark  on  this  will  not  take  up  much 

space.    "  Bravo  !    A  pretty  lawyer  he,  to  give  judgment 

before  he  has  read  his  brief  I  What  a  Scribe  it  is !  lawyer  to 
the  backbone !  I  wish  he  would  tell  us  what  truths  we  may 
be  allowed  to  utter,  and  when.  Certainly  it  seems  a  pity  to 
hurt  any  one's  feelings  :  but  Christianity  was  not  so  tender 
about  that :  nor  does  Nature  seem  very  particular.  It  is  all 
very  fine,  talking  about  people's  religious  convictions ;  but  what 
is  to  become  of  those  who  have  no  such  convictions,  —  that 
increasing  crowd  filling  up  the  spaces  between  the  schisms  of  the 
churches  1  The  Church  is  rotting  away  daily.  Convictions  are 
losing  their  stability.  Men  are  being  scattered  in  the  wilder- 
ness. Shall  we  not  hold  up  a  light  in  the  distance,  and  prepare 
them  a  shelter  from  the  storm  1  The  religious  people,  you  will 
see,  will  respect  us  more  than  the  infidels,  who  have  no  faith  in 
truth,  no  light  but  law,  no  hope  for  Man  but  his  fancies,  ("  con- 
victions.") —  .No,  I  don't  feel  any  thing  at  "  thunderbolts "  of 
this  kind,  I  assure  you.  I  think  it  more  like  the  squash  of  a 
rotten  apple.  Let  such  thunderbolts  come  as  thick  as  rain ; 
and  they  will  not  stir  a  blade  of  grass."  On  April  eleventh, 
my  friend  wrote,  in  reply  to  some  accounts  of  excursions  with 
two  nieces,  who  were  staying  with  me. 

"  Here  is  a  nice  packet  of  letters  from  you.  It  is  delightful 
to  read  your  account  of  your  doings.  You  have  no  time  to  be 
miserable  and  repent,  —  have  you  1  no  time  to  be  thinking  of 
your  reputation  or  your  soul.  Your  cheerful  front  to  the  storm 
and  active  exertions  will  make  you  respected ;  and  remember, 
the  Cause  requires  it.  It  would  be  hard  for  a  Christian  to  be. 
brave  and  cheerful  in  a  Mahomedan  country,  with  any  amount 
of  pitying  and  abusing ;  and  so  you  have  not  a  fair  chance  of 

VOL.  II. 


50 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


the  effect  of  your  faith  on  your  happiness  in  life,  —  as  it  will  be 
for  all  when  the  community  think  as  you  do,  and  each  supports 
each,  and  sympathy  abounds.       ...        ...       ...       As  for 

Dr.  B.  and  the  rest,  —  when  men  don't  like  the  end,  of  course  they 
find  fault  with  the  means.  How  could  it  be  logical  and  scientific 
if  it  leads  to  a  different  conclusion  from  them  :  —  them  —  yes, 
all  of  them  thinking  differently  !  F.  in  "  Fraser  "  does  not  think 
any  thing  of  a  future  life  from  instinct,  or  a  God  from  design  : 
but  these  points  are  just  what  the  others  insist  on.  To  my 
mind,  F.'s  article  and  the  one  in  the  "  Westminster  "  are  full  of 
sheer  assertion  and  error  and  bad  taste.  I  think  they  want  logic, 
science,  or  whatever  they  may  term  it.  If  I  am  wrong  and  un- 
scientific, why  do  they  not  put  me  right  1 — taking  the  "Letters  " 
as  a  mere  sketch,  of  course,  and  presenting  only  a  few  points  of 
the  subject.  It  is  but  a  slight  sketch  of  the  head,  leaving  the 
whole  figure  to  be  completed.  The  fact  is,  these  reviewers  skip 
over  the  science  to  the  theology,  and  talk  nonsense  when  they 
fee  I  uncomfortably  opposed,  —  perhaps  insulted.  I  don't  mean 
in  the  least  to  argue  that  I  am  not  wrong :  only,  those,  who 
think  so  ought  to  show  how  and  why.  Mr.  F.  reasons  from 
analogy  when  my  chief  argument  is  in  opposition  to  those  ana- 
logical reasonings.  The  analogy  with  Christ  is  curious,  as  show- 
ing how  minds  are  impressed  with  resemblances.  Some  see  a 
man  with  the  slightest  curve  of  the  nose,  and  say  "  how  like  the 
Duke  of  Wellington!"  or  with  a  club-foot,  and  say  "how  like 
Byron  ! "  I  am  certainly  well  contented  with  F.'s  praise ;  for 
one  reason  only :  that  people  won't  think  you  so  foolish  in 
bringing  me  forward  in  the  way  you  have.  As  for  the  book,  it 
is  left  by  the  critics  just  where  it  was :  nothing  disproved,  — 
neither  the  facts  nor  the  method,  nor  Bacon  :  and  after  all,  if 
mine  is  u  a  careless  sketch,"  (and  I  dare  say  it  is)  the  question  is 
the  truth  of  what  it  contains.  If  these  men  are  such  good  artists, 
they  will  read  the  fact  out  of  a  rough  sketch.  F.  throws  out 
that  idea  about  Bacon  again,  and  calls  it  a  moral  fault  in  me.  I 
cannot  see  it,  especially  as  I  am  supported  by  others  well  ac- 
quainted with  Bacon.  The  sin  was  of  a  piece  with  the  rest  of 
his  doings,  —  in  a  measure  essential  at  the  time  for  getting  a 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


51 


hearing  at  all  for  his  philosophy  :  and  F.  forgets  that  if  Bacon 
was  an  atheist,  there  was  no  offence  against  sacred  matters,  see- 
ing that  he  did  not  consider  them  sacred,  but  '  the  delirium  of 
phrenetics;'  and  thus  it  was  rather  a  showing  of  respect  and 
yielding.  I  do  not  see  that  this  can  spoil  him  as  an  authority, 
any  more  than  Macaulay  spoils  him  :  and  if  it  did,  he  had  better 
be  no  authority  at  all  than  an  authority  against  science.  Lord 
Campbell  says  Bacon  was  accustomed  in  his  youth  to  ridicule 
religion,  thinks  the  Paradoxes  were  his,  but  that  in  riper  years 
he  probably  changed  his  opinion ;  the  only  reason  given  for 
which  is  a  sentence  in  the  Advancement  of  Learning,  —  his 
earliest  great  work.  The  passage  there  is,  '  A  little  or  superficial 
knowledge  of  philosophy  may  incline  the  mind  of  man  to  athe- 
ism, &c  ; '  which  is  absurd,  if  it  were  insisted  on  by  Campbell. 
(I  suppose  Pope's '  a  little  learning  is  a  dangerous  thing,'  is  taken 
from  this  passage.)  Of  course,  people  will  say  I  am  wrong ;  but 
let  tliem  show  it,  with  all  their  logic ;  and  we  shall  see  who  has 
the  best  of  it.  —  So  you  think  the  storm  is  at  its  height.  It 
shows  how  little  I  know  of  it,  —  I  thought  it  was  all  over.  The 
organ  now  playing  a  wretched  tune  before  my  windows  is  more 
annoyance  than  all  their  articles  put  together.  If  they  generally 
speak  so  of  it,  methinks  there  must  be  something  in  it,  and  they 
are  not  indifferent  to  it.  Your  American  correspondent  is  quite 
a  mystic.  What  curious  turns  and  twists  the  human  mind  takes, 
before  it  gets  into  the  clear  road  of  true  philosophy,  walking 
through  the  midst  of  the  facts  of  Nature,  the  view  widening  and 

clearing  at  every  step  !    Men  like  and  don't  like  our 

book  because  it  makes  so  little  of  theirs  and  all  their  study,  by 

taking  a  more  direct  line  to  the  results.    I  can't  think  what  

can  have  to  say  that  has  not  been  said.  So  he  is  reading  Comte, 
is  he  ?  I  hope  it  will  do  him  good.  —  Make  Dr.  under- 
stand that  repetition  of  the  general  fact  was  not  the  thing 
required  or  intended.  I  had  other  things  to  say,  and  to  press 
into  a  mere  notice.  It  is  this  very  fact  of  incompleteness,  &c, 
&c,  that  I  believe  Bacon  would  have  praised.  There  is  nothing 
cut  and  dried.  There  are  facts  ;  and  in  a  certain  order ;  a  form 
for  thinking  men  to  work  upon,  —  not  to  satisfy  superficial  men 


53 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


with  a  show  of  completeness.  There  are  *  particulars  not  known 
before  for  the  use  of  man,'  which  is  better  than  all  their  logic  :  the 
one  is  mere  measure  and  music,  —  the  other  1  for  future  ages,'  — 
the  grain  of  mustard  seed  only,  perhaps,  but  a  germ  full  of  life. 
The  first  letters  are  a  sketch  expository  of  my  views  on  mental 
science  and  the  means  of  discovery;  and  the  following  letters 
merely  an  example  (like  Bacon's  Natural  History)  of  the  kind  of 
fact  that  will  throw  light  on  the  nature  of  the  mind's  action,  out 
of  which,  when  extended  and  arranged  in  order,  inductions  are 
to  be  made  of  the  laws  of  action.  The  rest  is  little  more  than 
conversational  replies  to  your  questions." 

Another  of  these  letters  was  written  when  I  was  ill  under  an 
attack  of  influenza,  which  disabled  me  from  duly  enjoying  a  visit 
I  was  paying  in  the  north  of  the  district,  and  from  getting  on 
with  my  next  great  scheme.  After  telling  me  how  ill  every  body 
was  at  that  time,  he  says  : 

"  It  is  sad  to  be  making  your  visit  now.  As  to  our  concerns, 
—  there  is  no  saying  how  the  next  post  may  alter  every  thing. 
There  really  is  no  place  for  an  ill  feeling,  or  a  disturbed  one,  if 
we  could  but  keep  it  so  in  view.  It  seems  to  me  that  life  is 
either  too  holy,  or  a  matter  too  indifferent  to  be  moved  by  every 
silly  thought  or  angry  feeling.  With  regard  to  what  they  say 
about  us,  it  is  only  precisely  what  you  anticipated  they  would 
say  :  and  it  seems  to  me  that  after  all  is  said,  our  facts  and  posi- 
tion remain  untouched.  It  seems  that  we  ought  to  have  some- 
thing to  bear.  I  value  this  more  every  day.  If  I  can  be  safe 
from  flatterers  and  inducements  to  indulgence,  I  will  be  thankful 
for  all  the  rest,  and  smile  at  all  their  scandal,  and  their  great 
discovery  that  I  am  notallwise.  It  all  presents  some  new  matter 
for  contemplation  ;  and  if  we  cannot  absolutely  love  our  enemies, 
at  least  we  may  thank  them  for  showing  us  our  faults,  which 
flattering  friends  hide  from  us.  It  seems  all  kinds  of  things 
must  happen  to  us  before  we  can  become  at  all  wise.  First,  wo 
must  become  disenchanted  of  many  delusions,  that  we  may  dis- 
cover the  pure  gold  through  all  the  alloy  which  passes  with  it  in 
the  current  coin  of  life.  The  Idols  of  the  Market  are  inveterate  ; 
but  down  they  must  go,  if  we  would  be  in  the  least  wise  :  and 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


53 


the  process  must  be  healthful  when  one  does  not  become  soured, 
but  feels  one's  heart  rather  expanding  and  warming  than  cooling 
with  years ;  and  more  thankful  for  every  kindness,  and  not 
exacting  as  formerly.  —  I  have  been  staying  a  few  days  in  the 
country.  We  went  over  to  a  charming  place,  one  day.  Such  a 
common !  Perfectly  beautiful !  Acres  of  cherry-blossom,  and 
splendid  furze,  like  heaps  of  living  gold ;  and  the  dark  pine-trees 
rising  from  the  midst !  But  one  can't  describe  such  things.  I 
walked  about  there  alone  while  the  others  were  shooting  young 
rooks,  —  the  parson  at  the  head  of  them.  I  had  a  little  volume 
which  pleased  me  much.   It  was  never  published. 

There  does  not  seem  to  be  any  chance  of  my 
having  got  at  Comte's  ideas  through  any  indirect  channel ;  and 
I  know  nothing  of  him  directly.  Knight's  volume  by  Lewes  is 
the  whole  of  my  acquaintance  with  him.  What  I  do  think  is 
by  labour  in  the  fields  or  wild  commons,  and  on  the  bench  in  the 
Eegent's  Park.  —  That  unqualified  condemnation  of  us  in  regard 
to  Bacon  looks  rather  like  the  condemnation  by  prejudiced  and 
ignorant  divines  which  Bacon  grieves  over.  The  whole  matter 
is  not  worth  wasting  good  feelings  upon  :  but  it  should  rather 
bring  them  forth,  not  injured,  but  strengthened.  If,  from  being 
ill,  we  cannot  depend  on  our  forces,  we  can  only  make  the  best 
of  it.  I  will  soon  tell  you  what  I  think  I  can  best  do  now,  in 
furtherance  of  our  subject.  All  before  us  seems  clear  and  sure, 
and  the  prospect  even  full  of  gaiety,  if  only  I  knew  that  you 
were  quite  well  again.  We  must  have  our  sad  moments  that  we 
may  have  our  wise  ones." 

Here  is  his  Good  Friday  letter,  written  amidst  the  ringing  of 
church  bells.  It  begins  with  a  comment  on  an  unhappy  aged 
person,  —  of  whom  we  had  been  speaking. 

"  Age  is  a  sad  affair.  If  men  went  out  of  life  in  the  very  ful- 
ness of  their  powers,  in  a  flash  of  lightning,  one  might  imagine 
them  transferred  to  heaven  :  but  when  the  fruit  fails,  and  then 
the  flower  and  leaf,  and  branch  after  branch  rots  by  our  side 
while  we  yet  live,  we  can  hardly  wish  for  a  better  thing  than 
early  death.  Yes  ;  it  is  true ;  —  we  do  good  to  those  to  whom 
we  have  done  good :  we  insult  those  we  have  insulted.  Good- 


54 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


ness  is  twice  blessed  :  but  hatred  cankers  the  soul ;  and  there  is 
no  relief,  no  unction,  but  in  hating  on.  But  of  all  the  sad  effects 
of  age,  the  saddest  is  when  as  in  this  case  a  person  reverses  the 
noble  principle  of  his  life,  —  like  the  insane  mother  who  detests 
the  child  she  has  so  tenderly  nurtured  and  loved.  Every  thing 
is  flimsy,  wrong,  illogical,  which  does  not  confirm  such  an  one 
in  his  own  opinions  :  as  a  lady  declared  last  evening  who  had 
been  accusing  me  of  not  giving  a  fair  consideration  to  the  other 
side  of  the  question,  while  I  was  recommending  her  to  read  so 
and  so.  '  Well,'  said  she,  *  it  does  not  signify  talking :  in  plain 
truth,  I  do  not  care  to  know  about  any  body's  views  or  reasons 
which  will  not  confirm  me  in  my  own  faith.'  This  was  a  sudden 
burst  of  honest  pride,  and  eagerness,  in  the  midst  of  the  con- 
fusion, to  hold  tight  where  she  had  got  footing.  Notions  are 
worth  nothing  which  are  uttered  in  irritation  partly,  and  in 
ignorance  greatly,  and  in  the  spirit  of  old  age,  —  not  of  Christ 
or  of  Paul.  If  what  I  have  said  is  wrong  in  logic  or  in  fact, 
it  is  no  use  abusing  us :  the  thing  is  to  exhibit  the  error ;  and 
I  am  sure  none  will  be  more  thankful  for  the  correction  than  I. 

F  is  the  only  one  who  has  tried  to  do  this ;  and  I  thank 

him  for  it,  though  I  think  him  wholly  wrong  on  matters  of  fact. 

—  The  book  is  objected  to  on  religious  grounds.  Now,  what  is 
the  use  of  all  the  millions  spent,  of  all  the  learning  of  the  col- 
leges, and  of  all  the  parsons,  —  as  thick  as  crows  over  the  land, 

—  if  they  cannot  correct  what  is  '  shallow '  and  1  superficial  1 ' 
No  ;  they  feel  otherwise  than  as  they  assert.  They  fear  that 
however  arrogant  or  superficial  the  book  may  be,  there  is  sub- 
stance in  the  midst  of  it ;  there  is  danger  to  the  existing  state 
of  things  ;  and  they  dare  not  honestly  face  the  facts,  and  meet 
the  argument  which  they  declare  to  be  too  superficial  to  deceive 
any  one.  They  dare  not  honestly  and  fairly  do  it.  Shame  upon 
the  land !  With  that  skulking  phantom  of  a  dressed-up  faith 
that  dares  not  face  the  light,  in  broad  day :  with  God  upon  their 
lips,  and  preaching  Christ  crucified,  they  fear  to  encounter  God's 
truth  by  the  way  side !  Why  does  Gavazzi  waste  his  breath 
upon  the  Pope?  Let  him  face  the  wide  world,  and  denounce 
its  false  faith,  and  show  them  how  God  walks  with  them  in 


Aged  49.] 


THE  ATKINSON  LETTERS. 


Nature  as  he  did  by  Adam  in  Eden,  and  they  hide  away  in 
shame,  worship  the  devil,  and  feed  on  the  apple  of  sin  every  day 
of  their  lives.    Men  are  subdued  by  fear.    There  is  no  faith 
in  change,  in  progress,  in  truth,  in  virtue,  in  holiness.    It  is  a 
terror-stricken  age  ;  and  men  fly  to  God  to  save  them,  and  God 
gives  them  truth  in  his  own  way  ;  and  they  receive  it  not. 
There  is  every  kind  of  stupid  terror  got  up  about  the  Great  Ex- 
hibition.   F.  is  in  terror  about  phreno-mesmerism :  he  would 
drown  himself,  —  go  out  of  the  world  if  the  thing  were  true. 
They  like  '  Deerbrook '  —  yes,  as  a  picture  :  but  the  spirit  of 
'  Deerbrook '  is  not  in  them,  or  they  would  love  the  spirit  of  the 
author  of  '  Deerbrook.'    Well !  it  is  not  so  bad  as  Basil  Montagu 
used  to  say.    '  My  dear  Atkinson,  thtfy  will  tear  you  to  pieces.' 
It  is  something  then  to  say  what  we  have  said,  and  remain  in  a 
whole  skin.        ...        ...        ...       The  world  is  ripe  if  there 

were  but  the  towering  genius  that  would  speak  to  it.  We  are 
all  dead  asleep.  We  want  rousing  from  a  lethargy,  that  we  may 
listen  to  the  God  of  heaven  and  of  earth  who  speaks  to  us  in 
our  hearts.  The  word  of  God  is  in  every  man,  if  he  will  listen. 
God  is  with  us  in  all  Nature,  if  we  will  but  read  the  written  law  ; 
written  not  on  tables  of  stone,  but  on  the  wide  expanse  of  nature. 
Yes,  the  savage  is  more  right.  God  is  in  the  clouds,  and  we 
hear  him  in  the  wind.  Yes  ;  and  in  the  curse  of  ignorance,  and 
the  voice  of  reprobation,  there  too  is  God,  —  warning  us  of  igno- 
rance, —  of  unbelief  of  temper,  —  putting  another  law  in  our 
way,  that  we  may  read  and  interpret  the  book  of  fate.  0  !  that 
some  great  teacher  would  arise,  and  make  himself  heard  from  the 
mountain  top  !  The  man  whom  they  crucified  on  this  day  gave 
a  Sermon  on  a  mount.  It  is  in  every  house,  in  every  head  ;  it 
is  known,  passage  after  passage  :  but  in  how  few  has  it  touched 
the  heart,  and  opened  the  understanding  !  Men  are  but  slowly 
led  by  pure  virtue  or  by  pure  reason.  They  require  eloquence 
and  powerful  persuasion ;  deep,  solemn,  unceasing  persuasion. 
The  bible  is  a  dead  letter.  Men  worship  the  air  and  call  it  God. 
God  is  truth,  law,  morals,  noble  deeds  of  heroism,  conscience, 
self-sacrifice,  love,  freedom  and  cheerfulness.  Men  have  no  God. 
It  is  yet  to  be  given  them.    They  have  but  a  log,  and  are  croak- 


56 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


ing  and  unsatisfied ;  and  tomorrow  they  try  King  Hudson  or 
the  devil." 

The  looking  over  these  letters  has  revived  my  recollection  of 
the  really  critical  time  at  which  they  were  written,  —  the  trials 
of  which  I  had  forgotten  as  completely  as  the  fatigues  of  the 
outside,  and  the  gloomy  horror  of  the  inside  of  the  Pyramid.  — 
I  shall  say  nothing  of  the  counterpart  of  the  experience ;  of  the 
vast  discoveries  of  sympathy,  the  new  connexions,  the  pleasant 
friendships,  and  the  gratitude  of  disciples  which  have  accrued  to 
us,  from  that  time  to  the  present  hour.  The  act  was  what  I  had 
to  give  an  account  of,  and  not  its  consequences.  The  same  rea- 
sons which  have  deterred  me  from  exhibiting  the  praises  awarded 
to  other  works  are  operative  here.  —  I  will  conclude  the  whole 
subject  with  observing  that  time  shows  us  more  and  more  the 
need  there  is  of  such  testimony  as  any  of  us  can  give  to  the 
value  of  philosophy,  and  of  science  as  its  basis.  Those  who 
praised  us  and  our  book,  in  print  or  in  conversation,  seem  to 
have  no  more  notion  than  those  who  condemned  us  of  the  in- 
finite importance  of  philosophy,  —  not  only  to  intellectual  wis- 
dom, but  to  goodness  and  happiness ;  and,  again,  that,  in  my 
comrade's  words,  "  the  only  method  of  arriving  at  a  true  philoso- 
phy of  Mind  is  by  the  contemplation  of  Man  as  a  whole,  —  as 
a  creature  endowed  with  definite  properties,  capable  of  being 
observed  and  classified  like  other  phenomena  resulting  from  any 
other  portion  of  Xature."  The  day  when  we  agreed  upon  bear- 
ing our  testimony,  (in  however  imperfect  a  form)  to  these  great 
truths  was  a  great  day  for  me,  in  regard  both  to  my  social  duty 
and  my  private  relations.  Humble  as  was  my  share  in  the  book, 
it  served  to  bring  me  into  a  wide  new  sphere  of  duty ;  and,  as 
to  my  private  connexions,  it  did  what  I  have  said  before ;  —  it 
dissolved  all  false  relations,  and  confirmed  all  true  ones.  Its 
great  importance  to  me  may  excuse,  as  well  as  account  for,  the 
length  to  which  this  chapter  of  my  life  has  extended. 


SECTION  VII. 


It  appears,  from  two  or  three  notices  above,  that  Comte's 
philosophy  was  at  this  time  a  matter  of  interest  to  me.  For 
many  months  after,  his  great  work  was  indeed  a  means  of  singu- 
lar enjoyment  to  me.  After  hearing  Comte's  name  for  many 
years,  and  having  a  vague  notion  of  the  relation  of  his  philosophy 
to  the  intellectual  and  social  needs  of  the  time,  I  obtained  some- 
thing like  a  clear  preparatory  view,  at  second-hand,  from  a  friend, 
at  whose  house  in  Yorkshire  I  was  staying,  before  going  to  Bol- 
ton, in  1850.  What  I  learned  then  and  there  impelled  me  to 
study  the  great  book  for  myself;  and  in  the  spring  of  1851, 
when  the  "  Atkinson  Letters "  were  out,  and  the  History  was 
finished,  and  I  intended  to  make  holiday  from  the  pen  for  awhile, 
I  got  the  book,  and  set  to  work.  I  had  meantime  looked  at 
Lewes's  chapter  on  Comte  in  Mr.  Knight's  Weekly  Volume,  and 
at  Littre's  epitome ;  and  I  could  thus,  in  a  manner,  see  the  end 
from  the  beginning  of  the  complete  and  extended  work.  This 
must  be  my  excuse  for  the  early  date  at  which  I  conceived  the 
scheme  of  translating  the  Philosophie  Positive. 

My  course  of  lectures  on  English  History  finished  on  the  first 
of  April :  and  on  the  eighth,  I  sent  off  the  last  proof-sheet  of  my 
history.  On  the  fourteenth,  my  nieces  left  me ;  and  there  was 
an  interval  before  my  spring  visits  which  I  employed  in  a  close 
study  of  the  first  volume  of  Comte's  work.  On  the  twenty- 
fourth,  the  book  arrived  from  London ;  and  I  am  amazed,  and 
somewhat  ashamed  to  see  by  my  Diary,  that  on  the  twenty- 
sixth,  I  began  to  "  dream "  of  translating  it ;  and  on  the  next 
night  (Sunday  the  twenty-seventh)  sat  up  late,  —  not  dreaming, 
but  planning  it.  On  the  second  of  May,  I  was  in  such  enthu- 
siasm that  I  wrote  to  one  of  the  best-informed  men  on  this  matter 
in  the  kingdom,  (an  old  friend)  to  ask  his  opinion  on  my  scheme. 


58 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


He  emphatically  approved  my  design,  —  of  introducing  the  work 
to  the  notice  of  a  wide  portion  of  the  English  public  who  could 
never  read  it  in  the  original ;  but  he  proposed  a  different  method 
of  doing  it.  He  said  that  no  results  could  compensate  to  me  for 
the  toil  of  translating  six  volumes  in  a  style  like  Comte's,  and  in 
the  form  of  lectures,  whereby  much  recapitulation  was  inevitable. 
He  proposed  that  I  should  give  an  abstract  of  Comte's  philoso- 
phy, with  illustrations  of  my  own  devising,  in  one  volume ;  or, 
at  most,  in  two  of  a  moderate  size.  I  was  fully  disposed  to  do 
this ;  and  I  immediately  began  an  analysis,  which  would,  I 
thought,  be  useful  in  whatever  form  I  might  decide  to  put  forth 
the  substance.  I  know  no  greater  luxury,  after  months  of  writ- 
ing, than  reading,  and  making  an  analysis  as  one  goes.  This 
work  I  pursued  while  making  my  spring  visits.  On  the  eighth 
of  May,  I  went  for  a  fortnight  to  stay  with  some  friends,  between 
whom  and  myself  there  was  cordial  affection,  though  they  were 
Swedenborgians,  of  no  ordinary  degree  of  possession  (for  I  will 
not  call  it  fanaticism  in  people  so  gentle  and  kind.)  Their  curi- 
osity about  Comte  rather  distressed  me ;  and  certainly  it  is  not 
in  the  power  of  the  most  elastic  mind  to  entertain  at  once  Swe- 
denborg  and  Comte.  They  soon  settled  the  matter,  however. 
My  host  kept  aloof,  —  going  out  to  his  fishing  every  morning, 
while  I  was  at  work,  and  having  very  different  matters  to  talk 
about  in  the  evenings.  It  was  his  lady  who  took  up  the  matter ; 
and  I  was  amused  to  see  how.  She  came  to  my  writing-table, 
to  beg  the  loan  of  the  first  volume,  when  I  was  going  out  for  a 
walk.  "When  her  daughter  and  I  returned  from  our  walk,  we 
met  her  in  the  wood ;  and  the  whole  affair  was  settled.  She 
knew  "  all  about  it,"  and  had  decided  that  Comte  knew  nothing. 
I  inquired  in  amazement  the  grounds  of  this  decision.  She  had 
glanced  over  the  first  chapter,  and  could  venture  to  say  she  now 
"  knew  all  about  it."  There  was  mere  human  science,  (which, 
for  that  matter,  Swedenborg  had  also ;)  and  such  science  bears 
no  relation  to  the  realities  which  concern  men  most.  This  was 
all  very  well :  and  I  was  rejoiced  that  the  thing  had  passed  over 
so  easily,  though  marvelling  at  the  presumption  of  the  judgment 
in  one  whom  I  consider  nearly  the  humblest  of  women  where 


Aged  49.] 


COMTE'S  CRITICS. 


59 


her  own  qualities  are  concerned.  A  year  later,  however,  she 
sent  me  a  letter  of  rebuke  about  my  work,  which  had  less  of  the 
modesty,  and  more  of  the  presumption,  than  I  should  have 
expected.  I  reminded  her  of  what  we  had  often  agreed  upon, 
with  remarkable  satisfaction,  —  the  superiority  of  the  Sweden- 
borgians  to  all  other  religious  sects  in  liberality.  "Not  only  does 
their  doctrine  in  a  manner  necessitate  this  liberality,  but  the 
temper  of  its  professors  responds  to  the  doctrine  more  faithfully 
than  that  of  religious  professors  in  general.  I  was  sorry,  as  I 
told  my  friend,  to  see  this  liberality  fail,  on  a  mere  change  of 
the  ground,  —  from  that  of  religious  controversy  to  that  of  the 
opposition  between  science  and  theology.  I  claimed  my  liberty 
to  do  the  work  which  I  thought  best  for  the  truth,  for  the  same 
reason  that  I  rejoiced  in  seeing  her  and  her  excellent  family 
doing  what  they  thought  best  for  what  they  regarded  as  truth. 
I  have  had  no  more  censure  or  remonstrance  from  any  of  the 
family,  and  much  kindness,  —  the  eldest  daughter  even  desiring 
to  come  and  nurse  me,  when  she  heard  of  my  present  illness  : 
but  I  have  no  doubt  that  all  the  heresy  I  have  ever  spoken  and 
written  is  tolerable  in  their  eyes,  in  comparison  with  the  further- 
ance given  to  science  by  the  rendering  of  Comte's  work  into  a 
tongue  which  the  multitude  can  read ;  and  which  they  will  read, 
while  the  young  men  should  be  seeing  visions  and  the  old  men 
dreaming  dreams. 

During  other  visits,  and  a  great  press  of  business  about  cottage- 
building,  and  of  writing  for  "  Household  Words  "  and  elsewhere, 
I  persevered  in  my  study  and  analysis,  —  spending  the  evenings 
in  collateral  reading,  —  the  lives  and  the  history  of  the  works  of 
eminent  mathematicians,  and  other  scientific  men.  This  went 
on  till  the  twenty-sixth  of  June,  when  tourists  began  to  fill  the 
place  and  every  body's  time,  and  I  must  be  off  to  London  and 
into  Norfolk,  and  leave  my  house  to  my  tenant  for  three  months. 
My  first  visit  was  to  some  beloved  American  friends  in  London, 
by  whom  I  was  introduced  to  the  Great  Exhibition.  I  attended 
the  last  of  Mr.  Thackeray's  lectures  of  that  season,  and  paid  even- 
ing visits,  and  saw  many  old  friends.  But  I  was  now  convinced 
that  I  had  lost  my  former  keen  relish  for  London  pleasures.  The 


CO 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


quiet  talks  late  at  night  with  my  hostesses  were  charming ;  and 
there  was  great  pleasure  in  meeting  old  acquaintances  :  but  the 
heat,  and  the  glare,  and  the  noise,  and  the  superficial  bustle,  so 
unlike  my  quiet  life  of  grave  pursuit  and  prevailing  solitude  at 
home  showed  me  that  my  Knoll  had  in  truth  spoiled  me  for 
every  other  abode. 

The  mention  of  Mr.  Thackeray's  name  here  reminds  me  that  it 
does  not  occur  in  my  notes  of  literary  London  twenty  years  ago. 
At  that  time  I  saw  him,  if  I  remember  right,  only  once.  It  was 
at  ^Ir.  Buller's,  at  dinner  ;  —  at  a  dinner  which  was  partly  ludi- 
crous and  partly  painful.  Mrs.  Buller  did  not  excel  in  tact ;  and 
her  party  was  singularly  arranged  at  the  dinner  table.  I  was 
placed  at  the  bottom  of  the  table,  at  its  square  end,  with  an 
empty  chair  on  the  one  hand,  and  Mr.  Buller  on  the  other,  — 
he  being  so  excessively  deaf  that  no  trumpet  was  of  much  u*se  to 
him.  There  we  sat  with  our  trumpets,  —  an  empty  chair  on  the 
one  hand,  and  on  the  other,  Mr.  J.  S.  Mill,  whose  singularly 
feeble  voice  cut  us  off  from  conversation  in  that  direction.  As 
if  to  make  another  pair,  Mrs.  Buller  placed  on  either  side  of  her 
a  gentleman  with  a  flattened  nose,  —  Mr.  Thackeray  on  her  right, 
and  her  son  Charles  on  the  left.  —  It  was  on  this  day  only  that 
I  met  either  Mr.  Dickens  or  Mr.  Thackeray  during  my  London 
life.  About  Mr.  Thackeray  I  had  no  clear  notion  in  any  way, 
except  that  he  seemed  cynical ;  and  my  first  real  interest  in  him 
arose  from  reading  M.  A.  Titmarsh  in  Ireland,  during  my  Tyne- 
mouth  illness.  I  confess  to  being  unable  to  read  "  Vanity  Fair," 
from  the  moral  disgust  it  occasions  ;  and  this  was  my  immediate 
association  with  the  writer's  name  when  I  next  met  him,  during 
the  visit  to  London  in  1851.  I  could  not  follow  his  lead  into 
the  subject  of  the  Bullers,  (then  all  dead)  so  strong  was  my 
doubt  of  his  real  feeling.  I  was,  I  fear,  rather  rough  and  hard 
when  we  talked  of  "  Vanity  Fair  ; "  but  a  sudden  and  most  genu- 
ine change  of  tone,  — of  voice,  face  and  feeling,  — that  occurred 
on  my  alluding  to  Dobbin's  admirable  turning  of  the  tables  on 
Amelia,  won  my  trust  and  regard  more  than  any  thing  he  had 
said  yet.  "  Pendennis  "  much  increased  my  respect  and  admira- 
tion ;  and  "  Esmond  "  appears  to  me  the  book  of  the  century,  in 


Aged  49.] 


DICKENS. 


61 


its  department.  I  have  read  it  three  times  ;  and  each  time  with 
new  wonder  at  its  rich  ripe  wisdom,  and  at  the  singular  charm 
of  Esmond's  own  character.  The  power  that  astonishes  me  the 
most  in  Thackeray  is  his  fertility,  shown  in  the  way  in  which  he 
opens  glimpses  into  a  multitudinous  world  as  he  proceeds.  The 
chief  moral  charm  is  in  the  paternal  vigilance  and  sympathy 
which  constitute  the  spirit  of  his  narration.  The  first  drawback 
in  his  books,  as  in  his  manners,  is  the  impression  conveyed  by 
both  that  he  never  can  have  known  a  good  and  sensible  woman. 
I  do  not  believe  he  has  any  idea  whatever  of  such  women  as 
abound  among  the  matronage  of  England,  —  women  of  excellent 
capacity  and  cultivation  applied  to  the  natural  business  of  life. 
It  is  perhaps  not  changing  the  subject  to  say  next  what  the  other 
drawback  is.  Mr.  Thackeray  has  said  more,  and  more  effectu- 
ally, about  snobs  and  snobbism  than  any  other  man  ;  and  yet  his 
frittered  life,  and  his  obedience  to  the  call  of  the  great  are  the 
observed  of  all  observers.  As  it  is  so,  so  it  must  be ;  but  "  0  ! 
the  pity  of  it !  the  pity  of  it !  "  Great  and  unusual  allowance  is 
to  be  made  in  his  case,  I  am  aware ;  but  this  does  not  lessen  the 
concern  occasioned  by  the  spectacle  of  one  after  another  of  the 
aristocracy  of  nature  making  the  ko-tow  to  the  aristocracy  of 
accident.  If  society  does  not  owe  all  it  would  be  thankful  to 
owe  to  Mr.  Thackeray,  yet  it  is  under  deep  and  large  obligations 
to  him  ;  and  if  he  should  even  yet  be  seen  to  be  as  wise  and 
happy  in  his  life  and  temper  as  he  might  be  any  day,  he  may  do 
much  that  would  far  transcend  all  his  great  and  rising  achieve- 
ments thus  far ;  and  I  who  shall  not  see  it  would  fain  persuade 
myself  that  I  foresee  it.  He  who  stands  before  the  world  as  a 
sage  de  jure  must  surely  have  impulses  to  be  a  sage  de  facto. 

Of  Mr.  Dickens  I  have  seen  but  little  in  face-to-face  inter- 
course ;  but  I  am  glad  to  have  enjoyed  that  little.  There  may 
be,  and  I  believe  there  are,  many  who  go  beyond  me  in  admira- 
tion of  his  works,  —  high  and  strong  as  is  my  delight  in  some 
of  them.  Many  can  more  keenly  enjoy  his  peculiar  humour,  — 
delightful  as  it  is  to  me ;  and  few  seem  to  miss  as  I  do  the  pure 
plain  daylight  in  the  atmosphere  of  his  scenery.  So  many  fine 
painters  have  been  mannerists  as  to  atmosphere  and  colour  that 


C»2 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


it  may  be  unreasonable  to  object  to  one  more  :  but  the  very- 
excellence  and  diversity  of  Mr.  Dickens's  powers  makes  one  long 
that  they  should  exercise  their  full  force  under  the  broad  open 
sky  of  nature,  instead  of  in  the  most  brilliant  palace  of  art. 
While  he  tells  us  a  world  of  things  that  are  natural  and  even 
true,  his  personages  are  generally,  as  I  suppose  is  undeniable, 
profoundly  unreal.  It  is  a  curious  speculation  what  effect  his 
universally  read  works  will  have  on  the  foreign  conception  of 
English  character.  Washington  Irving  came  here  expecting  to 
find  the  English  life  of  Queen  Anne's  days,  as  his  "Sketch-book" 
shows  :  and  very  unlike  his  preconception  was  the  England  he 
found.  And  thus  it  must  be  with  Germans,  Americans  and 
French  who  take  Mr.  Dickens's  books  to  be  pictures  of  our  real 
life.  —  Another  vexation  is  his  vigorous  erroneousness  about 
matters  of  science,  as  shown  in  "  Oliver  Twist "  about  the  new 
poor-law  (which  he  confounds  with  the  abrogated  old  one)  and 
in  "Hard  Times,"  about  the  controversies  of  employers.  Nobody 
wants  to  make  Mr.  Dickens  a  Political  Economist ;  but  there 
are  many  who  wish  that  he  would  abstain  from  a  set  of  difficult 
subjects,  on  which  all  true  sentiment  must  be  underlain  by  a 
sort  of  knowledge  which  he  has  not.  The  more  fervent  and 
inexhaustible  his  kindliness,  (and  it  is  fervent  and  inexhausti- 
ble,) the  more  important  it  is  that  it  should  be  well-informed 
and  well-directed,  that  no  errors  of  his  may  mislead  his  readers 
on  the  one  hand,  nor  lessen  his  own  genial  influence  on  the 
other. 

The  finest  thing  in  Mr.  Dickens's  case  is  that  he,  from  time 
to  time,  proves  himself  capable  of  progress,  —  however  vast  his 
preceding  achievements  had  been.  In  humour,  he  will  hardly 
surpass  "Pickwick,"  simply  because  "Pickwick"  is  scarcely 
surpassable  in  humour :  but  in  several  crises,  as  it  were,  of  his 
fame,  when  every  body  was  disappointed,  and  his  faults  seemed 
running  his  graces  down,  there  has  appeared  something  so  pro- 
digiously fine  as  to  make  us  all  joyfully  exclaim  that  Dickens 
can  never  permanently  fail.  It  was  so  with  "  Copperfield : " 
and  I  hope  it  may  be  so  again  with  the  new  work  which  my 
survivors  will  soon  have  in  their  hands.  —  Meantime,  every 


Aged  49.] 


NIGHT  IN  A  WORKHOUSE. 


03 


indication  seems  to  show  that  the  man  himself  is  rising.  He  is 
a  virtuous  and  happy  family  man,  in  the  first  place.  His  glow- 
ing and  generous  heart  is  kept  steady  by  the  best  domestic 
influences  :  and  we  may  fairly  hope  now  that  he  will  fulfil  the 
natural  purpose  of  his  life,  and  stand  by  literature  to  the  last ; 
and  again,  that  he  will  be  an  honour  to  the  high  vocation  by 
prudence  as  well  as  by  power :  so  that  the  graces  of  genius  and 
generosity  may  rest  on  the  finest  basis  of  probity  and  prudence ; 
and  that  his  old  age  may  be  honoured  as  heartily  as  his  youth 
and  manhood  have  been  admired.  —  Nothing  could  exceed  the 
frank  kindness  and  consideration  shown  by  him  in  the  corre- 
spondence and  personal  intercourse  we  have  had ;  and  my  cordial 
regard  has  grown  with  my  knowledge  of  him. 

When  I  left  London,  it  was  for  the  singular  contrast  of  spend- 
ing the  next  night  in  a  workhouse.  Two  of  my  servants 
(brother  and  sister)  had  been  sent  to  me  from  Norfolk,  —  the 
maid  by  my  own  family,  and  the  man  by  the  excellent  master 
of  the  Union  "Workhouse  near  Harling.  The  girl  (now  married 
to  the  master  of  the  Ragged  School  at  Bristol)  had  a  strong 
inclination  to  school-keeping,  and  had  pursued  it  in  this  work- 
house and  elsewhere  with  such  assiduity  as  to  lose  her  health. 
During  the  five  years  that  she  lived  with  me  (beloved  like  a 
daughter  by  me,  and  honoured  by  all  who  knew  her)  she  in  a 
great  measure  recovered  her  health ;  and  when  she  married  from 
my  house,  at  Christmas  1852,  she  went  to  resume  her  vocation, 
in  which  she  is  now  leading  the  most  useful  life  conceivable. 
We  went  to  Harling,, she  and  I,  in  this  July  1851,  to  see  her 
old  friends,  and  the  old  school,  and  her  old  parents,  and  the 
success  of  the  agricultural  part  of  the  management  of  this  Guilt- 
cross  Union.  Thus  it  was  that  I  went  from  London  to  sleep 
in  a  workhouse.    Very  comfortable  and  agreeable  I  found  it. 

The  next  weeks  were  spent  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Norwich, 
and  at  Cromer,  where  I  was  joined  by  my  younger  sister  and 
her  children.  It  was  at  Cromer  that  a  strange  impulse  on  my 
part,  —  an  impulse  of  yielding  chiefly,  —  caused  me  to  go  into 
an  enterprise  which  had  no  result.  It  put  me,  for  a  time,  in 
the  difficulty  of  having  too  many  irons  in  the  fire ;  but  that  was 


04 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


not  my  fault ;  for  I  could  have  no  conception  of  the  news  which 
was  awaiting  me  in  London,  on  my  return.  While  at  Cromer, 
I  was  justified  in  feeling  that  I  might  take  as  much  time  as  I 
pleased  about  Comte.  It  depended  wholly  on  myself:  but 
before  I  got  home,  the  case  was  changed,  as  I  shall  presently 
have  to  tell.  The  intervening  anecdote  has  been  hitherto  a  pro- 
found secret,  by  my  own  desire;  —  perhaps  the  only  secret  of  my 
own  that  I  ever  had  :  and  this  was  part  of  the  amusement.  One 
reason  why  I  tell  it  now  is  because  it  affords  a  confirmation  out 
of  my  own  experience  of  what  many  of  my  friends  have  won- 
dered to  hear  me  say  j  —  that  one  cannot  write  fiction,  after 
having  written  {con  amore,  at  least)  history  and  philosophy. 

Ever  since  the  "  Deerbrook  "  days,  my  friends  had  urged  me 
to  write  more  novels.  When  "Currer  Bell"  was  staying  with 
me,  the  winter  before  the  time  I  have  arrived  at,  she  had  spoken 
earnestly  to  me  about  it,  and,  as  it  appeared  to  us  both,  wholly 
in  vain.  While  at  Cromer,  however,  I  read  "  Pendennis  "  with 
such  intense  enjoyment,  and  it  seemed  so  much  the  richer  from 
its  contrast  with  "  the  Ogilvies,"  and  some  other  metaphysical, 
sentimental  novels  that  had  fallen  in  my  way,  that  the  notion 
of  trying  my  hand  once  more  at  a  novel  seized  upon  me ;  and 
I  wrote  to  Charlotte  Bronte,  to  consult  her  as  to  the  possibility 
of  doing  it  secretly,  and  getting  it  out  anonymously,  and  quite 
unsuspected,  —  as  a  curious  experiment.  She  wrote  joyously 
about  it,  and  at  once  engaged  her  publisher's*  interest  in  the 
scheme.  She  showed  the  most  earnest  friendliness  throughout. 
She  sent  me  a  packet  of  envelopes  directed  by  herself  to  her 
publisher;  and  she  allowed  his  letters  to  me  to  come  through 
her  hands.  When  I  reached  home,  on  the  first  of  October,  I 
was  somewhat  scared  at  what  I  had  undertaken,  —  the  case 
of  Comte  having  so  changed,  as  I  will  tell ;  and  the  matter  was 
not  made  easier  by  my  inability  to  tell  Mr.  Chapman,  who  was 
to  publish  Comte,  or  Mr.  Atkinson,  who  was  in  almost  daily 
correspondence  with  me,  what  was  delaying  the  progress  of  the 
philosophical  half  of  my  work.  The  difficulty  was  at  an  end 
before  Christmas  by  the  scheme  of  the  novel  being  at  an  end. 

*  Mr.  G.  Smith,  of  the  firm  of  Smith,  Elder  &  Co. 


Aged  49.] 


ABORTIVE  SCHEME. 


65 


It  was  on  an  odd  plan.  It  was  no  oddness  in  the  plan,  however, 
which  discouraged  me ;  but  I  doubted  from  the  first  whether  I 
could  ever  again  succeed  in  fiction,  after  having  completely- 
passed  out  of  the  state  of  mind  in  which  I  used  to  write  it.  In 
old  days,  I  had  caught  myself  quoting  the  sayings  of  my  own 
personages,  so  strong  was  the  impression  of  reality  on  myself; 
and  I  let  my  pen  go  as  it  would  when  the  general  plan  of  the 
story,  and  the  principal  scenes,  were  once  laid  down.  Now  I 
read  and  pondered,  and  arranged,  and  sifted,  and  satisfied  my- 
self, before  I  entered  upon  any  chapter,  or  while  doing  it :  — 
carrying,  in  fact,  the  methods  and  habits  of  historical  composi- 
tion into  tale-telling.  I  had  many  misgivings  about  tins ;  but, 
on  the  whole,  I  thought  that  the  original  principle  of  the  work, 
and  some  particular  scenes,  would  carry  it  through.  At  Christ- 
mas, I  sent  the  first  volume  to  Charlotte  Bronte,  who  read  it 
before  forwarding  it  to  the  publisher.  She  wrote  gloriously 
about  it :  and  three  days  after  came  a  pathetic  letter  from  the 
publisher.  He  dared  not  publish  it,  on  account  of  some  favour- 
able representations  and  auguries  on  behalf  of  the  Catholics. 
That  was  a  matter  on  which  C.  Bronte  and  I  had  perpetual  con- 
troversy, —  her  opinion  being  one  in  which  I  could  by  no  means 
agree  ;  and  thus  expressed,  after  I  had  claimed  credit  for  the 
Catholics,  as  for  every  body  else,  as  far  as  their  good  works  ex- 
tended :  —  M  Their  good  deeds  I  don't  dispute  j  but  I  regard 
them  as  the  hectic  bloom  on  the  cheek  of  disease.  I  believe  the 
Catholics,  in  short,  to  be  always  doing  evil  that  good  may  come, 
or  doing  good  that  evil  may  come."  Yet  did  my  representation 
of  the  Catholics  in  no  way  shake  her  faith  in  the  success  of  my 
novel ;  and  her  opinion,  reaching  the  publisher  the  day  after  he 
had  written  his  apprehensions  to  me,  aggravated,  as  he  said,  his 
embarrassment  and  distress.  He  implored  me  to  lay  aside  this 
scheme,  and  send  him  a  novel  "  like  Deerbrook."  That  was  no 
more  in  my  power  now  than  to  go  back  to  thirty  years  of  age. 
C.  Bronte*  entreated  me  merely  to  lay  aside  my  novel,  if  I  would 
not  finish  it  on  speculation,  saying  that  some  things  in  it  were 
equal  to,  or  beyond,  any  thing  I  had  ever  written.  I  did  intend 
at  first  to  finish  it :  but  other  works  pressed ;  the  stimulus,  and 


CG 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


even  the  conception,  passed  away ;  and  I  burned  the  M.S.  and 
memoranda,  a  few  months  since,  not  wishing  to  leave  to  my  sur- 
vivors the  trouble  of  an  unfinished  M.S.  which  they  could  make 
no  use  of,  and  might  scruple  to  burn.  I  told  Mr.  Atkinson 
and  my  Executor  the  facts  when  the  scheme  was  at  an  end; 
and  I  hereby  record  the  only  failure  of  the  sort  I  had  expe- 
rienced since  the  misleading  I  underwent  about  the  Life  of 
Howard,  at  the  outset  of  my  career.  I  may  add  that  the  pub- 
lisher behaved  as  well  as  possible,  under  the  circumstances.  He 
showed  me  civility  in  various  ways,  was  at  all  times  ready  to 
negotiate  for  another  novel  "like  Deerbrook,"  and  purchased 
the  copy-right  of  "  Deerbrook  "  itself,  in  order  to  bring  it  out  in  a 
cheap  series,  with  the  novels  of  Mr.  Thackeray  and  "Currer  Bell." 

While  I  write,  I  reca],  with  some  wonder,  the  fact  that  I  had 
another  literary  engagement  on  my  hands,  at  that  very  time. 
On  recurring  to  my  Diary,  I  find  it  was  even  so ;  and  I  wonder 
how  I  could  justify  it  to  myself.  It  was  at  Cromer,  as  I  have 
said,  that  this  scheme  of  the  novel  was  framed,  after  I  had  con- 
sulted Mr.  Chapman  in  London  about  publishing  Comte's  "  Pos- 
itive Philosophy."  We  had  a  clear  understanding  that  it  was 
to  be  done  ;  but  I  was  then  wholly  free  in  regard  to  time.  On 
my  return,  I  spent  a  week  in  London  (then  "  empty,"  according 
to  the  London  use  of  the  word)  with  a  cousin,  in  a  lodging,  for 
the  sole  object  of  seeing  the  Exhibition  in  our  own  way,  and  in 
peace  and  quiet.  On  the  last  day,  Mr.  Chapman,  who  had  been 
trying  to  track  me,  overtook  me  with  a  wonderful  piece  of  news. 
Mr.  Lombe,  a  Norfolk  country  gentleman,  and  late  High  Sheriff 
of  the  county,  had  for  many  years  been  a  disciple  of  Comte,  and 
had  earnestly  wished  to  translate  the  "  Positive  Philosophy," 
but  had  been  prevented  by  ill  health.  He  was  a  perfect  stranger 
to  me,  and  residing  in  Florence  ;  but,  hearing  from  Mr.  Chap- 
man what  I  was  doing,  he  sent  me,  by  him,  a  draft  on  his  bank- 
ers for  .£500.  His  obvious  intention  was  to  give  me  the  money, 
in  recompense  for  the  work  ;  but  I  preferred  paying  the  expenses 
of  paper,  print  and  publication  out  of  it,  taking  .£200  for  my 
own  remuneration.  To  finish  now  about  the  money  part  of  the 
affair,  —  I  took  advice  how  to  act,  in  regard  to  so  important  a 


Aged  49.]         PAPERS  ON  BRITISH  PRODUCTIONS. 


G7 


trust ;  and,  in  accordance  with  that  advice,  I  immediately  in- 
vested the  whole  amount  in  the  Three  per  Cents.,  and,  on  the 
death  of  Mr.  Lombe,  in  the  next  winter,  I  added  a  codicil  to  my 
will,  appointing  two  trustees  to  the  charge  and  application  of  the 
money,  in  case  of  my  dying  before  the  work  was  completed  and 
published.  Just  when  Mr.  Lombe  died,  I  was  proposing  to  send 
him  a  portion  of  my  M.S.,  to  see  whether  my  method  and  exe- 
cution satisfied  him.  When  the  whole  sum  was  distributed, 
and  the  work  out,  I  submitted  the  accounts  and  vouchers  to  two 
intimate  friends  of  Mr.  Lombe,  both  men  of  business,  and  ob- 
tained their  written  assurance  of  their  entire  approbation  of  what 
I  had  done,  —  with  the  one  exception  that  they  thought  I  ought 
to  have  taken  more  of  the  money  myself.  As  to  the  profits  of 
the  sale,  —  it  seemed  to  me  fair  that  M.  Comte  should  have  a 
portion  ;  and  also  Mr.  Chapman,  through  whom  Mr.  Lombe  had 
become  interested  in  the  scheme.  The  profits  have  therefore 
been,  up  to  this  time,  and  will  be  henceforward,  divided  among 
the  three,  —  M.  Comte,  Mr.  Chapman  and  myself  or  my  lega- 
tees. —  My  engagement  to  Mr.  Chapman  was  to  deliver  the 
M.S.  entire  within  two  years  of  my  return  home ;  that  is,  in 
October,  1853  ;  and  this  was  precisely  the  date  at  which  I  de- 
livered the  last  sheets.  The  printing  had  been  proceeding  dur- 
ing the  summer ;  so  that  the  work  appeared  at  the  beginning  of 
November,  1853. 

The  additional  work  to  which  I  have  referred,  as  upon  my 
hands  at  the  same  time,  was  this.  I  returned  home,  in  the 
autumn  of  1851,  by  Birmingham,  where  I  spent  a  month  at 
my  brother  Robert's  house,  at  Edgbaston.  The  proprietors  of 
"  Household  Words  "  had  all  this  time  been  urgent  with  me  to 
write  stories  for  them.  I  found  myself  really  unable  to  do  this 
with  any  satisfaction,  —  not  only  because  of  the  absurdity  of 
sending  fiction  to  Mr.  Dickens,  but  because  I  felt  more  and  more 
that  I  had  passed  out  of  that  stage  of  mind  in  which  I  could 
write  stories  well.  It  struck  me  that  a  full,  but  picturesque 
account  of  manufactures  and  other  productive  processes  might  be 
valuable,  both  for  instruction  and  entertainment :  and  I  proposed 
to  try  my  hand  on  two  or  three  of  the  Birmingham  manufac- 


•68 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


tures,  under  the  advantage  of  my  brother's  introduction,  in  the 
first  place,  and,  in  the  next,  of  his  correction,  if  I  should  fall 
into  any  technical  mistakes.  The  proposal  was  eagerly  accepted  ; 
and  I  then  wrote  the  papers  on  Electro-plating,  Papier-mache 
and  the  Xail  and  Screw  manufacture,  —  which  stand  in  "  House- 
hold "Words  "  under  the  titles  of  "Magic  Troughs  at  Birmingham," 
"  Flower-shows  in  a  Birmingham  Hot-house,"  and  "  Wonders  of 
Nails  and  Screws."  These  succeeded  so  well  that  I  went  on  at 
home  with  such  materials  as  the  neighbourhood  afforded,  —  the 
next  papers  which  appeared  being  "  Kendal  Weavers,"  and  "  The 
Bobbin-mill  at  Ambleside."  Moreover,  it  was  presently  settled 
that  I  should  spend  a  month  at  Birmingham  after  Christmas,  to 
do  another  batch.  Thereby  hangs  a  pretty  little  tale :  —  at  least, 
so  it  appears  to  me.  My  brother  and  sister  having  taken  for 
granted  that  I  should  go  to  their  house,  I  begged  them  not  to 
take  it  amiss  if  I  preferred  going  to  a  lodging,  with  my  maid. 
My  reasons  were  that  I  was  going  for  business  purposes,  which 
would  occupy  all  the  daylight  hours  at  that  time  of  year ;  that 
I  must  therefore  dine  late ;  that  I  should  be  going  about  among 
the  manufactories,  with  my  maid  to  hear  for  me ;  and  that  I 
really  thought  my  family  and  I  should  enjoy  most  of  one  another's 
society  by  my  lodging  near  enough  to  go  to  tea  with  them  every 
evening,  and  spend  the  Sundays  at  their  house.  They  appeared 
to  acquiesce  at  once,  —  saying,  however,  that  I  ought  to  be  very 
near,  on  account  of  the  highway  robberies,  with  violence,  which 
were  at  that  time  taking  place  at  Edgbaston  almost  every  even- 
ing. My  sister  wrote  me  an  account  of  the  rooms  she  had 
secured.  I  was  rather  struck  by  her  recommendations  about 
leaving  terms  and  arrangements  to  my  landlady,  and  by  an  odd 
bit  of  deprecation  about  not  expecting  the  charms  of  my  beautiful 
home.  The  next  letter  from  one  of  my  nephews  at  first  dispersed 
a  nascent  doubt  whether  they  were  not  intending  to  take  me  in, 
—  in  both  senses.    He  wrote,  "  your  rooms  are  in  one  of  those 

houses  near  Mrs.  E  's,  in  the  Highfield  Eoad ;  so  that  you 

will  not  have  so  far  to  go  to  our  tea-table  but  that  you  will  be 
very  safe  from  thieves.  Your  landlady  is  a  very  trustworthy 
person.    She  lived  with  us  when  we  lived  in  the  Bristol  road  ; 


Aged  49.] 


BIRMINGHAM  LODGINGS. 


G9 


and  she  left  that  place,  not  for  any  fault,  but  for  a  better  situa- 
tion." On  a  second  reading,  it  struck  me  that  this  was  all  true 
of  his  mother,  and  of  their  house ;  and  I  was  not  therefore  wholly 
surprised  when  the  nephew  who  met  us  at  the  station  directed 
the  car  to  my  brother's  house.  I  was  surprised,  however,  when 
I  saw  what  preparation  they  had  made  for  me  and  my  work. 
They  had  taken  down  a  bed  in  one  of  the  prettiest  rooms  in  the 
house,  and  had  put  in  a  writing-table,  a  sofa,  a  lamp,  and  all 
possible  conveniences.  As  one  of  my  nephews  had  to  dine  late, 
there  was  no  difficulty  about  that;  and  my  sister  and  nieces 
went  every  where  with  me,  one  at  a  time,  to  listen  with  and  for 
me,  make  notes,  and  render  all  easy.  It  really  was  charming. 
I  then  wrote  ten  more  papers,  as  follows  : 

"  The  Miller  and  his  Men,"  —  The  Birmingham  Flour-mills. 

"Account  of  some  treatment  of  Gold  and  Gems,"  Gold  refin- 
ing, Gold  Chains  and  Jewellery. 

"  Bainbow-Making,"  —  Coventry  Ribbons. 

"  Needles,"  —  the  Redditch  Manufacture. 

"  Time  and  the  Hour,"  —  Coventry  Watches. 

"  Guns  and  Pistols,"  —  Birmingham  Gun-manufacture. 

"  Birmingham  Glass-works,"  —  Messrs.  Chances  and  Messrs. 
Osiers. 

"  What  there  is  in  a  Button,"  —  Birmingham  buttons. 
"  Tubal  Cain,"  —  Brass-founding. 

"  New  School  for  Wives,"  —  Evening  School  for  Women. 

Invitations  were  sent  me,  when  the  authorship  of  these  papers 
got  abroad,  from  various  seats  of  manufacture ;  but  the  editors 
and  I  agreed  that  our  chief  textile  manufactures  were  already 
familiar  to  every  body's  knowledge ;  and  I  therefore  omitted  all 
of  that  kind  except  Kendal  carpets,  Coventry  ribbons,  and 
Paisley  shawls.  This  last  was  done  the  next  summer,  when  I 
was  in  Scotland,  at  the  same  time  with  Paper-hangings  ("  House- 
hold Scenery  ")  and  "  News  of  an  old  Place,"  —  the  Lead  works 
at  "  Leadhills."  From  Scotland,  my  niece  and  I  passed  into 
Ireland,  as  I  shall  have  to  tell ;  and  there  I  wrote,  at  the  Giant's 
Causeway,  "  the  Life  of  a  Salmon ; "  and  afterwards  "  Peatal 
aggression,"  —  the  Peat  Works  near  Athy  :  the  "  English  Pass- 


70 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851. 


port  system,"  —  Railway  ticket  manufacture;  "Triumphant  Car- 
riages," —  Messrs.  Hutton's  Coach  factory  at  Dublin  :  "  Hope 
with  a  Slate  Anchor,"  —  the  slate  quarries  in  Yalentia  :  "  Butter," 
"  the  Irish  Union,"  a  workhouse  picture  ;  and  "  Famine-time,"  a 
true  picture  of  one  of  the  worst  districts,  at  the  worst  time  of  the 
visitation.  I  have  done  only  two  more  of  the  same  character,  — 
of  the  productive  processes ;  —  Cheshire  Cheese,"  and  "  How  to 
get  Paper,"  —  both  last  year,  (1854.)  —  It  will  be  seen  that  I 
need  have  entertained  no  apprehension  of  enforced  idleness  in 
consequence  of  the  publication  of  the  "  Atkinson  Letters."  It 
appears  that,  at  the  close  of  the  same  year,  I  was  over-burdened 
with  work ;  and  I  will  add,  for  truth's  sake,  that  I  was  uneasy, 
and  dissatisfied  with  myself  for  having  undertaken  so  much. 
The  last  entry  in  my  Diary  (a  mere  note-book)  for  1851  is  on 
the  thirtieth  of  December.  "  As  I  shall  be  travelling  to  Bir- 
mingham tomorrow,  I  here  close  my  journal  of  this  remarkable 
year ;  —  an  improving  and  happy  one,  little  as  the  large  world 
would  believe  it.    I  have  found  it  full  of  blessings." 

All  this  time,  my  study  of  Comte  was  going  on ;  and  I  con- 
tinued the  analysis  for  some  weeks  ;  but  at  length  I  found  that 
I  had  attained  sufficient  insight  and  familiarity  to  render  that 
work  unnecessary.  The  first  day  on  which  I  actually  embodied 
my  study  of  it  in  writing, — the  first  day  on  which  I  wrote  what 
was  to  stand,  —  was  June  1st,  1852  :  and  a  month  before  that, 
the  greatest  literary  engagement  of  my  life  had  been  entered 
upon,  of  which  I  shall  have  to  speak  presently.  After  my  re- 
turn from  Birmingham,  I  had  had  to  give  my  annual  course  of 
lectures  to  the  Mechanics  ;  and  my  subject,  the  History  of  the 
United  States,  from  Columbus  to  Washington,  required  some 
study.  Before  I  left  home  for  the  tourist  season,  I  had  got  into 
the  thick  of  the  mathematical  portion  of  Comte ;  and  there  I  had 
to  stop  till  my  return  in  the  middle  of  October.  I  had  then  to 
write  an  article  on  Ireland  for  the  "  Westminster  Review,"  and 
other  matters;  so  that  it  was  the  first  of  December  before  I 
opened  Comte  again,  and  Christmas  day  when  I  finished  the 
first  of  the  six  volumes.  After  that,  the  work  went  on  swim- 
mingly.   All  the  rest  was  easy.    I  finished  Astronomy  in  the 


Aged  49.] 


"  PHILOSOPHIE  POSITIVE." 


71 


middle  of  January,  and  Biology  on  the  twenty-third  of  April ; 
so  that  I  had  five  months  for  the  three  last  volumes,  which  were 
by  far  the  easiest  to  do,  though  half  as  long  again  as  the  first 
three.  I  had  a  perpetual  succession  of  guests,  from  April  till 
the  end  of  September ;  but  I  did  not  stop  work  for  them ;  nor 
did  I  choose  to  leave  home  till  I  had  fulfilled  my  engagement. 
It  was  on  the  eighth  of  October  that  I  put  the  finishing  stroke 
to  the  version  :  on  the  ninth  I  wrote  the  Preface ;  and  on  the 
tenth,  I  had  the  pleasure  of  carrying  the  last  packet  of  M.S.  to 
the  post.  Some  cousins  who  were  staying  with  me  at  the  time 
went  on  an  excursion  for  the  day  \  and  when  they  returned, 
they  sympathised  with  me  on  the  close  of  so  long  and  so  arduous 
a  task.  I  was  much  exhausted,  —  after  a  summer  of  abundant 
authorship  in  other  ways,  as  well  as  of  social  engagement  from 
the  number  and  variety  of  guests,  and  the  absence  of  my  usual 
autumn  retirement  to  the  sea,  or  some  other  quiet  place:  but 
the  gain  was  well  worth  the  toil.  I  find  in  my  diary  some  very 
strong  expressions  of  rapture  about  my  task ;  and  I  often  said, 
to  myself  and  others,  in  the  course  of  it,  that  I  should  never 
enjoy  anything  so  much  again.  And  I  believe  that  if  I  were 
now  to  live  and  work  for  twenty  years,  I  could  never  enjoy  any 
thing  more.  The  vast  range  of  knowledge,  through  which  one 
is  carried  so  easily,  is  a  prodigious  treat ;  and  yet  more,  the  clear 
enunciation,  and  incessant  application  of  principles.  The  weak 
part  of  the  book,  —  the  sacrifices  made  to  system  and  order,  — 
happens  just  to  fall  in  with  my  weak  tendency  in  that  direction; 
so  that  it  required  some  warning  from  others,  and  more  from 
within,  to  prevent  my  being  carried  away  altogether  by  my 
author.  After  all  deductions  made,  on  the  score  of  his  faults 
as  a  teacher,  and  my  weakness  as  a  learner,  the  relation  was  a 
blessed  one.  I  became  "  strengthened,  stablished,  settled  "  on 
many  a  great  point  J  I  learned  much  that  I  should  never  other- 
wise have  known,  and  revived  a  great  deal  of  early  knowledge 
which  I  might  never  otherwise  have  recalled  :  and  the  subdued 
enthusiasm  of  my  author,  his  philosophical  sensibility,  and  honest 
earnestness,  and  evident  enjoyment  of  his  own  wide  range  of 
views  and  deep  human  sympathy,  kept  the  mind  of  his  pupil  in 


72 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1852. 


a  perpetual  and  delightful  glow.  Many  a  passage  of  my  version 
did  I  write  with  tears  falling  into  my  lap  ;  and  many  a  time  did 
I  feel  almost  stifled  for  want  of  the  presence  of  some  genial  dis- 
ciple of  my  instructor,  to  whom  I  might  speak  of  his  achieve- 
ment, with  some  chance  of  being  understood. 

As  for  my  method  of  working  at  my  version,  about  which  I 
have  often  been  questioned,  —  it  was  simple  enough.  —  I  studied 
as  I  went  along,  (in  the  evenings,  for  the  most  part)  the  subjects 
of  my  author,  reviving  all  I  had  ever  known  about  them,  and 
learning  much  more.  Being  thus  secure  of  what  I  was  about,  I 
simply  set  up  the  volume  on  a  little  desk  before  me,  glanced  over 
a  page  or  a  paragraph,  and  set  down  its  meaning  in  the  briefest 
and  simplest  way  I  could.  Thus,  my  work  was  not  mere  trans- 
lation :  it  involved  quite  a  different  kind  of  intellectual  exercise ; 
and,  much  as  I  enjoy  translating,  —  pleasant  as  is  the  finding 
of  equivalent  terms,  and  arranging  them  harmoniously,  —  it  is 
pleasanter  still  to  combine  with  this  the  work  of  condensation. 
To  me,  in  truth,  nothing  was  ever  pleasanter  :  and  I  had  no 
sympathy  with  the  friends  who  hoped,  as  I  proceeded,  that  I 
should  not  again  occupy  myself  with  translation.  I  told  them 
that  it  was  like  going  to  school  again  while  doing  the  useful 
work  of  mature  age ;  and  that  I  should  relish  nothing  better 
than  to  go  on  with  it  as  long  as  I  lived.  As  for  the  average 
amount  of  my  daily  work,  (four  or  five  days  in  the  week)  I  was 
discontented  if  it  was  under  twenty  pages  of  my  author,  and 
satisfied  if  it  was  any  where  from  twenty-five  to  thirty.  The 
largest  day's  work,  in  the  whole  course  of  the  business,  was  forty- 
eight  pages  :  but  that  was  when  I  had  breakfasted  before  seven, 
to  dismiss  a  guest ;  and  on  a  Saturday,  when  there  was  no  post 
to  London,  and  I  had  set  my  mind  on  finishing  a  volume.  I 
worked  nearly  all  day,  and  finished  after  midnight.  I  find  fifty 
pages  set  down  on  another  occasion  ;  but  in  that  case  there  was 
an  omission  of  a  recapitulatory  portion.  In  saying  what  was  the 
daily  amount  done,  I  ought  to  observe  that  it  was  really  done. 
I  finished  as  I  went  along  ;  and  I  looked  at  my  work  no  more 
till  it  came  in  the  shape  of  proof-sheets.  —  I  have  stated  in  my 
Preface  to  the  work  that,  on  my  expressing  my  intention  to  ob- 


Aged  50.] 


COMTE'S  CRITICS. 


73 


tain  a  revision  of  the  three  first  Books,  (Mathematics,  Astronomy 
and  Physics)  by  a  scientific  man,  Professor  Nichol  kindly  offered 
his  services.  His  revision  of  that  portion  (in  which  he  found, 
he  said,  no  mistakes)  and  the  few  notes  and  observations  which 
he  inserted,  made  me  easy  about  the  correctness  of  what  I  was 
putting  forth  j  and  I  did  not  run  the  risk  of  spoiling  the  fresh- 
ness of  what  I  had  done  so  enjoyably  by  any  retouching.  It 
came  out  precisely  as  I  wrote  it,  day  by  day. 

One  part  of  my  enjoyment  was  from  the  hope  that  the  appear- 
ance of  a  readable  English  version  would  put  a  stop  to  the  misr 
chievous,  though  ludicrous  mistakes  about  Comte's  doctrine  and 
work  put  forth  by  men  who  assumed,  and  might  be  expected,  to 
know  better.  The  mistakes  were  repeated,  it  is  true ;  but  they 
were  more  harmless,  after  my  version  had  appeared.  When  I 
was  studying  the  work,  I  was  really  astonished  to  see  a  very 
able  review  article  open  with  a  false  statement  about  Comte,  not 
only  altogether  gratuitous,  but  so  ignorant  that  it  is  a  curious 
thing  that  it  could  have  passed  the  press.  It  alleged  that  a  man 
called  Auguste  Comte,  who  assumed  in  1822  to  be  a  social 
prophet,  had  declared  the  belief  and  interest  in  theology  to  be 
at  an  end  ;  whereas,  here  was  the  whole  kingdom,  thirty  years 
later,  convulsed  with  theological  passion,  about  Papal  aggression 
and  the  Gorham  controversy.  Now,  this  was  a  treble  blunder. 
In  the  first  place,  Comte  has  never  said  that  theology  and  the 
popular  interest  in  it  are  over.  In  the  next,  he  has  written 
largely  on  the  social  turmoil  which  this  generation  is  in,  and 
generations  to  come  will  be  in,  from  the  collision  between  the 
theological  passion  of  one  social  period,  and  the  metaphysical 
rage  of  another,  with  the  advance  of  the  positive  philosophy 
which  is  to  supersede  them  both.  If  there  is  one  thing  rather 
than  another  reiterated  to  weariness  in  Comte's  work,  it  is  the 
state  of  turmoil,  and  its  causes,  of  which  the  Gorham  contro- 
versy was  an  admirable  exemplification.  In  the  third  place, 
Comte's  doctrine  is  that  theology  can  be  extinguished  only  by  a 
true  Science  of  Human  Nature ;  that  this  science  is  as  yet  barely 
initiated ;  and  that  therefore  theology  is  very  far  from  being  yet 
popularly  superseded. 

VOL.  II. 


74 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1852. 


At  a  later  time,  in  October,  1851,  when  an  eminent  philosopher 
from  Scotland  was  my  guest  for  a  few  days,  I  invited  to  meet  him 
at  dinner  a  friend  of  his,  who  was  in  the  neighbourhood,  and  that 
friend's  lady,  and  another  guest  or  two.  I  was  before  slightly 
acquainted  with  this  couple,  and  knew  that  the  gentleman  was 
highly  thought  of,  by  himself  and  others  (by  the  late  Dr.  Arnold, 
among  the  rest)  as  a  scholar  and  writer.  When  he  was  taking 
me  in  to  dinner,  he  asked  me  whether  I  had  heard  that  M.  Comte 
was  insane.  I  replied  that  it  was  not  true,  —  M.  Comte  being 
perfectly  well  the  week  before ;  and  I  told  him  that  I  was  en- 
gaged on  his  work.  My  guest  replied  that  he  had  heard  the 
whole  story,  —  about  Mr.  Lombe's  gift  and  all,  —  from  another 
gentleman,  then  present.  He  asked  me  an  insulting  question  or 
two  about  the  work,  and  made  objections  to  my  handling  it, 
which  I  answered  shortly,  (the  servants  being  present)  and  put 
down  my  trumpet,  to  help  the  fish.  "While  I  was  so  engaged, 
he  asked  questions  which  I  could  not  hear,  across  me,  of  my 
philosopher  guest ;  and  then,  with  triumph  and  glee,  reported  to 
me  my  friend's  replies,  as  if  they  were  spontaneous  remarks,  and 
with  gross  exaggeration.  During  the  whole  of  dinner,  and  in  the 
presence  of  my  servants,  he  continued  his  aspersions  of  Comte, 
and  his  insults  to  me  as  his  translator ;  so  that,  as  it  came  to  my 
knowledge  long  afterwards,  my  other  guest  wondered  that  I  put 
up  with  it,  and  did  not  request  him  to  leave  the  house.  I  saw, 
however,  that  he  knew  nothing  of  what  he  was  talking  about ; 
and  I  then  merely  asked  him  if  he  had  read  the  portion  of  the 
work  that  he  was  abusing.  Being  pressed,  he  reluctantly 
answered  —  No  ;  but  he  knew  all  about  it.  When  the  dessert 
was  on  the  table,  and  the  servants  were  gone,  he  still  continuing 
his  criticisms,  I  looked  him  full  in  the  face,  and  again  inquired 
if  he  had  read  that  portion  of  the  Philosophie  Positive :  — ■ 
"  N — n — o ; "  but  he  knew  all  about  it.  I  said  I  doubted  it  ; 
and  asked  if  he  had  read  the  book  at  all.  "  N — n — o  :  "  but  he 
knew  all  about  it.  "Come,"  said  I :  "tell  me,  —  have  you  ever 
seen  the  book  %n  —  "  No  ;  I  can't  say  I  have  ;  "  he  replied  ; 
"  but  I  know  all  about  it."  "  Now,"  said  I,  "  look  at  the  book- 
shelves behind  you.    You  see  those  six  volumes  in  green  paper  ] 


Aged  50.] 


COMTE'S  CRITICS. 


75 


[Now  you  can  say  that  you  have  seen  the  book."  I  need  not  say 
that  this  was  the  last  invitation  that  this  gentleman  would  ever 
have  from  me. 

Again,  —  a  lady,  younger  than  myself,  who  shrinks  from  the 
uncomfortable  notion  that  there  is  any  subject  which  she  is  not 
qualified  to  lay  down  the  law  upon,  folded  her  hands  on  her 
knees,  and  began  in  an  orderly  way  to  reprehend  me  for  trans- 
lating a  book  which  had  such  shocking  things  in  it  as  Comte's 
work.  I  made  the  usual  inquiry,  —  whether  she  had  read  it. 
She  could  not  say  she  had ;  but  she  too  "  knew  all  about  it," 
from  a  very  clever  man ;  a  very  clever  man,  who  was  a  great  ad-" 
mirer  of  Comte,  and  on  my  "  side."  She  was  sorry  I  could  intro- 
duce into  England  the  work  of  a  man  who  said  in  it  that  he 
could  have  made  a  better  solar  system  than  the  real  one ;  —  who 
declared  that  he  would  have  made  it  always  moonshine  at  night. 
I  laughed,  and  told  her  she  was  the  victim  of  her  clever  friend's 
moonshine.  She  ended,  however,  with  a  firm  faith  in  her  clever 
friend,  in  preference  to  reading  the  book  for  herself.  She  will 
go  on  to  the  end  of  her  days,  no  doubt,  regarding  the  "  Positive 
Philosophy  "  as  a  recipe  for  making  permanent  moonshine,  in 
opposition  to  the  nineteenth  Psalm. 

Once  more,  (and  only  once,  though  I  might  fill  many  pages 
with  anecdotes  of  the  blunders  about  Comte  made  by  critics  who 
assume  to  understand  their  subject  :)  —  a  professor  of  Mental 
Philosophy  has,  even  since  the  publication  of  my  version,  as- 
serted, both  in  print,  and  repeatedly  in  his  lectures  in  London, 
that  Positive  philosophers  declare  that  "  we  can  know  nothing 
but  phenomena  :  "  and  the  lecturer  fancies  that  he  has  confuted 
the  doctrine  by  saying  that  the  knowledge  of  phenomena  would 
occupy  Man's  observing  faculties  only,  and  leave  the  reasoning 
and  other  faculties  without  exercise.  In  this  case,  the  lecturer 
has  taken  half  Comte's  assertion,  and  dropped  the  other  half,  — 
"and  their  laws"  This  restoration,  of  course,  overthrows  the 
lecturer's  argument,  even  if  it  were  not  otherwise  assailable.  It 
is  true  that  Mr.  Atkinson  and  I,  and  many  others,  have  made 
the  assertion  as  the  lecturer  gives  it ;  —  that  "  we  can  know 
nothing  but  phenomena,"  —  the  laws  being  themselves  phe- 


76 


AUTOBIOCxRAPHY. 


[1852. 


nomena :  but  in  that  view,  as  in  tlie  case  of  the  restoration  of 
Comte's  text,  the  lecturer's  argument  about  the  partial  use  of  the 
human  faculties  is  stultified.  Some  of  his  pupils  should  have 
asked  him  what  we  can  know  but  phenomena.  The  onus  of 
showing  that  certainly  rests  with  him.  Such  are,  at  present,  the 
opponents  of  Comte  among  us,  while  his  work  is  heartily  and 
profitably  studied  by  wiser  men,  who  choose  to  read  and  think 
and  understand  before  they  scoff  and  upbraid. 

A  letter  of  Mr.  Atkinson's  in  my  possession  seems  to  me  to 
give  so  distinct  an  account  of  what  Man  "  can  know,"  and  of  the 
true  way  of  obtaining  the  knowledge,  that  I  am  tempted  to 
insert  a  part  of  it  here  as  settling  the  question  with  our  incompe- 
tent critics,  as  to  what  we  declare  that  we  can  and  cannot  know. 

"  Man  cannot  know  more  than  has  been  observed  of  the  order 
of  Xature,  —  he  himself  being  a  part  of  that  nature,  and,  like  all 
other  bodies  in  nature,  exhibiting  clear  individual  effects  accord- 
ing to  particular  laws.  The  infinite  character  and  subtlety  of 
Nature  are  beyond  his  power  of  comprehension ;  for  the  mind 
of  Man  is  no  more  than  (as  it  were)  a  conscious  mirror,  possessing 
a  certain  extent  of  interreflexion.  In  a  rude  state,  as  before  it 
has  become  reduced  to  a  proper  focus,  and  cleansed  and  purified 
by  knowledge,  it  is  subject  to  all  manner  of  spectral  illusions, 
presumptuous  and  vain  conceits,  which  may  be  well  termed  a 
kind  of  normal  or  infantine  madness ;  a  kind  of  disease  like  the 
small-pox  or  the  measles ;  conditions  to  which  all  children  are 
subject :  and  it  is  well  if  the  child  can  be  helped  through  these 
strange  malignant  conditions  in  early  youth,  and  be  then  and 
there  cleansed  from  them  for  ever. 

"  If  we  study  the  formation  of  the  globe,  and  the  history  of 
nations  or  of  individuals,  or  glance  at  the  progress  of  knowledge 
in  the  human  mind,  we  shall  perceive  that  difficulties  have  been 
overcome,  and  advances  achieved  in  the  early  stages  through 
violent  means  ;  that  that  which  we  call  evil  has  always  in  effect 
been  working  for  the  general  good  ;  and  that,  in  the  very  nature 
of  things,  that  good  could  not  have  come  about  by  any  other 
means  :  and  thus,  whatever  is  is  good,  in  its  place  and  season. 
Concluding  thus,  I  think  we  may  henceforth  dispense  with  that 


Aged  50.] 


WHAT  MAN  CAN  KNOW. 


77 


very  popular  gentleman  in  black,  the  Devil.  Indeed,  once  for 
all,  we  may  sign  ourselves  Naturalists,  as  having  no  knowledge, 
or  having  no  means  of  knowing  any  thing,  beyond  Nature.  To 
advance  by  the  acquiring  of  knowledge  and  by  reason  is  the  high 
privilege  and  prerogative  of  Man  :  for,  as  glorious  as  it  is  to  pos- 
sess a  just,  candid,  and  truth-loving  nature,  essential  as  it  is  that 
we  know  what  is  true,  —  yet  must  we  be  content  that  in  the 
first  instance,  and  for  some  short  space,  the  progress  should  be 
slow  and  devious  :  for  the  errors  and  imperfections  of  the  mind 
itself  prevent  men  from  attaining  that  knowledge  which  is  almost 
essential  to  the  cure  of  those  very  errors,  imperfections,  and 
impediments.  Thus,  mankind  have  had  to  rely  upon  a  genius 
springing  up  here  and  there,  —  great  men  who  have  had  the 
strength  to  overleap  the  difficulties,  and  the  sense  to  see  what 
was  before  them  j  and  the  honesty  to  declare  what  they  have  seen. 

"  The  power  of  knowledge  is  in  the  knowledge  of  causes  ;  that 
is,  of  the  material  conditions  and  circumstances  under  which  any 
given  effect  takes  place.  These  conditions  we  have  termed  Sec- 
ond Causes  :  but  of  the  primitive  matter  which  is  sui  generis  we 
know  nothing :  for  knowledge  is  limited  by  the  senses.  The 
knowledge  of  a  thing  includes  a  sense  of  its  material  cause  or 
conditions,  —  its  relative  or  distinguishing  qualities,  —  the  laws 
of  form  and  quantity  implicated  in  the  case,  and  the  laws  of 
action  in  sequence  and  duration.  —  The  higher  laws  are  discov- 
ered in  the  analogy  of  knowledge :  but  of  the  primitive  or  funda- 
mental cause  or  matter,  —  that  "  cause  of  causes  itself  without  a 
cause," — we  know  and  can  know  absolutely  nothing.  We  judge 
it  to  be  something  positive  :  to  so  much  the  nature  of  the  mind 
compels  assent :  but  we  do  not  know  what  this  positive  some- 
thing is  in  itself,  in  its  absolute  and  real  being  and  presence. 
We  must  rest  content  to  take  it  as  we  find  it,  and  suppose  it 
inherently  capable  of  performing  or  flowing  into  all  those  effects 
exhibited  throughout  nature.  We  only  recognise  a  primitive 
matter  as  a  required  cause  and  necessary  existence  implied  in 
the  sensational  phenomena  which  appear  to  include  it  in  their 
embraces.  But  the  existence  of  matter  cannot  be  proved ;  nor 
can  we  form  any  conception  of  its  real  nature,  because  we  can 


78 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1851 


only  divine  by  similitudes ;  and  our  similitudes  cannot  press 
beyond  sensational  phenomena  and  the  simple  inference.  1  So 
that  all  the  specious  meditations,  speculations,  and  theories  of 
mankind  (in  regard  to  the  nature  of  nature)  are  but  a  kind  of 
insanity.'  '  But  those  who  resolve  not  to  conjecture  and  divine, 
but  to  discover  and  know ;  not  to  invent  buffooneries  and  fables 
about  worlds,  but  to  inspect,  and,  as  it  were,  dissect  the  nature 
of  this  real  world,  must  derive  all  from  things  themselves  :  nor 
can  any  substitution  or  compensation  of  wit,  meditation  or  argu- 
ment (were  the  whole  wit  of  all  combined  in  one)  supply  the 
place  of  this  labour,  investigation,  and  personal  examination  of 
the  world  :  our  method  then  must  necessarily  be  pursued,  or  the 
whole  for  ever  abandoned.' 

"  The  intellect,  in  a  general  sense,  is  simply  an  observing 
faculty.  The  highest  efforts  of  reason  and  of  imagination  are 
but  an  extension  of  observation.  A  law  is  but  the  observed 
form  of  a  fact ;  and  in  truth,  the  entire  conscious  mind  may  be 
termed  a  faculty  of  observation.  To  deny  this  is  only  to  make  a 
quibble  about  distinctions  not  really  essential.  The  most  im- 
portant fact  which  the  experienced  mind  observes  is  the  fixed 
order  in  nature  :  and  the  trained  philosopher  instinctively  con- 
cludes, and  I  may  say  perceives,  the  necessity  of  this  order,  just 
as  he  acknowledges  the  existence  of  objects  in  their  objective  or 
material  appearance  :  (and  this  in  spite  of  all  that  Bishop  Berke- 
ley and  others  have  said.)  The  human  mind  by  the  constitution 
of  its  nature  recognises  the  necessity  of  a  determinate  order  in 
nature,  —  dependence  in  causes,  and  form  or  law  in  effects  :  and 
on  this  faith  we  build  all  our  confidence  that  similar  results  will 
always  flow,  as  a  necessary  consequence,  from  similar  causes.  In 
this  fact  we  have  the  reason  of  reason,  and  the  power  of  knowl- 
edge over  nature,  applying  the  principles  of  nature  by  art  to  the 
wants  of  Man.  The  instinct  or  sense  of  Man  acknowledges  a 
fundamental  cause  in  the  primitive  matter,  and  the  necessity  of 
a  particular  form  and  order  in  objects  and  their  effects  :  and  that 
it  is  absolutely  impossible  that  things  should  be  different  from 
what  they  are  found  to  be.  Now,  until  a  man  clears  his  mind, 
and  abstracts  it  from  all  fanciful  causes,  to  rest  upon  the  true 


Aged  50.] 


WHAT  MAN  CAN  KNOW. 


79 


and  fundamental  cause  in  the  primitive  matter,  perceiving  at  the 
same  time  that  this  cause  must  be  positive,  and  capable  of  pro- 
ducing all  the  effects  and  variety  of  nature,  and  in  a  form  and 
order  absolutely  fixed  in  1  an  adamantine  chain  of  necessity ; '  — 
until,  I  say,  a  man  is  fully  and  deeply  impressed  with  this  law 
of  laws,  this  form  of  forms,  evolved  frum  the  inherent  nature  of 
the  ultimate  fact  and  cause  (this  primitive  matter  and  cause 
being  fundamental,  neither  depending  upon  nor  requiring  any 
other  cause)  he  is  not  a  philosopher,  but  a  dreamer  of  dreams,  a 
poor  wanderer  on  a  false  scent,  seeking  for  a  cause  out  of  nature, 
and  in  a  magnified  shadow  of  himself.  '  If,'  says  Bacon,*  '  any 
man  shall  think,  by  view  and  inquiry  into  these  sensible  and 
material  things,  to  attain  to  any  light  for  the  revealing  of  the 
nature  or  will  of  God,  he  shall  dangerously  abuse  himself.'  — 
*  And  this  appeareth  sufficiently  in  that  there  is  no  proceeding  in 
invention  of  knowledge  but  by  similitude ;  and  God  is  only  self- 
like, having  nothing  in  common  with  any  creature,  otherwise 
than  as  in  shadow  and  trope.'  f  These  remarks  of  Bacon  in 
regard  to  the  '  invention  1  of  a  cause  out  of  nature  apply  equally 
to  the  '  invention '  of  the  nature  of  the  cause  in  nature  :  for  all 
the  knowledge  we  can  have  of  the  primitive  matter  is  by  way  of 
negatives  and  exclusions. 

"  I  hold  then  with  Democritus,  Heraclitus,  Empedocles,  An- 
axagoras,  Anaximenes  and  others  that  matter  is  eternal,  possess- 
ing an  active  principle,  and  being  the  source  of  all  objects  and 
their  effects  :  for  you  may  as  well  suppose  time  and  space  to 
have  a  beginning,  and  to  have  been  created,  as  that  matter 
should  have  been  brought  out  of  nothing,  and  have  had  a  begin- 
ning. The  active  principle  and  the  properties  of  matter  are 
essential  to  our  very  conception  of  matter  :  and  the  necessary 
form  of  the  effects  we  term  Laws  :  —  laws,  not  to  be  considered 
in  a  political  sense,  as  rules  laid  down  by  a  ruler,  and  capable 
of  alteration  and  change  ;  but  the  rule  of  rules ;  —  the  essen- 
tial and  necessary  form  and  life  and  mind,  so  to  speak,  of  what 
is  in  fact  not  a  ruling  power  at  all,  but  simply  the  principle  or 

*  Interpretation  of  Nature.    Chapter  I. 
t  Ibid. 


so 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1852. 


form  of  the  result,  — just  as  grammar  exhibits  the  form  of  lan- 
guage. 

"  The  belief  in  the  freedom  of  the  will,  or  that  any  thing  is 
free  in  any  other  way  than  as  being  unimpeded  and  at  liberty  to 
move  according  as  it  is  impelled  by  that  which  determines  its 
motion  or  choice,  is  absolutely  nonsense  :  and  the  doctrine  of 
chance  is  as  absurd  as  would  be  the  belief  that  Xature  arose 
from  a  rude  mob  of  lawless  atoms,  arranging  themselves  by 
chance ;  a  notion  which  is  clearly  nonsense,  —  a  weak  and 
unmitigated  atheism,  to  escape  from  which  men  impose  upon 
themselves  a  despotism  in  the  shape  of  a  King  Log  or  a  King 
Stork,  as  the  case  may  be.  That  which  they  suppose  to  be  divine 
and  most  holy  is  but  a  presumptuous,  shallow,  and  ridiculous 
assumption.  It  is  a  folly  built  upon  a  shifting  sand-bank,  which 
the  tide  will  presently  carry  away,  exhibiting  the  true  strong- 
hold of  the  understanding  built  upon  the  solid  granite  rock  of 
Xature ;  —  that  Xature  which  is  no  despotism,  but  a  pure  and 
free  republic,  and  a  law  unto  itself,  —  an  eternal,  unalterable 
law  unto  itself :  for  two  and  two  will  never  become  five  ;  nor 
will  the  three  angles  of  a  triangle  ever  be  less  than  two  right 
angles ;  nor  will  the  great  law  of  gravity  be  changed  nor  the 
Atomic  rule  in  chemical  effects ;  nor  the  material  conditions 
essential  to  thought  and  feeling  be  reversed.  The  world  may 
come  to  an  end,  —  become  worn  out,  and  dissolve  away,  or  ex- 
plode ;  but  the  nature  of  the  particles  of  matter  cannot  change  : 
the  principles  of  truth  will  hold  the  same,  and  a  new  world  will 
rise  out  of  the  dust. 

"  With  regard  to  the  origin  of  the  mind  itself,  —  it  is  clearly 
a  consequence  or  result  of  the  body  evolved  under  particular 
laws  :  —  as  much  so  as  a  flower  is  a  consequence  of  the  growth 
of  a  tree,  —  instinct  of  the  lower  animal  body,  —  light  of  a  tal- 
low candle.  The  light  and  heat  of  a  candle  may  set  light  to 
other  candles,  or  react  upon  its  own  body,  as  mental  conditions 
may,  when  they  cause  the  heart  to  beat,  and  the  face  to  flush, 
and  tears  to  flow,  and  the  whole  frame  to  be  convulsed  by 
laughter.  So  may  the  bile,  or  any  other  secretion,  react  on  the 
body  :  but  not  the  less  is  the  mind  the  effect  and  consequent  of 


Aged  50.] 


WHAT  MAN  CAN  KNOW. 


81 


the  body,  dependent  on  the  condition  of  the  body,  and  the  prop- 
er supply  of  air  and  food.  To  suppose  otherwise  is  to  give  up 
all  hope  and  all  philosophy,  and  to  desert  common  sense  and 
universal  experience.  The  mind  proper  is  simply  the  conscious 
phenomenon  which  is  not  a  power  at  all,  but  the  representative 
or  expression  of  an  unconscious  power  and  condition  to  which 
it  is  a  concomitant.  Strictly  speaking,  there  are  but  two  condi- 
tions in  nature ;  matter  the  physique,  and  the  conscious  mind,  or 
the  metaphysique,  —  the  positive  and  the  negative.  The  con- 
scious mind  is  purely  phenomenal :  it  is  not  therefore  the  mind 
proper  which  acts  upon  the  body,  but  that  force  which  underlies 
the  mind,  of  which  the  mind  is  simply  the  result,  expression  or 
exponent.  The  mind's  unconscious  working  power  or  sphere  is 
evident  in  almost  every  act  of  the  body,  as  well  as  in  almost 
every  fact  of  the  mind.  It  may  be  studied  in  the  higher  phe- 
nomena of  clairvoyance  and  prophecy,  —  higher,  only  as  an  ex- 
tending of  experience  by  another  and  a  clearer  sense.  We  spring 
up  from  the  earth  like  a  flower.  We  live,  love,  and  look  abroad 
on  the  wide  expanse  of  heaven,  wondering  at  the  night  which 
lies  behind,  and  at  the  dim  shadows  and  flickering  lights  which 
coming  events  cast  before  them  :  and  then  we  expire,  and  give 
place,  as  others  have  given  place  to  us.  We  have  but  a  glance 
at  existence ;  yet  the  laws  we  discover  are  eternal  truths. 
Knowledge  is  not  infinite.  A  few  simple  principles  or  elements 
are  fundamental  to  the  whole  ;  as  a  few  simple  primitive  sounds 
form  into  glorious  music,  and  all  the  languages  which  exist : 
and  therefore  knowledge  is  not  infinite,  and  progress  has  its 

limit   Still,  1  the  mighty  ocean 

of  truth  lies  before  us,'  and  its  advance  is  irresistible  ;  and  it  will 
be  well  to  remember  King  Canute,  and  take  the  hint  in  time ;  — 
to  look  abroad  upon  the  expanse,  and  up  to  the  multitude  of 
stars  ;  and  to  listen  to  the  deep-speaking  truths  which  are  now 
making  themselves  heard  in  society ;  and  not  to  seek  to  resist 
what  is  inevitable.  That  the  new  day  will  be  bright  and  glorious 
when  Man  will  know  his  own  power  and  nature,  and  rise  into' 
his  new  dignity  as  a  rational  human  being,  is  enough  for  us  now 
to  prophecy." 


SECTION  VIII. 


I  have  referred,  some  pages  back,  to  a  great  opening  for  work, 
of  a  delightful  kind,  which  offered  while  I  was  busy  about 
Comte.  As  I  have  explained,  the  whole  version,  except  half  of 
Comte's  first  volume  (that  is,  about  a  sixteenth  part)  was  done 
between  Christmas  1852  and  the  following  October:  and  it 
remains  to  be  told  what  else  I  had  to  do  while  engaged  on  that 
version.  In  April  1852, 1  received  a  letter  from  a  literary  friend 
in  London,  asking  me,  by  desire  of  the  Editor  of  "  Daily  Xews," 
whether  I  would  "send  him  a  '  leader  '  occasionally."  I  did  not 
know  who  this  editor  was;  had  hardly  seen  a  number  of  the 
paper,  and  had  not  the  remotest  idea  whether  I  could  write 
*  leaders  : '  and  this  was  my  reply.  I  saw  that  this  might  be  an 
opening  to  greater  usefulness  than  was  likely  to  be  equalled  by 
anything  else  that  I  could  undertake ;  so  I  was  not  sorry  to  be 
urgently  invited  to  try.  The  editor,  my  now  deeply-mourned 
friend,  Mr.  Frederick  Knight  Hunt,  and  I  wrote  frank  and 
copious  letters,  to  see  how  far  our  views  and  principles  agreed ; 
and  his  letters  gave  me  the  impression  which  all  my  subsequent 
knowledge  of  him  confirmed ;  that  he  was  one  of  the  most  up- 
right and  rational  of  men,  and  a  thorough  gentleman  in  mind 
and  manners.  I  sent  him  two  or  three  articles,  the  second  of 
which  (I  think  it  was)  made  such  a  noise  that  I  found  that  there 
would  be  no  little  amusement  in  my  new  work,  if  I  found  I  could 
do  it.  It  was  attributed  to  almost  every  possible  writer  but  the 
real  one.  This  "  hit  "  set  me  forward  cheerily ;  and  I  immedi- 
ately promised  to  do  a  1  leader '  per  week,  while  engaged  on 
Comte.  Mr.  Hunt  begged  for  two ;  and  to  this  I  agreed  when 
I  found  that  each  required  only  two  or  three  hours  in  an  even- 
ing, and  that  topics  abounded.  I  had  sufficient  misgiving  and 
uncertainty  to  desire  very  earnestly  to  have  some  conversation 


Aged  50.]  DOMESTIC  CHANGES.  83 

with  Mr.  Hunt ;  and  I  offered  to  go  to  London  (on  my  way  to 
Scotland)  for  the  purpose.  He  would  not  hear  of  this,  but  said 
he  would  come  to  me,  if  public  affairs  would  allow  of  his  leaving 
the  office.  Then  parliament  was  dissolved  \  and  the  elections 
kept  him  at  home  ;  so  that  I  looked  for  him  in  vain  by  every 
train  for  ten  days  before  my  niece  and  I  started  for  Edinburgh. 
He  came  to  us  at  Portobello ;  and  for  two  half  days  he  poured  out 
so  rich  a  stream  of  conversation  that  my  niece  could  not  stand 
the  excitement.  She  went  out  upon  the  shore,  to  recover  her 
mind's  breath,  and  came  in  to  enjoy  more.  It  was  indeed  an 
unequalled  treat ;  and  when  we  parted,  I  felt  that  a  bright  new 
career  was  indeed  opened  to  me.  He  had  before  desired  that 
I  should  write  him  letters  from  Ireland  ;  and  he  now  bespoke 
three  per  week  during  our  travels  there.  This  I  accomplished  ; 
and  the  letters  were  afterwards,  by  his  advice  and  the  desire  of 
Mr.  Chapman,  published  in  a  volume.  It  was  on  occasion  of 
that  long  journey,  which  extended  from  the  Giant's  Causeway 
to  Bantry  Bay,  and  from  the  Mullet  to  Wexford,  that  I  first  felt 
the  signs  of  failure  in  bodily  strength  which  I  now  believe  to 
have  been  a  warning  of  my  present  fatal  malady.  My  compan- 
ion was  an  incomparable  help.  It  was  impossible  to  be  more 
extensively  and  effectually  aided  than  I  was  by  her.  She  took 
upon  herself  all  the  fatigue  that  it  was  possible  to  avert  from 
me ;  and  I  reposed  upon  her  sense  and  spirit  and  watchfulness 
like  a  spoiled  child.  Yet  I  found,  and  said  at  the  time,  that 
this  must  be  my  last  arduous  journey.  The  writing  those  Letters 
was  a  pure  pleasure,  whether  they  were  penned  in  a  quiet  cham- 
ber at  a  friend's  house,  or  amidst  a  host  of  tourists,  and  to  the 
sound  of  the  .harp,  in  a  salon  at  Killarney ;  but,  in  addition  to 
the  fatigue  of  travelling  and  of  introductions  to  strangers,  they 
were  too  much  for  me.  I  had  some  domestic  griefs  on  my  mind, 
it  is  true.  During  the  spring,  my  neighbours  had  requested  me 
to  deliver  two  or  three  lectures  on  Australia;  and  one  conse- 
quence of  my  doing  so  was  that  my  dear  servant  Jane  resolved 
to  emigrate  (for  reasons  winch  I  thought  sound)  and  she  was  to 
sail  in  Xovember  :  and  now  at  Cork,  the  news  met  me  that  the 
other  servant,  no  less  beloved,  was  going  to  marry  the  Master  of 


84 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1852. 


the  Eagged  School  at  Bristol,  who  had  been  her  coadjutor  in  the 
Norfolk  Workhouse  School  before  mentioned.  I  wrote  to  advise 
their  marriage  at  Christmas ;  but  it  was  with  the  sense  of  a  heavy 
misfortune  having  befallen  me.  I  did  not  believe  that  my  little 
household  could  ever  again  be  what  it  had  been  since  I  built  my 
house  :  and  I  should  have  been  thankful  to  have  foreseen  how 
well  I  should  settle  again,  —  to  change  no  more.  I  did  not 
fully  recover  my  strength  till  our  pretty  wedding  was  over,  and 
I  was  fairly  settled  down,  in  winter  quiet,  to  Comte  and  my 
weekly  work  for  "Daily  News."  —  The  wedding  was  truly  a 
charming  one.  My  dear  girl  had  the  honour  of  having  Miss 
Carpenter  for  her  bridesmaid,  and  the  Revd.  Philip  P.  Carpenter 
to  perform  the  ceremony,  —  the  Bristol  Eagged  School  being,  as 
every  body  knows,  the  special  care  of  Miss  Carpenter.  I  told 
the  bride,  the  week  before  the  bridegroom  and  guests  arrived, 
that,  as  I  could  not  think  of  sending  the  former  to  the  kitchen 
table,  nor  yet  of  separating  them,  it  would  be  a  convenience  and 
pleasure  to  me  if  she  would  be  my  guest  in  the  sitting-rooms  for 
the  few  days  before  the  marriage.  She  did  it  with  the  best  pos- 
sible grace.  She  had  worked  hard  at  her  wedding  clothes  during 
my  absence,  that  she  might  be  free  for  my  service  after  my 
return  :  and  now,  after  instructing  her  young  successor,  she 
dressed  herself  well,  and  dined  with  us,  conversing  freely,  and, 
best  of  all,  making  a  good  dinner,  while  watching  that  every 
body  was  well  served.  A  more  graceful  lady  I  never  saw.  She 
presented  me  with  a  pretty  cap  of  her  own  making  for  the  wed- 
ding morning  ;  and  would  let  nobody  else  dress  me.  The  evening 
before,  when  Mr.  Carpenter  delivered  a  Temperance  lecture,  Miss 
Carpenter  and  I  sent  the  entire  household  to  the  lecture ;  and  we 
set  out  the  long  table  for  the  morning,  dressed  the  flowers  (which 
came  in  from  neighbouring  conservatories)  and  put  on  all  the 
cold  dishes  ;  covered  up  the  whole,  and  shut  up  the  cat.  The 
kitchen  was  the  only  room  large  enough  for  the  party  ;  and 
there,  after  the  ceremony,  we  had  a  capital  breakfast,  with  good 
speaking,  and  all  manner  of  good  feeling.  When  all  were  gone, 
and  my  new  maids  had  dried  their  sympathetic  tears,  and  re- 
moved the  tables,  and  given  away  the  good  things  which  that 


Aged  50.] 


"LETTERS  FROM  IRELAND." 


85 


year  served  iny  usual  Christmas  day  guests  for  dinner  at  home 
instead  of  here;  and  when  I  had  put  off  my  finery,  and  sat  down, 
with  a  bursting  headache,  to  write  the  story  to  the  bride's  family, 
and  the  Carpenters'  and  my  own,  I  felt  more  thoroughly  down- 
hearted than  for  many  a  year.  —  All  went  well,  however.  The 
good  couple  are  in  their  right  place,  honoured  and  useful ;  and 
"  our  darling,"  as  Miss  Carpenter  called  my  good  girl,  is  beloved 
by  others  as  by  me.  There  have  been  no  more  changes  in  my 
household ;  and,  as  for  me,  I  soon  recovered  entirely  from  my 
griefs  in  my  delectable  work. 

When  summer  was  coming  on,  and  Comte  was  advancing  well, 
I  agreed  to  do  three  leaders  per  week  for  Mr.  Hunt.  All  the 
early  attempts  at  secrecy  were  over.  Within  the  first  month,  I 
had  been  taxed  with  almost  every  article  by  somebody  or  other, 
who  "  knew  me  by  my  style,"  or  had  heard  it  in  omnibuses,  or 
somehow ;  and,  after  some  Galway  priests  had  pointed  me  out 
by  guess,  in  the  Irish  papers,  as  the  writer  of  one  of  the  Irish 
Letters,  and  this  got  copied  into  the  English  papers,  Mr.  Hunt 
wrote  me  that  all  concealment  was  wholly  out  of  the  question, 
and  that  I  need  not  trouble  myself  further  about  it.  In  the 
summer  he  came  to  see  me ;  and  we  settled  that  I  should  send 
him  four  articles  per  week  when  Comte  was  out  of  my  hands. 
During  that  visit  of  his,  we  went  by  the  lake,  one  day,  to  pay  a 
visit  a  few  miles  off,  —  he  rowing  me  in  one  of  the  lake  skiffs. 
A  windy  rain  overtook  us  on  our  return.  I  had  no  serious  idea 
of  danger,  or  I  should  not  have  talked  as  I  did,  about  drowning 
being  an  easy  death,  and  my  affairs  being  always  settled,  even  to 
the  arrangement  of  my  papers  &c.  We  came  home  to  dinner 
without  his  giving  me  (experienced  boatman  as  he  was)  any  idea 
of  our  having  had  a  serious  adventure.  I  found  afterwards  that 
he  had  told  his  friends  in  London  that  we  had  been  in  extreme 
danger  from  the  swell  on  the  lake  ;  and  that  when  I  was  talking 
of  the  ease  of  drowning,  in  comparison  with  other  deaths,  he  was 
thinking  of  his  wife  and  children.  He  requested  me  to  write  an 
article,  at  the  opening  of  the  next  season,  on  the  criminal  care- 
lessness of  our  boatkeepers  in  letting  those  little  skiffs  to  strangers, 
on  a  lake  subject  to  gusts  and  sudden  storms  :  and  this  I  did. 


80 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1853. 


How  little  did  he  imagine  that  before  the  beginning  of  yet 
another  season,  he  would  have  been  months  in  his  grave,  and  I 
standing  on  the  verge  of  mine  ! 

Immediately  on  the  publication  of  my  "  Positive  Philosophy," 
I  went  to  London  and  Birmingham  for  nearly  three  months.  I 
visited  so  many  hosts,  and  saw  so  much  society  that  I  became 
fully  and  finally  satisfied  that  my  settling  myself  at  Ambleside 
was,  as  Wordsworth  had  said,  the  wisest  step  of  my  life.  It  is 
true,  I  was  at  work  the  whole  time.  Besides  the  plentiful  as- 
sistance which  I  desired  to  give  the  "  Daily  News,"  while  on  the 
spot,  and  some  papers  for  "  Household  Words,"  a  serious  piece 
of  business  required  my  attention.  The  impending  war  rendered 
desirable  an  earnest  and  well-studied  article  on  England's  Foreign 
Policy,  for  the  "  Westminster  Eeview ; "  and  I  agreed  to  do  it. 
I  went  to  the  Editor's  house,  for  the  purpose,  and  enjoyed  both 
my  visit  and  my  work.  —  On  taking  possession  of  my  room  there, 
and  finding  a  capital  desk  on  my  table,  with  a  singularly  con- 
venient slope,  and  of  an  admirable  height  for  writing  without 
fatigue,  it  struck  me  that,  during  my  whole  course  of  literary 
labour,  —  of  nearly  five-and-thirty  years,  it  had  never  once  oc- 
curred to  me  to  provide  myself  with  a  proper,  business-like  desk. 
I  had  always  written  on  blotting  paper,  on  a  flat  table,  except 
when,  in  a  lazy  mood  in  winter,  I  had  written  as  short-sighted 
people  do  (as  Mrs.  Somerville  and  "  Currer  Bell "  always  did)  on 
a  board,  or  something  stiff,  held  in  the  left  hand.  I  wrote  a 
good  deal  of  the  "  Political  Economy  "  in  that  way,  and  with 
steel  pens  ;  and  the  method  had  the  effect,  advantageous  or  not, 
of  making  the  writing  more  upright,  and  thereby  increasing  the 
quantity  in  a  page.  But  it  was  radically  uncomfortable  ;  and  I 
have  ever  since  written  on  a  table,  and  with  quill  pens.  Now, 
on  occasion  of  this  visit  at  my  friend's,  Mr.  Chapman's,  I  was  to 
begin  on  a  new  and  most  luxurious  method,  —  just,  as  it  hap- 
pens, at  the  close  of  my  life's  work.  Mr.  Chapman  obtained  for 
me  a  first-rate  regular  Chancery-lane  desk,  with  all  manner  of 
conveniences,  and  of  a  proper  sanitary  form :  and,  moreover,  some 
French  paper  of  various  sizes,  which  has  spoiled  me  for  all  other 
paper :  ink  to  correspond ;  and  a  pen-maker,  of  French  work- 


Aged  51.] 


THE  "  DAILY  NEWS." 


87 


manship,  suitable  to  eyes  which  were  now  feeling  the  effects  of 
years  and  over-work.  I  had  before  me  the  prospect  of  more 
moderate  work  than  for  a  quarter  of  a  century  past,  with  sure 
and  sufficient  gain  from  it ;  work  pleasant  in  itself,  and  recom- 
mended by  all  agreeable  appliances.  Never  was  I  more  home- 
sick, even  in  the  wilds  of  Arabia,  than  I  now  was,  amidst  the 
high  civilisation  of  literary  society  in  London.  —  I  came  home 
very  happy  ;  and  well  I  might. 

Mr.  Hunt  escorted  me  part  of  the  way  to  my  host's,  on  our 
last  meeting  for  that  time,  for  the  sake  of  some  conversation 
which  he,  very  properly,  called  serious.  He  told  me  that  he  had 
something  to  say  which  he  begged  me  to  consider  well.  He  told 
me  that  he  had  been  looking  back  through  my  connexion  with 
"  Daily  News  ; "  and  he  found  that  of  nearly  300  articles  that  I 
had  sent  him,  only  eight  had  not  been  used ;  and  that  (I  think) 
six  of  those  eight  had  been  sent  during  the  first  few  weeks,  be- 
fore I  had  got  into  the  ways  of  the  paper.  I  had  now  written 
four  or  five  per  week  for  a  considerable  time,  without  one  rejec- 
tion. His  advice  was  that  I  should  henceforth  do  six  per  week, 
—  under  the  liability,  of  course,  of  a  few  more  being  unused, 
from  the  enhanced  chances  of  being  intercepted  by  recent  news, 
when  my  communications  were  daily.  If  I  should  agree  to  this, 
and  continue  my  other  literary  connexion,  he  thought  I  ought  to 
lay  out  money  freely  in  books,  and  in  frequent  visits  to  London, 
to  keep  up  with  the  times.  This  scheme  suited  me  exactly  ;  for 
my  work,  under  his  guidance,  had  become  thoroughly  delightful. 

His  recourse  to  me  was  avowedly  on  account  of  the  "  History 
of  the  Peace  ; "  and  now  that  war  was  beginning,  my  recent  study 
of  the  politics  of  the  last  half-century  was  a  fair  qualification. 
We  were  precisely  agreed  as  to  the  principle  of  the  war,  as  to 
the  character  of  the  Aberdeen  Ministry,  as  to  the  fallaciousness 
and  mischievousness  of  the  negotiations  for  the  Austrian  alliance, 
and  as  to  the  vicious  absurdity  of  Prussia,  and  the  mode  and 
degree  in  which  Louis  Napoleon  was  to  be  regarded  as  the  repre- 
sentative of  the  French  nation.  For  some  time  past,  the  his- 
torical and  geographical  articles  have  been  my  charge  ;  together 
with  the  descriptive  and  speculative  ones,  in  relation  to  foreign 


88 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


personages  and  states.  At  home,  the  agricultural  and  educational 
articles  were  usually  consigned  to  me;  and  I  had  the  fullest 
liberty  about  the  treatment  of  special  topics,  arising  any  where. 
With  party  contests,  and  the  treatment  of  "  hot  and  hot  "  news, 
I  never  had  any  concern,  —  being  several  hundred  miles  out  of 
the  way  of  the  latest  intelligence.  Mr.  Hunt  thought  my  dis- 
tance from  London  no  disadvantage;  and  he  was  quite  plain- 
spoken  about  the  inferiority  of  the  articles  I  wrote  in  London 
and  Birmingham  to  those  I  sent  him  from  home.  —  I  followed 
his  suggestions  with  great  satisfaction,  —  his  wife  and  family 
having  already  made  a  compact  with  me  for  an  exchange  of 
visits,  when  I  wanted  London  news,  and  they  needed  country 
refreshment.  So  I  bought  books  to  the  amount  of  above  £100, 
under  his  guidance,  and  came  home  exceedingly  happy,  —  little 
dreaming  that  in  one  year  from  that  time,  he  would  be  in  his 
grave,  his  wife  a  broken-spirited  widow,  and  I  myself  under 
sentence  of  death,  and  compelled  to  tell  her  that  we  should  never 
meet  again. 

That  eventful  year,  1854,  began  most  cheerily  to  us  all.  Mr. 
Hunt  had  raised  the  paper  to  a  condition  of  high  honour  and 
prosperity.  He  enjoyed  his  work  and  his  position,  and  was  at 
ease  about  his  affairs  and  his  beloved  family,  after  years  of  heroic 
struggle,  and  the  glorious  self-denial  of  a  man  of  sensitive  con- 
science and  thoroughly  domestic  heart.  He  had  to  bear  the 
wear  and  tear  which  a  man  of  his  order  of  conscience  has  to 
endure  in  a  post  of  such  responsibility  as  his ;  and  this,  we  all 
believe,  was  a  predisposing  cause  of  his  inability  to  resist  an 
attack  of  disease.  But  at  the  opening  of  the  year,  he  was  in  his 
usual  health,  and  had  every  reason  to  be  very  happy.  As  for 
me,  —  my  life  was  now  like  nothing  that  I  had  ever  experienced. 
I  had  all  the  benefits  of  work,  and  of  complete  success,  without 
any  of  the  responsibility,  the  sense  of  which  has  always  been  the 
great  drawback  on  my  literary  satisfactions,  and  especially  in 
historical  writing,  —  in  which  I  could  have  no  comfort  but  by 
directing  my  readers  to  my  authorities,  in  all  matters  of  any 
importance.  Now,  while  exercising  the  same  anxious  care  as  to 
correctness,  and  always  referring  Mr.  Hunt  to  my  sources  of 


Aged  52.] 


LIFE  AT  HOME. 


89 


information,  I  was  free  from  the  responsibility  of  publication 
altogether.  My  continued  contributions  to  the  "Westminster 
Review  "  and  elsewhere  preserved  me  from  being  engrossed  in 
political  studies ;  and  I  had  more  leisure  for  philosophical  and 
literary  pursuits  than  at  any  time  since  my  youth.  Two  or 
three  hours,  after  the  arrival  of  the  post  (at  breakfast  time  now) 
usually  served  me  for  my  work ;  and  when  my  correspondence 
was  done,  there  was  time  for  exercise,  and  the  discharge  of 
neighbourly  business  before  dinner.  Then,  —  I  have  always  had 
some  piece  of  fancy-work  on  hand,  —  usually  for  the  benefit  of 
the  Abolition  fund  in  America ;  and  I  have  a  thoroughly  woman- 
ish love  of  needle- work ;  —  yes,  even  ("I  own  the  soft  impeach- 
ment ")  of  wool-work,  many  a  square  yard  of  which  is  all  invisibly 
embossed  with  thoughts  of  mine  wrought  in,  under  the  various 
moods  and  experiences  of  a  long  series  of  years.  It  is  with 
singular  alacrity  that,  in  winter  evenings,  I  light  the  lamp,  and 
unroll  my  wool-work,  and  meditate  or  dream  till  the  arrival  of 
the  newspaper  tells  me  that  the  tea  has  stood  long  enough. 
Before  Mr.  Rowland  Hill  gave  us  a  second  post  delivery  at 
Ambleside,  Mr.  Hunt  had  made  arrangements  by  which  I  received 
the  paper  of  the  day  at  tea  time.  After  tea,  if  there  was  news 
from  the  seat  of  war,  I  called  in  my  maids,  who  brought  down 
the  great  atlas,  and  studied  the  chances  of  the  campaign  with 
me.  Then  there  was  an  hour  or  two  for  Montaigne,  or  Bacon, 
or  Shakspere,  or  Tennyson,  or  some  dear  old  biography,  or  last 
new  book  from  London,  —  historical,  moral  or  political.  Then, 
when  the  house  and  neighbourhood  were  asleep,  there  was  the 
half-hour  on  the  terrace,  or,  if  the  weather  was  too  bad  for  that, 
in  the  porch,  —  whence  I  seldom  or  never  came  in  without  a 
clear  purpose  for  my  next  morning's  work.  I  believe  that,  but 
for  my  country  life,  much  of  the  benefit  and  enjoyment  of  my 
travels,  and  also  of  my  studies,  would  have  been  lost  to  me.  On 
my  terrace,  there  were  two  worlds  extended  bright  before  me, 
even  when  the  midnight  darkness  hid  from  my  bodily  eyes  all 
but  the  outlines  of  the  solemn  mountains  that  surround  our 
valley  on  three  sides,  and  the  clear  opening  to  the  lake  on  the 
south.    In  the  one  of  those  worlds,  I  saw  now  the  magnificent 


90 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


coast  of  Massachusetts  in  autumn,  or  the  flowery  swamps  of 
Louisiana,  or  the  forests  of  Georgia  in  spring,  or  the  Illinois 
prairie  in  summer ;  or  the  blue  Nile,  or  the  brown  Sinai,  or  the 
gorgeous  Petra,  or  the  view  of  Damascus  from  the  Salahiey  ;  or 
the  Grand  Canal  under  a  Venetian  sunset,  or  the  Black  Forest 
in  twilight,  or  Malta  in  the  glare  of  noon,  or  the  broad  desert 
stretching  away  under  the  stars,  or  the  Red  Sea  tossing  its  superb 
shells  on  shore,  in  the  pale  dawn.  That  is  one  world,  all  com- 
prehended within  my  terrace  wall,  and  coming  up  into  the  light 
at  my  call.  —  The  other  and  finer  scenery  is  of  that  world,  only 
beginning  to  be  explored,  of  Science.  The  long  study  of  Comte 
had  deeply  impressed  on  me  the  imagery  of  the  glorious  hierarchy 
of  the  sciences  which  he  has  exhibited.  The  time  was  gone  by 
when  I  could  look  at  objects  as  mere  surface,  or  separate  exist- 
ences ;  and  since  that  late  labour  of  love,  I  had  more  than  ever 
seen  the  alliance  and  concert  of  the  heavenly  bodies,  and  the 
mutual  action  and  interior  composition  of  the  substances  which 
I  used  to  regard  as  one  in  themselves,  and  unconnected  in  respect 
to  each  other.  It  is  truly  an  exquisite  pleasure  to  dream,  after 
the  toil  of  study,  on  the  sublime  abstractions  of  mathematics  ; 
the  transcendent  scenery  unrolled  by  astronomy;  the  mysterious, 
invisible  forces  dimly  hinted  to  us  by  Physics  ;  the  new  concep- 
tion of  the  constitution  of  Matter  originated  by  Chemistry ;  and 
then,  the  inestimable  glimpses  opened  to  us,  in  regard  to  the 
nature  and  destiny  of  Man,  by  the  researches  into  vegetable  and 
animal  organisation,  which  are  at  length  perceived  to  be  the 
right  path  of  inquiry  into  the  highest  subjects  of  thought.  All 
the  grandeur  and  all  the  beauty  of  this  series  of  spectacles  is 
deepened  by  the  ever-present  sense  of  the  smallness  of  the  amount 
of  discovery  achieved.  In  the  scenery  of  our  travels,  it  is  other- 
wise. The  forest,  the  steppe,  the  lake,  the  city,  each  filled  and 
sufficed  the  sense  of  the  observer  in  the  old  days  when,  instead 
of  the  'Western  Continents,  there  were  dreams  of  far  Cathay ; 
and  we  of  this  day  are  occupied  for  the  moment  with  any  single 
scene,  without  caring  whether  the  Avhole  globe  is  explored.  But 
it  is  different  in  the  sphere  of  science.  Wondrous  beyond  the 
comprehension  of  any  one  mind  is  the  mass  of  glorious  facts,  and 


Aged  52.] 


SPRING  ENGAGEMENTS. 


01 


the  series  of  mighty  conceptions  laid  open ;  bnt  the  shadow  of 
the  surrounding  darkness  rests  upon  it  all.  The  unknown  always 
engrosses  the  greater  part  of  the  field  of  vision ;  and  the  awe  of 
infinity  sanctifies  both  the  study  and  the  dream.  Between  these 
worlds,  and  other  interests,  literary  and  political,  were  my  even- 
ings passed,  a  short  year  ago.  Perhaps  no  one  has  had  a  much 
more  vivid  enjoyment  than  myself  of  London  society  of  a  very 
high  order;  and  few,  I  believe,  are  of  a  more  radically  social 
nature  than  myself :  yet,  I  may  say  that  there  has  never  been, 
since  I  had  a  home  of  my  own,  an  evening  spent  in  the  most 
charming  intercourse  that  I  would  not  have  exchanged  (as  far 
as  the  mere  pleasure  was  concerned)  for  one  of  my  ordinary 
evenings  under  the  lamp  within,  and  the  lights  of  heaven 
without. 

I  did  not  at  once,  however,  sit  down  in  comparative  leisure 
on  my  return.  I  had  before  promised,  most  unwillingly,  and 
merely  for  neighbourly  reasons,  to  write  a  Guide  to  Windermere 
and  the  neighbourhood ;  and  this,  and  an  article  on  the  Census 
(requiring  much  care)  for  the  "  Westminster  Review  "  for  April, 
were  pressing  to  be  done,  as  soon  as  I  could  sit  down  on  my 
return  home.  Then  there  was  a  series  of  articles  (on  Personal 
Infirmities, — the  treatment  of  Blindness,  Deafness,  Idiotcy, 
&c.)  promised  for  "  Household  Words." 

I  must  pause  a  moment  here  to  relate  that  these  papers  were 
the  last  I  sent  to  "  Household  Words,"  except  two  or  three 
which  filled  up  previous  schemes.  I  have  observed  above  that 
Magazine  writing  is  quite  out  of  my  way ;  and  that  I  accepted 
Mr.  Dickens's  invitation  to  write  for  his,  simply  because  its  wide 
circulation  went  far  to  compensate  for  the  ordinary  objections  to 
that  mode  of  authorship.  I  did  not  hesitate  on  the  ground  on 
which  some  of  my  relations  and  friends  disapproved  the  con- 
nexion ;  on  the  ground  of  its  being  infra  dig :  for,  in  the  first 
place,  I  have  never  stopped  to  consider  my  own  dignity  in 
matters  of  business ;  and,  in  the  next,  Mr.  Dickens  himself 
being  a  contributor  disposed  of  the  objection  abundantly.  But, 
some  time  before  the  present  date,  I  had  become  uneasy  about 
the  way  in  which  "  Household  Words  "  was  going  on,  and  more 


02 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


and  more  doubtful  about  allowing  my  name  to  be  in  any  way 
connected  with  it :  and  I  have  lately  finally  declined  Mr. 
Wills's  invitation  to  send  him  more  papers.  As  there  is  no 
quarrel  concerned  in  the  case,  I  think  it  is  right  to  explain  the 
grounds  of  my  secession.  My  disapproval  of  the  principles,  or 
want  of  principles,  on  which  the  Magazine  is  carried  on  is  a 
part  of  my  own  history ;  and  it  may  be  easily  understood  that 
feelings  of  personal  friendliness  may  remain  unaffected  by  oppo- 
sition of  views,  even  in  a  matter  so  serious  as  this.  I  think 
the  proprietors  of  "  Household  "Words  "  grievously  inadequate  to 
their  function,  philosophically  and  morally ;  and  they,  no  doubt, 
regard  me  as  extravagant,  presumptuous  and  impertinent.  I 
have  offered  my  objections  as  a  reply  to  a  direct  request  for  a 
contribution ;  and  Mr.  Wills  has  closed  the  subject.  But,  on 
all  other  ground,  we  are  friends. 

In  the  autumn  of  1849,  my  misgivings  first  became  serious. 
Mr.  Wills  proposed  my  doing  some  articles  on  the  Employments 
of  Women,  (especially  in  connexion  with  the  Schools  of  Design 
and  branches  of  Fine-Art  manufacture ;)  and  was  quite  unable 
to  see  that  every  contribution  of  the  kind  was  necessarily  ex- 
cluded by  Mr.  Dickens's  prior  articles  on  behalf  of  his  view 
of  Woman's  position;  articles  in  which  he  ignored  the  fact 
that  nineteen-twentieths  of  the  women  of  England  earn  their 
bread,  and  in  which  he  prescribes  the  function  of  Women ;  viz., 
to  dress  well  and  look  pretty,  as  an  adornment  to  the  homes  of 
men.  I  was  startled  by  this ;  and  at  the  same  time,  and  for 
many  weeks  after,  by  Mr.  Dickens's  treatment  in  his  Magazine 
of  the  Preston  Strike,  then  existing,  and  of  the  Factory  and 
Wages  controversy,  in  his  tale  of  "Hard  Times."  A  more 
serious  incident  still  occurred  in  the  same  autumn.  In  conse- 
quence of  a  request  from  Mr.  Dickens  that  I  would  send  him  a 
tale  for  his  Christmas  Number,  I  looked  about  for  material  in 
real  life ;  for,  as  I  had  told  him,  and  as  I  have  told  every  body 
else,  I  have  a  profound  contempt  of  myself  as  a  writer  of  fiction, 
and  the  strongest  disinclination  to  attempt  that  order  of  writing. 
I  selected  a  historical  fact,  and  wrote  the  story  which  appears 
under  the  title  of  "  The  Missionary  "  in  my  volume  of  "  Sketches 


Aged  52.] 


SECESSION  FROM  "  HOUSEHOLD  WORDS." 


93 


from  Life."  I  carried  it  with  me  to  Mr.  Wills's  house ;  and  he 
spoke  in  the  strongest  terms  of  approbation  of  it  to  me,  but 
requested  to  have  also  "  a  tale  of  more  domestic  interest,"  which 
I  wrote  on  his  selection  of  the  ground-work  (also  fact.)  Some 
weeks  afterwards,  my  friends  told  me,  with  renewed  praises 
of  the  story,  that  they  mourned  the  impossibility  of  publishing 
it,  —  Mrs.  Wills  said,  because  the  public  would  say  that  Mr. 
Dickens  was  turning  Catholic ;  and  Mr.  Wills  and  Mr.  Dickens, 
because  they  never  would  publish  any  thing,  fact  or  fiction, 
which  gave  a  favourable  view  of  any  one  under  the  influence 
of  the  Catholic  faith.  This  appeared  to  me  so  incredible  that 
Mr.  Dickens  gave  me  his  "  ground  "  three  times  over,  with  all 
possible  distinctness,  lest  there  should  be  any  mistake :  —  he 
would  print  nothing  which  could  possibly  dispose  any  mind 
whatever  in  favour  of  Eomanism,  even  by  the  example  of  real 
good  men.  In  vain  I  asked  him  whether  he  really  meant  to 
ignore  all  the  good  men  who  had  lived  from  the  Christian  era 
to  three  centuries  ago :  and  in  vain  I  pointed  out  that  Pere 
d'Estelan  was  a  hero  as  a  man,  and  not  as  a  Jesuit,  at  a  date  and 
in  a  region  where  Eomanism  was  the  only  Christianity.  Mr. 
Dickens  would  ignore,  in  any  publication  of  his,  all  good  catho- 
lics; and  insisted  that  Pere  d'Estelan  was  what  he  was  as  a 
Jesuit  and  not  as  a  man;  —  which  was,  as  I  told  him,  the 
greatest  eulogium  I  had  ever  heard  passed  upon  Jesuitism.  I 
told  him  that  his  way  of  going  to  work,  —  suppressing  facts 
advantageous  to  the  Catholics,  —  was  the  very  way  to  rouse  all 
fair  minds  in  their  defence;  and  that  I  had  never  before  felt 
so  disposed  to  make  popularly  known  all  historical  facts  in  their 
favour.  —  I  hope  I  need  not  add  that  the  editors  never  for  a 
moment  supposed  that  my  remonstrance  had  any  connexion 
with  the  story  in  question  being  written  by  me.  They  knew 
me  too  well  to  suppose  that  such  a  trifle  as  my  personal  interest 
in  the  acceptance  or  rejection  of  the  story  had  any  thing  to  do 
with  my  final  declaration  that  my  confidence  and  comfort  in 
regard  to  "Household  Words"  were  gone,  and  that  I  could 
never  again  write  fiction  for  them,  nor  any  thing  in  which  prin- 
ciple or  feeling  were  concerned.    Mr.  Dickens  hoped  I  shoidd 


94 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


"  think  better  of  it ; "  and  this  proof  of  utter  insensibility  to  the 
nature  of  the  difficulty,  and  his  and  his  partner's  hint  that  the 
real  illiberality  lay  in  not  admitting  that  they  were  doing  their 
duty  in  keeping  Catholic  good  deeds  out  of  the  sight  of  the 
public,  showed  me  that  the  case  was  hopeless.  To  a  descendant 
of  Huguenots,  such  total  darkness  of  conscience  on  the  morality 
of  opinion  is  difficult  to  believe  in  when  it  is  before  one's  very 
eyes. 

I  need  not  add  that  my  hopes  from  the  influence  of  "  House- 
hold Words  "  were  pretty  nearly  annihilated  from  that  time  (the 
end  of  1853)  forwards  :  but  there  was  worse  to  come.  I  had 
supposed  that  the  editors  would  of  course  abstain  from  publish- 
ing any  harm  of  catholic  priests  and  professors,  if  they  would 
admit  no  good ;  but  in  this  I  have  recently  found  myself  mis- 
taken ;  and  great  is  my  concern.  I  had  just  been  reading  in  an 
American  advertisement  a  short  account  of  the  tale  called  "  The 
Yellow  Mask,"  with  its  wicked  priest,  when  I  received  from  the 
Editor  of  "  Household  Words  "  another  request  for  an  article.  I 
had  not  read  "  The  Yellow  Mask ; "  but  a  guest  then  with  me 
related  the  story  so  fully  as  to  put  me  in  complete  possession  of 
it.  I  will  cite  the  portion  of  my  letter  to  Mr.  Wrills  which  con- 
tains my  reply  to  his  request.  It  is  abundantly  plain-spoken ; 
but  we  ivere  plain-spoken,  throughout  the  controversy  ;  and  never 
did  occasion  more  stringently  require  the  utmost  plainness  of 
remonstrance  on  the  side  of  the  advocate  of  religious  liberty  and 
social  justice,  and  any  clearness  of  reply  that  might  be  possible 
on  the  opposite  side.  —  Here  is  my  letter,  as  far  as  relates  to 
Mr.  Wills's  petition. 

"       ...       ...       ...       ...      Another  paper  from  me  ?  you  ask. 

No  —  not  if  I  were  to  live  twenty  years,  —  if  the  enclosed  paragraph 
from  an  American  paper  be  no  mistake  ;  and  except,  of  course,  in  case 
of  repentance  and  amendment. 

"  The  1  Yellow  Mask,'  in  Twelve  Chapters  :  Philadelphia. 

"  This  pamphlet  is  a  re-print  from  Dickens's  '  Household  Words.' 
The  story  is  ingenious,  and  fraught  with  considerable  interest.  The 
despicable  course  of  '  Father  Rocco '  pursued  so  stealthily  for  the 
pecuniary  benefit  of  '  holy  mother  church'  shows  of  what  stuff  priest- 
craft is  made." 


Aged  52.] 


"GUIDE  TO  WINDERMERE." 


95 


"  The  last  thing  I  am  likely  to  do  is  to  write  for  an  anti-catholic 
publication  ;  and  least  of  all  when  it  is  anti-catholic  on  the  sly.  I 
have  had  little  hope  of  '  Household  Words '  since  the  proprietors  re- 
fused to  print  a  historical  fact  (otherwise  approved  of)  on  the  ground 
that  the  hero  was  a  Jesuit  :  and  now  that  they  follow  up  this  suppres- 
sion of  an  honourable  truth  by  the  insertion  of  a  dishonouring  fiction 
(or  fact,  —  no  matter  which)  they  can  expect  no  support  from  advo- 
cates of  religious  liberty  or  lovers  of  fair-play  :  and  so  fond  are  Eng- 
lish people  of  fair-play,  that  if  they  knew  this  fact,  you  woidd  soon 
find  your  course  in  this  matter  ruinous  to  your  publication.  —  As  for 
my  writing  for  it,  —  I  might  as  well  write  for  the  '  Record '  news- 
paper ;  and,  indeed,  so  far  better,  that  the  '  Record '  avows  its  anti- 
catholic  course.  No  one  wants  '  Household  Words '  to  enter  into  any 
theological  implication  whatever  :  — but  you  choose  to  do  it,  and  must 
accept  accordingly  the  opinions  you  thereby  excite.  I  do  not  forget 
that  you  plead  duty  ;  and  I  give  you  credit  for  it,  —  precisely  as  I  do 
to  the  Grand  Inquisitor.  He  consecrates  his  treatment  of  heretics  by 
the  plea  of  the  dangers  of  Protestantism  :  and  you  justify  your  treat- 
ment of  Catholics  by  the  plea  of  the  dangers  of  Romanism.  The  one 
difference  that  there  is,  is  in  his  favour  ;  —  that  he  does  not  profess 
Protestant  principles  while  pursuing  the  practices  of  Jesuitry.  —  No, 
I  have  no  more  to  say  to  '  Household  Words  ; '  and  you  will  prefer  my 
telling  you  plainly  why,  and  giving  you  this  much  light  on  the  views 
your  course  has  occasioned  in  one  who  was  a  hearty  well-wisher  to 
'  Household  Words,'  as  long  as  possible. 

"H.  MARTINEAU." 

Mr.  Wills  replied  that  he  felt  justified  in  what  he  had  done ; 
that  we  should  never  agree  on  the  matter ;  and  that,  agreeing  to 
differ,  we  would  drop  the  subject.  —  Such  are  the  grounds,  and 
such  was  the  process,  of  my  secession  from  the  corps  of  Mr. 
Dickens's  contributors. 

When  I  fancied  I  was  going  to  do  what  I  pleased  till  I  left 
home  in  July  1854,  the  proprietor  of  the  Windermere  Guide 
made  an  irresistible  appeal  to  me  to  do  the  whole  district,  under 
the  form  of  a  "  Complete  Guide  to  the  Lakes."  Still  in  hope 
that  leisure  would  come  at  last,  and  feeling  that  I  should  enjoy 
it  the  more  for  having  omitted  no  duty,  I  gave  up  my  holiday 
evenings  now.  I  made  the  tour  of  the  district  once  more,  with 
a  delightful  party  of  friends,  —  reviving  impressions  and  noting 


96 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


facts,  and  then  came  home,  resigned  to  work  "  double  tides  "  for 
the  remaining  weeks  before  my  summer  absence,  —  dining  early, 
after  my  morning's  work,  and  writing  topography  in  the  evenings. 
I  received  much  aid  in  the  collection  of  materials  from  the  pub- 
lisher, and  from  the  accomplished  artist,  Mr.  Lindsey  Aspland, 
who  illustrated  the  volume  :  and  I  finished  my  work,  and  went 
forth  on  a  series  of  visits,  which  were  to  occupy  the  tourist  sea- 
son,— my  house  being  let  for  that  time.  I  little  imagined,  when 
I  left  my  own  gate,  that  the  ease  and  light-hearted  pleasure  of 
my  life,  —  I  might  almost  say,  my  life  itself,  —  were  left  behind 
me ;  —  that  I  was  going  to  meet  sickness  and  sorrow,  and  should 
return  to  sorrow,  sickness  and  death. 

If  I  had  been  duly  attentive  to  my  health,  I  might  have  be- 
come aware  already  that  there  was  something  wrong.  Long 
after,  I  remembered  that,  from  about  March,  I  had  been  kept 
awake  for  some  little  time  at  night  by  odd  sensations  at  the 
heart,  followed  by  hurried  and  difficult  breathing  :  and  once,  I 
had  been  surprised,  while  reading,  to  find  myself  unable  to  see 
more  than  the  upper  half  of  the  letters,  or  more  of  that  than  the 
word  I  was  reading.  I  laid  aside  my  book ;  and  if  I  thought 
at  all  of  the  matter,  it  was  to  suppose  it  to  be  a  passing  fit  of 
indigestion, — though  I  had  no  other  sign  of  indigestion.  While 
at  Liverpool,  I  found  myself  far  less  strong  than  I  had  supposed ; 
and  again  in  "Wales  and  at  Shrewsbury ;  but  I  attributed  this 
to  the  heat.  Mr.  Hunt  met  me  and  my  maid  at  the  Station  in 
London,  and  took  us  over  to  his  house  at  Sydenham,  giving  us 
bad  news  by  the  way  of  the  spread  of  cholera.  A  poor  carpen- 
ter had,  the  week  before,  died  of  cholera  while  at  work  in  Mr. 
Hunt's  house,  —  the  seizure  being  too  sudden  to  admit  of  his 
removal  to  his  own  unhealthy  home,  —  from  whence,  no  doubt, 
he  brought  the  disease.  On  our  way  from  the  Sydenham  station 
to  Mr.  Hunt's  house,  he  pointed  out  to  me  an  abominable  pond, 
covered  with  slime  and  duckweed,  which  he  had  tried  in  vain  to 
draw  official  attention  to.  During  my  short  visit,  and  just  after 
it,  almost  all  of  us  were  ill,  —  my  host  and  hostess,  some  of  the 
children,  a  servant,  and  myself :  and  after  my  removal  to  an 
airy  lodging  at  Upper  Norwood,  opposite  the  Crystal  Palace 


Aged  52.] 


THE  WESTMINSTER  REVIEW. 


07 


fence,  I  had  repeated  attacks  of  illness,  and  was,  in  fact,  never 
well  during  the  five  weeks  of  my  residence  there.  —  It  was  a 
time  of  anxiety  and  sorrow.  My  good  friend  and  publisher,  Mr. 
Chapman,  had  just  failed,  —  in  consequence  of  misfortunes  which 
came  thick  upon  him,  from  the  time  of  Mr.  Loinbe's  death,  which 
was  a  serious  blow  to  the  "  Westminster  Review."  Mr.  Chap- 
man never,  in  all  our  intercourse,  asked  me  to  lend  him  money ; 
yet  the  "  Westminster  Review  "  was  by  this  time  mortgaged  to 
me.  It  was  entirely  my  own  doing  ;  and  I  am  anxious,  for  Mr. 
Chapman's  sake,  that  this  should  be  understood.  The  truth  of 
the  case  is  that  I  had  long  felt,  as  many  others  had  professed 
to  do,  that  the  cause  of  free-thought  and  free-speech  was  under 
great  obligations  to  Mr.  Chapman ;  and  it  naturally  occurred  to 
me  that  it  was  therefore  a  duty  incumbent  on  the  advocates  of 
free-thought  and  speech  to  support  and  aid  one  by  whom  they 
had  been  enabled  to  address  society.  Thinking,  in  the  preced- 
ing winter,  that  I  saw  that  Mr.  Chapman  was  hampered  by  cer- 
tain liabilities  that  the  review  was  under,  I  offered  to  assume  the 
mortgage,  —  knowing  the  uncertain  nature  of  that  kind  of  in- 
vestment, but  regarding  the  danger  of  loss  as  my  contribution  to 
the  cause.  At  first,  after  the  failure,  there  was  every  probability, 
apparently,  that  Mr.  Chapman's  affairs  would  be  speedily  settled, 
—  so  satisfied  were  all  his  creditors  who  were  present  with  his 
conduct  under  examination,  and  the  accounts  he  rendered.  A 
few  generous  friends  and  creditors  made  all  smooth,  as  it  was 
hoped ;  but  two  absent  discontented  creditors  pursued  their 
debtor  with,  (as  some  men  of  business  among  the  creditors  said) 
"  a  cruelty  unequalled  in  all  their  experience."  One  of  their 
endeavours  was  to  get  the  review  out  of  Mr.  Chapman's  hands  ; 
and  one  feature  of  the  enterprise  was  an  attempt  to  upset  the 
mortgage,  and  to  drive  Mr.  Chapman  to  bankruptcy,  in  order  to 
throw  the  review  into  the  market,  at  the  most  disadvantageous 
season,  when  London  was  empty,  and  cholera  prevalent,  —  that 
these  personages  might  get  it  cheap.  One  of  them  made  no 
secret  of  his  having  raised  a  subscription  for  the  purpose.  It 
was  the  will  of  the  great  body  of  the  creditors,  however,  that 
Mr.  Chapman  should  keep  the  review,  which  he  had  edited  thus 

VOL.  II. 


lJ8 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


far  with  great  and  rising  success ;  and  his  two  foes  were  got  rid 
of  by  the  generosity  of  Mr.  Chapman's  guaranteeing  supporters. 
The  attempt  to  upset  the  mortgage  failed,  of  course.  I  had  an 
intimation  in  twenty-four  hours  that  I  was  "  not  to  be  swindled 
out  of  the  Review  : "  but  the  whole  anxiety,  aggravated  by  in- 
dignation and  pain  at  such  conduct  on  the  part  of  men  who  had 
professed  a  sense  of  obligation  to  Mr.  Chapman,  extended  over 
many  weeks.  The  whole  body  of  the  creditors  were  kept  wait- 
ing, and  the  estate  was  deteriorating  for  those  weeks,  during 
which  the  two  persecutors  were  canvassing  for  subscriptions  for 
the  review  which  one  of  them  endeavoured  to  drive  into  a  bad 
market,  at  my  expense,  and  to  the  ruin  of  its  proprietor.  The 
business  extended  over  my  residence  at  Sydenham.  I  had  long 
before  promised  an  article,  involving  no  small  labour,  for  the 
next  number  of  the  review  ("Rajah  Brooke  ; ")  and,  when  I  was 
reckoning  on  my  return  home,  two  misfortunes  occurred  which 
determined  me  to  stay  another  week,  and  work.  A  relative  of 
Mr.  Chapman's,  his  most  valued  friend  and  contributor,  was 
struck  down  by  cholera  in  the  very  act  of  writing  an  article  of 
first-rate  consequence  for  the  forthcoming  number  :  and,  while 
my  poor  friend  was  suffering  under  the  first  anguish  of  this  loss, 
another  contributor,  wrought  on  by  evil  influences,  disappointed 
the  editor  of  a  promised  article  at  the  time  it  ought  to  have  been 
at  press.  I  could  not  but  stay  and  write  another ;  and  I  did  so, 
—  being  bound  however  to  be  at  home  on  the  nineteenth  of 
September,  to  receive  the  first  of  a  series  of  autumn  guests.  On 
the  night  of  my  arrival  at  home,  after  a  too  arduous  journey  for 
one  day,  I  was  again  taken  ill ;  and  next  morning,  the  post 
brought  the  news  of  the  death  of  another  of  my  dear  aunts,  — 
one  having  died  during  my  absence  from  home.  I  had  left  Mr. 
Hunt  in  a  very  poor  state  of  health,  —  as  indeed  every  body 
seemed  to  be  during  those  melancholy  months ;  but  we  hoped 
that  a  shooting  excursion  would  restore  him  to  business  in  his 
usual  vigour.  It  appeared  to  do  so  ;  but  cholera  was  making 
such  ravage  among  the  corps  of  the  paper  that  those  who  could 
work  were  compelled  to  over-work  ;  and  the  editor  slept  at  the 
office  during  the  most  critical  time.    Every  circumstance  was 


Aged  52.] 


DEATH  OF  MR.  HUNT. 


99 


against  him ;  and  we  began  to  be  uneasy,  without  having  any 
serious  apprehension  of  what  was  about  to  befal. 

There  was  great  enjoyment  in  that  Sydenham  sojourn,  through 
all  its  anxieties.  During  the  first  half  of  the  time  that  I  was  in 
lodgings,  a  dear  young  niece  was  with  me;  and  for  the  other 
half,  a  beloved  cousin,  —  my  faithful  friend  for  forty  years. 
Some  whole  days,  and  many  half  holidays,  I  spent  with  them  in 
the  Crystal  Palace,  with  great  joy  and  delight.  I  dwell  upon 
those  days  now  with  as  much  pleasure  as  ever,  —  the  fresh  beauty 
of  the  summer  morning,  when  we  were  almost  the  first  to  enter, 
and  found  the  floors  sprinkled,  and  the  vegetation  revived,  and 
the  tables  covered  with  cool-looking  viands,  and  the  rustics  com- 
ing in,  and  venting  their  first  amazement  in  a  very  interesting 
way  :  —  and  again,  our  steady  duties  in  the  Courts  in  the  middle 
of  the  day ;  and  again,  the  walk  on  the  terrace,  or  the  lingering 
in  the  nave  when  the  last  train  was  gone,  and  the  exhibitors  were 
shutting  up  for  the  day.  There  were  also  merry  parties,  and 
merry  plans  at  Mr.  Hunt's.  We  went,  a  carriage-full,  to  the 
prorogation  of  parliament,  when  I  had  a  ticket  to  the  Peeresses' 
gallery,  where,  however,  we  were  met  by  the  news  (which  en- 
countered us  every  where)  of  a  mournful  death  from  cholera,  — 
Lord  Jocelyn  having  died  that  afternoon.  We  had  a  plan  for 
going,  a  party  of  fifteen,  to  Paris,  in  the  next  April :  —  to  Paris,  for 
the  opening  of  the  Exhibition  on  May-day.  May-day  has  passed 
without  the  opening  of  the  Exhibition :  Mr.  Hunt  has  been 
above  five  months  in  his  grave ;  and  I  have  been  above  three 
months  in  daily  expectation  of  death.  In  November,  when  Mr. 
Hunt  was  ill,  but  we  knew  not  how  ill,  I  wrote  to  him  that,  on 
consideration,  it  seemed  to  me  that  the  party  to  Paris  would  be 
better  without  me,  (for  political  reasons  :)  and  Mr.  Hunt's  mes- 
sage (the  last  to  me)  was  that  it  would  be  time  enough  to  settle 
that  when  April  came.  I  suspect  that  he  foresaw  his  fate.  —  In 
November,  my  correspondence  was  with  the  sub-editor,  because 
Mr.  Hunt  was  ill.  The  cashier  told  me  next  of  his  "  alarm  " 
about  his  beloved  friend  :  but  the  sub-editor  wrote  that  he  was 
not  alarmed  like  the  rest.  Then  the  accounts  were  worse  ;  there 
was  one  almost  hopeless  :  and  then,  he  was  dead.    I  did  not 


100 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


think  that  such  capacity  for  sorrow  was  left  in  me.  He  was  so 
happy  in  life  ;  and  the  happiness  of  so  many  was  bound  up  in  him ! 
He  was  only  forty ;  and  he  had  fairly  entered  on  a  career  of  un- 
surpassed usefulness  and  honour,  and  was  beginning  to  reap  the 
natural  reward  of  many  years  of  glorious  effort !  But  he  was 
gone ;  and  I  had  not  known  such  a  personal  sorrow  since  the 
loss  of  Dr.  Follen,  in  1840,  by  the  burning  of  a  steamer  at  sea. 
I  certainly  felt  very  ill ;  and  I  told  my  family  so  ;  but  I  thought 
I  could  go  to  London,  and  work  at  the  office  during  the  interval 
till  his  place  could  be  filled.  I  offered  to  do  so  ;  but  the  propri- 
etors assured  me  that  I  could  help  them  best  by  working  daily 
at  home.  The  cousin  who  had  been  my  companion  at  Syden- 
ham wrote  that  she  was  glad  I  had  not  gone ;  for  she  believed, 
after  what  she  had  seen  in  September,  that  it  would  have  killed 
me.  I  believe  she  was  right,  though  it  seemed  rather  extrava- 
gant at  the  time. 


SECTION  IX. 


By  December,  I  felt  somewhat  better ;  but  I  was  not  able  to 
write  my  usual  New  Year's  letters  to  my  family.  The  odd  ob- 
literation of  words  and  half  letters  when  I  read  returned  once  or 
twice  when  there  was  certainly  no  indigestion  to  account  for 
it ;  and  a  symptom  which  had  perplexed  me  for  months  grew 
upon  me,  —  an  occasional  uncertainty  about  the  spelling  of  even 
common  words.  I  had  mentioned  this,  as  an  odd  circumstance, 
to  a  Professor  of  Mental  Philosophy,  when  he  was  my  guest  in 
October ;  and  his  reply  was,  "  there  is  some  little  screw  loose 
somewhere  :  "  and  so  indeed  it  proved.  Throughout  December 
and  the  early  part  of  January,  the  disturbance  on  lying  down 
increased,  night  by  night.  There  was  a  creaking  sensation  at  the 
heart  (the  beating  of  which  was  no  longer  to  be  felt  externally;) 
and,  after  the  creak,  there  was  an  intermission,  and  then  a  throb. 
When  this  had  gone  on  a  few  minutes,  breathing  became  per- 
turbed and  difficult ;  and  I  lay  till  two,  three,  or  four  o'clock, 
struggling  for  breath.  When  this  process  began  to  spread  back 
into  the  evening,  and  then  forward  into  the  morning,  I  was  con- 
vinced that  there  was  something  seriously  wrong  ;  and  with  the 
approbation  of  my  family,  I  wrote  to  consult  Dr.  Latham ;  and 
soon  after,  went  to  London  to  be  examined  by  him.  That  hon- 
est and  excellent  physician  knew  beforehand  that  I  desired,  for 
reasons  which  concerned  others  more  than  myself,  to  know  the 
exact  truth ;  and  he  fulfilled  my  wish.  —  I  felt  it  so  probable 
that  I  might  die  in  the  night,  and  any  night,  that  I  would  not 
go  to  the  house  of  any  of  my  nearest  friends,  or  of  any  aged  or 
delicate  hostess ;  and  I  therefore  declined  all  invitations,  and 
took  rooms  at  Mr.  Chapman's,  where  all  possible  care  would  be 
taken  of  me,  without  risk  to  any  one.  There  Dr.  Latham  visited 
and  examined  me,  the  day  after  my  arrival,  and  frankly  told  me 


102 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1854. 


his  "  impression,"  —  observing  that  it  could  not  yet  be  called  an 
opinion.  The  impression  soon  became  an  opinion,  as  I  knew  it 
would,  because  he  would  not  have  told  me  of  such  an  impression 
without  the  strongest  ground  for  it.  He  requested  me  to  see  an- 
other physician ;  and  Dr.  Watson's  opinion,  formed  on  examina- 
tion, without  prior  information  from  Dr.  Latham  or  me,  was  the 
same  as  Dr.  Latham's.  Indeed  the  case  appears  to  be  as  plain 
as  can  well  be.  It  appears  that  the  substance  of  the  heart  is  de- 
teriorated, so  that  "  it  is  too  feeble  for  its  work  j  "  there  is  more 
or  less  dilatation  ;  and  the  organ  is  very  much  enlarged.  Before 
I  left  London,  the  sinking-fits  which  are  characteristic  of  the 
disease  began  to  occur ;  and  it  has  since  been  perfectly  under- 
stood by  us  all  that  the  alternative  lies  between  death  at  any 
hour  in  one  of  these  sinking-fits,  or  by  dropsy,  if  I  live  for  the 
disease  to  run  its  course. 

Though  I  expected  some  such  account  of  the  case,  I  was  rather 
surprised  that  it  caused  so  little  emotion  in  me.  I  went  out,  in 
a  friend's  carriage,  to  tell  her  the  result  of  Dr.  Latham's  visit ; 
and  I  also  told  a  cousin  who  had  been  my  friend  since  our 
school- days.  When  I  returned  to  my  lodgings,  and  was  prepar- 
ing for  dinner,  a  momentary  thrill  of  something  like  painful 
emotion  passed  through  me,  —  not  at  all  because  I  was  going  to 
die,  but  at  the  thought  that  I  should  never  feel  health  again. 
It  was  merely  momentary;  and  I  joined  the  family  and  Mr. 
Atkinson,  who  dined  with  us,  without  any  indisposition  to  the 
merriment  which  went  on  during  dinner,  —  no  one  but  my 
hostess  being  aware  of  what  had  passed  since  breakfast.  In  the 
course  of  the  evening,  I  told  them ;  and  I  saw  at  once  what  sup- 
port I  might  depend  on  from  my  friend.  I  did  not  sleep  at  all 
that  night ;  and  many  were  the  things  I  had  to  think  over ;  but 
I  never  passed  a  more  tranquil  and  easy  night.  As  soon  as  my 
family  heard  the  news,  a  beloved  niece,  who  had  repeatedly  re- 
quested to  be  allowed  to  come  to  me,  joined  me  in  London,  and 
gave  me  to  understand,  with  her  parents'  free  consent,  that  she 
would  not  leave  me  again.  I  sent  for  my  Executor,  made  a  new 
will,  and  put  him  in  possession  of  my  affairs,  my  designs  and 
wishes,  as  fully  as  possible,  and  accepted  his  escort  home  to  Am- 


Aged  52.]  RETURN  HOME.  103 

bleside.  As  there  was  but  one  possible  mode  of  treatment,  and 
as  that  could  be  pursued  in  one  place  as  well  as  another,  I  was 
eager  to  get  home  to  the  repose  and  freshness  of  my  own  sweet 
place.  It  was  not  only  for  the  pleasure  of  it ;  but  for  the  sake 
of  my  servants ;  and  because,  while  prepared,  in  regard  to  my 
affairs,  to  go  at  any  time,  there  were  things  to  be  done,  if  I  could 
do  them,  to  which  the  quiet  of  home  was  almost  indispensable. 
The  weather  was  at  that  time  the  worst  of  a  very  bad  winter  \ 
and  it  was  a  very  doubtful  matter  whether  I  could  perform  the 
journey.  By  the  kindness  of  a  friend,  however,  the  invalid  car- 
riage of  the  North  Western  Eailway  was  placed  at  my  disposal ; 
and  we  four,  —  my  niece,  my  Executor,  my  maid  and  myself, 
travelled  in  all  possible  comfort.  The  first  thing  I  saw  in  my 
own  house,  —  the  pale,  shrunk  countenance  of  the  servant  I  had 
left  at  home,  —  made  me  rejoice  that  I  had  returned  without 
further  delay.  I  found  afterwards  that  she  had  cried  more  than 
she  had  slept  from  the  time  that  she  had  heard  how  ill  I  was, 
and  what  was  to  happen.  —  That  was  three  months  ago  :  and 
during  those  three  months,  I  have  been  visited  by  my  family, 
one  by  one,  and  by  some  dear  friends,  while  my  niece  has  been 
so  constantly  with  me  as  to  have,  in  my  opinion,  prolonged  my 
life  by  her  incomparable  nursing.  The  interval  has  been  em- 
ployed in  writing  tins  Memoir,  and  in  closing  all  my  engage- 
ments, so  that  no  interest  of  any  kind  may  suffer  by  my  depart- 
ure at  any  moment.  The  winter,  after  long  lingering,  is  gone, 
and  I  am  still  here,  —  sitting  in  the  sun  on  my  terrace,  and  at 
night  going  out,  according  to  old  custom,  to  look  abroad  in  the 
moon  or  star-light.  We  are  surrounded  by  bouquets  and  flower- 
ing plants.  Never  was  a  dying  person  more  nobly  "  friended," 
as  the  Scotch  have  it.  My  days  are  filled  with  pleasures,  and  I 
have  no  cares ;  so  that  the  only  thing  I  have  to  fear  is  that, 
after  all  the  discipline  of  my  life,  I  should  be  spoiled  at  the  end 
of  it. 

When  I  learned  what  my  state  is,  it  was  my  wish  (as  far  as  I 
wish  any  thing,  which  is  indeed  very  slightly  and  superficially) 
that  my  death  might  take  place  before  long,  and  by  the  quicker 
process  :  and  such  is,  in  an  easy  sort  of  way,  my  wish  still.  The 


104 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


last  is  for  the  sake  of  my  nurse,  and  of  all  about  me ;  and  the 
first  is  mainly  because  I  do  not  want  to  deteriorate  and  get 
spoiled  in  the  final  stage  of  my  life,  by  ceasing  to  hear  the  truth, 
and  the  whole  truth  :  and  nobody  ventures  to  utter  any  unpleas- 
ant truth  to  a  person  with  "  a  heart-complaint."  I  must  take  my 
chance  for  this ;  and  I  have  a  better  chance  than  most,  because 
my  nurse  and  constant  companion  knows  that  I  do  not  desire 
that  any  body  should  "  make  things  pleasant  "  because  I  am  ill. 
I  should  wish,  as  she  knows,  to  live  under  complete  and  healthy 
moral  conditions  to  the  last,  if  these  can  be  accommodated,  by 
courage  and  mutual  trust,  with  the  physical  conditions.  —  As  to 
the  spoiling  process,  —  I  have  been  doubting,  for  some  years 
past,  whether  I  was  not  undergoing  it.  I  have  lived  too  long  to 
think  of  making  myself  anxious  about  my  state  and  prospects  in 
any  way ;  but  it  has  occurred  to  me  occasionally,  of  late  years, 
whether  I  could  endure  as  I  formerly  did.  I  had  become  so 
accustomed  to  ease  of  body  and  mind,  that  it  seemed  to  me 
doubtful  how  I  might  bear  pain,  or  any  change ;  for  it  seemed 
as  if  any  change  must  be  for  the  worse,  as  to  enjoyment.  I 
remember  being  struck  with  a  saying  of  Mrs.  Wordsworth's, 
uttered  ten  years  ago,  when  she  was  seventy-six, — that  the 
beauty  of  our  valley  made  us  too  fond  of  life,  —  too  little  ready 
to  leave  it.  Her  domestic  bereavements  since  that  time  have 
doubtless  altered  this  feeling  entirely ;  but,  in  many  an  hour  of 
intense  enjoyment  on  the  hills,  I  have  recalled  that  saying ;  and, 
in  wonder  at  my  freedom  from  care,  have  speculated  on  whether 
I  should  think  it  an  evil  to  die,  then  and  there.  I  have  now 
had  three  months'  experience  of  the  fact  of  constant  expectation 
of  death ;  and  the  result  is,  as  much  regret  as  a  rational  person 
can  admit  at  the  absurd  waste  of  time,  thought  and  energy  that 
I  have  been  guilty  of  in  the  course  of  my  life  in  dwelling  on  the 
subject  of  death.  It  is  really  melancholy  that  young  people, 
(and,  for  that  matter,  middle-aged  and  old  people)  are  exhorted 
and  encouraged  as  they  are  to  such  waste  of  all  manner  of  power. 
I  romanced  internally  about  early  death  till  it  was  too  late 
to  die  early;  and,  even  in  the  midst  of  work  and  the  busiest 
engagements  of  my  life,  I  used  to  be  always  thinking  about 


Aged  53.] 


LEAVING  LIFE. 


105 


death,  —  partly  from  taste,  and  partly  as  a  duty.  And  now  that 
I  am  awaiting  it  at  any  hour,  the  whole  thing  seems  so  easy, 
simple  and  natural  that  I  cannot  but  wonder  how  I  could  keep 
my  thoughts  fixed  upon  it  when  it  was  far  off.  I  cannot  do  it 
now.  Night  after  night  since  I  have  known  that  I  am  mortally 
ill,  I  have  tried  to  conceive,  with  the  help  of  the  sensations  of 
my  sinking-fits,  the  act  of  dying,  and  its  attendant  feelings  :  and, 
thus  far,  I  have  always  gone  to  sleep  in  the  middle  of  it.  And 
this  is  after  really  knowing  something  about  it ;  for  I  have  been 
frequently  in  extreme  danger  of  immediate  death  within  the  last 
five  months,  and  have  felt  as  if  I  were  dying,  and  should  never 
draw  another  breath.  Under  this  close  experience,  I  find  death 
in  prospect  the  simplest  thing  in  the  world,  —  a  thing  not  to 
be  feared  or  regretted,  or  to  get  excited  about  in  any  way.  — 
I  attribute  this  very  much,  however,  to  the  nature  of  my  views 
of  death.  The  case  must  be  much  otherwise  with  Christians,  — 
even  independently  of  the  selfish  and  perturbing  emotions  con- 
nected with  an  expectation  of  rewards  and  punishments  in  the 
next  world.  They  can  never  be  quite  secure  from  the  danger 
that  their  air-built  castle  shall  dissolve  at  the  last  moment,  and 
that  they  may  vividly  perceive  on  what  imperfect  evidence  and 
delusive  grounds  their  expectation  of  immortality  or  resurrection 
reposes.  The  mere  perception  of  the  incompatibility  of  immor- 
tality and  resurrection  may  be,  and  often  is,  deferred  till  that 
time  ;  and  that  is  no  time  for  such  questions.  But,  if  the  intel- 
lect be  ever  so  accommodating,  there  is  the  heart,  —  steady  to  its 
domestic  affections.  I,  for  one,  should  be  heavy-hearted  if  I 
were  now  about  to  go  to  the  antipodes,  —  to  leave  all  whom 
I  love,  and  who  are  bound  up  with  my  daily  life,  —  however 
certain  might  be  the  prospect  of  meeting  them  again  twenty  or 
thirty  years  hence ;  and  it  is  no  credit  to  any  Christian  to  be 
"joyful,"  "  triumphant  "  and  so  forth,  in  going  to  "glory,"  while 
leaving  any  loved  ones  behind,  —  whether  or  not  there  may  be 
loved  ones  "gone  before."  An  unselfish  and  magnanimous  person 
cannot  be  solaced,  in  parting  with  mortal  companions  and  human 
sufferers,  by  personal  rewards,  glory,  bliss,  or  any  thing  of  the 
sort.    I  used  to  think  and  feel  all  this  before  I  became  enianci- 


106 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


pated  from  the  superstition ;  and  I  could  only  submit,  and  sup- 
pose it  all  right  because  it  was  ordained.    But  now,  the  release 
is  an  inexpressible  comfort ;  and  the  simplifying  of  the  whole 
matter  has  a  most  tranquillizing  effect.    I  see  that  the  dying 
(others  than  the  aged)  naturally  and  regularly,  unless  disturbed, 
desire  and  sink  into  death  as  into  sleep.    Where  no  artificial 
state  is  induced,  they  feel  no  care  about  dying,  or  about  living 
again.    The  state  of  their  organisation  disposes  them  to  rest ; 
and  rest  is  all  they  think  about.     We  know,  by  all  testi- 
mony, that  persons  who  are  brought  face  to  face  with  death  by 
an  accident  which  seems  to  leave  no  chance  of  escape,  have  no 
religious  ideas  or  emotions  whatever.    Where  the  issue  is  doubt- 
ful, the  feeble  and  helpless  cry  out  to  God  for  mercy,  and  are  in 
perturbation  or  calmness  according  to  organisation,  training,  and 
other  circumstances  :  but,  where  escape  appears  wholly  impossi- 
ble, the  most  religious  men  think  and  feel  nothing  religious  at 
all,  —  as  those  of  them  who  have  escaped  tell  their  intimate 
friends.    And  again,  soldiers  rush  upon  death  in  battle  with 
utter  carelessness, — engrossed  in  other  emotions,  in  the  presence 
of  which  death  appears  as  easy  and  simple  a  matter  as  it  does  to 
me  now.  —  Conscious  as  I  am  of  what  my  anxiety  would  be  if  I 
were  exiled  to  the  antipodes,  —  or  to  the  garden  of  Eden,  if  you 
will,  —  for  twenty  or  thirty  years,  I  feel  no  sort  of  solicitude 
about  a  parting  which  will  bring  no  pain.     Sympathy  with 
those  who  will  miss  me,  I  do  feel,  of  course  :  yet  not  very  pain- 
fully, because  their  sorrow  cannot,  in  the  nature  of  things,  long 
interfere  with  their  daily  peace  j  but  to  me  there  is  no  sacrifice, 
no  sense  of  loss,  nothing  to  fear,  nothing  to  regret.    Under  the 
eternal  laws  of  the  universe,  I  came  into  being,  and,  under  them, 
I  have  lived  a  life  so  full  that  its  fulness  is  equivalent  to  length. 
The  age  in  which  I  have  lived  is  an  infant  one  in  the  history  of 
our  globe  and  of  Man ;  and  the  consequence  is,  a  great  waste  in 
the  years  and  the  powers  of  the  wisest  of  us ;  and,  in  the  case 
of  one  so  limited  in  powers,  and  so  circumscribed  by  early  unfa- 
vorable influences  as  myself,  the  waste  is  something  deplorable. 
But  we  have  only  to  accept  the  conditions  in  which  we  find 
ourselves,  and  to  make  the  best  of  them ;  and  my  last  days  are 


Aged  53.] 


LEAVING  LIFE. 


107 


cheered  by  the  sense  of  how  much  better  my  later  years  have 
been  than  the  earlier ;  or  than,  in  the  earlier,  I  ever  could  have 
anticipated.  Some  of  the  terrible  faults  of  my  character  which 
religion  failed  to  ameliorate,  and  others  which  superstition  bred 
in  me,  have  given  way,  more  or  less,  since  I  attained  a  truer 
point  of  view  :  and  the  relief  from  old  burdens,  the  uprising  of 
new  satisfactions,  and  the  opening  of  new  clearness,  —  the  fresh 
air  of  Nature,  in  short,  after  imprisonment  in  the  ghost-peopled 
cavern  of  superstition,  —  has  been  as  favourable  to  my  moral 
nature  as  to  intellectual  progress  and  general  enjoyment.  Thus, 
there  has  been  much  in  life  that  I  am  glad  to  have  enjoyed;  and 
much  that  generates  a  mood  of  contentment  at  the  close.  Besides 
that  I  never  dream  of  wishing  that  any  thing  were  otherwise 
than  as  it  is,  I  am  frankly  satisfied  to  have  done  with  life.  I 
have  had  a  noble  share  of  it,  and  I  desire  no  more.  I  neither 
wish  to  live  longer  here,  nor  to  find  life  again  elsewhere.  It 
seems  to  me  simply  absurd  to  expect  it,  and  a  mere  act  of 
restricted  human  imagination  and  morality  to  conceive  of  it.  It 
seems  to  me  that  there  is,  not  only  a  total  absence  of  evidence  of 
a  renewed  life  for  human  beings,  but  so  clear  a  way  of  accounting 
for  the  conception,  in  the  immaturity  of  the  human  mind,  that  I 
myself  utterly  disbelieve  in  a  future  life.  If  I  should  find  my- 
self mistaken,  it  will  certainly  not  be  in  discovering  any  existing 
faith  in  that  doctrine  to  be  true.  If  I  am  mistaken  in  supposing 
that  I  am  now  vacating  my  place  in  the  universe,  which  is  to  be 
filled  by  another,  —  if  I  find  myself  conscious  after  the  lapse  of 
life,  —  it  will  be  all  right,  of  course ;  but,  as  I  said,  the  suppo- 
sition appears  to  me  absurd.  Nor  can  I  understand  why  any 
body  should  expect  me  to  desire  any  thing  else  than  this  yielding 
up  my  place.  If  we  may  venture  to  speak,  limited  as  we  are, 
of  any  thing  whatever  being  important,  we  may  say  that  the 
important  thing  is  that  the  universe  should  be  full  of  life,  as  we 
suppose  it  to  be,  under  the  eternal  laws  of  the  universe  :  and,  if 
the  universe  be  full  of  life,  I  cannot  see  how  it  can  signify 
whether  the  one  human  faculty  of  consciousness  of  identity  be 
preserved  and  carried  forward,  when  all  the  rest  of  the  organisa- 
tion is  gone  to  dust,  or  so  changed  as  to  be  in  no  respect  properly 


108 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


the  same.  In  brief,  I  cannot  see  how  it  matters  whether  my 
successor  be  called  H.  M.  or  A.  B.  or  Y.  Z.  I  am  satisfied  that 
there  will  always  be  as  much  conscious  life  in  the  universe  as  its 
laws  provide  for;  and  that  certainty  is  enough,  even  for  my 
narrow  human  conception,  which,  however,  can  discern  that 
caring  about  it  at  all  is  a  mere  human  view  and  emotion.  The 
real  and  justifiable  and.  honourable  subject  of  interest  to  human 
beings,  living  and  dying,  is  the  welfare  of  their  fellows,  sur- 
rounding them,  or  surviving  them.  About  this,  I  do  care,  and 
supremely;  in  what  way  I  will  tell  presently. 

Meantime,  as  to  my  own  position  at  this  moment,  I  have  a 
word  or  two  more  to  say.  —  I  had  no  previous  conception  of  the 
singular  interest  of  watching  human  affairs,  and  one's  own  among 
the  rest,  and  acting  in  them,  when  on  the  verge  of  leaving  them. 
It  is  an  interest  which  is  full  even  of  amusement.  It  has  been 
my  chief  amusement,  this  spring,  to  set  my  house  and  field  in 
complete  order  for  my  beloved  successor ;  —  to  put  up  a  hand- 
some new  garden  fence,  and  paint  the  farming  man's  cottage, 
and  restore  the  ceilings  of  the  house,  and  plan  the  crops  which 
I  do  not  expect  to  see  gathered.  The  mournful  perplexity  of 
my  good  farm-servant  has  something  in  it  amusing  as  well  as 
touching  ; —  the  necessity  he  is  under  of  consulting  me  about  his 
sowings,  and  his  plans  for  the  cows,  —  relating  to  distant  autumn 
months,  and  even  to  another  spring,  —  the  embarrassing  necessity 
that  this  is  to  him,  while  his  mind  is  full  of  the  expectation  that 
I  shall  then  be  in  my  grave.  In  the  midst  of  every  consultation 
about  this  or  that  crop,  he  interposes  a  hope  that  I  may  live  to 
see  his  hay,  and  to  eat  his  celery  and  artichokes  and  vegetable 
marrow,  and  to  admire  the  autumn  calf;  and  his  zeal  for  my 
service,  checked  by  the  thought  that  his  services  are  in  fact  for 
others,  has  something  in  it  as  curious  as  touching.  —  And  so  it 
is,  more  or  less,  with  all  my  intercourses,  —  that  a  curious  new 
interest  is  involved  in  them.  Mere  acquaintances  are  shocked 
that  the  newspapers  should  tell  that  I  am  "  in  a  hopeless  state," 
that  "  recovery  is  impossible "  &c,  while  my  own  family  and 
household  have  no  sort  of  scruple  in  talking  about  it  as  freely  as 
I  do.    A  good  many  people  start  at  hearing  what  a  cheerful,  — 


Aged  53.] 


LEAVING  LIFE. 


109 


even  merry  —  little  party  we  are  at  home  here,  and  that  we 
sometimes  play  a  rubber  in  the  evenings,  and  sometimes  laugh 
till  I,  for  one,  can  laugh  no  more.  To  such  wonder,  we  answer 
—  why  not  ?  If  we  feel  as  usual,  why  not  do  as  usual  1  Others, 
again,  cannot  conceive  how,  with  my  "opinions,"  I  am  not 
miserable  about  dying  ;  and  declare  that  they  should  be  so  ;  and 
this  makes  me  wonder,  in  my  turn,  that  it  does  not  strike  them 
that  perhaps  they  do  not  comprehend  my  views  and  feelings,  and 
that  there  may  be  something  in  the  matter  more  than  they  see 
or  understand.  There  is  something  very  interesting  to  me  in  the 
evidences  of  different  states  of  mind  among  friends  and  strangers 
in  regard  to  my  "  good  "  or  "bad  spirits,"  —  a  matter  which  ap- 
pears to  me  hardly  worth  a  thought.  As  it  happens,  my  spirits 
are  good ;  and  I  find  good  spirits  a  great  blessing ;  but  the  so- 
licitude about  them,  and  the  evident  readiness  to  make  much  of 
bad  spirits,  if  I  had  them,  are  curious  features  in  my  intercourse 
with  acquaintance  or  strangers  who  are  kind  enough  to  interest 
themselves  in  my  affairs.  One  sends  me  a  New  Testament  (as 
if  I  had  never  seen  one  before)  with  the  usual  hopes  of  grace 
&c,  though  aware  that  the  bible  is  no  authority  with  me ;  and, 
having  been  assured  that  I  am  "  happy,"  this  correspondent  has 
the  modesty  to  intimate  that  I  ought  not  to  be  happy,  and  that 
people  sometimes  are  so  "without  grounds."  It  is  useless  to 
reply  that,  as  I  have  not  pursued  happiness  as  an  aim,  all  this 
kind  of  speculation  is  nothing  to  me.  There  is  the  fact  j  and 
that  is  enough.  —  Others,  again,  who  ought,  by  their  professions, 
to  know  better,  are  very  glad  about  this  "  happiness,"  and  settle 
it  in  their  own  minds  that  christian  consolations  are  administered 
to  me  by  God  without  my  knowing  it.  If  so,  I  can  only  say  it 
is  a  bounty  not  only  gratuitous,  but  undesired.  Christian  con- 
solations would  certainly  make  me  any  thing  but  happy,  after  my 
•  experience  of  them  in  contrast  with  the  higher  state  of  freedom, 
and  the  wider  sympathies  opened  by  my  later  views. 

The  lesson  taught  us  by  these  kindly  commentators  on  my 
present  experience  is  that  dogmatic  faith  compels  the  best  minds 
and  hearts  to  narrowness  and  insolence.  Even  such  as  these 
cannot  conceive  of  my  being  happy  in  any  way  but  theirs,  or 


110 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


that  there  may  be  views  whose  operation  they  do  not  understand. 
In  a  letter  just  received,  a  dear  friend  says  "  I  have  seen  no  one 
since  I  left  you  who  is  '  sorry*  about  you  (about  my  i  opinions.') 
Still  I  see  that  the  next  row,  and  the  next,  still  more  so,  are 
'  very  sorry '  and  '  very  very  sorry.' "  The  unconscious  insolence 
revealed  in  this  "  sorrow  "  is  rebuked  by  the  more  rational  view 
of  others  who  are  no  nearer  agreeing  with  me  than  the  second 
and  third  "  row."  "  Not  agreeing,"  says  my  friend,  "  they  still 
see  no  more  reason  for  lamentation  over  you  than  for  you  to 
lament  over  them.  '  II  y  a  aussi  loin  de  chez  toi  chez  moi  que  de 
chez  moi  chez  toi,1  is  the  perfectly  applicable  French  proverb." 
Another,  who  professes  to  venerate  martyrs  and  reformers  (if 
only  they  are  dead)  is  "  sorry  "  again  because  this,  that,  or  the 
other  Cause  suffers  by  my  loss  of  influence.  The  mingled  weak- 
ness and  unconscious  insolence  of  this  affords  a  curious  insight. 
First,  there  is  the  dereliction  of  principle  shown  in  supposing 
that  any  "  Cause  "  can  be  of  so  much  importance  as  fidelity  to 
truth,  or  can  be  important  at  all  otherwise  than  in  its  relation 
to  truth  which  wants  vindicating.  It  reminds  me  of  an  incident 
which  happened  when  I  was  in  America,  at  the  time  of  the 
severest  trials  of  the  Abolitionists.  A  pastor  from  the  southern 
States  lamented  to  a  brother  clergyman  in  the  North  the  intro- 
duction of  the  Anti-slavery  question,  because  the  views  of  their 
sect  were  "  getting  on  so  well  before  ! "  "  Getting  on  !  "  cried 
the  northern  minister.  "  What  is  the  use  of  getting  your  vessel 
on  when  you  have  thrown  both  captain  and  cargo  overboard] " 
Thus,  what  signifies  the  pursuit  of  any  one  reform,  like  those 
specified,  —  Anti-slavery  and  the  Woman  question,  —  when  the 
freedom  which  is  the  very  soul  of  the  controversy,  the  very 
principle  of  the  movement,  —  is  mourned  over  in  any  other  of 
its  many  manifestations  1  The  only  effectual  advocates  of  such 
reforms  as  those  are  people  who  follow  truth  wherever  it  leads. 
The  assumption  that  I  have  lost  influence  on  the  whole  exposes 
itself.  Nobody  can  know  that  I  have  lost  influence  on  the 
whole,  either  in  regard  to  ordinary  social  intercourse  or  to  sub- 
jects of  social  controversy ;  and  I  have  reason  to  believe  that  I 
have  (without  at  all  intending  it)  gained  influence  in  proportion 


Aged  53.] 


LEAVING  LIFE. 


Ill 


to  the  majority  that  the  free-thinkers  of  our  country  constitute 
to  the  minority  existing  in  the  form  of  the  sect  in  which  I  was 
reared,  or  any  other. 

As  to  the  curious  assortment  of  religious  books  and  tracts  sent 
me  by  post,  they  are  much  what  I  have  been  accustomed  to  re- 
ceive on  the  publication  of  each  of  my  books  which  involved 
religious  or  philosophical  subjects.  They  are  too  bad  in  matter 
and  spirit  to  be  safe  reading  for  my  servants  ;  so,  instead  of  the 
waste-basket,  they  go  into  the  fire.  I  have  not  so  many  anony- 
mous letters  now  as  on  occasions  of  publication  ;  but  some  which 
are  not  anonymous  are  scarcely  wiser  or  purer.  After  the  publi- 
cation of  "  Eastern  Life,"  I  had  one  which  was  too  curious  to  be 
forgotten  with  the  rest.  It  was  dated  "  Cheltenham,"  and  signed 
"  Charlotte  ; "  and  it  was  so  inviting  to  a  reply  that,  if  it  had  borne 
any  address,  I  should  have  been  tempted  to  break  through  my 
custom  of  silence  in  such  cases.  "  Charlotte  "  wrote  to  make  the 
modest  demand  that  I  would  call  in  and  destroy  all  my  writings, 
"because  they  give  pain  to  the  pious."  It  would  have  been 
amusing  to  see  what  she  would  think  of  a  proposal  that  "  the 
pious"  should  withdraw  all  their  writings,  because  they  give 
pain  to  the  philosophical.  It  might  have  been  of  service  to  sug- 
gest the  simple  expedient,  in  relief  of  the  pious,  that  they  should 
not  read  books  which  offend  them.  After  the  publication  of  the 
"  Atkinson  Letters,"  anonymous  notes  came  in  elegant  clerical 
hand-writing,  informing  me  that  prayers  would  be  offered  up 
throughout  the  kingdom,  for  my  rescue  from  my  awful  condi- 
tion, "  denying  the  Lord  that  bought  me,"  &c.  Now,  the  con- 
cern seems  to  be  of  a  gentler  sort,  and  to  relate  more  to  my  state 
of  spirits  at  present  than  to  my  destiny  hereafter.  —  But  enough 
of  this.  I  have  referred  to  these  things,  not  because  they  relate 
to  myself,  but  because  the  condition  of  opinion  in  English  society 
at  present  affords  material  for  profitable  study ;  and  my  own 
position  at  this  moment  supplies  a  favourable  opportunity.  In 
the  midst  of  the  meddlesomeness,  I  do  not  overlook  the  human- 
ity thus  evidenced.  My  only  feeling  of  concern  arises  from  see- 
ing how  much  moral  injury  and  suffering  is  created  by  the 
superstitions  of  the  Christian  mythology  ;  and  again,  from  the 


112 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


chaotic  state  of  opinion  among  Christians  themselves,  and  among 
those  who  would  fain  retain  the  name,  while  giving  up  all  the 
essentials,  and  unfurnished  with  a  basis  of  conviction,  while 
striving  to  make  the  fabrics  of  the  imagination  serve  the  pur- 
pose. —  As  for  me,  who  unexpectedly  find  myself  on  the  side  of 
the  majority  of  thoughtful  persons  on  these  questions,  I  am  of 
course  abundantly  solaced  with  sympathy  which  I  can  accept ; 
and  I  am  more  and  more  sensible,  as  I  recede  from  the  active 
scenes  of  life,  of  the  surpassing  value  of  a  philosophy  which  is 
the  natural  growth  of  the  experience  and  study,  —  perhaps  I 
may  be  allowed  to  say,  —  the  progression  of  a  life.  While  con- 
scious, as  I  have  ever  been,  of  being  encompassed  by  ignorance 
on  every  side,  I  cannot  but  acknowledge  that  philosophy  has 
opened  my  way  before  me,  and  given  a  staff  into  my  hand,  and 
thrown  a  light  upon  my  path,  so  as  to  have  long  delivered  me 
from  doubt  and  fear.  It  has  moreover  been  the  joy  of  my  life, 
harmonising  and  animating  all  its  details,  and  making  existence 
itself  a  festival.    Day  by  day  do  I  feel  that  it  is  indeed 

1 '  Not  harsh  and  crabbed  as  dull  fools  suppose  ; 
But  musical  as  is  Apollo's  lute." 

A  state  like  mine  of  late  has  its  peculiar  privileges,  —  the  first 
felt  of  which  is  its  freedom  from  cares  and  responsibilities.  I 
have  hitherto  loved  solitude  perhaps  unduly;  partly,  no  doubt, 
on  account  of  my  deafness,  which,  from  its  attendant  fatigues,  has 
rendered  solitude  necessary,  to  husband  my  strength,  —  (always, 
I  now  suspect,  below  the  average,)  for  my  work ;  but  partly  also 
from  the  unusual  amount  of  intellectual  labour  which  it  has 
been  my  duty  to  undertake.  Now,  when  my  work  is  done,  I 
am  enjoying  genuine  holiday,  for  the  first  time  for  a  quarter  of 
a  century.  I  relish,  very  keenly,  the  tending  of  affection,  and 
the  lawful  transference  of  my  responsibilities  to  the  young  and 
strong,  and  those  who  have  a  tract  of  life  before  them,  and  who 
are  pausing  on  their  way  to  give  me  the  help  I  need.  I  am  now 
free  for  intellectual  luxury,  —  to  read  what  charms  me  most, 
without  the  feeling  that  I  am  playing  truant  from  the  school  of 
technical  knowledge,  for  which  I  shall  have  no  further  occasion. 


Aged  53.] 


LAST  VIEW  OF  MY  COUNTRY. 


113 


Again,  I  enjoy  the  free  expenditure  of  my  resources.  It  is  some- 
thing pleasant  not  to  have  to  consider  money,  —  the  money  which 
I  have  earned,  and  laid  up  to  meet  such  an  occasion.  But  it  is 
more  and  better  not  to  grudge  my  time.  My  hours  are  now 
best  spent  in  affectionate  intercourses,  and  in  giving  a  free  flow 
to  every  passing  day.  I  need  not  spare  my  eyes,  nor  husband 
my  remaining  hearing.  I  may,  in  short,  make  a  free  and  lavish 
holiday  before  I  go. 

Such  is  the  selfish  aspect  of  the  case ;  and  I  am  bound,  having 
begun,  to  tell  the  whole  case.  —  Far  greater  are  the  privileges  I 
enjoy  in  regard  to  the  world  outside  my  home.  I  need  not  say 
that  one's  interests  in  regard  to  one's  race,  and  to  human  life  in 
the  abstract,  deepen  in  proportion  to  the  withdrawal  of  one's  own 
personal  implication  with  them.  Judging  by  my  own  experi- 
ence, one's  hopes  rise,  and  one's  fears  decline  as  one  recedes  from 
the  action  and  personal  solicitude  which  are  necessary  in  the 
midst  of  life,  but  which  have  a  more  or  less  blinding  and  per- 
turbing influence  on  one's  perception  and  judgment.  When  at 
the  zenith,  clouds  are  apt  to  come  between  one's  particular  star 
and  the  wide  world ;  whereas,  on  the  clear  horizon,  at  the  mo- 
ment of  the  star's  sinking,  nothing  intervenes  to  shroud  or  dis- 
tort the  glorious  scene.  I  was  always  hopeful  for  the  world  ; 
but  never  so  much  so  as  now,  when  I  am  at  full  leisure  to  see 
things  as  they  are,  and  placed  apart  where  the  relation  of  the 
past  and  the  future  become  clear,  and  the  meeting-point  of  the 
present  is  seen  in  something  like  its  due  proportion.  It  appears 
to  me  now  that,  while  I  see  much  more  of  human  difficulty  from 
ignorance,  and  from  the  slow  working  (as  we  weak  and  transitory 
beings  consider  it)  of  the  law  of  Progress,  I  discern  the  working 
of  that  great  law  with  far  more  clearness,  and  therefore  with  a 
far  stronger  confidence,  than  I  ever  did  before. 

When  I  look  at  my  own  country,  and  observe  the  nature  of 
the  changes  which  have  taken  place  even  within  my  own  time, 
I  have  far  more  hope  than  I  once  had  that  the  inevitable  po- 
litical reconstitution  of  our  state  may  take  place  in  a  peaceable 
and  prosperous  manner.  There  have  been  times  in  my  life 
when,  having  a  far  obscurer  view  than  I  now  entertain  of  the* 


114 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


necessity  of  a  total  change  in  the  form  of  government,  I  yet 
apprehended  a  revolution  in  the  fearful  sense  in  which  the  word 
was  understood  in  my  childhood,  when  the  great  French  Kevo- 
lution  was  the  only  pattern  of  that  sort  of  enterprise.  I  now 
strongly  hope  that,  whenever  our  far-famed  British  Constitution 
gives  place  to  a  new  form  of  government,  it  may  be  through 
the  ripened  will  of  the  people,  and  therefore  in  all  good  will 
and  prudence.  That  the  change  must  be  made,  sooner  or  later, 
was  certain  from  the  time  when  the  preponderance  of  the  aris- 
tocratic over  the  regal  element  in  our  state  became  a  fact. 
From  the  natural  alliance  between  king  and  people,  and  the 
natural  antagonism  of  aristocracy  and  people,  the  occurrence 
of  a  revolution  is  always,  in  such  a  case,  a  question  merely  of 
time.  In  our  case,  the  question  of  time  is  less  obscure  than  it 
was  in  my  childhood.  The  opponents  of  the  Eeform  Bill  were 
right  enough,  as  every  body  now  sees,  in  saying  that  the  Con- 
stitution was  destroyed  by  that  act;  though  wrong,  of  course, 
in  supposing  that  they  could  have  preserved  the  balance  by 
preventing  the  act  of  reform.  A  constitution  of  checks  and 
balances,  made  out  of  old  materials,  can  never  be  more  than 
a  provisional  expedient ;  and,  when  the  balance  is  destroyed,  — 
when  the  power  of  the  Crown  is  a  mere  lingering  sentiment,  and 
the  Commons  hold  the  Lords  in  the  hollow  of  their  hand,  while 
no  recent  House  of  Commons  has  been  in  any  degree  worthy  of 
such  a  trust,  the  alternative  is  simply  between  a  speedy  revolu- 
tion with  an  unworthy  House  of  Commons,  or  a  remoter  one, 
with  a  better  legislature  in  the  mean  time.  The  circumstan- 
ces of  the  hour  in  which  I  write  seem  to  show  that  so  much 
social  change  is  near  as  may  be  caused  by  the  exposure  of  admin- 
istrative incompetence  under  the  stress  of  the  war.  It  may  be 
this,  or  it  may  be  something  else  which  will  rouse  the  people 
to  improve  the  House  of  Commons  :  and  under  an  improved 
House  of  Commons,  the  establishment  of  a  new  method  of 
government  may  be  long  delayed.  From  the  general  state  of 
prosperity  and  contentment  at  home,  the  retrieval  of  Ireland, 
the  rapid  advance  of  many  good  popular  objects,  and  the  raising 
of  the  general  tone  of  the  popular  mind,  we  may  hope  that  what 


Aged  53.] 


LAST  VIEW  OP  MY  COUNTRY. 


115 


has  to  be  done  will  be  done  well.  —  Meantime,  the  thing  that 
causes  me  most  anxiety,  in  regard  to  our  political  condition, 
is  the  universal  ignorance  or  carelessness  about  the  true  sphere 
of  legislation.  Before  the  people  can  be  in  any  degree  fit  for 
the  improved  institutions,  it  is  highly  necessary  that  they  should 
understand,  and  be  agreed  upon,  the  true  function  of  legislation 
and  government ;  and  this  is  precisely  what  even  our  best  men, 
in  and  out  of  parliament,  seem  to  know  nothing  about.  I 
regard  this  as  a  most  painful  and  perilous  symptom  of  our  con- 
dition, —  though  it  has  been  brought  to  light  by  beneficent 
action  which  is,  in  another  view,  altogether  encouraging.  Our 
benevolence  towards  the  helpless,  and  our  interest  in  personal 
morality,  have  grown  into  a  sort  of  public  pursuit ;  and  they 
have  taken  such  a  hold  on  us  that  we  may  fairly  hope  that 
the  wretched  and  the  wronged  will  never  more  be  thrust  out  of 
sight.  But,  in  the  pursuit  of  our  new  objects,  we  have  fallen 
back,  —  far  further  than  1688,  —  in  the  principle  of  our  legis- 
lative proposals,  —  undertaking  to  provide  by  law  against  per- 
sonal vices,  and  certain  special  social  contracts,  while  refusing 
that  legitimate  legislative  boon,  —  a  system  of  national  educa- 
tion, —  which  would  supersede  the  vices  and  abuses  complained 
of  by  intelligence  more  effectually  than  acts  of  parliament  can 
ever  obviate  them  by  penalty.  If  I  were  to  form  one  hope 
rather  than  another  in  relation  to  the  political  condition  of 
England,  it  would  be  that  my  countrymen  should  rise  to  the 
level  of  their  time,  and  of  their  intelligence  in  other  respects,  in 
regard  to  the  true  aims  of  government  and  legitimate  function 
of  legislation. 

As  to  the  wider  political  prospects  outside  our  own  empire,  I 
am  of  much  the  same  opinion  now  as  when  I  wrote  a  certain 
letter  to  an  Anti-slavery  friend  in  America  in  1849,  which  I 
will  subjoin.  That  letter  was  published  in  the  newspapers  at 
the  time  by  my  correspondent,  and  it  has-  been  republished  in 
England  since  the  outbreak  of  the  war  with  Kussia. 

October  1st,  1849. 

"My  Dear  ;  We  can  think  of  little  else  at  present  than 

of  that  which  should  draw  you  and  us  into  closer  sympathy  than 


116 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


even  that  which  has  so  long  existed  between  us.  We,  on  our  side 
the  water,  have  watched  with  keen  interest  the  progress  of  your  War 
of  Opinion,  —  the  spread  of  the  great  controversy  which  cannot  but 
revolutionize  your  social  principles  and  renovate  your  social  morals. 
For  fifteen  years  past,  we  have  seen  that  you  are  '  in  for  it/  and  that 
you  must  stand  firm  amidst  the  subversion  of  Ideas,  Customs  and  In- 
stitutions, till  you  find  yourselves  encompassed  by  '  the  new  heavens 
and  the  new  earth '  of  which  you  have  the  sure  promise  and  foresight. 

We,  —  the  whole  population  of  Europe,  —  are  now  evidently  enter- 
ing upon  a  stage  of  conflict  no  less  important  in  its  issues,  and  proba- 
bly more  painful  in  its  course.  You  remember  how  soon  after  the 
conclusion  of  the  Napoleonic  wars  our  great  Peace  Minister,  Canning, 
intimated  the  advent,  sooner  or  later,  of  a  War  of  Opinion  in  Europe ; 
a  war  of  deeper  significance  than  Napoleon  could  conceive  of,  and 
of  a  wider  spread  than  the  most  mischievous  of  his  quarrels.  The 
war  of  Opinion  which  Canning  foresaw  was  in  fact  a  war  between 
the  further  and  nearer  centuries,  —  between  Asia  and  Europe, — 
between  despotism  and  self-government.  The  preparations  were 
begun  long  ago.  The  Barons  at  Runnymede  beat  up  for  recruits 
when  they  hailed  the  signature  of  Magna  Charta  ;  and  the  princes 
of  York  and  Lancaster  did  their  best  to  clear  the  field  for  us  and 
those  who  are  to  come  after  us.  The  Italian  Republics  wrought  well 
for  us,  and  so  did  the  French  Revolutions,  one  after  the  other  as 
hints  and  warnings  ;  and  so  did  the  voyage  of  your  Mayflower,  — 
and  the  Swiss  League,  and  German  Zollverein,  and  in  short,  every 
thing  that  has  happened  for  several  hundreds  of  years.  Every  thing 
has  tended  to  bring  our  continent  and  its  resident  nations  to  the 
knowledge  that  the  first  principles  of  social  liberty  have  now  to  be 
asserted  and  contended  for,  and  to  prepare  the  assertors  for  the  great- 
est conflict  that  the  human  race  has  yet  witnessed.  It  is  my  belief 
that  the  war  has  actually  begun,  and  that,  though  there  may  be 
occasional  lulls,  no  man  now  living  will  see  the  end  of  it. 

Russia  is  more  Asiatic  than  European.  It  is  obscure  to  us  who  live 
nearest  to  her  where  her  power  resides.  We  know  only  that  it  is 
not  with  the  Emperor,  nor  yet  with  the  people.  The  Emperor  is 
evidently  a  mere  show,  —  being  nothing  except  while  he  fulfils  the 
policy  or  pleasure  of  the  unnamed  power  which  we  cannot  discern. 
But,  though  the  ruling  power  is  obscure,  the  policy  is  clear  enough. 
The  aim  is  to  maintain  and  extend  despotism  ;  and  the  means  chosen 
are  the  repression  of  mind,  the  corruption  of  conscience,  and  the 
reduction  of  the  whole  composite  population  of  Russia  to  a  brute 


Aged  53.] 


LAST  VIEW  OF  THE  WORLD. 


117 


machine.  For  a  great  lapse  of  time,  no  quarter  of  a  century  has 
passed  without  some  country  and  nation  having  fallen  in,  and  become 
a  compartment  of  the  great  machine  ;  and,  the  fact  being  so,  the 
most  peace-loving  of  us  can  hardly  be  sorry  that  the  time  has  come 
for  deciding  whether  this  is  to  go  on,  —  whether  the  Asiatic  princi- 
ple and  method  of  social  life  are  to  dominate  or  succumb.  The 
struggle  will  be  no  contemptible  one.  The  great  tarantula  has  its 
spider-claws  out  and  fixed  at  inconceivable  distances.  The  people 
of  Russia,  wretched  at  home,  are  better  qualified  for  foreign  aggres- 
sion than  for  any  thing  else.  And  if,  within  her  own  empire,  Russia 
knows  all  to  be  loose  and  precarious,  poor  and  unsound,  and  with 
none  but  a  military  organisation,  she  knows  that  she  has  for  allies, 
avowed  or  concealed,  all  the  despotic  tempers  that  exist  among  men. 
Not  only  such  Governments  as  those  of  Spain,  Portugal,  Rome  and 
Austria  are  in  reality  the  allies  of  Eastern  barbarism  ;  but  all  aris- 
tocracies, —  all  self-seekers,  —  be  they  who  and  where  they  may.  It  is 
a  significant  sign  of  the  times  that  territorial  alliances  are  giving  way 
before  political  affinities,  —  the  mechanical  before  the  essential  union  : 
and,  if  Russia  has  not  for  allies  the  nations  that  live  near  her  frontier, 
she  has  those  men  of  every  nation  who  prefer  self-will  to  freedom. 

This  corrupted  "patriarchal"  system  of  society,  (but  little  supe- 
rior to  that  which  exists  in  your  slave  States)  occupies  one-half  of 
the  great  battle-field  where  the  hosts  are  gathering  for  the  fight.  On 
the  other,  the  forces  are  ill-assorted,  ill-organised,  too  little  prepared  ; 
but  still,  as  having  the  better  cause,  sure,  I  trust,  of  final  victory. 
The  conflict  must  be  long,  because  our  constitutions  are,  like  yours, 
compromises,  our  governments  as  yet  a  mere  patch-work,  our  popu- 
lar liberties  scanty  and  adulterated,  and  great  masses  of  our  brethren 
hungry  and  discontented.  We  have  not  a  little  to  struggle  for  among 
ourselves,  when  our  whole  force  is  needed  against  the  enemy.  In 
no  country  of  Europe  is  the  representative  system  of  government 
more  than  a  mere  beginning.  In  no  country  of  Europe  is  human 
brotherhood  practically  asserted.  Nowhere  are  the  principles  of 
civilisation  of  Western  Europe  determined  and  declared,  and  made 
the  ground-work  of  organised  action,  as  happily  your  principles  are 
as  against  those  of  your  slave-holding  opponents.  But,  raw  and 
ill-organised  as  are  our  forces,  they  will  be  strong,  sooner  or  later, 
against  the  serried  armies  of  the  Asiatic  policy.  If,  on  the  one  side, 
the  soul  comes  up  to  battle  with  an  imperfect  and  ill-defended  body, 
on  the  other,  the  body  is  wholly  without  a  soul,  and  must,  in  the 
end,  fall  to  pieces.    The  best  part  of  the  mind  of  Western  Europe 


118 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


will  make  itself  a  body  by  dint  of  action,  and  the  pressure  which 
must  bring  out  its  forces  ;  and  it  may  be  doubted  whether  it  could 
become  duly  embodied  in  any  other  way.  What  forms  of  society 
may  arise  as  features  of  this  new  growth,  neither  you  nor  I  can  say. 
We  can  only  ask  each  other  whether,  witnessing  as  we  do  the  spread 
of  Communist  ideas  in  every  free  nation  of  Europe,  and  the  ad- 
mission by  some  of  the  most  cautious  and  old-fashioned  observers 
of  social  movements  that  we  in  England  cannot  now  stop  short  of 
"  a  modified  communism,"  the  result  is  not  likely  to  be  a  wholly  new 
social  state,  if  not  a  yet  undreamed-of  social  idea, 

"  However  this  may  be,  —  while  your  slave  question  is  dominant 
in  Congress,  and  the  Dissolution  of  your  Union  is  becoming  a  famil- 
iar idea,  and  an  avowed  aspiration,  our  crisis  is  no  less  evidently 
approaching.  Russia  has  Austria  under  her  foot,  and  she  is  casting 
a  corner  of  her  wide  pall  over  Turkey.  England  and  France  are 
awake  and  watchful  ;  and  so  many  men  of  every  country  are  astir, 
that  we  may  rely  upon  it  that  not  only  are  territorial  alliances  giving 
way  before  political  affinities,  but  national  ties  will  give  way  almost 
as  readily,  if  the  principles  of  social  liberty  should  demand  the  dis- 
integration of  nations.  Let  us  not  say,  even  to  ourselves,  whether 
we  regard  such  an  issue  with  hope  or  fear.  It  is  a  possibility  too 
vast  to  be  regarded  but  with  simple  faith  and  patience.  In  this 
spirit  let  us  contemplate  what  is  proceeding,  and  what  is  coming, 
doing  the  little  we  can  by  a  constant  assertion  of  the  principles  of 
social  liberty,  and  a  perpetual  watch  for  opportunities  to  stimulate 
human  progress. 

"  Whether  your  conflict  will  be  merely  a  moral  one,  you  can  form 
a  better  idea  than  I.  Ours  will  consist  in  a  long  and  bloody  war- 
fare—  possibly  the  last,  but  inevitable  now.  The  empire  of  brute 
force  can  conduct  its  final  struggle  only  by  brute  force  ;  and  there 
are  but  few  yet  on  the  other  side  who  have  any  other  notion  or 
desire.  While  I  sympathise  wholly  with  you  as  to  your  means  as 
well  as  your  end,  you  will  not  withhold  your  sympathy  from  us 
because  our  heroes  still  assert  their  views  and  wills  by  exposing 
themselves  to  wounds  and  death  in  the  field,  and  assenting  once  more 
to  the  old  non  sequitur  about  Might  and  Eight.  Let  them  this  time 
obtain  the  lower  sort  of  Might  by  the  inspiration  of  their  Right, 
and  in  another  age,  they  will  aim  higher.  But  I  need  not  thus  peti- 
tion you  ;  for  I  well  know  that  where  there  is  most  of  Right,  there 
will  your  sympathies  surely  rest. 

"  Believe  me  your  friend, 

"  HARRIET  MARTINEAU." 


Aged  53.]  LAST  VIEW  OF  THE  WORLD. 


119 


I  have  no  doubt  whatever  of  the  power  of  France  and  England 
to  chastise  Eussia,  without  the  aid  of  any  other  power.  I 
should  have  no  doubt  of  the  power  of  England  alone  (if  that 
power  were  well  administered)  to  humble  Eussia,  provided  the 
case  remained  a  simple  one.  But  that  is  precisely  what  appears 
impossible,  under  the  existing  European  dynasties.  I  now 
expect,  as  I  have  anticipated  for  many  years,  a  war  in  Europe 
which  may  even  outlast  the  century,  —  with  occasional  lulls ; 
and  I  suppose  the  result  must  be,  after  a  dreary  chaotic  interval, 
a  discarding  of  the  existing  worn-out  methods  of  government, 
and  probably  the  establishment  of  society  under  a  wholly  new 
idea.  Of  course,  none  but  a  prophet  could  be  expected  to 
declare  what  that  new  idea  will  be.  It  would  be  rational,  but 
it  is  not  necessary  here,  to  foretell  what  it  would  not  be  or 
include.  But  all  that  I  feel  called  on  to  say  now,  when  I  am 
not  writing  a  political  essay,  is  that  the  leading  feature  of  any 
such  radical  change  must  be  a  deep  modification  of  the  institu- 
tion of  Property;  —  certainly  in  regard  to  land,  and  probably 
in  regard  to  much  else.  Before  any  effectual  social  renovation 
can  take  place,  men  must  efface  the  abuse  which  has  grown  up 
out  of  the  transition  from  the  feudal  to  the  more  modern  state ; 
the  abuse  of  land  being  held  as  absolute  property  •  whereas  in 
feudal  times  land  was  in  a  manner  held  in  trust,  inasmuch  as 
every  land-holder  was  charged  with  the  subsistence  of  all  who 
lived  within  his  bounds.  The  old  practice  of  Man  holding  Man 
as  property  is  nearly  exploded  among  civilised  nations ;  and  the 
analogous  barbarism  of  Man  holding  the  surface  of  the  globe 
as  property  cannot  long  survive.  The  idea  of  this  being  a  bar- 
barism is  now  fairly  formed,  admitted,  and  established  among 
some  of  the  best  minds  of  the  time ;  and  the  result  is,  as  in  all 
such  cases,  ultimately  secure. 

These  considerations  lead  my  thoughts  to  America ;  and  I 
must  say  that  I  regard  the  prospects  of  the  republic  of  the 
United  States  with  more  pain  and  apprehension  than  those  of 
any  other  people  in  the  civilised  world.  It  is  the  only  instance, 
I  believe,  of  a  nation  being  inferior  to  its  institutions ;  and  the 
result  will  be,  I  fear,  a  mournful  spectacle  to  the  world.    I  am 


120 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


not  thinking  chiefly,  at  this  moment,  of  American  slavery.  I 
have  shown  elsewhere  what  I  think  and  expect  about  that. 
Negro  slavery  in  the  United  States,  as  regards  the  existing 
Union,  is  near  its  end,  I  have  no  doubt.  I  regard  with  a  deeper 
concern  the  manifest  retrogression  of  the  American  people,  in 
their  political  and  social  character.  They  seem  to  be  lapsing 
from  national  manliness  into  childhood,  —  retrograding  from  the 
aims  and  interests  of  the  nineteenth  century  into  those  of  the 
fifteenth  and  sixteenth.  Their  passion  for  territorial  aggrandise- 
ment, for  gold,  for  buccaneering  adventure,  and  for  vulgar 
praise,  are  seen  miserably  united  with  the  pious  pretensions  and 
fraudulent  ingenuity  which  were,  in  Europe,  old-fashioned  three 
centuries  ago,  and  which  are  now  kept  alive  only  in  a  few  petty 
or  despised  States,  where  dynasty  is  on  its  last  legs.  I  know 
that  there  are  better  men,  and  plenty  of  them,  in  America  than 
those  who  represent  the  nation  in  the  view  of  Europe;  but 
those  better  men  are  silent  and  inactive ;  and  the  national  retro- 
gression is  not  visibly  retarded  by  them.  I  fear  it  cannot  be. 
I  fear  that  when  the  bulk  of  a  nation  is  below  its  institutions,  — 
whether  by  merely  wanting  the  requisite  knowledge,  or  by 
being  in  an  immature  moral  condition,  —  it  is  not  the  intelli- 
gence and  virtue  of  a  small,  despairing,  inactive  minority  that 
can  save  it  from  lapse  into  barbarism.  I  fear  that  the  Ameri- 
can nation  is  composed  almost  entirely  of  the  vast  majority  who 
coarsely  boast,  and  the  small  minority  who  timidly  despair, 
of  the  Republic.  It  appears  but  too  probable  that  the  law  of 
Progression  may  hold  good  with  regard  to  the  world  at  large 
without  preventing  the  retrogression  of  particular  portions  of  the 
race.  But  the  American  case  is  not  exactly  of  this  kind.  I 
rather  take  it  to  be  that  a  few  wise  men,  under  solemn  and 
inspiring  influences,  laid  down  a  loftier  political  programme  than 
their  successors  were  able  to  fulfil.  If  so,  there  is,  whatever 
disappointment,  no  retrogression,  properly  speaking.  We  sup- 
posed the  American  character  and  policy  to  be  represented  by 
the  chiefs  of  the  revolution,  and  their  Declaration  of  Indepen- 
dence and  republican  constitution  ;  and  now  we  find  ourselves 
mistaken  in  our  supposition.    It  is  a  disappointment;  but  we 


Aged  53.]  LAST  VIEW  OF  THE  WOKLD. 


121 


had  rather  admit  a  disappointment  than  have  to  witness  an 
actual  retrogression. 

Effacing  these  national  distinctions,  in  regarding  the  peoples 
as  the  human  race,  the  condition  of  humanity  appears  to  one 
who  is  taking  leave  of  it  very  hopeful,  though  as  yet  exceed- 
ingly infantine.  It  is  my  deliberate  opinion  that  the  one  essen- 
tial requisite  of  human  welfare  in  all  ways  is  scientific  knowledge 
.  of  human  nature.  It  is  my  belief  that  we  can  in  no  way  but 
by  sound  knowledge  of  Man  learn,  fully  and  truly,  any  thing 
else ;  and  that  it  is  only  when  glimpses  of  that  knowledge  were 
opened,  —  however  scantily  and  obscurely,  —  that  men  have 
effectually  learned  any  thing  else.  I  believe  that  this  science 
is  fairly  initiated ;  and  it  follows  of  course  that  I  anticipate  for 
the  race  amelioration  and  progression  at  a  perpetually  accelerated 
rate.  Attention  is  fully  fixed  now  on  the  nature  and  mode  of 
development  of  the  human  being;  and  the  key  to  his  mental 
and  moral  organisation  is  found.  The  old  scoff  of  divines 
against  philosophers  must  now  soon  be  dropped,  —  the  reproach 
that  they  have  made  no  advance  for  a  thousand  years ;  —  that 
there  were  philosophers  preaching  two  thousand  years  ago,  who 
have  hardly  a  disciple  at  this  day.  In  a  little  while  this  can 
never  more  be  said ;  nor  could  it  be  said  now  by  any  one 
who  understood  the  minds  of  the  people  among  whom  he  lives. 
The  glorious  aims  and  spirit  of  philosophy  have  wrought  for 
good  in  every  age  since  those  ancient  sages  lived ;  and  the  name 
and  image  of  each  is  the  morning  star  of  the  day  in  which  each 
lived.  In  this  way  were  the  old  philosophers  truly  our  masters ; 
and  they  may  yet  claim,  in  a  future  age,  the  discipleship  of  the 
whole  human  race.  But  to  them  scientific  fact  was  wanting :  by 
them  it  was  unattainable.  Their  aim  and  their  spirit  have  led 
recent  generations  to  the  discovery  of  the  element  wanting,  — 
the  scientific  fact;  and,  now  that  is  done,  the  progression  of 
philosophy  is  secure.  The  philosophy  of  human  nature  is  placed 
on  a  scientific  basis ;  and  it,  and  all  other  departments  of  phi- 
losophy, (for  all  depend  mainly  on  this  one)  are  already  spring- 
ing forward  so  as  to  be  wholly  incomparable  with  those  of  a 
thousand  years  ago.    There  is  no  need  to  retort  the  scoff  of 

VOL.  XL 


122 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


divines,  as  facts  are  against  them.  There  is  no  need  to  inquire 
of  them  what  is  the  state  of  Christianity  at  the  end  of  1800 
years,  nor  what  it  has  done  in  regenerating  human  nature,  and 
establishing  peace  on  earth  and  goodwill  among  men,  according 
to  its  promise.  Leaving  divines  on  one  side,  as  professionally 
disqualified  for  judging  of  the  function  and  prospects  of  phi- 
losophy, and  looking  at  the  matter  in  a  speculative,  and  not  au 
antagonistic  way,  I  should  say  that  the  time  cannot  be  far  off 
when,  throughout  the  civilised  world,  theology  must  go  out 
before  the  light  of  philosophy.  As  to  the  fact,  the  civilised 
world  is  now  nearly  divided  between  gross  Latin  or  Greek 
Catholicism  and  disbelief  of  Christianity  in  any  form.  Protes- 
tantism seems  to  be  going  out  as  fast  as  possible.  In  Germany 
the  Christian  faith  is  confessedly  extinct ;  and  in  France  it  is  not 
far  otherwise.  The  Lutheranism  of  Sweden  is,  in  its  effects, 
precisely  like  the  Catholicism  of  Spain  or  Italy,  and  will  issue  in 
"  infidelity  "  in  the  one  country  as  surely  as  in  the  others.  In 
England,  the  lamentations  of  the  religious  world,  and  the  dis- 
closures of  the  recent  Census,  show  how  even  outward  adhesion 
to  Christianity  is  on  the  decline :  and  if  they  did  not,  the 
chaotic  state  of  religious  opinion  would  indicate  the  fact  no  less 
reliably.  In  America  we  see  Protestantism  run  wild,  —  each 
man  being  his  own  creed-maker ;  and  the  result,  —  a  seeking 
erelong  for  something  true  and  stable,  —  is  secure.  —  Not  only 
is  such  the  state  of  the  civilised  world,  but  it  must  be  so.  Pre- 
cisely in  proportion  to  Man's  ignorance  of  his  own  nature,  as 
well  as  of  other  things,  is  the  tendency  of  his  imagination  to 
inform  the  outward  world  with  his  own  consciousness.  The 
fetish  worshipper  attributes  a  consciousness  like  his  own  to 
every  thing  about  him  ;  the  imputation  becomes  more  select  and 
rare  through  every  rising  grade  of  theology,  till  the  Christian 
makes  his  reflex  of  himself  invisible  and  intangible,  or,  as  he 
says,  "spiritual."  His  God  is  an  invisible  idol,  fading  away 
into  a  faint  abstraction,  exactly  according  to  the  enlightenment 
of  the  worshipper,  till  he  who  does  justice  to  his  own  faculties 
gives  up  the  human  attributes,  and  the  personality  of  that  First 
Cause  which  the  form  of  his  intellect  requires  him  to  suppose, 


Aged  53.] 


LAST  VIEW  OF  THE  WORLD. 


123 


and  is  called  an  atheist  by  the  idolaters  he  has  left  behind 
him.  By  the  verification  and  spread  of  the  science  of  human 
nature,  the  conflict  which  has  hitherto  attended  such  attainment 
as  this  will  be  spared  to  our  successors.  "When  scientific  facts 
are  established,  and  self-evident  truths  are  brought  out  of  them, 
there  is  an  end  of  conflict;  —  or  it  passes  on  to  administer 
discipline  to  adventurers  in  fresh  fields  of  knowledge.  About 
this  matter,  of  the  extinction  of  theology  by  a  true  science  of 
human  nature,  I  cannot  but  say  that  my  expectation  amounts 
to  absolute  assurance ;  and  that  I  believe  that  the  worst  of  the 
conflict  is  over.  I  am  confident  that  a  bright  day  is  coming  for 
future  generations.  Our  race  has  been  as  Adam  created  at 
nightfall.  The  solid  earth  has  been  but  dark,  or  dimly  visible, 
while  the  eye  was  inevitably  drawn  to  the  mysterious  heavens 
above.  There,  the  successive  mythologies  have  arisen  in  the 
east,  each  a  constellation  of  truths,  each  glorious  and  fervently 
worshipped  in  its  course ;  but  the  last  and  noblest,  the  Chris- 
tian, is  now  not  only  sinking  to  the  horizon,  but  paling  in  the 
dawn  of  a  brighter  time.  The  dawn  is  unmistakable ;  and  the 
sun  will  not  be  long  in  coming  up.  The  last  of  the  mythologies 
is  about  to  vanish  before  the  flood  of  a  brighter  light. 

With  the  last  of  the  mythologies  will  pass  away,  after  some 
lingering,  the  immoralities  which  have  attended  all  mytholo- 
gies. Now,  while  the  state  of  our  race  is  such  as  to  need  all 
our  mutual  devotedness,  all  our  aspiration,  all  our  resources  of 
courage,  hope,  faith  and  good  cheer,  the  disciples  of  the  Christian 
creed  and  morality  are  called  upon,  day  by  day,  to  "  work  out 
their  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling,"  and  so  forth. 
Such  exhortations  are  too  low  for  even  the  wavering  mood  and 
quacked  morality  of  a  time  of  theological  suspense  and  uncer- 
tainty. In  the  extinction  of  that  suspense,  and  the  discrediting 
of  that  selfish  quackery,  I  see  the  prospect,  for  future  genera- 
tions, of  a  purer  and  loftier  virtue,  and  a  truer  and  sweeter 
heroism  than  divines  who  preach  such  self-seeking  can  conceive 
of.  When  our  race  is  trained  in  the  morality  which  belongs 
to  ascertained  truth,  all  "fear  and  trembling"  will  be  left  to 
children ;  and  men  will  have  risen  to  a  capacity  for  higher  work 


124 


AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


[1855. 


than  saving  themselves,  —  to  that  of  "  working  out "  the  welfare 
of  their  race,  not  in  "  fear  and  trembling,"  but  with  serene  hope 
and  joyful  assurance. 

The  world  as  it  is  is  growing  somewhat  dim  before  my  eyes ; 
but  the  world  as  it  is  to  be  looks  brighter  every  day. 


INDEX. 


Abolitioxists,  the,  L  337,  338;  meeting  of, 
L  347  -  352. 

Accession,  the  Queen's,  I.  417. 

Advice,  I.  501. 

"  Ages,  The  Three,''  I.  192. 

Aid  and  kindness,  I.  464. 

Aikin,  Dr.,  I.  78,  79. 

Aikin,  Miss,  I.  229,  230,  323,  324. 

Ailsie,  I.  435,  436. 

Alarm,  an,  I.  393,  394. 

Alcott,  I.  387. 

Alderson,Dr.,I.  226. 

Althorp,  Lord,  1. 196-199. 

Ambleside,  arrival  at,  I.  494. 

Amende,  vicious,  I.  359. 

"  America,  Society  in,"  I.  405. 

Anxieties,  I.  188 

Appearance  in  print,  first,  I.  9L 

Arnold,  Mr.,  II.  41. 

Arnold,  Mrs  ,  I.  499. 
•  Aspland,  Lindsey,  II.  96. 

Athenaeum,  the,  I.  475,  476. 

Atkinson  Letters,  the,  II.  36-56. 

Atkinson,  Mr.,  friend  of  Basil  Montagu,  I. 
489  ;  first  sight  of,  I.  489  ;  recovery  owiDg 
to,  1. 4S9 ;  philosophical  method  of,  I.  491 ; 
reviewers  overlook  it,  I.  492 ;  letters  on 
man's  nature  and  development,  I.  492 ; 
central  truth  apprehended  by,  I.  493 :  let- 
ter of  H.  M.  to,  I.  539 ;  reply  to  H.  M's. 
letter,  I.  542 :  London  lecturer's  mistake 
of,  II.  75 ;  account  of  what  man  can  know, 
II.  76  -  81 ;  receives  the  result  of  Dr. 
Latham's  visit,  II.  102. 

Atten.ion,  request  to  the  reader's,  I.  2. 

Austen,  Miss,  I.  77,  323. 

Austin,  Colonel,  I.  366,  367. 

Austin,  Mrs.,  I.  265. 

Authoress,  an,  I.  280,  281. 

Authorship,  courage  in,  I.  151. 

Autobiography,  I.  7. 

Babbage,  Mr.,  I.  201,  209,  265,  267. 
Back,  1.209. 

Bacon,  I.  263,  516 ;  II.  28,  53,  79,  89. 


Baillie,  Joanna,  I.  266,  270,  271. 

Baldwin  and  Cradock,  I.  123, 124. 

Barbauld,  Mrs.,  I.  26,  78,  228,  243,  270. 

Barnes,  Mr.,  1.  168, 169. 

Beachy  Head,  trip  to,  I.  183. 

Beaufort,  Admiral,  L  268. 

Beckwith,  Mr.,  I.  41,42. 

Bell,  Currer,  II.  21-25  ,  45,  64. 

Bell,  SirC.,I.  272. 

Belles,  ancient,  I.  279. 

Belsham,  Mr.,  I.  29. 

Bentley,  I.  330,  399,  400. 

Berry,  Miss,  I  277  -  279  ,  330,  399,  400  ;  Ap- 
pendix A.,  I.  553. 

"  Billow  and  the  Rock,  The,"  I.  531. 

Birth  of  the  youngest,  I.  39. 

Bishop,  I.  256.  • 

Bishops,  the,  I.  255. 

Bolton  Abbey,  II.  33 

Book,  scheme  of,  I.  538,  539. 

Boston,  reaction  in,  I.  356. 

Bowring,  I.  311. 

Bremer,  Miss,  II.  322. 

Bright.  Mr  ,  I.  521. 
1  Bronte,  Miss,  I.  324  ;  II.  23,  41,  64,  66. 

Brooks,  Rev.  C,  I.  361,  362. 

Brougham,  I.  164,  169,  203,  233  -  237  ,  254, 
'  255,266,329,425,460,462. 

Brown,  Dr.  Samuel,  I.  435. 

Browning,  Mrs.,  I.  412. 
1  Brownings,  the,  I.  266,  314,  315. 

Buckland,  I.  209. 

Buller,  C.  and  A.,  I.  425,  426. 

Buller,  Charles,  I.  257,  258.  462 ;  II.  60. 

Bulwer,  I.  180,  264,  266,  267. 

Bunsen,  Chevalier,  I.  537. 

Burney,  Fanny,  I.  4. 

Byron,  II.  50. 

Byron,  Lady,  I.  463,  464. 

Calhoux,  I.  343,  372,  378. 
Callcott,  Sir  A.,  I.  273. 
Campbell,  I.  265,  267,  400,  467. 
Campbell,  Lord,  I.  255 ;  H.  61 
Canning,  I.  61 ;  II.  18, 116. 


126 


INDEX. 


Carlisle,  Lord,  I.  374. 

Carlyle,  I.  287-289,  326,  407,  468. 

Carlyles,  the,  I.  284. 

Carpenter,  Dr.,  I.  26,  73,  79,  80,  466. 

Carpenter,  Miss,  II.  84. 

Castlereagh,  I.  61. 

Chadwick,  I.  308. 

Chalmers,  Dr.,  I.  308,  327. 

Chambers,  Lord  Advocate's,  I.  242. 

Chambers,  R.,  I.  433  ;  II.  20. 

Chances,  Messrs.,  II.  69. 

Chandos,  Lord,  I.  425. 

Changes,  domestic,  II.  83. 

Channing,  Dr.,  I.  80, 256,  327,  353, 357,  359, 

363,  365,  368,  506. 
Channing's,  Dr.,  advice,  I.  365. 
Chantrey,  I.  273,  274. 
Chapman,  Mr.,  II.  64,  66,  67,  97,  98, 101. 
Chapmau,  Mrs.,  I.  390. 
Chaucer,  I.  218. 
Child,  Mr.  D.  L.,  I.  368. 
Chorley,  I.  317,  318. 
"  Cinnamon  and  Pearls,"  I.  185. 
Citizens,  apathy  of,  I.  369. 
Clarke,  Sir  Charles,  I.  472. 
Clay,  Mr.,  I.  343,  344,  372, 378,  379. 
Cobbett,  I.  61,93;  II.  34. 
Cobden,  I.  523  -  526. 
Coke,  Mr.,  I.  467. 
Colburn,  I.  400,  402,  403. 
Coleridge,  I.  298-300  ;  II.  32. 
College,  Haileybury,  I.  248. 
Collins,  Mr.,  I.  172, 173. 
Colonization  scheme,  I.  338. 
Coltman,  I.  255. 
Columbus,  II.  10,  70. 
Combes,  the,  I.  313. 
Companion,  travelling,  T.  331. 
"  Complete  Guide,"  II.  32. 
Composition,  methods  of,  I.  93,  94,  327,  328. 
Comte,  II.  57  -  59,  64  -  67,  70  -  76,  82, 84. 
Comte,  rendering,  II.  59. 
Congleton,  Lord,  I.  467. 
Conroy,  Sir  John,  I.  417. 
Conversation,  ominous,  I.  339. 
Conviction,  grasp  of  a,  I.  83. 
Cooper,  Mrs.  Lewis,  I.  16. 
Coronation,  the,  I.  419-424. 
Country,  last  view  of,  II.  113-115. 
Cousins,  clever,  I.  70. 
Cranworth,  I.  255. 
Cresson,  Elliott,  I.  149-151,  338. 
Crisis,  reform,  I.  163. 
Critics,  Comte's,  II.  73  -  76. 
Croker,  Mr.,  1. 151, 155,  157, 158. 
Crompton,  I.  255. 
Cropper,  Mr.,  I.  149-151. 
Crowe,  Mrs. ,  I.  435. 
Cruger,  Mrs.  Douglas,  I.  356. 
Cunningham,  Allan,  I.  274. 


"  Daily  News,"  the,  II.  87. 

Dalton,  Dr.,  I.  269  ,  467. 

D-Arblay,  Madame,  I.  4. 

Darwin,  Charles,  I.  268. 

Davy, I. 298. 

Davy,  Lady,  I.  265. 

Deafness,  I.  55-58. 

Death,  first,  I.  43. 

Death  of  betrothed,  I.  100. 

Death  of  brother  and  his  child,  I.  96,  97. 

Death  of  father,  I.  99. 

Decline,  brother's,  I.  96. 

"  Deerbrook,"  I.  413,  414. 

Devices,  politic,  I.  400. 

Deville,  Mr.,  I.  297. 

Dickens,  I.  170, 180,  514;  II.  25,  60,  62,  67, 

91,  93,  94. 
Disappointment,  I.  113, 125. 
Discipline,  I.  35. 
Discouragement,  I.  127-130. 
Dissection  Bill,  Mr.  Warburton's,  I.  295. 
Doddridge,  I.  4. 
Dream,  infant,  I.  11. 
Dreaming,  mesmeric,  I.  515,  516. 
Dreams,  vain-glorious,  I.  34. 
Dresser,  Amos,  I.  363. 

Drummond,  Mr.,  1. 15,  34,  60, 165, 196,  198. 
Drummond,  Thomas,  I.  467. 
Dryden,  I.  215. 

Durham,  Lord,  I.  193,  236,  237  ,  257,  258, 
260,  425  -  428,  461,467. 

"  Eastern  Life,"  I.  551. 
Eastlake.SirC.,  I.  276,277. 
Edgeworth,  Miss,  I.  93,  94,  319,  320,  324. 
Education,  careful,  I.  20,  21. 
Effort,  literary,  1. 104  -107, 112. 
Efforts,  fruitless,  I.  126. 
Embarkation,  I.  332. 
Emerson,  Charles,  I.  375. 
Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo,  I.  375,  382,  549. 
Empson,  Mr.,  I.  160, 162,  245,  250. 
Encouragement,  first,  I.  131. 
Enfield,  Dr. ,  I.  226. 
Engagements,  spring,  TT.  91. 
Essays,  prize,  I.  119  - 121. 
Esterhazy,  Prince,  I.  421. 
Evans,  Mr.,  T.  293. 

Everett,  Mr.  Edward,  I.  352,  375,  380. 
Ewart,  Mr.,  I.  532. 
Exercises,  Sunday,  I.  25. 
Experience  and  progress,  I.  466  -  471. 

Fanaticism,  T.  73. 
Faraday,  I.  209,  298. 
Farming,  small,  II.  34,  35. 
Father,  I.  97. 
Fiction,  plot  in,  1. 181. 
Field,  buying  a,  I.  499. 
Fillmore,  I.  380. 


INDEX. 


127 


Fisher,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  L  283. 
Flattery,  I.  387. 
Foliage,  thirst  for,  I.  487. 
Folleu,  Dr.,  II.  100. 

Follen,  Dr.  and  Mrs.,  I.  344,  345,  347,  352, 

363,  366,  369,  390,  466. 
Fonblanque,  II.  33. 
Forbes,  Dr.,  I.  519. 

"  Forest  and  Game-Law  Tales,"  I.  521. 
Fox,  Mr.,  I.  106,  110-112,  115,  124,  126, 

127, 129, 152,  190, 194,  230,  329. 
Franklin,  Dr.,  I.  27. 
Friends,  American,  I.  391. 
Fry,  Mrs.,  I.  173. 
Fuller,  Margaret,  I.  380-384,  517. 

Garrison,  I.  338,  346,  365,  369,  372,  373. 

Gift,  a  fairy,  I.  503. 

Gillies,  Miss,  I.  293,  294. 

Gilman,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  I.  298. 

Gilman,  Mrs.,  I.  344. 

Glasscock,  Captain,  I.  535. 

Godwin,  I.  301-305. 

Gregory ,  Professor,  I.  515,  517. 

Grey,  Lord,  I.  460,  461,  467. 

Grote,  Mr  ,  I.  260. 

"  Guide  to  Service,"  I.  416. 

Guizot,  M.,  I.  177. 

Gurney,  Joseph  John,  I.  228. 

Gurney,  Priscilla,  I.  228. 

Gurneys,  the,  I.  134. 

Hale,  Mr.,  I.  353,  354. 

Hall,  Mr.  Spencer,  I.  473,  475. 

Hall,  Mrs.  S.  C,  I.  412. 

Hallam,  Mr.,  I.  230,  231,  239,  245,  250  -  252, 

325,  486,  497. 
Hallams,  the,  I.  250. 
Halliday/Mrs.,  I.  444. 
Harness,  I.  253. 
Harper,  Mr.,  I.  398,  400. 
Hartley  on  Man,  I.  80,  81. 
Havne,  Governor,  I.  343. 
Henley,  Lord,  I.  203,  331,  467. 
Herschel,  Sir  John,  I.  209,  431. 
Hill,  Rowland,  I.  309,  310 ;  II.  89. 
History,  Introductory,  II.  19. 
Hoax,  the  Fraser,  I.  320. 
Holidays,  I.  283. 
Holland,  Dr.,  I.  250. 
Holland,  Lady,  I.  245. 
Holley,  Mrs.,  I.  366. 
Holm,  Mr.,  I  298. 
Holman,  I.  186. 
Home,  life  at,  II.  89. 
Home,  London,  I.  189. 
Home,  return,  II.  103. 
Home,  I.  287. 
Horner,  I.  241. 
Host,  Philadelphia,  I.  360. 


Houlstons,  the,  I.  102-105. 
"  Hour  and  the  Man,  The,"  I.  446. 
"  Household  Education,"  II.  4. 
"Household  Words,"  II.  31. 
"  Household  Words,"  secession  from,  II.  93, 
94. 

House-hunting,  I.  497. 

Howitt,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  I.  313. 

"How  to  observe,"  I.  416. 

Hume,  Mr.,  I.  135,  149. 

Hunt,  F.  K.,  II.  82,  85,  87  -  89,  96,  98. 

Hunt,  Leigh,  I.  287. 

Hunt,  Mr.,  death  of,  II.  99. 

Hutton,  I.  283. 

Hutton,  Messrs.,  II.  70. 

Illness,  I.  193,  443. 
Illness,  false  sentiment  about,  I.  441. 
Illness,  last,  II.  101. 
Impressions,  early,  I.  9. 
Interdicts,  foreign,  I.  179. 
Interference,  I.  453-455. 
Introduction,  I.  1-6. 
Invitations,  political,  II.  11-14. 
"Ireland,  Letters  from,"  II.  85. 

Jackson,  Francis,  I.  347,  349,  352. 

Jackson,  President,  I.  378. 

Jameson,  Mrs.,  I.  265. 

Jane,  servant,  I.  518-521. 

Jeffrey,  I.  237  -  239,  241,  246,  297,  506. 

Jeffrey,  Mrs.,  I.  337. 

Jerrold,  Douglas,  I.  180  ;  II.  32. 

J.,  Miss,  I.  331,  332. 

Jocelyn,  Lord,  II.  99. 

Johnson,  Dr.,  I.  3,221. 

Johnstone,  Sir  Alexander,  I.  185-187. 

Journey,  a,  I.  531. 

Journey,  autumn,  I.  428  -  430. 

Journey,  first  long,  I.  23. 

Joux,  trip  to,  I.  437. 

Julius,  Dr.,  I.  335,  336,  340,  341,  360. 

Keats,  I.  508. 
Kelty,  Miss,  I.  321. 
Kemble,  Fanny,  I.  180. 
Kembles,  the,  I.  275,  276. 
Kenrick,  Mr.,  I.  79. 
Ker,  Mrs.,  I.  283. 
Kneeland,  Abner,  I.  359. 
Knight,  Mr.  Charles,  I.  332,  408,416  ,  428, 
429,449;  11.2,4, 18. 

Laing,  Mr.,  1. 164,455. 

Lambton,  George,  I.  428. 

Landon,  Miss,  I.  318. 

Landseer,  Sir  E.,  I.  265. 

Lansdowne,  Lord  and  Lady,  I.  251,  296. 

Lardner,  Dr.,  I.  430. 

Latham,  Dr.,  II.  101, 102. 


128 


INDEX. 


Lawyers,  the,  I.  254. 
Lectures,  II.  4-10. 
Lee,  James  Martineau,  I.  107. 
Legacies,  anatomical,  I.  295. 
Leicester,  Lord,  L  467. 
Lessons,  our,  I.  41. 
Letters,  publication  of,  I.  2-6. 
"  Letters  on  Man's  Nature  and  Develop- 
ment," n.  30 
Life,  leaving,  IT.  105-112. 
Life,  single,  I.  100-102. 
Lindsay,  Lady  C,  I.  425. 
Lionism,  literary,  £  141,  205  -  225. 
LittrS,  II.  57. 

Lockhart,  Mr.,  1. 151, 154-158,  414,  434. 

Lodgings,  Birmingham,  II.  69. 

Lofft,  Capel,  Jr.,  I.  313,  314. 

Lombe,  Mr.,  II.  66,  67,  74,  97. 

Loring,  E.  6.,  I.  344  ,  345,  348  -  350  ,  355, 

363,  364. 
Lovejoy,  I.  363. 
Luxuries,  new,  TI.  86. 
Lyells,  the,  I.  268,  269,  326. 
Lyfton,  E.  L.  Bulwer,  I.  472. 

Macauiay,  I.  245,  261-264. 

Macgregor,  I.  311. 

Machinations,  I.  480. 

Macready,  I.  274,  293,  314,  317 ;  II.  33. 

Madge,  Mr.,  I.  26,  28,  47. 

Madison,  I.  380. 

Malthus,  Mr.,  I.  54, 151-153,158-160, 191, 
247,  248. 

Marcet,  Mrs.,  I.  105,  106,  176, 178,  237 
Marsh,  Mrs.,  T.  Ill,  283,  284. 
Marshall,  Chief  Justice,  I.  380,  395,  396. 
Martineau,  Philip  Meadows,  I.  6,  76. 
May,  Rev.  S.  J.,  I.  349,  352. 
Mazzini,  I.  285,  286. 
Mclan,  I.  488. 

Meeting,  British  Association,  I.  430. 
Melbourne,  Lord,  I.  417,  418,  422,  425,  462, 
463. 

Memorial,  Boston  (Appendix  B.),  I.  557,  558. 

Mental  training,  differences  of,  I.  493. 

Men,  vain,  I.  264,265. 

Mesmerism,  trial  of,  I.  474. 

Metternich,  Prince,  1. 175. 

Mill,  James,  I.  329. 

Mill,  Mr.  J.  S.,  I.  313,408. 

Milman,  I.  239,  240. 

Milnes,  R.  M.,  I.  258  -  260,  279. 

Milton,  I  26,  32,  83,  325. 

Minot,  I.  359. 

Miscellanies,  II.  31. 

Mitford,  Miss,  I.  315-317. 

Money,  love  of,  I.  19. 

Montagu,  Basil,  I.  305,  306,  473, 489. 

Montaigne,  II.  89. 

Monteagle,  Lord,  I.  310. 


Moore,  I.  232,  233. 

Morgan,  Lady,  I.  265,  316. 

Morpeth,  Lord,  I.  374. 

Mortification,  vicious,  I.  357. 

Mother,  death  of,  II.  15. 

Moxon,  I.  414,  458,  476,  552. 

Murray,  Lord,  I.  241,  242,  429,  432  -  434. 

Murray,  Mr.,  I.  414,  415,  467,  551 ;  IL  1. 

Mystery,  a,  I.  392-395. 

Mystification,  I.  24. 

Nantes,  Edict  of,  I.  6,  28. 
Necessity,  doctrine  of,  I.  84-86. 
Needs,  religious,  I.  31. 
New  Orleans,  night  at,  I.  392-395. 
Newspapers,  Boston,  I.  355. 
Nightingale,  Miss,  I.  464. 
Normanby,  Lord,  I  427. 
NoveL  subject  for,  I.  411. 

O'Connell,  n.  12, 14. 
O'Conner,  II.  1,3,  4. 
Opie,  Mrs.,  I.  226,  280,  324. 
Osier,  Messrs.,  II.  69. 
Otley,  I.  399. 
Otter,  Bishop,  I.  257. 
Outbreak,  I.  66. 
Overwork,  question  of,  L  142. 
Owen,  Robert,  I.  174-176. 

Panic,  publisher's,  I.  551. 
Parable,  I.  389,  390. 
Parke,  Sir  James,  I.  333. 
Parr,  Dr.,  II  31. 
Peabody,  Miss,  I.  353,  354. 
"  Peace,  History  of,"  II.  17. 
Pedantry,  provincial,  I.  225. 
Peel,  Sir  R.,  I.  461. 
Penn,  William,  I.  263. 

Pension,  Correspondence  about  a  (Appendix 

B  ),  I.  587-594. 
Pension,  offer  of,  I.  460  -463. 
Perplexities,  theological,  I.  31. 
Perry,  Rev.  Isaac,  I.  47,  54, 59,  60,  65,  67,  72. 
Phillips,  I.  274. 

"  Philosophic  Positive,"  II.  57,  58,  71. 

Philosophy,  desideratum  in,  II.  29. 

Philosophy,  rest  in,  II.  28. 

Philosophy,  restlessness  in,  II.  27. 

Phrenology,  hap  hazard,  I.  297,  298. 

Pierce,  I.  3S0. 

"  Playfellow,  The,"  I.  448. 

Plot,  political,  I.  523-526. 

Plunket,  Lord,  II.  13. 

Politics,  first,  I.  18,  61. 

Politics,  Mediterranean,  I.  635. 

Poor-Law,  new,  I.  167. 

Porro,  Count,  II.  14,  15. 

Porter,  Mr.,  I.  310-312. 

Portraits,  I.  293,  294. 


INDEX. 


129 


Position,  new  social,  I.  141. 

Potter,  Mr.  G.  R.,I.  283. 

Practice,  mesmeric,  I.  513. 

Prayer,  view  of,  L  87. 

Prejudice,  professional,  L  486,  487. 

Preparation,  method  of,  I.  147. 

Preston,  Colonel,  I.  343. 

Priestley,  Dr.,  I.  81-83, 191,  388. 

Print,  rushing  into,  I.  475. 

Prisoners,  the  Canadian,  I.  306,  307. 

Productions,  papers  on  British,  IL  67. 

Project,  a,  II.  25. 

Project,  new,  I.  115. 

Proposal,  literary,  I.  410. 

Prosecution  for  opinion  (Appendix  B.),  I. 

557,  558. 
Public,  the  Secularist,  I.  550. 
Publishers,  competition  of,  I.  399-403. 
Publisher,  trouble  with,  I.  191. 

Question,  the  Texas,  I.  367,  368. 
Question,  the  vital,  I.  371-373. 
Question,  the  Woman,  I.  301-303. 
Quillinan,  Mr.,  EL  41. 
Quincy  De,  I.  448. 

Rammohun  Rot,  I.  184,  298. 

Rankin,  Elizabeth,  1  6. 

Reading,  capacity  of,  I.  323. 

Reid,  Mrs.,  1.283. 

Relations,  domestic,  I.  77. 

Repository,  the  Monthly,  I.  110,  111. 

Resolutions,  I.  122. 

Revelation,  problem  of,  I.  80. 

Review,  Westminster,  the,  EL  97. 

Richmond,  Mr.,  I.  293,  294. 

Rigby,  Dr.,  I.  149. 

Robertson,  Mr.,  I.  318. 

Roebuck,  I.  260,  261,  306. 

Rogers,  I.  232  ,  233,  239  ,  240,  249,  252,  324, 

326,  414. 
Rogers,  Miss,  I.  434. 
Romer,  Mrs.,  I.  535. 
Romillys,  I.  249,  255,  305. 
Ross,  Sir  John,  I.  246. 
Ruin,  pecuniary,  I.  108, 109. 
Rumours,  I.  165. 
Russell,  Lord  John,  I.  523. 

Saunders,  I.  400  -  402,  404. 

Saunders  and  Otley,  I.  284,  399,  403. 

Savans,  the,  I.  272. 

Sayers,  Dr.,  I.  226. 

Scheme,  abortive,  II.  65. 

School,  I.  49. 

School,  close  of,  I.  53. 

Scott,  I.  144, 180, 188, 192,  356,  434. 

Scrape,  a,  I.  51. 

Sea,  .A  Month  at  (Appendix  C),  I.  559-586. 
Sea-side,  I.  45. 


Season,  tourist,  I.  529. 
Sedgwick,  I.  209. 

Sedgwick,  Miss,  I.  376  -  378,  408, 411. 

Sedgwicks,  the,  I.  359,  376  -  378. 

Senior,  Mr.,  I.  313. 

Sensitiveness,  Boston,  I.  353. 

Shakspere,  I.  53  -  55  ,  67,180,218,219,224, 

270,  293,  325,  429 ;  II.  89. 
Shakspere,  topographical  notes  to,  I.  429. 
Shallowness,  Unitarian,  I.  29. 
Shelley,  I.  508. 

Shepherd,  Lady  Mary,  I.  279,  280. 
"Shirley,"  II.  21,22,24. 
Shyness,  I.  42. 

"  Sick-room,  Life  in,"  I.  456  -  460. 
Sidmouth,  I.  61. 

Slave-holders,  understanding  with,  I.  343. 

Smith,  Sir  James,  I.  226. 

Smith,  Sydney,  I.  145,  186,  237,  244-246, 

297,  325,  407,  464. 
Snare,  a,  I.  153. 
"  Society  in  America,"  I.  405. 
Society,  old  Norwich,  I.  225. 
Society,  the  Diffusion,  I.  124, 133  - 135. 
Somerville,  Mrs.,  I.  266,  269,  270,  279,  280, 

324,  326. 
Southey,  I.  4,  144,  227,  327,  467. 
Stael,  Madame  de,  I.  205. 
Stanley,  Bishop,  I.  256. 
Statesmen,  baffled,  I.  378-380. 
Stepney,  Lady,  I.  280,  281. 
Sterling,  John,  I.  171,  232,  286. 
Story,  Judge,  I.  184. 
Story,  the  old,  I.  478. 
Stowe,  Mrs.,  I.  358. 
Stratheden,  Lady,  I.  255. 
Studies,  I.  53. 
Studies,  biblical,  I.  79. 
Studies,  classical,  I.  78. 
Studies,  topical,  I.  512,  513. 
Success,  I.  135. 
Success,  results  of,  I.  201. 
Sullivans,  the,  I.  356,  357. 
Sundial  again,  a,  I.  527. 
Sunrise,  a,  1. 13. 
Suspension,  last,  I.  132. 
Sydenham,  II.  99. 
Sydenham,  Lord,  I.  426,  467. 

Tales,  early,  1. 103. 
Tales,  materials  of,  I.  149. 
Tales,  scenery  of,  1. 172. 
Talfourd,  I.  54,  90,  261,  317. 
Tappan,  Messrs.,  I.  336. 
Taxes,  proceedings  on,  I.  197-199. 
Taylor,  Mrs.  John,  I.  226. 
Taylor,  Mrs.  Meadows,  I.  19. 
Taylor,  William,  I.  56,  62,  225  -  227. 
Temper,  I.  65. 
Temper,  jealous,  I.  15. 


130 


INDEX. 


Tennyson,  I.  508;  H.  89. 

Terrors,  childish,  I.  8,  9. 

Testimonial,  I.  464,  465. 

Testing  time,  a,  I.  375. 

Thackeray,  1.  180  ;  II.  60,  61. 

Thompson,  Colonel,  I.  523. 

Thompson,  Mr.  George,  I.  335, 337, 351,  362. 

Thompson,  Mr.  Vincent,  I.  413. 

Time,  value  of,  I.  195. 

"Times,  The,"  and  the  Poor-Law,  I.  168- 
171. 

Toynbee,  Mr.  ,  I.  295,  296. 
Travel,  conditions  of,  I.  537. 
Travel,  invitation  to,  I.  531. 
Travel,  need  of,  I.  330. 
Travel,  results  of,  I.  391,  392. 
Travel,  Scotch,  I.  432,  433. 
Travellers,  British,  I.  374. 
Tremenheere,  Mr.  S.,  I.  503,  510. 
Trollope,  Mrs.,  I.  240,  241. 
Troubles,  personal,  I.  69. 
Troubles,  school,  I.  51. 
Tuckerman,  Miss,  I.  353. 
Tufnell.Mr.,  I.  510. 
Turner,  Ann,  I.  14,  22,  33. 
Turner,  Mr.,  I.  83. 
Twins.  Dutch,  I.  182. 
Tynemouth,  going  to,  I.  443. 
Tynemouth,  leaving,  I.  481. 
Tynemouth,  window  at,  I.  445. 

Unhappiness,  I.  33. 
Unitarian  Christianity,  I.  28  -  33. 
Unitarians,  leaving  the,  I.  119-121. 
Urquhart,  I.  311,  312. 

Visit,  country,  I.  37. 
Visiting,  declining  local,  I.  495. 


Visitors,  morning,  I.  313. 
Voyage,  critical,  I.  533. 

Walker,  Dr.,  I.  352-354. 

Ware,  Henry,  I.  346-348,  352,  467. 

Warniugs,  1.  341. 

Washington,  II.  10,  70. 

Way  land,  I.  346. 

Ways,  Belgravian,  II.  3. 

Ways,  village,  II.  6. 

Webster,  I.  372,378  -  380. 

Wedgwood,  I.  283. 

"  Western  Travel,  Retrospect  of,"  I-  407. 

Westmacott,  I.  274. 

Whately,  Archbishop,  I.  255. 

What  man  can  know,  II.  76-81. 

Whewell,  I.  209,  245,  265. 

Whishaw,  Mr.,  I.  249  -  251. 

Whisperings  on  board,  I.  336. 

Whittaker,  I.  126,  127. 

Willis,  N.  P.,  I.  384,  386. 

Wills,  Mr.,  II.  92-95. 

Wills,  Mr.  and  Mrs.,  I.  433. 

Windermere,  Guide  to,  II.  91. 

Wollstonecraft,  Mary,  I.  301,  303. 

Wordsworth,  I.  292,  499, 500,  503  -  511,  522. 

Wordsworth,  Mrs.,  II.  104. 

Work,  more,  I.  170,  409. 

Workhouse,  night  in  a,  II.  63. 

Working,  times  of,  I.  145. 

Work  of  the  year,  I.  117. 

World,  last  view  of,  II.  115-124. 

Worship,  public,  I.  17. 

Writing,  method  of,  1. 148,  149. 

Yates,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  R.  V.,  I.  531-533, 
552. 

Yates,  Misses,  I.  531. 


END  OF  THE  AUTOBIOGRAPHY. 


MEMOEIALS. 


MEMORIALS 

OF 


HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 


"But  do  thou,  O  Muse,  and  thou,  Truth,  daughter  of  Zeus,  put  forth  your  hands 
and  keep  from  me  the  reproach  of  having  wronged  a  friend  by  breaking  my  pledged 
word.  For  from  afar  hath  overtaken  me  the  time  that  was  then  yet  to  come,  and 
hath  shamed  my  deep  debt."  —  Pindar. 

"  The  sea-sand  none  hath  numbered ;  and  the  joys  that  Theron  hath  given  to 
others— who  shall  declare  the  tale  thereof ?"  — Pindar. 


BY 


MARIA  WESTON  CHAPMAN. 


BOSTON: 
JAMES  R.  OSGOOD  AND  COMPANY, 


Copyright,  1877. 
By  JAMES  R.  OSGOOD  8s  CO. 


University  Press  :  Welch,  Bigelow,  &  Co., 
Cambridge. 


CONTENTS. 


Page 

Introduction   137 

Infancy   141 

Youth   147 

Womanhood   153 

Fame   187 

Foreign  Life,  —  Western   225 

Consequences  of  Foreign  Life,  —  Without     ....  285 

Consequences  of  Foreign  Life,  —  Within    ....  303 

Consequences,  —  to  Life  Passive   343 

Foreign  Life,  —  Eastern   369 

Home   377 

Philosophy   409 

The  Life  Sorrow   427 

Work   443 

Fresh  Foreign  Intercourse   475 

Conversations   499 

Waiting  for  Death   527 

Self  Estimate,  and  other   561 

Survivorship       ...    575 


MEMORIALS  OF  HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 


INTRODUCTION. 

It  was  about  the  New  Year's  time  of  1855,  being  then  resi- 
dent in  Paris,  that  I  wrote  to  my  most  valued  friend,  Harriet 
Martineau,  expressing  the  natural  feelings  of  the  season,  and  the 
hope  that  she  would  soon  visit  me.  Knowing  that  she  had  been 
even  more  than  commonly  occupied,  and  not  in  her  usual  health, 
I  entreated  her  to  spare  herself  the  fatigue  of  writing  to  me,  un- 
less she  had  more  leisure  at  command  than  I  supposed.  A  few 
days  brought  me  the  following  letter  :  — 

London,  January  24th. 
My  dear  Friend,  —  You  are  generous  in  desiring  me  not  to 
write  to  you  if  too  busy.  I  need  not  say  that  keeping  up  my  friend- 
ship with  you  is  more  important  than  any  business,  and  dearer  than 
most  pleasures.  I  must  tell  you  now  why  I  have  not  written  before  ; 
and  I  wish  I  could  spare  you,  by  the  way  of  telling,  any  of  the  pain 
which  I  must  give  you.  The  last  half-year  has  been  the  gravest,  per- 
haps, that  I  have  ever  known.  I  think  I  told  you  of  the  sad  cholera 
season  when  I  was  at  Sydenham,  and  some  of  the  best  people  at  work 
among  us  died,  and  others  were  sick,  and  I  had  their  work  to  do 
while  ill  myself,  and  sore  at  heart  for  the  world's  loss  in  them.  Two 
months  later  died  my  very  dear  friend,  the  editor  of  the  "  Daily 
News,"  *  —  cut  off  by  a  fever  at  the  age  of  forty,  —  a  man  whose 
place  cannot  possibly  be  filled.  Since  Dr.  Follen's  death,  I  have  not 
had  such  a  personal  sorrow  ;  but  in  sight  of  his  devoted  wife  and 
his  four  children,  and  the  gap  made  in  our  public  action  by  his  loss, 
I  could  not  dwell  on  my  own  sorrow.    And  now  it  turns  out  that  I 


*  Frederic  Knight  Hunt. 


138 


MEMORIALS. 


need  not ;  for  I  am  going  to  follow  him.  My  clear  friend,  you  are  a 
brave  woman,  and  you  have  shown  that  you  can  serenely  part  with 
comrades  and  friends,  and  work  on  for  the  cause  ;  and  you  must  do 
the  same  again.  I  will  try  to  work  with  you  for  such  time  as  1 
remain  ;  but  I  am  mortally  ill,  and  there  is  no  saying  for  how  long 
this  may  be.  For  many  months  past  I  have  had  symptoms  of  what 
now  turns  out  to  be  organic  disease  of  the  heart ;  —  symptoms  occa- 
sioning so  little  trouble  (no  pain),  that  I  did  not  attend  sufficiently  to 
them.  Nothing  could  have  been  done  if  I  had.  The  anxiety  and 
fatigue  of  the  autumn  increased  the  ailment,  and  for  a  month  past, 
and  from  week  to  week,  it  has  become  so  much  worse  that  I  put  my- 
self under  the  charge  of  Dr.  Latham,  the  first  man  for  heart-com- 
plaints. After  a  little  correspondence,  we  met  yesterday.  He  made 
a  long  examination  by  auscultation,  and  did  not  attempt  to  conceal 
the  nature  and  extent  of  the  mischief.  He  made  me  observe  that  he 
gave  me  his  impression,  —  reserving  a  positive  opinion  till  he  should 
have  watched  the  case  ;  but  the  impression  was  one  which  he  would 
not  have  communicated  if  he  had  not  been  very  sure  of  his  ground. 
From  his  being  unable  to  feel  the  pulsation  of  the  heart  in  any  direc- 
tion, while  it  is  audible  over  a  large  surface,  he  believes  that  the 
organ  is  extremely  feeble  in  structure,  —  "  too  weak  for  its  work,"  — 
and  very  greatly  enlarged.  The  treatment  prescribed  only  shows 
the  desperation  of  the  case.  We  do  not  yet  know  when  I  may  return 
home,  —  I  wish  to  be  there  for  the  latter  period,  —  which  may  be  a 
long  one  for  aught  I  know,  but  I  think  not,  from  the  great  progress 
the  case  has  made  within  a  month.  If  I  should  be  living  when  you 
are  in  England,  I  am  sure  you  will  come  and  see  me  :  you  will  meet 
me  if  I  am  alive,  and  we  can  manage  it.  If  not,  my  beloved  friend, 
take  my  blessing  on  yourself  and  your  labors,  and  my  assurance 
that  my  knowledge  of  you  has  been  one  of  the  greatest  privileges  and 
pleasures  of  my  life. 

This  is  not  the  answer  you  are  looking  for  to  your  charming  invi- 
tation ;  but  such  is  life,  and  such  a  marplot  is  death !  I  think  you 
can  hardly  want  much  information  as  to  my  state  of  feeling.  My  life 
has  been  a  full  and  vivid  one,  —  so  that  I  consider  myself  a  very  old 
woman  indeed,  and  am  abundantly  satisfied  with  my  share  in  the 
universe  (even  if  that  were  of  any  real  consequence).  I  have  not 
the  slightest  anxiety  about  dying, —  not  the  slightest  reluctance  to  it. 
I  enjoy  looking  on,  and  seeing  our  world  under  the  operation  of  a 
law  of  progress  ;  and  I  really  do  not  feel  that  my  dropping  out  of  it, 
now  or  a  few  years  hence,  is  a  matter  worth  drawing  attention  to  at 


INTRODUCTION. 


139 


all,  —  my  own  or  another's.  Your  friend's  book  arrived  safe,  —  you 
must  have  it  again,  dear  friend.  Your  name  is  on  it,  and  it  shall 
return  to  you.  I  have,  as  yet,  only  looked  at  it.  When  I  go  home, 
I  will  see  whether  or  not  I  can  read  it,  and  serve  it  by  notice.  I 
hope  to  work  to  the  last  in  the  "  Daily  News,"  which  is  easy  work, 
and  the  most  important  possible  ;  and  now  the  more  so  because  the 
present  editor  is  more  up  to  American  subjects  than  any  Englishman 
I  have  met  with.  It  is  really  a  substantial  comfort  to  find  how 
sound  and  enlightened  and  heartily  conscientious  he  is  about  the 
vices  of  Yankeedom  and  the  merits  of  your  true  patriots. 

■  And  now,  dear  friend,  farewell,  at  least  for  the  present.  If  you 
wish  to  write,  do  so.  But  I  do  not  ask  it,  because  I  desire  that  you 
should  do  what  is  most  congenial  to  your  own  feelings.  If  you  do 
write,  address  to  Ambleside,  for  I  cannot  at  all  tell  how  long  I  must 
remain  here,  and  your  letters  will  be  constantly  forwarded. 

My  love  to  your  daughters  and  your  sisters,  and  best  wishes  to 
your  son-in-law. 

I  am,  while  I  live, 

Your  loving  friend, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

After  the  reception  of  this  letter  our  correspondence  became 
very  frequent ;  for  we  felt  that  her  hold  on  life  was  so  precari- 
ous, that  every  interchange  of  thought  or  feeling  became  doubly 
precious.  Her  letters  to  me  were  all  charming  in  their  tone  of 
elevated  good  sense,  deep  and  tender  feeling,  and  natural  cheer- 
fulness. 

On  the  26th  of  March  I  received  one  which  did  not  fail  to 
produce  all  the  effect  that  from  her  long  knowledge  of  me  she 
was  so  well  able  to  foresee. 

"  I  take  courage  this  fine  morning  to  write  to  you  on  the  subject 
nearest  my  heart.  It  will  come  very  near  to  yours  too  ;  and  that  is 
why  I  feel  a  sort  of  shrinking  from  exciting  so  much  emotion  as  my 
proposition  will  awaken  in  you.  Also  I  shall  rather  dread  the 
quenching  of  a  new  hope  by  your  reply.  The  matter  is  this.  You 
know  I  am  writing  my  Autobiography.  While  it  was  an  infant  mat- 
ter, and  there  seemed  reason  to  suppose  I  should  not  live  to  do  much 
of  it,  I  yearned  to  ask  you  to  undertake  to  finish  it.  But  there 
seemed  too  much  English  literary  work.    Now,  the  case  is  altered. 


140 


MEMORIALS. 


I  have  done  so  much,  and  seem  so  likely  to  do  more,  if  not  even  the 
whole  of  the  interior  life,  that  I  may  fairly  indulge  my  first  wish, 
and  look  to  you  ....  to  render  the  last  services  to  me." 

She  went  on  to  speak  of  my  peculiar  qualifications  to  treat  of 
the  whole  remarkable  American  period  of  her  life,  which  had  so 
largely  modified  all  that  remained ;  and  she  mentioned  three 
misgivings  she  felt  in  making  her  request. 

First,  that  I  should  not  have  time  to  fulfil  it,  in  the  midst  of 
the  antislavery  labours  in  which  I  was  always  fully  engaged ; 
second,  that  I  might  decide  it  to  be  injurious  to  the  cause  for 
me  to  issue  the  biography  of  "  such  an  infidel  as  herself : "  and 
third,  that  I  might  praise  her  too  much.  —  "  You  greatly  over- 
rate me." 

In  case  of  my  acceptance,  she  placed  at  my  discretion  the 
whole  immense  mass  of  journals,  memoranda,  letters,  papers,  and 
manuscript  studies  of  her  whole  life. 

There  is  no  need  to  say  what  I  felt  of  sorrow  and  of  inade- 
quacy for  the  service  demanded.  But  I  could  not  hesitate ;  and 
I  replied,  while  combating  her  choice  with  all  the  arguments  I 
possessed,  that,  in  case  it  remained  unchanged,  there  was  noth- 
ing she  could  ask  that  I  could  refuse  :  I  was  wholly  at  her  dis- 
position, living  or  dying.  Her  mind  remained  unchanged,  even 
after  the  part  undertaken  by  herself  was  completed  :  and  thus  it 
was  that  it  became  my  duty  to  take  up  the  parallel  thread  of  her 
exterior  life,  —  to  gather  up  and  co-ordinate  from  the  materials 
placed  in  my  hands  the  illustrative  facts  and  fragments  by  her 
omitted  or  forgotten ;  and  to  show,  as  far  as  I  may,  what  no 
mind  can  see  for  itself,  —  the  effect  of  its  own  personality  on  the 
world. 


INFANCY. 


"The  poor  Duckling  was  hunted  about  by  every  one  And  the  Cat  said 

to  it,  1  Can  you  bend  your  back  and  purr  and  give  out  sparks? '  'No.'  '  Then 
please  to  have  no  opinion  of  your  own  while  sensible  folks  are  speaking.'  And 
the  Duckling  sat  in  a  corner,  and  was  melancholy,  and  the  fresh  air  and  the 
sunshine  streamed  in,  and  it  was  seized  with  such  a  longing  to  swim  on  the 
water  that  it  could  not  help  telling  the  Hen  of  it.  'It  is  so  charming  to  swim, 
and  so  refreshing  to  dive  down  to  the  bottom.'  'A  mighty  pleasure,'  said 
the  Hen.  '  I  fancy  you  must  have  gone  crazy.  Ask  the  Cat ;  ask  our  mistress 
the  old  woman,  the  cleverest  animal  I  know,  and  who  so  clever  as  she  ?  Do  you 
think  they  have  any  desire  to  swim,  and  let  the  water  close  over  their  heads  ? ' 
'  You  don't  understand  me,'  said  the  Duckling." 

Hans  Christian  Andersen. 

For  a  thorough  comprehension  of  the  eminent  personage  of 
whose  interior  life  we  have  been  thus  made  sharers,  it  is  neces- 
sary to  cast  a  single  retrospective  glance  over  the  land  into  which 
she  was  born. 

It  was  the  isolated,  Tory-governed  England  of  more  than  sev- 
enty years  ago,  —  the  England  of  agricultural,  commercial,  colo- 
nial, and  manufacturing  monopoly;  the  England  of  religious 
disabilities,  feminine  disqualifications,  and  sharp  class  distinc- 
tions ;  the  England  of  unquestioned  universal  taxation ;  the 
England  of  poor-laws,  game-laws,  corn-laws,  tithes,  and  slavery. 

Who  could  have  foreseen,  in  this  delicate,  suffering  infant  the 
influential  opposer  of  all  these  great  national  evils'?  And  yet 
one  cannot  help  observing,  in  the  current  of  her  early  feelings 
and  thoughts  as  exhibited  in  the  Autobiography,  the  very  charac- 
ter which  should  mark  the  great  reformer  and  legislator.  "What 
she  was  as  a  child  she  continued  essentially  to  be  as  a  woman. 
Kever  was  a  human  being  more  of  one  piece  through  life.  The 
few  authentic  anecdotes  of  her  childhood  that  are  to  be  found 


142 


MEMORIALS. 


beyond  the  limits  of  the  preceding  Autobiography  show  the  same 
groundwork  of  character  as  her  most  recent  experience.  There 
is  development,  improvement,  progress,  —  but  not  change. 

In  order  to  appreciate  justly  the  powers  of  a  human  being,  we 
must  note  the  obstacles  to  be  overcome ;  and  the  circumstances 
of  Harriet  Martineau's  infancy  were  sadly  obstructive.  Anxious, 
nervous,  and  timid  from  ill  health,  plain  in  feature  and  awk- 
ward for  lack  of  self-esteem,  her  great  powers  found  neither  rec- 
ognition nor  sympathy.  Had  they  been  as  tenderly  hailed  and 
cherished  as  they  were  systematically  humbled  and  denied,  what 
a  waste  of  energy  had  been  avoided,  and  what  unnecessary  suf- 
fering spared  !  Had  she  been  the  eldest  child,  to  have  been 
praised  by  a  vain  mother,  or  the  youngest,  to  have  been  petted 
by  a  fond  one,  she  would  not  have  been  so  painfully  deprived  of 
the  natural  current  of  hope  and  joy  that  lifts  human  nature  so 
happily  over  the  entrance  of  life.  But  at  the  period  of  her  birth 
children  had  ceased  to  be  a  novelty  in  the  household.  The  sixth 
of  a  family  of  eight,  she  was  neither  petted  nor  praised.  It  was 
her  lot  to  be  disciplined,  and  that  not  wisely.  The  feeble,  hum- 
ble, grandly  endowed  child  was  alternately  neglected  and  tor- 
mented, and  all  her  welfare  and  happiness  sacrificed  by  the 
high-spirited,  clever,  conscientious  mother,  whose  sense  of  duty 
far  outstripped  her  power  of  sympathy. 

Thus  hardly  dealt  with  by  her  mother,  and  subjected  to  the 
arrogant  quizzing  of  the  elder  children,  the  first  words  of  en- 
couragement she  ever  received  came  to  her  in  the  guise  of 
severity.  She  was  suffering  from  a  fly  having  got  into  her  eye. 
"  Harriet !  "  said  the  mother,  firmly  grasping  her  for  the  opera- 
tion, "  I  know  that  you  have  resolution,  and  you  must  stand 
still  till  I  get  it  out."  Thus  conjured,  the  startled,  nervous  little 
creature  never  stirred  till  the  obstruction  was  removed.  —  And 
was  she,  the  trembling  little  one,  "  with  cheeks  pale  as  clay," 
"flat  white  forehead  over  which  the  hair  grew  low,"  "eyes 
hollow,  —  eyes  light,  large,  and  full,  generally  red  with  crying, 
—  a  thoroughly  scared  face,"  —  was  she,  then,  resolute  ?  She 
ran  to  the  great  gateway  near  the  street,  and  beckoned  to  a  play- 
mate, to  tell  her  what  her  mother  had  said.    "Is  that  all  you 


INFANCY. 


143 


have  made  me  come  to  hear  ] "  It  was  the  first  encouraging  word 
she  had  ever  heard,  and  she  could  find  no  one  with  whom  to 
share  the  new  joy.  Till  now  she  had  never  thought  herself 
worth  any  thing  whatever.  Her  whole  infancy  confirmed  the 
profound  intuition  of  Madame  de  Stael,  that  suffering  carries 
trouble  even  into  the  conscience.  She  had  naturally  thought, 
because  she  was  miserable,  that  she  was  stupid,  wicked,  and  dis- 
agreeable. Henceforward,  scoldings  always  cheered  her  when 
they  implied  a  recognition  of  any  value  in  her  character  or  ac- 
quirements. An  accusation  of  carelessness  was  in  this  way  con- 
verted into  a  sort  of  moral  support.  Her  tippet  slipped  awry 
one  Sunday  morning  before  chapel ;  and,  while  pinning  it 
straight,  her  mother  sternly  bade  her  remember  that  superior 
book-knowledge  will  never  make  up  for  being  troublesome.  All 
service-time  and  long  after  did  she  ponder  whether  she  had 
book-knowledge.  To  such  a  child  "  the  taking-down  system," 
as  she  has  called  it,  might  have  been  fatal.  And  it  seems  to 
have  been  England's  fatal  mistake,  —  the  mistake  of  a  race  as 
well  as  that  of  a  family ;  —  in  education,  in  criticism,  in  legis- 
lation. New  England,  though  more  lax  in  educational  disci- 
pline, has  been  thought  by  strangers  no  less  cold  and  dry  of 
heart  than  Old  England.  The  distinguished  French  statesman 
and  author,  Gustave  de  Beaumont,  observing  upon  the  extreme 
rarity  of  any  demonstrations  of  tenderness  in  American  house- 
holds, declares  that  the  few  families  in  which  he  noticed  them 
were  called  in  derision  "  the  kissing  families." 

The  probability  seems  to  be  that  an  examination  of  French  and 
English  domestic  life  would  prove  the  happy  childhood  of  Mar- 
montel  and  the  wretched  one  of  Lady  Jane  Grey  to  be  tolerable 
representative  cases  for  each  nation.  The  "  little  hearts  palpi- 
tating with  joy"  to  the  bubbling  of  the  boiling  chestnuts,  "the 
best  of  grandmothers  and  the  most  temperate  of  women  making 
us  all  gluttons  by  dividing  among  us  the  quince  she  had  so  much 
enjoyed  roasting  for  us  beneath  the  ashes,"  —  is  the  French  pen- 
dant to  the  English  picture  of  Lady  Jane  Grey,  rigorously  held, 
"  with  pinches,  nips,  and  bobs,"  to  do  every  thing  "  even  so  per- 
fectly as  God  made  the  world  j "  —  till,  for  very  wretchedness, 


144 


MEMORIALS. 


she  wished  herself  well  out  of  it.  In  such  national  pictures, 
rank  makes  no  difference.  The  whole  is  a  matter  of  race  ;  and 
the  advantage  is  so  manifestly  with  the  gentler  one,  as  to  demand 
a  reform  in  the  other.  The  sterner  one  claims  that  its  hardness 
and  coldness  are  merely  exterior.  Be  it  so.  But  there  are  some 
overt  acts  that  warm  and  tender  hearts  should  debar  themselves  : 
—  flogging,  fagging,  and  "  taking  down."  Harriet  Martineau's 
opposite  nature  rose  up  in  after  times  against  it,  in  all  these 
departments  of  human  life.  The  sweet,  protesting  Huguenot 
blood  seems  to  have  been  concentrated  in  so  large  a  measure  in 
Harriet  Martineau,  and  so  combined  with  her  other  great  endow- 
ments, as  to  make  her  a  mystery  to  her  family.  This  a  child 
could  not,  of  course,  suspect  or  comprehend;  and  she  went  on 
blaming  herself  at  every  instance  of  incompatibility.  Well 
might  her  affectionate,  sympathetic  nature  cry  aloud  from  that 
time  forward  for  gentler  methods  of  discipline  and  a  freer 
effusion  of  heart ;  since  only  twice  in  all  her  childhood  could 
she  remember  to  have  received  any  demonstrations  of  tender- 
ness. 

One  among  many  anecdotes  which  come  to  me  perfectly 
authenticated  shows  how  impossible  it  was  for  Harriet  Marti- 
neau to  conceive  of  those  class  distinctions  which  are  so  generally 
uppermost  in  the  thoughts  of  her  countrymen,  as  to  have  drawn 
satirical  rebuke  from  minds  utterly  unlike  her  own,  in  being  by 
no  means  too  grandly  made  to  be  instantly  classified. 

A  distant  cousin,  of  a  branch  of  the  family  which  had  fallen 
through  poverty  into  a  social  position  inferior  to  the  rest,  became 
the  subject  of  conversation  in  Harriet's  hearing.  "  After  all," 
observed  the  mother,  "  she  is  the  handsomest  of  the  clan." 
When  her  mother  and  Mrs.  Opie  were  talking  over  the  annoy- 
ance of  the  begging  relation,  Harriet  repeated  the  remark  about 
the  solitary  beauty  of  the  family.  "  Why  should  she  not  repeat 
it  1 "  was  her  reply  to  subsequent  reproofs.  "  Indeed,  Harriet, 
if  you  do  not  see  why,  it  is  of  no  use  to  try  to  explain  to  you." 
Of  no  use,  in  truth.  Her  choice  and  treatment  of  subjects  in  her 
whole  literary  career  show  that  she  never  attained  the  power  of 
attaching  ideas  of  disgrace  or  honour  to  mere  social  conditions : 


INFANCY. 


145 


and  she  transcended  them  in  every  direction,  from  childhood 
onward. 

Whether  all  be  for  the  best  or  no,  one  thing  is  certain,  —  that 
the  best  may  always  be  made  of  it.  Heart-breaking  as  it  is  to 
see  the  noblest  germs  of  human  character  treated  as  weeds  to  be 
eradicated,  and  the  broad,  deep  sympathies  that  knew  no  limita- 
tions of  egotism  mistakenly  repressed,  and  their  necessary  reac- 
tion strangely  stigmatized  as  arrogance  and  obstinacy,  there  is  a 
consolation  in  the  thought  that  all  this  weight  of  suffering  in- 
flicted on  a  being  so  conscientious  and  sensitive,  however  hurtful 
as  personal  discipline,  wrought  a  preparation  for  incalculable 
public  service.  The  affections  so  outraged  and  repressed  did 
but  flow  the  stronger  and  deeper.  Injustice  could  not  pervert  a 
natural  rectitude  so  true,  nor  oppression  harden  into  selfishness 
a  sympathy  so  tender.  They  did  but  render  "  metal-strong  "  the 
poet  heart  that  gave  itself  to  life's  great  organ-music  in  the  after 
years,  so  early,  so  gladly,  and  with  so  full  a  consciousness. 


VOL.  II. 


YOUTH. 


"  Looks  commercing  with  the  skies."  —  Milton. 

"  The  intellectual  power,  through  words  and  things 
Went  sounding  on." 

Wordsworth. 

"  In  to-day  already  walks  to-morrow."  —  Schiller,  Wallenstein. 


I  am  indebted  to  friends  of  her  youth  older  than  herself  for 
a  picture  of  Harriet  Martineau  as  she  was  in  her  school-days. 
"She  was,"  says  one  of  them,  ''what  is  called  among  us  in 
England  an  old-fashioned  child,  —  sententious  and  thick  of  utter- 
ance." "  A  little  prim  thing,  with  a  very  grave  countenance,  — 
the  companion  and  care-taker  of  her  younger  brother,  who  was 
an  irritable  child."  The  same  sketch  gives  an  outline  of  her 
mother.  "  It  was  the  first  time  I  had  ever  seen  her,  and  she 
frightened  me.  She  appeared  to  me  to  order  every  thing  and 
every  body  right  and  left,  and  though  by  no  means  an  indulgent 
mother,  she  was  yet  a  proud  one,  and  had  confidence  in  the 
results  of  her  own  management  and  system  of  education.  I 
was  so  much  impressed  by  her  cleverness,  and  felt  that  she  had 
such  a  contempt  for  myself  and  the  way  in  which  I  was  brought 
up,  that  never,  to  the  day  of  her  death,  did  I  fail  to  be  taken 
by  surprise  by  any  expression  on  her  part  of  confidence  in  my 
judgment,  pleasure  in  my  company,  or  approbation  of  my  house- 
hold. The  apprehension  of  this  formidable  visitor  on  the  first 
occasion  made  me  ill.  It  was  the  setting-down  way  she  had, 
which  was  so  terrible  to  sensitive  young  people,  and  which  her 
own  children  felt,  though  I  do  not  know  that  the  two  eldest 
ever  experienced  it  to  the  same  degree.    Perhaps  her  young 


H8 


MEMORIALS. 


mother  pride  and  instinct  suppressed  it.  "When  she  was  at  the 
age  of  thirteen  I  saw  much  of  Harriet.  I  remember  no  tenderness 
towards  her,  but  the  same  severity  and  sharpness  of  manner, 
cleverness  of  management,  and  sarcastic  observation  of  other 
people's  management.  I  thought  Harriet  at  that  time  a  clever 
child,  but  an  odd  and  wise  one.    She  used  then,  I  remember,  to 

be  left  much  by  herself, — put  aside,  as  it  were  At  that 

time  she  was  occasionally  a  little  deaf.  After  this  time  I  do  not 
remember  hearing  of  her  except  at  school  at  Bristol,  —  of  her 
being  happy  there,  and  a  great  favourite.  What  a  good  thing,  I 
thought,  for  Harriet,  that  she  has  found  friends  of  her  own,  and 
encouragement  :  for  I  had  a  vague  and  private  idea  that  she  was 
not  developed  at  home.  Next  I  was  gratified  and  surprised  to 
receive  a  most  affectionate  letter  from  her,  on  an  occasion  of 
severe  affliction,  and  I  was  pleased  to  think  I  might  find  a 
second  friend  in  that  family,  —  her  elder  sister  and  myself 
having  been  intimate  for  years.  Then  Harriet  visited  me,  and 
I  began  to  like  and  understand  her."  This  same  friend  saw 
Harriet  Martineau  in  various  circumstances  of  trial  and  sor- 
row, and  says  thereupon,  "  I  frequently  saw  her  own  cheer- 
ful simplicity  and  fortitude  construed  by  others  into  cold- 
ness and  indifference.  I  did  not  generalize  at  the  time  as  I 
have  since  done,  but  I  then  learned  that  the  heart  runs  the  risk 
of  being  thought  cold  which  does  not  overrule  and  outstep 
ever}-  other  faculty  and  power.  Folly,  with  a  display  of  selfish 
feeling,  is  excused ;  but  the  tenderest  heart  obeying  a  higher 
command  is  not  appreciated,  except  by  those  who  know  it  inti- 
mately." 

Amid  all  the  obstructions  of  this  period  of  her  early  youth 
she  was  in  one  thing  most  fortunate.  Her  strong  intellectual 
powers  were  committed  to  the  training  of  a  schoolmaster  who 
was  a  scholar,  and  in  companionship  with  his  boy  pupils.  Both 
these  circumstances  insured  her  the  inestimable  advantage  of  a 
thorough  classical  and  mathematical  groundwork  of  education, 
freed  from  the  mistake  that  there  is  a  female  road  to  knowledge. 
Her  delight  in  reading  found  its  satisfaction  in  the  best  English 
poetry,  history,  critical  literature,  and  a  political  newspaper. 


YOUTH. 


149 


Thus  deeply  and  soundly  were  laid  the  foundations  of  her  liter- 
ary life. 

Neither  does  her  boarding-school  life  at  Bristol  seem  to  have 
been  weakened  down  to  a  supposed  inferiority  in  the  needs  of 
woman.  One  of  her  schoolmates  thus  gives  me  her  impressions 
of  that  time. 

?  Harriet  was  considered  among  us  as  especially  the  good  girl, 
always  working  diligently  and  conscientiously,  and  never  seeming  to 
think  pleasure  possible  till  duty  was  performed.  Her  companions 
thought  her  very  clever,  but  I  think  she  then  showed  no  signs  of 
brilliant  abilities.  She  was  perhaps  more  respected  by  them  than 
loved  ;  but  liked  by  all ;  for  from  her  they  never  felt  any  inconven- 
iences of  ill-temper  and  selfishness.  She  was  not  ambitious  of  shin- 
ing or  pleasing  ;  was  sometimes  thought  conceited  because  she  was 
not  content  with  a  low  aim  in  any  thing,  nor  ever  seemed  to  doubt 
her  power  to  learn  or  to  do  what  she  proposed  to  herself.  She  had 
much  reverence  in  her  character,  and  I  always  thought  a  true  humil- 
ity. Her  manner  was  quiet  and  reserved,  rather  than  melancholy  or 
timid.  She  appeared  self-possesseil,  but  was  very  silent  and  uncom- 
municative, except  in  quiet  conversation  with  a  friend,  when  her 
thoughtful  and  affectionate  nature  came  out  freely.  She  seldom  or 
never  talked  of  herself  on  such  occasions  ;  rather  of  her  family  and 
her  friends,  of  whom  she  always  spoke  in  such  a  way  that  it  became  a 
proverb  among  us  that  i  all  the  Norwich  geese  were  swans.'  Words- 
worth's line  would  have  more  correctly  described  her,  — 

1  True  to  the  kindred  points  of  Heaven  and  home.' 

"  She  was  graver  and  laughed  more  rarely  than  any  young  person 
I  ever  knew.  Her  face  was  plain,  and  (you  will  scarcely  believe  it) 
she  had  no  light  in  the  countenance,  no  expression  to  redeem  the 
features.  The  low  brow  and  rather  large  under  lip  increased  the 
effect  of  her  natural  seriousness  of  look,  and  did  her  much  injustice. 
I  used  to  he  asked  occasionally,  ;  What  has  offended  Harriet,  that  she 
looks  so  glum  ? '  I,  who  understood  her.  used  to  answer.  1  Nothing  ; 
she  is  not  offended  ;  it  is  only  her  look/ 

"  She  was  fond  of  poetry,  Milton  and  Wordsworth  especially.  She 
first  made  me  acquainted  with  Lycidas.  I  can  now  recall  her  tone  and 
manner  in  many  passages  of  that  poem,  as  well  as  in  certain  parts  of 
the  New  Testament,  which  we  used  to  read  at  night  together  in  our 
bedroom. 


150 


MEMORIALS. 


"  I  do  not  suppose  that  she  showed  promise  at  that  time  of  any 
thing  remarkable.  Some  were  greatly  surprised  when  she  published, 
some  years  afterwards,  a  volume  of  meditations  and  prayers.  The 
late  Dr.  Carpenter,  who  knew  little  of  her  except  as  a  student  in  his 
Sunday  class,  expressed  so  much  surprise  at  that  time  as  to  astonish 
me,  who  saw  nothing  in  it  that  I  did  not  know  to  be  in  her." 

Harriet  Martineau  speaks  in  her  Autobiography  of  her  infant 
concealments  occasioned  by  fear ;  but  the  declaration  of  all  her 
early  friends  whom  I  have  known  is  uniform  as  to  the  beautiful 
sincerity  of  her  character  and  the  habitual  truthfulness  of  her 
intercourse  in  youth.  The  expression  of  one  of  them  is,  "  She 
seemed,  above  all,  to  desire  truth  in  the  inward  part." 

All  her  family  and  friends  were,  at  this  time,  disagreeably 
impressed  with  the  first  evidences  of  that  integrity  of  mind  and 
impartiality  of  judgment  which  made  her  in  after  life  the  chosen 
umpire  and  advocate  of  all  classes  and  conditions  of  men  who 
desire  to  have  wrong  righted.  When,  piercing  through  appear- 
ances to  the  very  heart  of  things,  she  stood  by  the  royal  family 
against  the  Martineau  family,*  she  was  met  by  a  shout  of  de- 
rision and  a  reprimand  for  immorality.  Unlike  the  French 
statesman  who  "passed  his  life  in  coming  to  the  rescue  of  the 
strongest,"  her  true  and  heroic  instincts  always  drew  her  to  the 
side  of  the  most  defenceless,  wherever  that  post  might  chance 
to  be.  One  of  the  latest  acts  of  her  life  wTas  an  endeavour 
to  procure  the  correction,  by  the  editor  of  the  "  Nation "  (an 
American  newspaper  she  very  highly  esteemed),  of  a  misrepre- 
sentation that  had  crept  into  it  about  the  Prince  of  Wales  and 
Dean  Stanley's  sermon  on  his  departure  for  India. 

Thus  passed  the  thoughtful,  dutiful  youth  of  Harriet  Marti- 
neau, in  serious  studies,  as  well  as  others  that  were  in  that  day 
called  accomplishments.  Her  delight  in  music  and  in  modern 
languages,  so  soon  to  receive  a  check  from  her  increasing  deaf- 
ness, was  still  unalloyed.  Her  resolute  spirit  bore  down  by 
method  and  industry,  even  at  that  early  age,  all  weakness  of 
the  flesh.  To  her  classical  and  belles-lettres  studies  she  joined 
biblical  and  metaphysical  ones.    But  the  influence  of  Unitarian- 

*  See  Vol.  I.  p.  61. 


YOUTH. 


151 


ism  proper  seems  in  her  case  to  have  been,  in  a  sense,  an  ob- 
structive one.  It  releases  from  authority  without  committing  to 
reason,  and  is  therefore  obliged  to  rely  upon  routine,  which 
fetters  the  imagination.  Its  chief  excellency  in  England  (cited 
by  Dr.  Channing  as  its  great  defect)  had  by  this  time,  too,  be- 
come obscure  :  it  was  no  longer  the  synonyme  of  political  pro- 
test ;  though  the  reflected  light  of  Priestley's  life  still  illuminated 
it  to  the  eye  of  Harriet  Martineau. 

All  the  above-mentioned  studies,  not  customarily  permitted  to 
women  at  that  period  in  England  any  more  than  in  the  United 
States,  were  planned  for  and  encouraged  by  Mrs.  Martineau. 
Her  own  superior  mind  bore  to  her  unmistakable  inward  witness 
that  the  education  which  was  good  for  her  sons  must  be  no  less 
beneficial  to  her  daughters ;  and  Harriet  profited  by  that  convic- 
tion to  the  utmost,  while  cultivating  to  the  highest  degree  every 
household  accomplishment,  and  fulfilling  every  domestic  duty. 
All  this  while  she  never  suspected  her  own  superiority,  and 
continued  to  suppose  herself  in  the  wrong,  or  at  least  to  be  pain- 
fully puzzled,  as  often  as  she  felt  the  sharp  pain  of  a  sphere  too 
contracted  for  her  faculties,  and  unrelieved  by  sympathetic  appre- 
ciation. Still,  she  was  not  entirely  without  support  of  this  kind. 
Her  gentle  and  loving  aunt  and  her  other  Bristol  friends  fathomed 
somewhat  of  her  nature,  and  one  of  her  early  and  elder  friends 
in  another  quarter,  afterwards  the  wife  of  her  beloved  brother 
Robert,  reports  to  me  the  impression  she  made  at  that  time,  — 
the  period  of  her  leaving  school.  "  I  was  an  only  and  indulged 
child,"  says  this  friend,  "  and  my  mother  took  pleasure  in  seeing 
me  surround  myself  with  my  young  friends ;  so  I  filled  the 
house  with  them  as  often  and  as  much  as  I  liked.  She  used 
frequently  to  say  to  me  on  occasion  of  their  visits,  '  Ah,  my 
dear,  Harriet  Martineau  is  the  one  of  your  friends  whose  society 
is  really  a  benefit  to  you.'  " 

To  the  world  of  readers  of  her  Autobiography,  which  enables 
them  to  comprehend  her  whole  compass  of  character,  there 
remains  no  such  mystery  as  shrouded  it  in  those  early  days 
from  her  own  household,  when  she  seems  to  have  been  like  the 
"ugly  duckling  "of  Hans  Christian  Andersen,  and  made  her  very 


152 


MEMORIALS. 


transparency  the  most  incomprehensible  mystery  of  all.  They 
already  see  how  her  life  at  this  period,  and  ever  after,  must  per- 
force turn  on  two  main  points,  the  causes  of  all  its  joys,  its 
sorrows,  its  conflicts,  and  its  vast  and  happy  influences  :  her 
love  of  truth,  —  the  desire  to  come  into  real  relations  with  the 
world  of  things  ;  and  her  power  of  sympathy,  —  the  need  to 
come  into  real  relations  with  the  world  of  persons. 


WOMANHOOD, 

"Lady,  that  in  the  prime  of  earliest  youth 

Wisely  hast  shunned  the  broad  way  and  the  green, 
And  with  those  few  art  eminently  seen 

That  labour  up  the  hill  of  heavenly  Truth, 

The  better  part  with  Mary  and  with  Ruth 
Chosen  thou  hast." 

Milton. 

"  Her  open  eyes  desire  the  Truth. 
The  Wisdom  of  a  thousand  years 
Is  in  them." 

Tennyson. 

At  the  age  of  nearly  seventeen  Harriet  Martineau's  school  life 
closed.  It  had  been  very  favorable  to  the  development  of  her 
powers.  It  had  strongly  ministered  to  her  affections,  hitherto 
so  painfully  repressed,  awakened  the  faculty  of  admiration,  and 
stimulated  her  imagination  by  glimpses  of  a  beauty  in  nature 
and  a  power  in  art  till  then  but  imperfectly  felt. 

It  is  impossible,  indeed,  to  look  down  on  Bristol  from  Bran- 
don Hill,  and  watch  the  creeping  gold  that  catches  spire  and 
tower  as  the  mist  gives  way  beneath  the  morning  sun,  till  St. 
Stephen's,  St.  Mary  Bedcliffe,  and  many  another  precious  rem- 
nant of  antiquity  shine  out  from  the  belt  of  trees  and  bristling 
masts,  without  feeling  how  it  was  that  here  the  deeper  spell  of 
poetry  should  have  been  fully  opened  to  a  mind  already  awak- 
ened to  its  marvels  and  its  charm.  No  wonder  that  here,  about 
Leigh  Woods,  King's-Weston,  and  the  Downs,  she  should  have 
been  transported,  as  she  has  told  us,  "  to  a  rapture  that  knew  no 
bounds  :"  for  these  are  the  very  "beaked  promontories"  where 
Milton  made  Lycidas  the  genius  of  the  shore;  and  when  she 


154 


MEMORIALS. 


read  the  promise  "  of  his  large  recompense,"  it  was  with  a  pas- 
sion so  deep  that  her  early  friend  was  haunted  by  the  tone  after 
the  lapse  of  wellnigh  forty  years. 

The  circumscriptions  of  the  English  Unitarianism  of  that 
period  were  thus  met  by  so  strong  a  counteracting  force  as  to 
make  them  an  unmingled  benefit.  She  was  not,  indeed,  one 
that  could  be  imprisoned  in  the  ordinary  Sunday-school  routine 
of  its  Scripture  commentaries,  Gospel  harmonies,  sacred  geogra- 
phies, or  Biblical  lessons ;  but  all  these  were  fused  by  her  active 
mind  to  a  sort  of  basis  on  which  her  devotional  feelings  and  her 
poetical  conceptions  alternately  wrought ;  and  where  by  means 
of  scientific  investigation  and  philosophical  study  she  was  con- 
tinually adding,  rejecting,  and  rectifying  as  years  went  on.  She 
was  always  as  diligent  and  persevering  as  if  she  had  not  pos- 
sessed quick  and  brilliant  faculties ;  always  accepting  at  all  risks 
whatever  she  found  to  be  true. 

There  was  little  in  the  old  cathedral  city  of  Norwich,  with  its 
narrow,  ill-paved,  winding  streets  and  uninteresting  antiquity,  to 
distract  her  mind  or  give  variety  to  her  life.  It  had  nothing  of 
the  bustling  character  of  the  business  cities  of  the  North  of  Eng- 
land. Its  very  manufacturing  celebrity  dates  from  times  before 
the  Norman  Conquest.  These  woollen  manufactures  have  since 
received  improvements  from  age  to  age,  as  religious  persecution 
drove  hither  from  France  and  Flanders  the  men  of  thought,  skill, 
and  energy,  who  were  the  leaders  of  the  spirit  of  their  times. 
Among  them  came  the  French  Huguenot  ancestor  of  the  English 
Martineau  family ;  and  that  name  is  among  those  which  appear 
most  frequently  on  the  records  of  the  little  Protestant  church 
founded  at  Norwich  in  1564,  at  the  instance  of  the  Duke  of  Nor- 
folk.   The  crest  pertaining  to  the  name  is  a  water-marten. 

An  engraving  of  Harriet  Martineau's  birthplace  is  given  in 
this  volume.  The  house  was  in  a  court  in  Magdalen  Street,  and 
she  was  born  in  the  upper  bay-room.  But  it  was  never  her 
dwelling-place  after  the  time  of  her  removal  from  it  at  three 
months  old.  It  was  to  her  home  in  Magdalen  Street  itself  that 
she  returned  from  Bristol,  —  to  the  household  and  family  duties, 
the  manly  studies,  the  literary  pursuits,  and  lady-like  accomplish- 


WOMANHOOD. 


155 


ments,  which  she  so  much  enjoyed,  as  one  does  the  things  in 
which  one  greatly  excels. 

The  prevailing  tone  of  mind  in  England  at  the  beginning  of 
the  present  century  was  far  more  opposed  than  in  the  United 
States  to  the  education  of  women.  Public  opinion  on  that  sub- 
ject had,  in  fact,  gone  backward  since  the  times  when  the  daugh- 
ters of  families  assumed  to  be  "  the  best "  studied  with  their 
brothers  the  learned  languages  in  which  knowledge  was  then 
locked  up ;  while  it  has  been  true  of  New  England,  as  it  still 
continues  to  be,  that,  among  its  inhabitants  generally,  the  wo- 
men possessed  more  literary  culture  than  the  men.  Hence  the 
idea  of  a  professional  career  for  women  who  desire  it  meets 
with  so  little  comparative  opposition  here.  In  Miss  Martineau's 
youth,  to  say  of  a  lady  in  England  that  she  was  a  learned  wo- 
man, was  to  convey  a  disparaging  meaning;  while  to  say  in 
New  England,  in  its  old-fashioned  phrase,  "  She  has  good  learn- 
ing," was  to  express  something  greatly  to  her  credit.  I  well 
remember  the  London  tone  of  1825  on  this  subject.  It  was  the 
echo  of  twenty  years  before,  when  Matt  Lewis  took  his  mother 
to  task  for  writing  a  novel,  enjoining  on  her  "  whatever  might 
be  its  merits,  even  if  she  had  already  made  a  bargain  with  the 
publisher,  to  break  it ;  for  he  held  that  a  woman  had  no  busi- 
ness to  be  a  public  character,  and  that  in  proportion  as  she 
acquires  notoriety  she  loses  delicacy ; "  he  "  always  considering 
a  female  author  as  a  sort  of  half-man."  It  was  this  feeling  in 
the  moral  atmosphere  that  made  Mrs.  Martineau,  naturally  am- 
bitious of  social  success  and  distinction  for  her  daughter,  direct 
that  her  serious  studies  should  be  carried  on  out  of  sight  and 
with  reserve,  putting  the  music,  fancy-work,  and  French,  Ger- 
man, and  Italian  literature  in  the  foreground,  till  the  time  when 
the  pecuniary  misfortunes  of  the  family  absolved  its  daughters 
from  this  obligation  and  left  them  free  to  fulfil  a  better  work 
for  society  than  obedience  to  its  injurious  whimseys.  Much 
power  now  begins  to  be  saved  among  women  on  both  sides  of 
the  Atlantic  that  seventy  years  ago  was  wasted  (and  worse  than 
wasted)  by  concealment  and  the  disadvantage  of  indirect  exer- 
cise.   To  no  one  of  the  intervening  period  is  this  so  greatly 


156 


MEMORIALS. 


owing  as  to  Harriet  Martineau.  Her  life  tells  upon  her  own  and 
after  times  with  a  power  quite  unexampled,  because  it  was  a  life 
not  only  true  and  noble,  but  irreproachable. 

Meanwhile,  obedience  and  humility  (too  much  of  both,  had 
they  not  been  prompted  by  filial  affection  and  occasionally  abated 
by  good  sense)  continued  to  mark  her  character  as  in  her  earli- 
est years.  Her  tendencies  continued  as  strongly  religious,  and 
the  intellectual  preponderance  to  be  more  strikingly  marked  than 
ever.  She  was  more  favourably  situated  in  her  own  family  than 
young  ladies  in  general,  for  the  cultivation  of  her  mental  powers ; 
for  her  mother's  fine  sense,  and  strong  consciousness  of  the  hid- 
den man  in  her  own  heart,  were  on  the  right  side.  So  was  the 
feeling  of  the  brothers  who  encouraged  her  first  literary  efforts. 
"  Go  on  and  prosper,  dear  ! "  says  the  beloved  eldest  brother, 
Thomas,  writing  from  Madeira,  after  receiving  her  first  work, 
"  Devotional  Exercises ; "  "  you  are  engaged  in  pursuits  that  bring 
with  them  true  pleasure,  and  confer  real  advantage ;  may  you  be 
abundantly  rewarded."  This  was  great  encouragement  to  one  so 
sensitive  and  self-distrusting,  and  encouragement  was  what  her 
nature  especially  needed.  He  had  already  determined  her  ca- 
reer by  the  manner  in  which  he  received  her  first  article  in  the 
"Monthly  Repository."  "My  dear,  leave  it  to  other  women  to 
make  shirts  and  darn  stockings,  and  do  you  give  yourself  to 
this."  I  do  not  believe  she  ever  forgot  a  single  one  of  the  rare 
words  of  family  appreciation  she  received ;  and  I  have  heard  her 
relate  with  much  feeling  the  effect  produced  on  her  mind  by  an 
encouraging  word  from  her  mother,  when,  at  ten  years  old,  she 
sat  trying  to  learn  to  sew,  under  the  heart-sinking  apprehension 
that  she  should  never  succeed.  She  stood  with  her  face  to  the 
window  to  hide  her  tears,  as  the  needle  squeaked  through  the 
dingy  gusset  she  was  stitching,  her  sister  Rachel  at  play  with 
a  visitor,  and  Harriet  longing  to  join.  Her  mother  entered  the 
room  with  her  eldest  sister,  both  dressed  for  making  visits,  and 
approaching  the  suffering,  stitching,  striving  child,  said  cheerfully, 
as  she  examined  the  work,  "  Why,  Harriet !  if  you  go  on  in  this 
way,  you  will  soon  be  the  best  needlewoman  of  us  all."  She 
always  described  the  revulsion  of  feeling  consequent  on  this  ex- 


WOMANHOOD. 


157 


pression  of  maternal  satisfaction  as  a  ray  of  light  and  life  ;  and 
she  dated  from  it  her  success  in  all  those  little  feminine  handi- 
crafts which  then  went  by  the  name  of  "  fancy-work,"  in  which 
she  so  greatly  delighted  and  excelled. 

I  should  have  related  this  recollection  at  an  earlier  period,  but 
it  matters  the  less,  that  her  childhood  was  womanly  and  thought- 
ful. She  herself  says,  "  I  had  no  spring."  I  never,  indeed,  met 
one  like  her  for  wholeness  of  character  through  life.  She  always 
seemed  to  me  to  have  been,  so  to  say,  of  one  piece.  It  was  in 
part  the  secret  of  her  great  educational  power.  She  not  only 
remembered  the  feelings  of  her  own  childhood,  but  felt  them 
over  again,  through  life.  "  Why  did  they  dress  us  so  ill  ] "  she 
once  said,  in  talking  over  the  griefs  of  childhood.  "  It  has  a 
dreadfully  depressing  influence,  when  it  is  a  thing  that  can  as 
well  as  not  be  helped." 

I  have  never  been  able  to  find  the  essay,  "  On  Female  Writers 
on  Practical  Divinity,"  in  which  Dr.  Thomas  Martineau  saw  the 
promise  of  her  future  greatness,  and  which  her  mature  judgment 
treats  with  so  much  contempt.  The  title  indicates  the  turn  of 
her  thoughts  at  that  time.  With  her  fervent  religious  feelings, 
there  was' a  moment,  at  this  period,  such  as  sends  a  gifted  young 
Catholic  devotee  to  the  cloister  to  be  a  lady  abbess,  and  bids 
a  young  man  of  similar  genius  become  a  bishop.  One  of  her 
early  and  most  beloved  friends  recollects  the  great  regret  she 
expressed  at  the  marriage  of  a  young  lady,  the  friend  of  both, 
"because  it  would  deprive  her  of  larger  opportunities  of  useful- 
ness to  the  world."  This  idea  seems  to  have  had  but  a  momen- 
tary existence.    It  was  one  of  the  visions  of  eighteen. 

In  searching  for  her  earlier  writings  I  have  no  difficulty  in 
finding  the  little  book  of  Addresses  which  she  valued  on  account 
of  the  pleasure  it  gave  her  father,*  and  for  that  alone  in  after 
years.  Very  recently  friends  of  hers  have  expressed  to  me  their 
astonishment  that  she  should  since  have  entirely  forgotten  the 
book  of  which  edition  after  edition  passed  the  press,  not  only 
in  England,  but  in  America.  The  wonder,  however,  would  have 
been  had  she  remembered  it ;  for  the  form  is  wholly  traditional, 

*  This  was  the  "Addresses,"  the  second  "  Book  of  Devotions,"  1826. 


158 


MEMORIALS. 


and  the  devotional  sentiment,  true  and  beautiful  as  it  is,  would 
necessarily  be  lost  in  the  first  influx  of  original  thought  and 
deeper  feeling  that  accompany  the  real  life.  But  many  go  no 
further  in  experience  than  this  book ;  and  to  all  that  thus  stop 
living  at  the  threshold  it  will  supply  a  want. 

The  book  which  preceded  this  —  "  Devotional  Exercises  "  — 
is  admirably  compiled,  in  conformity,  as  she  says  in  the  Preface, 
with  "  the  prayers  I  have  been  accustomed  to  form  under  the 
guidance  of  able  teachers  for  my  own  use ; "  and  it  differs  from 
the  customary  tone  of  Unitarian  teachings  only  in  a  more  poeti- 
cal way  of  presenting  them,  and  in  a  certain  perfume  of  ortho- 
doxy inseparable  from  her  greater  use  of  Scripture  phraseology. 
The  book  is,  in  fact,  a  digest  of  favourite  passages  from  the  Bible 
poets,  prophets,  and  apostles,  cemented  together  by  expressions 
which  show  that  her  fervent  spirit  had  found  prayer  "under 
guidance"  too  dry  a  task.  It  is  the  effort  of  a  superior  mind 
to  lift  its  religion  out  of  the  region  of  commonplace.  "Being 
yet  young,"  she  says  (the  date  is  1823),  "  I  have  a  vivid  remem- 
brance of  the  ideas  and  feelings  which  in  early  youth  I  found 
to  be  most  impressive,  and  to  excite  the  most  powerful  emotions, 
and  winch  are  by  no  means  the  same  ideas  and  feelings  which 
produce  these  effects  at  a  more  advanced  age.  Possessing  these 
remembrances,  I  must  believe  that  the  young  are  best  fitted  to 
write  for  the  young  in  most  cases  where  the  feelings  and  affec- 
tions are  concerned;  and  therefore  I  have  written  down  the 
thoughts  which  used  to  present  themselves  in  a  natural  train 
of  reflection."  To  the  young,  forty  is  old  age ;  and  she  thought 
the  absence  of  warmth  which  Evangelical  Christians  always 
complain  of  in  Unitarianism,  the  consequence  of  the  advanced 
years  of  its  advocates.  She  determined,  by  pouring  in  her  own 
glow  of  heart,  to  make  the  dry  bones  live ;  and  not  without  suc- 
cess, as  the  call  for  the  book  attests.  Its  feeling  is  genuine,  and 
the  occasional  escape  from  the  traditional  form  is  very  touching ; 
as,  for  example,  when,  after  condemning  those  who  are  wholly 
engrossed  in  the  care  of  their  own  happiness,  she  says  :  "  0, 
surely  the  spirit  of  love  is  the  noblest  and  best  that  can  dwell 
in  the  human  heart !  it  is  a  portion  of  God's  own  spirit !  it  is 


WOMANHOOD. 


159 


the  mind  which  was  in  Christ  Jesus  !  0  noble  example  of  this 
glorious  virtue  !  let  that  mind  be  in  me  also  !  May  thy  labours, 
thy  sufferings,  thy  strivings  to  promote  the  good  of  all,  not  be 
lost  upon  me !  May  they  animate  me  to  follow  in  thy  steps, 
to  press  forward  to  the  goal  which  thou  hast  reached,  like  thee 
seeking  no  reward."  There  is  also  a  very  beautiful  and  eloquent 
passage  respecting  "  those  lofty  and  sublime  affections  which  can 
lind  no  fit  object  on  earth ;  that  adoration  of  perfection,  that 
aspiring  after  something  nobler  and  better  than  is  to  be  found 
among  men."  Thus  her  heart  and  mind  wrought  together  on 
the  threshold  of  life.  She  was  soon  to  seize  the  true  purpose 
of  these  affections  and  aspirations ;  and  once  having  clearly  per- 
ceived it,  the  strenuous  constancy  of  her  endeavours  to  create 
among  men  the  goodness  and  the  nobleness  she  found  wanting 
was  something  astonishing  in  its  efficacy. 

Her  remarkable  self-control  had  nothing  of  that  divine  hard- 
ness the  ancients  tell  of,  that  makes  invulnerable  by  pain.  She 
was  quiet  and  silent  about  her  own  distresses,  for  the  sake  of 
others,  not  that  she  might  have  the  credit  of  appearing  happy 
or  unmoved,  but  that  she  might  avoid  giving  them  annoyance. 
This  exposed  her  to  the  misconstructions  of  superficial  observers. 
They  called  her  unloving  and  unfeeling  at  the  very  moment 
when  greater  warmth  and  depth  on  their  own  part  would  have 
enabled  them  to  fathom  the  reality ;  just  as  they  pronounced  her 
hard  whenever  her  yielding  and  tender  nature,  like  water  sud- 
denly struck,  made  one  effort  to  maintain  itself  against  the  blow. 
And,  although  in  affliction  she  was  so  nearly  able  to  appear 
unmoved,  I  never  knew  her  to  pass  a  day  without  that  frequent 
swell  of  unshed  tears  from  which  the  sympathetic  observer  never 
failed  to  learn  what  she  felt.  An  instance  of  devotedness  or 
endurance,  a  tale  of  suffering  or  of  wrong,  a  touching  verse  or 
song,  a  trait  of  the  moral  sublime,  always  show  us  in  her  eyes 
no  idle  tears  j  all  that  know  her,  know  what  they  mean. 

These  years  of  her  early  womanhood,  full  as  they  were  of 
grief,  anxiety,  and  laborious  preparation,  had  yet  the  comfort 
of  an  increasing  maternal  sympathy  and  appreciation.  Her 
mother's  character  was  directly  opposed  to  her  own,  in  not  being 


160 


MEMORIALS. 


strong  enough  on  the  side  of  the  imagination  for  the  exercise 
of  sympathy,  except,  so  to  speak,  in  a  straight  line  on  her  own 
level.  Her  daughter,  having  now  grown  up  to  that  line  and 
level,  came  within  the  field  of  her  affections. 

I  regret  inexpressibly  that  Miss  Martineau's  long  journalizing 
letters  of  this  period  cannot,  in  consistency  with  her  introduc- 
tory principle,  be  made  public*  With  but  few  exceptions,  such 
confidential  family  letters  must  needs  contain  too  much  that  is 
common  property  to  admit  of  their  being  printed.  But  one 
cannot  help  wishing  this  whole  collection  came  within  the  terms 
she  has  laid  down.  Every  letter  is  full  of  charm  and  instruction 
in  various  ways,  as  well  as  finely  illustrative.  So  far  as  she  is 
concerned,  they  might  all  go  to  the  press  as  they  stand,  without 
a  word  of  omission.  They  show,  not  the  hidden  springs  of  life, 
but  the  severely  beautiful  life  itself.  There  are  all  the  occu- 
pations of  each  day  of  absence  from  her  mother,  whether  at 
London  and  vicinity,  Newcastle,  or  Norwich ;  the  failures  and 
successes  of  each  fresh  effort  for  a  maintenance,  or  endeavour  after 
excellence ;  the  little  plans  for  making  each  member  of  the  fam- 
ily happy  in  his  or  her  own  way ;  the  kindly  thought  for  the 
servants ;  the  anxious  solicitude  to  please  and  satisfy  all ;  the 
passionate  devotion  to  the  young  sister,  to  whom  she  was  mother, 
sister,  and  teacher  in  one ;  the  ever-new  contrivances  by  which 
to  increase  her  income  and  economize  her  expenditure ;  the  con- 
sultations about  the  shawl  or  bonnet,  which,  by  good  manage- 
ment, she  might  continue  to  wear  another  year ;  and  the  presents 
by  which  she  hoped  to  surprise  and  please  the  children,  —  all  are 
charming  in  their  simplicity,  and  from  the  absorbing  family  feel- 
ing that  dictates  the  record. 

Profoundly  affecting  is  the  controlled  agony  of  the  letter  that 
tries  to  tell  how  her  lover  died,  so  as  not  to  awaken  anxiety  for 
herself  in  the  heart  of  her  mother.  Very  touching  are  the  occa- 
sional allusions  to  attentions  and  commendations  of  her  works 
received  from  those  whose  opinions  she  respected;  "because, 
my  dear  mother,  it  is  your  right  to  know,  or  I  could  not  be  so 
vain  as  to  mention  such  things."    She  never  fails  to  notice  with 

*  Vol.  L  p.  L 


WOMANHOOD. 


161 


disgust  any  thing  like  flattery.  She  had  already  become  a  com- 
petent critic  by  means  of  the  "Monthly  Repository"  and  its 
editor,  Mr.  Fox,  and  uses  her  newly  acquired  power  on  her  own 
productions;  saying,  "they  praise  this  too  much,  but  not  so 
egregiously  as  the  other,"  with  a  love  of  justice  entirely  above 
personal  considerations. 

Here,  too,  are  occasional  gleams  of  Unitarian  satisfaction  or  dis- 
comfort, as  the  case  might  be.  She  loved  Unitarianism  as  the 
faith  of  her  own  family,  without  having  so  closely  analyzed  it 
as  to  have  ascertained  in  it  any  want  of  essential  stability,  and 
she  identified  herself  with  it,  without  having  assimilated  it.  Its 
high  standard  of  morality  was  very  dear  to  her,  and  stood  in- 
stead of  much  that  she  missed.    "Mr.   ,"  she  says,  "has 

been  guilty  of  a  forgery.  What  a  disgrace  to  us  !  "  Such  and 
such  writings,  she  goes  on  to  say,  "are  a  credit  to  us  Unita- 
rians." Copies  of  the  last  poems  she  had  written  occasionally 
help  to  fill  the  enormous  letters  of  those  days,  —  the  shilling 
sheet  of  unlimited  size  before  the  discovery  of  penny  postage. 

One  of  these  poems,  written  for  music,  and  afterwards  set  and 
admired,  may  have  a  place  here,  because,  apart  from  the  music, 
it  has  never  been  printed  before. 

WINTER. 

True  hearts !  true  hearts  !  the  time  is  cheery  : 
Who  says  the  days  are  chill  and  dreary 

The  frozen  winter  through  ? 
Come,  skim  the  deep  blue  ice  so  free  ; 
Or  away  with  me  beside  the  tree 
Where  the  robin  chirps  from  day  to  day, 
While  tinkle  the  rocks  with  his  song  alway 

The  gladsome  winter  through. 

True  hearts  !  what  though  the  sun  full  early 
Goes  down  with  blink  or  frown  so  surly, 

The  hazy  winter  through ! 
We  have  the  lady  moon  so  fair, 
That  showers  through  the  air  her  diamonds  rare, 


162 


MEMORIALS. 


While  the  waiting  earth  is  hushed  and  bright, 
So  delicate  in  her  vestal  white, 

The  frozen  winter  through. 

True  hearts  !  come  change  your  cares  for  folly  ; 
The  bowl  is  brewed  and  green  the  holly 

The  cheery  winter  through. 
Now  age  and  childhood  share  their  mirth, 
And  love  hath  birth  beside  the  hearth. 
O,  no  more  can  our  way  be  waste  and  dead 
While  the  springs  of  the  soul  are  found  and  fed 

The  heartsome  winter  through. 

Another  of  these  little  poems  seems  never  to  have  been  printed. 
It  was  written  in  1822. 

Bright  shines  the  sun  upon  our  spreading  sail, 

And  flashes  o'er  the  foaming  crested  wave  : 
And  briskly  blows  the  spirit-rousing  gale, 

And  laughing  waters  our  light  vessel  lave. 
But  now  the  orb  has  sunk  below  the  verge 

Which  parts  the  sea  and  sky,  —  is  lost  to  sight. 
The  dying  winds  no  more  the  vessel  urge, 

But  a  deep  calm  succeeds  ;  —  a  softened  light 
Melts  into  one  vast  whole  the  sky,  the  deep, 
And  the  far-distant  shore  :  how  still  they  sleep  ! 

So  when  the  deepening  twilight  of  my  day 

Succeeds  my  early  youth's  more  brilliant  light, 
No  more  careering  on  my  joyous  way, 

But  each  subsiding  wave  as  still,  as  bright, 
May  heaven's  calm  hues  so  in  my  spirit  shine 

As  to  illume  my  path  ;  may  heaven's  pure  breath 
Still  waft  me  on  ;  and  may  the  fading  line 

Be  scarce  discerned  which  parts  'tween  Life  and  Death  : 
While  Hope's  soft  voice  shall  every  fear  control, 
And  her  sweet  strain  shall  soothe  my  listening  soul. 

Her  poetry  (all  of  it  at  least  that  I  have  been  able  to  col- 
lect) is  very  correct  and  flowing,  but,  like  most  early  versifica- 
tion, entirely  imitative  in  its  form.  No  one  could  infer  from 
it  what  she  afterwards  became.    It  is  the  voice  of  one  who,  in 


WOMANHOOD. 


163 


the  vision  of  the  poets,  has  drunk  of  the  first  pool,  and  heard 
the  first  bidding,  "  Be  holy  and  cold  !  "  She  was  to  drink,  long 
afterwards,  of  all,  —  world's  use,  world's  love,  world's  cruelty,* 
■ —  that  she  might  fitly  lead,  not  chant,  the  world's  great  battle- 
march  against  wrong. 

She  thought  it  singular,  on  revisiting  in  after  life  the  large, 
plain,  comfortable  house  where  these  and  the  succeeding  years 
were  passed,  that  it  should  have  been  the  spot  where  her  imagi- 
nation wrought  most  strongly.  Yet,  notwithstanding  the  absence 
of  outward  stimulants,  this  does  not  seem  otherwise  than  natural, 
in  the  circumstances  of  her  greatly  increasing  deafness,  and  the 
severity  of  her  sufferings  from  what  one  cannot  help  seeing  to 
have  been  a  most  wearing  degree  of  friction  in  the  family  life. 
Less  sensibility,  less  filial  piety,  or  more  experience  would  have 
neutralized  this  last  source  of  pain  ;  but  experience  it  is  impossi- 
ble to  have  at  these  years  ;  and  she  preserved  her  best  feelings 
unimpaired,  by  taking  refuge  in  the  world  of  dreams  when  the 
world  of  letters  and  of  actual  life  became  too  severe  a  trial  to 
her  slender  stock  of  health.  It  was  the  natural  sanctuary  of  a 
mind  too  large  for  its  circumstances.  It  was  not  an  aimless, 
diseased  wandering  of  the  fancy,  as  she  seems  to  have  supposed 
in  those  days,  but  a  state  of  renovating  aspiration  and  high 
resolution  which  greatly  aided  in  overcoming  all  obstacles,  par- 
ticularly those  her  deafness  threw  in  her  way. 

Her  course  with  regard  to  this  great  trial  was  the  same  she 
always  pursued  in  all  cases  of  trial  and  suffering.  Though  she 
often  wrote  of  it,  she  never  made  it  a  subject  of  conversation. 
She  was  silent  respecting  it  with  intimate  and  family  friends,  to 
whom  talking  of  it  might  prove  a  source  of  affliction  and  misun- 
derstanding, —  till  such  a  time  as  she  might  seek  the  allevi- 
ation of  that  not  too  painful  sympathy  which  the  world  at  large 
never  fails  to  give  to  them  that  use  their  own  sufferings  as  a 
means  of  ministering  to  its  relief.  During  the  whole  course  of 
our  intimate  friendship  and  correspondence  she  never  once 
mentioned  to  me  what,  with  her  career,  duties,  and  aspirations, 
could  not  have  been  any  thing  less  than  a  continual  pressure  of 

*  Mrs.  Browning's  "Vision  of  the  Poets." 


MEMORIALS. 


heavy  calamity.  I  have  reason  to  think  that  the  simple  and 
affecting  statement  in  a  preceding  volume  as  to  the  labour  of 
living  a  life  of  undiminished  usefulness  under  such  a  deprivation 
will  be  a  revelation  to  most  of  her  friends.* 

The  peculiar  anxieties  and  responsibilities  of  womanhood  were 
now  at  hand.  It  is  not  for  me  to  do  more  than  mark  this  as  the 
heart-wearing  period  of  long  uncertainty  which  preceded  her 

engagement  with  Mr.  W  ;  of  the  loss  of  property  that 

involved  a  change  in  all  her  parents'  hopes  and  prospects  for 
their  daughters  ;  of  the  death  of  her  dear  elder  brother  and  his 
infant  child ;  the  death  of  her  father ;  the  death  of  her  lover,  in 
the  moment  of  happy  union  of  heart ;  and,  heaviest  blows  of  all, 
coming  as  they  did  from  a  quarter  which  should  have  given  only 
sympathy  and  furtherance,  the  evil  offices  which,  by  creating  delay 
and  misunderstanding,  contributed  to  his  death.  They  who  had 
the  privilege  of  being  her  personal  friends  during  these  terrible 
hours  have  told  me  that  her  demeanour  was  nobly  calm  and  com- 
posed ;  but  she  seems,  notwithstanding,  to  have  been  still,  from 
time  to  time,  beset  by  the  idea  that  suffering  necessarily  proves 
something  blameworthy  in  the  sufferer. 

"  I  have  been  so  above  the  common  lot 
Chastened  and  visited,  I  needs  must  think 
That  I  was  wicked," 

is  always  the  thought  of  the  heart  that  has  been  tormented  by 
fault-finding,  whether  with  itself  or  with  human  nature.  This 
superstition  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  to  be  eradicated,  because 
it  springs  out  of  the  deep  and  real  grounds  whence  come  our  best 
intimations  for  the  government  of  life. 

These  were  times  of  terrible  toil  as  well  as  of  terrible  sorrow. 
Besides  the  labours  performed  for  discipline,  preparation,  and 
maintenance,  what  she  wrote  in  one  year,  1826  -  7,  under  the. 
influence  of  thoughts  and  feelings  that  would  be  expressed,  an 
imagination  too  active  to  keep  silence,  a  high  sense  of  duty,  and 
some  stirrings  of  ambition,  would  amount  to  volumes.  I  will 
hereafter  give  a  list  of  their  subjects;  and  now  need  mention 

*  See  Vol.  I.  p.  57. 


WOMANHOOD. 


165 


but  one,  —  a  little  tale  called  "  The  Rioters,"  which  was  the  true 
precursor  of  the  coming  fame.  Of  her  other  stories  of  this  period 
none  strikes  me  so  much  as  the  one  called,  I  think,  "Mary  and  her 
Grandmother."  I  found  it  in  the  Mansarde  of  a  Paris  friend,  and 
stood  reading  on  the  spot  where  I  took  it  up,  without  the  least 
idea  of  its  authorship.  It  seemed  a  Sunday-school  book,  but 
how  different  from  its  class  in  general !  It  was  crude  and  strange 
in  a  sense,  and  impressed  one,  as  so  many  of  her  after  works 
have  done,  as  a  plant  that  has  outgrown  its  bed ;  but  the  sacred 
fire  was  there.  She  did  not,  however,  remember  it,  and  thought  it 
could  not  have  been  written  by  herself ;  still  I  was  assured  of  the 
authorship  by  those  whom  I  might  suppose  to  know.  It  was 
beginning  to  be  a  work  of  experience.  "Five  Years  of  Youth," 
written  some  time  afterwards,  leaves  the  same  impression.  But 
"  The  Rioters  "  leaves  no  impression  of  inequality  or  discrepancy 
on  the  mind.  It  came  home  to  the  business  and  bosoms  of  the 
lace-makers  of  Derby  and  Nottingham  with  so  much  power  that 
they  instantly  put  themselves  in  communication  with  Miss 
Martineau,  requesting  a  second  story  on  Wages.  These  tales  are 
remarkable,  not  only  for  their  deep  political  insight  and  even- 
handed  humanity ;  not  only  as  coming  from  one  of  her  youth 
and  sex,  on  subjects  hitherto  thought  the  special  province  of 
elderly  members  of  Parliament ;  not  merely  as  able  illustrations 
of  political  economy.  They  are  the  first  examples  of  a  new  ap- 
plication of  the  modern  novel.  To  the  biographical  and  the 
philosophical  novel,  the  descriptive  and  the  historical  novel, 
the  romantic  and  the  domestic  novel,  the  fashionable  and  the 
religious  novel,  and  the  novel  of  society,  was  now  to  be  added 
the  humanitarian  or  novel  of  social  reform.  These  tales  are  the 
pioneers,  not  only  of  the  thirty-four  monthly  volumes  of  her 
illustrations  of  political  economy,  but  of  the  multitudes  of  social- 
reform  novels  that  have  since  followed,  up  to  the  time  of  Mrs. 
Gaskell  and  Mrs.  Stowe. 

Among  the  papers  of  the  time  immediately  succeeding  I  find 
many  that  more  perfectly  illustrate  Harriet  Martineau's  nature 
and  character  than  could  possibly  be  done  by  any  recollections  of 
hers  or  any  statements  of  mine.    Written  without  any  thought 


166 


MEMORIALS. 


that  they  could  possibly  meet  the  public  eye,  we  have  in  thein 
the  actual  reflection  of  what  she  then  was  ;  and  they  differ  from 
autobiography  and  from  narrative,  as  the  object  from  the  picture, 
as  life  itself  from  the  story  of  a  life. 

First  in  the  order  of  time  is  the  following  paper,  written  at 
Norwich,  and  dated  June,  1829  :  — 

PRIVATE. 

For  some  years  past  my  attention  has  been  more  and  more  directed 
towards  literary  pursuits  ;  and,  if  I  mistake  not,  my  capacity  for 
their  successful  prosecution  has  increased,  so  that  I  have  now  fair 
encouragement  to  devote  myself  to  them  more  diligently  than  ever. 
After  long  and  mature  deliberation,  I  have  determined  that  my  chief 
subordinate  object  in  life  shall  henceforth  be  the  cultivation  of  my 
intellectual  powers,  with  a  view  to  the  instruction  of  others  by  my 
writings.    On  this  determination  I  pray  for  the  blessing  of  God. 

I  wish  to  hold  myself  prepared  to  relinquish  this  purpose,  should 
any  decided  call  of  duty  interfere  ;  but  I  pray  that  no  indolence  or 
caprice  in  myself,  no  discouragement  or  ill-grounded  opposition  from 
others,  may  prevail  on  me  to  relinquish  a  resolution  which  I  now 
believe  to  be  rational,  and  compatible  with  the  highest  desire  of  a 
Christian. 

I  am  now  just  twenty-seven  years  of  age.  It  is  my  wish  to  ascer- 
tain (should  life  and  health  be  spared)  how  much  may  be  accom- 
plished by  diligent  but  temperate  exertion  in  pursuit  of  this  object 
for  ten  years. 

I  believe  myself  possessed  of  no  uncommon  talents,  and  of  not  an 
atom  of  genius  ;  but  as  various  circumstances  have  led  me  to  think 
more  accurately  and  read  more  extensively  than  some  women,  I 
believe  that  I  may  so  write  on  subjects  of  universal  concern  as  to 
inform  some  minds  and  stir  up  others.  My  aim  is  to  become  a  forci- 
ble and  elegant  writer  on  religious  and  moral  subjects,  so  as  to  be 
useful  to  refined  as  well  as  unenlightened  minds.  But,  as  I  see 
how  much  remains  to  be  done  before  this  aim  can  be  attained,  I 
wish  to  be  content  with  a  much  lower  degree  of  usefulness,  should 
the  Father  of  my  spirit  see  fit  to  set  narrow  bounds  to  my  exertions. 
Of  posthumous  fame  I  have  not  the  slightest  expectation  or  desire. 
To  be  useful  in  my  day  and  generation  is  enough  for  me.  To  this  I 
henceforth  devote  myself,  and  desire  to  keep  in  mind  the  following 
rules.    (A  frequent  reference  to  them  is  necessary.) 


WOMANHOOD. 


167 


I.  To  improve  my  moral  constitution  by  every  means  ;  to  culti- 
vate my  moral  sense  ;  to  keep  ever  in  view  the  subordination  of 
intellectual  to  moral  objects  ;  by  the  practice  of  piety  and  benevo- 
lence, by  entertaining  the  freedom  and  cheerfulness  of  spirit  which 
results  from  dependence  on  God,  to  promote  the  perfection  of  the 
intellectual  powers. 

II.  To  seek  the  assistance  of  God  in  my  intellectual  exertions,  and 
his  blessing  on  their  results. 

III.  To  impart  full  confidence  to  my  family  respecting  my  pur- 
suits, but  to  be  careful  not  to  weary  them  with  too  frequent  a  refer- 
ence to  myself  ;  and  to  be  as  nearly  as  possible  silent  on  the  subject 
to  all  the  world  besides. 

IV.  To  study  diligently,  1.  The  Scriptures,  good  commentators, 
works  of  religious  philosophy  and  practice,  —  for  moral  improvement ; 
2.  Mental  philosophy,  — for  intellectual  improvement ;  3.  Natural 
philosophy  and  natural  history,  languages  and  history,  —  for  improve- 
ment in  knowledge;  4.  Criticism,  belles-lettres,  and  poetry, — for 
improvement  in  style.    Each  in  turn,  and  something  every  day. 

V.  While  I  have  my  intellectual  improvement  ever  in  view,  to 
dismiss  from  my  thoughts  the  particular  subject  on  which  I  have 
written  in  the  morning  for  the  rest  of  the  day,  i.  e.  to  be  temperate 
in  my  attention  to  an  object. 

VI.  By  early  rising,  and  all  due  economy  of  time,  and  especially  by 
a  careful  government  of  the  thoughts,  to  employ  my  life  to  better  pur- 
pose than  heretofore. 

VII.  To  exalt,  enlarge,  and  refresh  my  mind  by  social  intercourse, 
observation  of  external  nature,  of  the  fine  arts,  and  of  the  varieties  of 
human  life. 

VIII.  To  bear  in  mind  that  as  my  determination  is  deliberately 
formed  and  now  allowed  to  be  rational,  disappointments  should  not 
be  lightly  permitted  to  relax  my  exertions.  If  my  object  is  conscien- 
tiously adopted,  mortifications  of  vanity  should  prove  stimulants, 
rather  than  discouragements.  The  same  consideration  should  induce 
patience  under  painful  labour,  delay,  and  disappointment,  and  guard 
me  against  heat  and  precipitation. 

IX.  To  consider  my  own  interests  as  little  as  possible,  and  to  write 
with  a  view  to  the  good  of  others  ;  therefore  to  entertain  no  dis- 
taste to  the  humblest  literary  task  which  affords  a  prospect  of  useful- 
ness. 

X.  Should  my  exertions  ultimately  prove  fruitless,  to  preserve  my 
cheerfulness,  remembering  that  God  only  knows  how  his  work  may 


1G8 


MEMORIALS. 


be  best  performed,  and  that  I  have  no  right  to  expect  the  privilege  of 
eminent  usefulness,  though  permitted  to  seek  it.  Should  success  be 
granted,  to  take  no  honour  to  myself,  remembering  that  I  possess  no 
original  power  or  intrinsic  merit,  and  that  I  can  receive  and  accom- 
plish nothing,  except  it  be  given  me  from  Heaven. 

June,  1829. 

Such  were  the  sheet-anchors  :  no  wonder  the  vessel  never 
drifted  in  any  stress  of  weather.  By  comparison  of  dates  it  must 
have  been  these  of  which  she  says,  "  I  promised  myself  that 
nothing  should  ever  draw  me  away  from  them."  I  now  recall 
to  mind  the  seal,  —  a  present  from  her  grandmother.  It  was  one 
then  in  fashionable  and  sentimental  use,  —  an  evergreen  leaf, 
with  the  motto,  "Je  ne  change  qiCen  mourant"  But  her  friends 
were  often  surprised  in  this  way  to  find  that  what  with  others 
might  be  a  matter  -of  fancy  or  of  course,  was  with  her  a  thing  of 
solemn  significance.  I  shall  often  have  occasion  to  tell  of  such 
instances.  One  sees  by  such  a  record  as  this  in  the  early  life  of 
such  a  person,  that  stability  of  character  is  affected  by  change  of 
"  views  "  exactly  as  the  dropping  of  the  bark  affects  the  tree. 

After  reading  these  ten  resolutions,  no  one  would  fear  to  pre- 
dict admirable  results.  One  of  the  first  was  the  "  Traditions  of 
Palestine."  The  title  and  the  treatment  of  the  stories  indicated 
a  more  than  Unitarian  severance  from  authority.  This  was  more 
felt  in  America  than  in  England  ;  and  in  the  Boston  reprint,  the 
beautiful  title  was  changed  to  fit  the  new  meridian.  The  same 
self-constituted  editor  had  caused  the  latest  edition  of  the  "  De- 
votional Exercises  "  to  be  republished,  with  an  apology  on  his 
own  part  for  an  able  additional  essay  on  the  study  of  the  Scrip- 
tures, "  where  in  one  or  two  instances  the  writer  may  be  thought 
to  have  expressed  herself  incautiously."  The  American  Unitarian 
public  knows  the  "  Traditions  of  Palestine  "  under  the  name  of 
"  Times  of  the  Saviour."  The  "  poetical  expressions,"  as  the 
editor  called  some  of  the  beauties  of  the  book,  are  cut  out,  and 
the  whole  structure  of  one  story  spoiled  ;  but  it  matters  little,  as 
the  "  Traditions  "  still  are  continually  republished  in  their  original 
form  in  England. 

It  was  this  book  which  first  brought  Miss  Martineau  fairly 


WOMANHOOD. 


169 


before  her  own  Unitarian  public.  Her  studies,  tastes,  and  feel- 
ings all  combined  to  make  it  interesting,  and  it  still  gives  great 
delight  to  all,  especially  to  those  whose  interest  in  the  Scriptures 
has  been  impaired  by  injudicious  methods  of  reading.  It  is  a 
successful  effort  to  give  actuality  to  the  past,  —  to  make  her 
imagination  the  ally  of  the  unimaginative  faith  into  which  she 
was  born. 

But  whoever  desires  to  watch  the  progress  of  her  mind  and 
the  effect  of  her  literary  education  should  read  the  fifty-five 
miscellaneous  papers  of  this  year.    I  will  mention  one  especially, 

—  the  review  of  the  Essays  of  Bailey,  of  Sheffield,  on  the  Pur- 
suit of  Truth,  Progress  of  Knowledge,  and  Principle  of  Evidence, 

—  because  it  was  the  one  which  more  than  any  other  showed  to 
Mr.  Fox,  then  editor  of  the  "  Monthly  Repository,"  her  value  as 
a  contributor,  and  made  him  predict  that  she  would  "  be  one  of 
the  first  of  the  age  by  and  by."  It  was  the  old  (and  in  her 
latest,  mature  judgment,  unsound)  argument  against  Hume's  treat- 
ment of  the  miracles.  At  that  time,  however,  it  was  not  only 
new  to  her,  but  mainly  original,  being  wrought  out  by  her  own 
mind ;  and  she  gave  me  an  account  of  the  circumstances  under 
which  she  wrote  it.  It  was  in  June,  before  the  Municipal  Reform 
Bill,  so  that  the  old  Norwich  Mayor's  feast  was  still  in  existence, 

—  the  guild  feast,  —  a  dinner  in  St.  Andrew's  Hall,  to  about  six 
hundred  gentry  of  the  county  and  city,  with  a  ball  at  the  assem- 
bly-rooms. "  I  was  never,"  she  said,  "  at  one  of  those  dinners, 
nor  wished  to  be.  I  regularly  avoided  them.  On  that  occasion 
all  the  family  were  absent  from  Norwich  but  brother  Henry, 
Rachel,  and  myself.  They  went :  I  stayed  at  home,  to  their  great 
amazement,  to  write  my  review.  It  was  a  convenience,  because 
the  servants  always  expected  to  go  out  and  see  the  shows  of  the 
day.  So  I  dressed  Rachel,  and  saw  them  off  in  their  hackney- 
coach  before  four  o'clock ;  had  the  tea-things  set  out  on  the 
sideboard  and  the  kettle  filled  in  the  kitchen,  sent  out  the  ser- 
vants, locked  the  doors,  and  wrote.  When  the  servants  returned 
at  ten,  they  set  cold  meat  and  bread  on  the  sideboard,  and  I 
sent  them  to  bed  and  sat  down  again.  I  remember  that  the 
time  seemed  but  five  minutes,  till  I  was  startled  by  the  ring  of 

VOL.  II. 


170 


MEMORIALS. 


the  door-bell.  I  opened  it,  and  lo !  it  was  daylight,  between 
three  and  four.  Rachel  was  weary  and  out  of  curl,  and  I  was  as 
fresh  as  twelve  hours  before.  That  review  did  more  for  me  with 
Mr.  Fox  than  any  one  article,  and  he  did  not  think  it  so  unsound 
as  he  doubtless  does  now.  But  the  thing  which  makes  me  so 
vividly  remember  this  day  was  the  miraculous  passage  of  twelve 
hours,  and  especially  of  the  last  five.  I  doubt  whether  I  have 
ever  since  experienced  such  absorption  in  work,  though  I  have 
made  a  similar  stretch  more  than  once.  The  mere  work  will 
appear  nothing  remarkable  to  you,  but  the  experience  was  really 
so  to  me." 

This  "  mere  work,"  which  she  supposed  would  appear  so  little 
remarkable  to  me,  may  be  found  in  the  American  edition  of  her 
Miscellanies,  Vol.  II.  p.  174,  through  twenty  pages  onwards, — 
a  train  of  close,  steady,  and  condensed  thought  on  philosophical 
necessity,  the  limitations  of  human  testimony,  causation,  possi- 
bility and  probability,  and  the  various  abstruse  considerations 
involved  in  a  treatise  on  the  Principle  of  Evidence.  The  limita- 
tions of  her  field  of  thought  at  this  time  are  plainly  indicated, 
but  the  vigor  of  her  thinking  faculties  is  very  strikingly  demon- 
strated. The  exercise  of  them  in  this  way  was  her  true  voca- 
tion ;  and  she  says,  in  a  letter  to  her  mother,  written  at  this  time, 
"  Writing  is  a  more  delightful  employment  to  me  than  ever, 
and  I  could  sit  all  day  at  it."  There  were  periods,  about  this 
time,  when,  after  writing  ten  hours  a  day  for  six  weeks,  she 
says,  "  Never  be  uneasy,  dear  mother,  about  my  writing  so  much. 
It  is  impossible  to  give  you  an  idea  of  the  increasing  facility  and 
delight  which  come  with  practice.  It  is  the  purest  delight  to 
me,  when  there  is  a  fair  prospect  of  usefulness  ;  and  it  is  easier 
than  the  mere  manual  act  once  was.  How  I  once  marvelled  at 
the  manufacture  of  a  volume !  Now  I  wonder  that  those  who 
once  write  do  not  always  write." 

It  is  worthy  of  notice  that  even  in  these  early  writings  there 
is  that  strong  grasp  of  facts,  and  correctness  in  drawing  infer- 
ences from  them,  which  want  of  opportunity  for  study  and 
observation  makes  uncommon  in  the  works  of  women.  From 
the  beginning,  Harriet  Martineau's  anonymous  writings  have 


WOMANHOOD. 


171 


always  been  attributed  to  a  man ;  her  industry,  judgment,  and 
insight  went  so  far  to  supply  the  want  of  what  men  learn  in  the 
university  and  the  market-place. 

"What  are  the  elements  of  that  strange  gift  of  influence  that 
some  human  beings  possess  in  addition  to  all  their  other  gifts  1 
I  notice  about  this  period  the  first  instance  of  the  great  power 
possessed  by  Miss  Martineau  to  lead  and  control  human  affairs, 
sometimes  without  the  thought  or  purpose  of  doing  so,  —  an 
article  on  India,  which  occasioned  a  sermon  on  Indian  abuses, 
and  a  consequent  investment  in  East  India  stock,  to  enable  the 
holder  to  influence  the  Company's  doings  by  his  vote.  Yet  these 
were  the  times  in  England  when  so  many  prejudices  existed 
against  women's  thinking  and  acting  in  conformity  to  their 
natural  endowments,  that  on  the  publication  of  the  "  Traditions 
of  Palestine,"  Miss  Martineau,  in  writing  to  Xorwich  about  ad- 
vertising it  there,  felt  the  necessity  of  breaking  it  to  her  mother. 
It  was  ever  a  peculiarity  of  Harriet  Martineau's  writings  that 
their  reality  operated  as  a  personal  introduction  to  her  readers. 
The  first  thought  was,  "  She  will  know  exactly  how  we  feel  and 
be  able  to  tell  us  exactly  what  we  wish  to  know  and  what  we 
ought  to  do."  The  second  was,  "  What  is  she  like  ]  how  does 
she  look1?  I  must  see  and  know  her." 

She  is  described  at  this  period  of  her  young  ladyhood  as 
plain  and  unattractive  in  appearance,  and  many  of  her  own 
pleasantries  in  conversation  confirm  it.  She  was  pale  and  thin, 
rather  above  the  ordinary  height,  with  abundant  dark  brown 
hair.  "  I  never  had  but  one  civil  speech  about  my  looks,"  she 
used  to  say,  "  and  that  was  a  compliment  to  my  hair.  As  a 
child,  I  used  to  take  the  matter  into  consideration.  '  What  did 
I  take  myself  to  be  T  Not  pretty,  certainly.  But  was  it  a  hope- 
less matter  altogether  ?  The  chin  was  not  bad  (advancing  and 
retreating  before  the  glass),  it  had  rather  a  nice  point,  I  fancied. 
But  at  fifteen  a  saucy  speech  of  a  satirical  cousin  —  1  How  ugly 
all  my  mother's  daughters  were,  Harriet  in  particular  '  —  settled 
the  question  for  me.  I  never  doubted  my  ugliness  after  that.  I 
tried  to  think  I  danced  well,  and  my  feet  did  go  well  enough. 
But  I  was  too  weak  to  be  a  good  dancer,  and  all  my  complacency 


172 


MEMORIALS. 


in  dancing  was  destroyed  on  being  told  by  my  sister  (an  admi- 
rable dancer  herself)  of  a  quizzing  clergyman  who  got  behind  me 
and  imitated  me  till  every  body  laughed." 

She  was  herself  very  serious  in  these  days  of  humiliation; 
like  the  ugly  duckling,  so  superior  in  nature  to  those  about  her, 
that,  judging  in  the  only  way  possible  to  them,  —  by  compari- 
son,—  their  self-love  looked  down  contemptuously  upon  the  future 
swan.  Colonel  Radice,  an  Italian  of  the  emigration  of  1822,  a 
favourite  with  her  mother,  said  of  her  at  the  age  of  twenty,  in 
his  foreign  English,  "  James  [her  brother]  lauch  [laughs]  seldom  ; 
Henriette  lauch  never."  Of  this  brother  Colonel  Radice  re- 
marked, "  Henriette  is  always  his  defendart" 

By  and  by  the  weight  of  Norwich  began  to  lift.  Occasional 
visits  to  Newcastle,  London,  and  its  neighbourhood  showed  her 
what  provincial  opinion  is  worth.  As  appreciation  gave  her 
more  freedom,  and  more  freedom  made  her  more  and  more  ap- 
preciated, the  singularly  attaching  quality  of  her  character  was 
constantly  made  manifest.  Especially  did  persons  possessing 
any  superiority  of  ability  become  strongly  interested  in  her. 
She  was,  during  these  years,  more  than  a  great  general  favourite : 
she  was  also  held  in  admiring  respect  by  the  most  remarkable 
persons  in  the  society  she  met.  Ladies  of  great  musical  genius, 
elderly  gentlemen  of  business,  the  clerical,  the  legal,  the  literary, 
the  learned,  all  became  in  their  several  ways  what  is  called  ro- 
mantically attached  to  her  :  they  felt,  to  wit,  without  analyzing 
the  causes,  the  comprehensiveness  of  her  intellect  and  the  power 
of  her  sympathy.  All  that  they  were  she  could  have  been  in 
a  greater  degree. 

In  estimating  her  powers  at  this  time,  one  should  think  not  so 
much  of  what  is  commonly  considered  literary  and  critical  ability, 
as  the  quality  and  depth  of  thought  that  measures  human  life 
aright ;  and  one  finds  the  means  for  making  such  an  estimate 
in  her  remarks  on  biography,  written  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
seven. 

"  And  yet,  in  no  department  of  literature,  perhaps,  is  there  so  much 
imperfection  ;  in  none  so  much  error  and  deception.  The  causes  of 
this  imperfection  are  so  obvious,  and  so  many  curious  discoveries 


WOMANHOOD. 


173 


have  been  made  here  and  there,  that  a  pretty  general  distrust  of 
the  fidelity  of  biographers  now  exists  ;  and  few  but  children  and 
the  wilfully  credulous  now  believe  all  that  is  told  them  of  the 
great  and  good  and  wonderful  people  whom  they  long  to  resemble. 
This  distrust,  however  unavoidable,  has  a  very  demoralizing  effect ; 
and  it  is  worth  a  serious  inquiry  whether  there  is  any  probabil- 
ity, or  at  least  whether  there  is  not  a  possibility,  of  its  being  re- 
moved  

"  Have  we  ever  met  with  a  representation  of  character  supported 
by  facts  at  all  approaching  in  fairness  to  those  discussions  of  the  char- 
acters of  our  friends  which  are  held  in  conversation  while  they  are 
alive  and  active  ?  For  ourselves  we  can  answer,  never.  In  the  long- 
est and  most  fair-seeming  narrative  of  a  life  we  have  always  found 
something  deficient,  something  unsatisfactory,  something  which  we 
cannot  reconcile,  or  which  it  is  impossible  to  believe.  Much  as  we 
grieve,  we  do  not  wonder  at  this,  for  we  see  where  the  difficulties 
lie  ;  and  these  difficulties  are  so  various  and  so  nearly  insuperable, 
that  we  consider  the  position  of  a  conscientious  biographer  one  of  the 
most  perplexing  that  can  be  conceived.  Did  he  know  intimately  the 
character  he  is  going  to  describe  1  If  he  did,  how  can  he  bring  him- 
self to  notice  the  weakness,  the  follies,  the  peculiarities,  which  he  de- 
sires should  be  forgotten  in  the  grave,  and  which,  to  the  eye  of  friend- 
ship, have  already  faded  away  into  shades  too  slight  to  be  caught  ere 
they  vanish  \  If  he  did  not  know  him,  how  is  he  qualified  for  the 
task  he  has  undertaken  1  Did  he  love  the  departed  1  If  he  did,  can 
he  form  an  impartial  estimate  of  his  virtues  ?  If  not,  how  came  he 
by  the  knowledge  of  those  finer  qualities  of  soul  which  can  only  be 
revealed  to  a  kindred  soul,  and  which  yet  must  not  be  omitted  in  a 
delineation  of  the  mind  ?  It  is  obvious  that  no  delineation  of  the 
mind  can  be  complete.  The  obstacles  are  too  many  and  too  great. 
But  true  philosophy  can  argue  from  things  that  are  known  to  those 
which  are  not  known  ;  and  here  we  have  a  method  by  which  we  may 
surmount  many  difficulties.  For  this  purpose,  the  facts  with  which 
we  are  furnished  must  be  true,  the  details  faithful,  the  materials  of 
unquestionable  originality.  If  we  cannot  have  the  whole  truth,  we 
ought  to  be  told  nothing  but  the  truth  ;  and  if  this  rule  be  observed  (as 
in  common  fairness  it  ought),  we  will  contrive  to  make  out  for  ourselves 
whatever  it  is  of  material  consequence  to  ascertain.  But  can  we  ever 
feel  entirely  satisfied  of  the  fidelity  of  the  meagre  relations  which  are 
afforded  us  ?  Alas  !  in  very  few  cases  ;  but  in  a  few  we  may.  How 
do  we  know,  how  do  we  distinguish  such  cases  from  the  many  1  By 


174 


MEMORIALS. 


the  presence  of  a  simplicity  which  carries  conviction  with  it  ;  by  an 
impress  of  truth  which  cannot  be  counterfeited  ;  by  a  verisimilitude 
analogous  to  that  by  which  we  are  enabled  to  pronounce  on  the  resem- 
blance of  a  portrait  without  having  seen  the  original.  Where  are  we 
to  look  for  such  ?  Not  in  volumes  of  panegyric  which  assume  the 
form  of  narrative.  Not  in  quartos  whose  chapters  contain  one  fact 
enveloped  in  a  multitude  of  observations,  where  the  author  forgets 
his  subject  while  striving  to  immortalize  himself.  Not  among  the 
equivocations  of  timid  friendship,  or  the  mysterious  insinuations  of  a 
writer  who  sports  with  the  interest  of  his  readers,  and  seems  proud  of 
knowing  more  than  he  chooses  to  tell." 

This  remained  her  permanent  judgment ;  as  one  may  learn  by 
reference  to  the  Preface  of  her  "  Biographical  Sketches  "  in  1869, 
forty  years  later,  when  expressing  her  satisfaction  at  the  exten- 
sive appreciation  which  had  attended  her  endeavours  to  discharge 
a  biographer's  duty,  —  a  satisfaction  greater  than  any  literary  suc- 
cess can  yield ;  for  this  appreciation  was  to  her  an  assurance  that 
the  deliberate  judgment  of  society  pronounces  for  an  ethical 
standard  of  character  in  the  first  place,  and  in  the  next  for  fidel- 
ity to  that  standard. 

Early  and  late,  she  thought  men's  characters  a  more  impor- 
tant possession  than  any  thing  they  could  do.  More  than  their 
deeds  is  what  they  were,  and  how  they  came  to  be  what  they 
were. 

She  by  no  means  absolved  a  biographer  from  presenting  the 
whole  truth  because  it  was  unacceptable  or  painful.  ' '  It  is  high 
time  that  some  one  should  set  an  example  of  intrepid  fidelity." 
Later  she  confirms  this  ;  and,  remarking  the  confusion  of  thought 
and  the  unchastened  feelings  which  occasion  so  many  readers 
to  misapprehend  altogether  the  purpose  and  character  of  biog- 
raphy, she  asks  if  readers  do  not  feel  that  there  is  no  right  way 
but  to  tell,  in  the  spirit  of  justice,  the  whole  truth  about  the 
characters  of  persons  important  enough  to  have  their  lives  pub- 
licly treated  at  all. 

And  now,  after  so  much  toil  and  conscientious  preparation,  as 
laid  down  in  the  resolutions  ;  after  having  written  in  the  course 
of  it  the  matter  of  at  least  half  a  dozen  octavo  volumes,  with 


WOMANHOOD.  175 

fancy-work,  needful  needle-work,  and  German  literature  crowded 
deep  into  the  night,  the  way  seemed  to  be  opening  to  a  suc- 
cessful literary  career,  when  the  very  next  month  brought 
the  failure  of  the  Norwich  manufacturing  house  of  which  her 
father  had  been  formerly  the  head. 

She  has  told  how  her  hopes  were  disappointed  ;  but  how  she 
bore  the  disappointment  the  following  letter  tells  better.  She 
writes  thus  to  her  mother,  absent  at  Birmingham  :  — 

Norwich,  July  5,  1829. 
My  dearest  Mother,  —  I  am  glad  that  our  good  friend  Mr.  Hut- 
ton  goes  straight  to  Birmingham,  that  we  may  make  him  the  bearer 
of  some  comfort  to  you.  He  will  tell  you  that  we  are  well  and  cheer- 
ful, and  I  am  sure  we  shall  be  yet  more  so  when  we  have  heard  of 
you.  This  is  our  great  anxiety  at  present,  and  we  can  scarcely  turn 
our  thoughts  to  the  future,  till  we  know  how  you  have  borne  what  is 
past.  It  must,  indeed,  be  a  very  heavy  blow  to  you  ;  and  all  other 
considerations,  we  find,  shrink  to  nothing  compared  to  this.  I  wish 
it  were  possible  to  transfer  to  you  all  the  comfort  we  derive  from  the 
circumstances  which  are  happening  every  hour  ;  but  I  am  afraid 
there  are  no  means  of  assuring  you,  till  you  come  home  to  witness  it, 
how  manifold  are  the  consolations  which  arise  from  the  respect  and 
kindness  of  friends.  Still,  there  are  better  consolations  than  this, 
and  you  possess  them  ;  and  if  it  will  gratify  you  to  hear  it  from  your 
children,  I  have  pleasure  in  expressing  what  we  all  feel,  that  if  we 
should  be  found  able  to  go  through  this  trial  better  than  some,  it  is 
to  you  chiefly  that  we  owe  it.  We  have  by  you  been  trained  to 
habits  of  industry  and  economy,  which  will  now  prove  our  best 
wealth.  We  may  thank  God  that,  instead  of  wealth,  he  has  given  us 
more  durable  blessings,  various  and  abundant.  Our  best  comfort, 
dearest  mother,  will  be  to  hear  from  you.  I  am  sure  fresh  trials  in- 
spire fresh  love,  and  in  this  belief  I  sign  myself  more  than  ever  your 
dutiful  and  affectionate 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Your  letter  has  just  arrived.  What  a  blessing  it  is  to  us  !  Our 
greatest  anxiety  is  now  at  an  end. 

Mrs.  Martineau  having  decided  that  her  daughter's  hopes  of 
a  literary  career  should  be  crushed,  the  daughter  wrote  thus. 
Talking  over  with  old  friends  this  obedience  of  hers  (this 


MEMORIALS. 


"  going  back  with  them  and  being  subjected  unto  theni"),  one 
of  them  said,  "  How  could  she  be  so  foolish  1 "  "  Nevertheless," 
replied  the  other,  "  it  was  Christlike." 

The  following  letter  is  the  story  of  that  time,  told  at  that 
time  :  — 

Stamford  Hill,  January  22,  1830. 
My  dear  Mother,  —  I  received  your  letter  yesterday,  and  the 

purpose  of  my  answering  it  already  is  to  prevent  's  having  the 

trouble  of  writing.  He  knows  how  I  like  hearing  from  him,  but  his 
time  is  very  fully  occupied,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  save  him  trouble. 
I  have  read  yours  to  my  dear  aunt,  who  has  been  my  confidante  in  the 
business,  and  we  agree  in  seeing  that  there  is  not  a  shadow  of  doubt 
as  to  what  I  am  to  do.  "We  chiefly  regret  that  such  painful  feelings 
should  have  been  excited,  where  my  sole  intention  was  to  offer  a 
confidence  which  is  your  due.  I  could  not  but  let  you  know  how 
entirely  my  prospects  are  declared  to  depend  on  certain  circum- 
stances ;  but  once  knowing  your  wishes,  I  have  no  other  desire  than 
to  comply  with  them,  reserving  to  myself,  however,  the  liberty  of 
changing  my  plans  when  I  find  my  resources  fail,  as  Mr.  Fox  says 
they  inevitably  will,  if  I  remain  at  a  distance  from  town.  There  is 
no  periodical  work  ever  sent  into  the  country,  and  my  choice  lies 
between  the  little  stories  for  Houlston  and  Darton,  and  original 
works,  which  I  have  neither  capital  nor  courage  to  undertake.  Mr. 
Fox  is  exceedingly  sorry  that  I  am  obliged  to  decline  the  three  offers 
which  have  been  made  me,  —  the  Westminster,  the  larger  engage- 
ment for  the  M.  R.,  and  Mr.  Hill's  assistance.  If  Mr.  Fox  can  get  his 
work  done  under  his  own  eye,  I  cannot  expect  him  to  send  it  to  a 
distance,  and  he  declines  doing  so.  Mr.  Hill  has  asked  the  essential 
question,  whether  I  have  continual  access  to  the  Museum  and  other 
libraries,  and  literary  society  here  ;  and  finding  that  I  live  in  the 
country,  can  do  nothing  for  me,  and  "  Pemberton  M  *  is  coming  back 
to  me.  I  must  try  if  Baldwin  or  somebody  else  will  take  it.  Mr. 
Fox  will  keep  his  eye  upon  my  interests,  and,  if  anything  offers,  I 
shall  be  sure  to  have  the  benefit  of  it.  A  better  and  kinder  friend 
I  cannot  have  ;  and  he  shows  his  kindness  in  not  puffing  me  up  with 
false  hopes.  He  says  £  100  or  £  150  per  year  is  as  much  as  our  most 
successful  writers  usually  make,  with  all  the  advantages  of  town  :  and 
I  must  not  expect  any  such  thing  except  in  particularly  lucky  years. 

*  I  think  "  Pemberton  and  its  Politics  "  is  the  "  Brook  Farm  "  of  the  Political 
Economy  series. 


WOMANHOOD. 


177 


Neither  he  nor  I  dreamed  of  writing  to  dispel  selfish  doubts  in  you, 
my  dear  mother,  but  only  to  show  that  my  change  of  views  arose 
from  no  fancy  of  my  own.  When  I  came,  I  believed  as  firmly  as  you 
do  that  my  means  of  subsistence  were  in  my  own  power  at  home. 
Now  I  see  that  they  will  probably  not  be  so  ;  but  I  am  not  anxious, 
while  I  have  any  prospect  at  all  of  useful  employment.  I  have  given 
up  Derby.  We  see  no  use  in  going  to  Bristol,  as  there  are  no  literary 
people  but  Sydney  Smith,  who  is  but  a  slight  acquaintance  of  Aunt 
K.'s  and  has  little  literary  influence,  and  there  I  should  not  have  the 
leisure  for  writing  which  I  should  enjoy  at  Derby.  So,  if  you  please, 
I  will  remain  here  for  a  few  weeks,  and  make  the  most  of  my  time 
and  opportunities.  My  aunt  insists  on  my  remaining  here,  as  being 
near  Mr.  Fox.  One  thing  more,  —  I  never  entertained  so  preposter- 
ous an  idea  for  a  moment  as  that  of  going  alone  into  lodgings,  and 
must  have  expressed  myself  very  ill  if  I  led  you  to  think  so.  It 
would  be  positively  disreputable.  I  thought  of  boarding  in  a  family. 
So  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter  is  that  you  will  see  me  in  two 
or  three  months,  quite  inclined  to  be  happier  at  home  than  any  where 
else,  as  long  as  I  can  maintain  myself  there  in  a  useful  way  ;  but 
holding  the  power  of  seeking  employment  elsewhere,  should  my 
resources  fail.  I  cannot  regret  (and  here  my  aunt  bears  me  out)  hav- 
ing mentioned  to  you  the  proposals  I  have  received  ;  but  if  the  man- 
ner has  caused  you  pain,  I  ask  your  forgiveness,  and  beg  you  to  forget 
the  matter  as  speedily  as  possible.  We  know  well  how  far  you  are 
from  being  selfish  on  such  occasions,  and  this  consideration  made  me 
the  more  ready  to  be  perfectly  open  with  you.  And  here  I  make  an 
end  of  the  subject  entirely. 

I  have  been  enjoying  myself  exceedingly  since  I  last  wrote,  and 
some  very  pleasant  things  have  happened.  The  thing  which  was 
more  wanting  to  my  peace  than  any  one  circumstance  besides  has 

been  granted  me.    Albina  W  *  called  on  me  at  Chiswell  Street 

on  Monday  ;  and  we  had  a  very  long  and  satisfactory  explanation 
of  past  mysteries,  the  particulars  of  which  you  shall  hear  when  we 
meet.  There  is  nothing  so  delightful  as  coming  to  a  clear  under- 
standing in  such  cases,  and  a  load  has  been  taken  off  our  minds  by  it. 
She  is  a  very  sensible  girl,  and  talked  in  a  way  that  I  liked  very 
much.  She  is  not  in  the  slightest  degree  like  her  brother  in  counte- 
nance, which  disappointed  me.  I  think  I  never  before  failed  to  trace 
a  family  resemblance  

My  aunt  is  so  pleased  with  the  basket  making  that  she  has  given 

*  The  sister  of  her  betrothed. 


178 


MEMORIALS. 


me  two  dozen  pieces  of  braid  and  cord,  satin, —  lilac,  blue,  and  pink, — 
paper,  etc.  How  very  kind  !  I  have  seen  a  most  beautiful  new  sort 
of  bag,  which  I  find  I  can  imitate  ;  and  I  have  several  orders  already 
in  this  family,  and  shall  probably  make  two  or  three  guineas  by 

them  As  I  write  much  and  often  to  you,  I  am  obliged  to  hurry, 

which  I  hope  you  will  pardon. 

Farewell.  With  dear  love  to  all,  believe  me,  dear  mother,  your 
very  affectionate 

H.  MARTINEAU. 

This  disappointment  was  a  severe  one,  but  it  was  not  in  her 
nature  to  stay  disappointed.  The  very  next  day  after  her  return 
from  London  she  began  to  prepare  for  the  competition  proposed 
by  the  Unitarian  Association,  as  a  means  of  obtaining  the  best 
effort  of  the  denomination  for  the  promotion  of  its  views  among 
Catholics,  Jews,  and  Mahometans.  Instinctively  placing  her- 
self, with  her  own  belief  and  opinions,  as  far  as  possible  in  their 
point  of  view,  and  seeking  whatever  agreement  existed,  with  a 
courtesy  and  sympathy  rare  in  theological  writings,  she  avoided 
controversy,  and  strove  to  make  Unitarianism  an  affirmative 
faith.  These  essays  placet!  her  at  the  head  of  the  denomination. 
They  are  able  and  complete  in  all  Unitarian  learning,  and  in  the 
clear  order  and  arrangement  of  the  arguments  and  the  appropri- 
ateness of  the  style  give  proof  that  she  had  thoroughly  accom- 
plished herself  as  a  writer.  In  execution  they  answer  exactly  to 
what  the  French  call  des  travaux  admirables  et  serieux.  They 
are  not  works  of  experience,  but  beautified  traditions,  such  as 
youthful  piety  receives  unquestioning  from  the  beloved  elders, 
and  delights  to  worship  and  adorn.  One  fruit  of  her  own 
thoughts,  however,  as  well  as  the  heartfelt  respect  for  the  right 
of  opinion,  is  to  be  seen  in  them  all,  — that  doctrine  of  necessity, 
predestination,  election,  or  by  whatever  name  men  call  it,  whose 
inconsistency  with  other  parts  of  Unitarianism  seems  to  have 
struck  neither  herself,  her  judges,  nor  the  denomination  at  large. 
The  tone  and  handling  of  these  three  subjects  are  so  excellent  as 
to  take  attention  from  the  anatomy  and  the  perspective.  They 
were  immediately  translated  into  French  and  Spanish,  and  the 
Catholic  one  was  circulated  on  the  Continent.    Whether  or  not 


WOMANHOOD. 


179 


it  made  converts  there  I  cannot  learn.  She  herself  seems  to  sup- 
pose not.  But  it  certainly  must  have  struck  strangely  on  the 
ears  of  the  persecuted  English  Catholics  of  that  time  to  be  ad- 
dressed as  "  our  Roman  Catholic  brethren."  This  truly  catholic 
tone  subjected  her  afterwards  to  insult  from  one  of  the  Anglican 
Church  who  had  long  lost  all  notion  of  the  meaning  either  of 
brotherhood  or  protest. 

It  was  ever  one  of  Harriet  Marti neau's  strongest  characteristics 
that  nothing  in  life  came  to  her  void  or  left  her  profitless.  This 
seems  to  have  been  the  compensation  of  her  great  misfortune  of 
deafness,  which,  in  conjunction  with  her  actual  faculties,  com- 
pelled so  much  closer  observation  and  reflection  than  others 
exercise.  It  was  at  this  period  that  the  distinguished  Hindoo 
Rammohun  Roy  visited  England ;  and  I  gather  from  her  corre- 
spondence of  this  date  that  his  character,  appearance,  and,  above 
all,  the  manner  of  his  reception,  afforded  a  lesson  soon  to  be  of 
essential  service  to  her.  She  honoured  in  him  the  high  qualities 
of  the  man,  set  off  to  advantage  by  his  high  position,  and  was 
astonished  to  see  persons  striving  selfishly  to  use  his  celebrity  for 
their  own  illustration  ;  and  she  was  thus  prepared  to  rate  at  its 
true  value  much  of  the  general  homage  that  waits  on  greatness. 

She  was  now  to  share  with  the  great  Hindoo  convert  the 
regards  of  the  English  Unitarian  world.  She  writes  thus  to 
Norwich  on  the  occasion.  The  letter  begins  with  a  preface  from 
her  cousin,  certifying  to  her  health,  and  prudence  in  exertion. 

London,  Wednesday  morning. 
There,  dear  mother  !  will  this  do  ?  I  thank  you  a  thousand 
times  for  your  friendly  and  tender  warning,  but  I  do  assure  you  that 
I  am  in  perfect  health.  I  have  been  resting  at  Maidstone,  and  I  fur- 
ther assure  you  that  I  know  too  well  what  it  is  to  want  health,  to 
venture  to  trifle  with  the  very  unusual  portion  now  granted  to  my- 
self. On  Nelly's  affairs  I  will  write  when  I  have  seen  her.  In  the 
mean  time,  this  glorious  meeting  to-day  is  engrossing  all  our  thoughts. 
We  had  such  a  crowd  this  morning,  and  are  expecting  a  greater  to- 
night !  The  Rajah  was  there.  Little  as  I  had  reckoned  on  the  mere 
sight  of  him,  I  shall  never  forget  it.  Never  did  I  see  any  thing  so 
touching.    He  looks  spirit-broken  and  wasted  by  illness.    I  believe 


180 


MEMORIALS. 


his  domestic  troubles  have  been  very  severe.  So  melting  an  expres- 
sion of  meek  suffering  was  never  seen.  I  could  not  have  pressed 
upon  him  for  an  introduction,  as  a  hundred  ladies  did.  I  had  rather 
wait  and  see  him  in  peace  and  quietness.  The  people  actually  stood 
on  the  benches  to  catch  a  glimpse  of  him.  What  a  moment  it  was 
to  me,  when  the  most  beautiful  of  the  hymn-tunes  was  being  sung, 
when  the  Rajah  was  bending  his  head  on  his  breast,  and  my  old 
friend  Dr.  Carpenter  was  sitting  next  him  !  With  these  feelings 
mingled  some  for  myself,  for  I  had  just  heard  that  the  committee  had 
talked  of  inserting  my  name  in  the  report,  and  had  determined  that 
the  winning  of  the  prizes  was  too  remarkable  and  honourable  an 
achievement  to  be  passed  over  in  silence,  and  that  they  had  jokingly 
said  they  should  put  the  Rajah  on  one  side  of  the  chair  and  me  on 
the  other.  I  was  afraid  I  must  stay  away  to-night,  but  my  friends 
say  it  would  be  a  sad  pity  to  lose  such  a  meeting.  How  little 
could  I  have  imagined,  but  lately,  that  I  should  be  publicly  noticed 
as  the  benefactor  and  advocate  of  a  cause  which  1  have  always  had  at 
heart,  but  scarcely  hoped  to  aid  !  The  result  to-morrow.  I  begin  to 
be  afraid  that  dear  Nelly  *  will  not  come.  It  is  scarcely  to  be  ex- 
pected, but  I  do  especially  wish  it. 

Wednesday  night. 

And  now  to  my  narrative  again,  dear  mother.  I  went  very  early, 
and  as  I  left  the  gate  gave  a  sigh  to  poor  Ellen,  who,  I  thought,  could 
not  be  coming  ;  and  it  was  easy  to  see  that  this  meeting  would  be 
infinitely  grander  than  all  former  meetings.  There  was  a  crowd 
about  the  unopened  doors  when  I  arrived,  and  when  we  got  in,  Mr. 
Fox,  who  stood  aloft  on  the  platform,  directed  me  to  the  corner  of  a 
quiet  pew.  In  a  very  few  minutes  the  whole  place,  except  the  plat- 
form and  the  reporter's  seat,  was  filled  to  overflowing.  The  windows, 
even,  were  crowded.  Then  Mr.  Mardon  t  came  to  be  introduced  and 
make  his  obeisance  about  the  essays.  His  wife  sat  beside  me  and 
pointed  people  out  whom  I  did  not  know.  Mr.  Aspland  made  a 
capital  chairman.  After  the  money-matters  had  been  discussed, 
the  report  was  read  by  Mr.  Mardon,  who  stood  on  my  side,  so 
that  I  heard  every  word.  My  corner  was  so  quiet  that  I  thought 
nobody  saw  me  ;  but  I  was  mistaken,  for  when,  after  a  pause  in  the 
midst  of  the  book  part,  Mr.  Mardon  cast  an  instantaneous  glance 
at  me  from  the  corner  of  his  eye,  I  saw  them  all  on  the  platform 
turn  half  round  and  away  again,  to  see  whether  I  was  attending. 

*  Her  youngest  and  favourite  sister. 

t  Rev.  Benjamin  Mardon,  Secretary  of  the  Unitarian  Association. 


WOMANHOOD. 


181 


Then  followed  this,  which  Ellen  thinks  is  nearly  word  for  word  as 
delivered. 

"  It  will  be  remembered  that  three  premiums  were  offered  last 
year  for  the  best  essays  whose  purpose  should  be  the  introduction 
and  promotion  of  our  faith  among  Catholics,  Jews,  and  Mahome- 
tans. The  first  of  these  prize  essays  was  printed  some  months 
ago  under  the  title  of  '  Essential  Faith  of  the  Universal  Church.' 
The  other  two  have  been  so  recently  adjudged,  that  your  committed 
must  leave  to  their  successors  the  work  of  printing  and  publishing, 
and  of  causing  translations  of  them  to  be  prepared  in  the  various 
European  languages  in  which  it  is  intended  they  should  be  circulated. 
For  the  purpose  of  fulfilling  to  the  utmost  the  intentions  of  their 
predecessors,  your  committee  appointed  three  distinct  committees  for 
this  special  purpose,  three  judges  being  provided  in  each  department. 
The  result  is,  that  after  the  strictest  and  most  impartial  investigation 
the  premiums  are  all  awarded  to  the  same  individual.  It  cannot  but 
be  thought  most  honourable  to  the  successful  competitor,  Miss  Har- 
riet Martineau  of  Norwich,  that  her  compositions  have  united  all 
suffrages." 

Then  came  a  round  of  loud  applause.  I  was  glad  enough  when 
Mr.  Mardon  went  on  to  other  things.  When  all  the  business  was 
discussed,  and  two  or  three  of  the  resolutions,  a  buzz  announced  that 
the  Rajah  was  coming.  He  seemed  very  feeble,  and  was  quite  per- 
plexed to  know  what  the  clapping  and  cheering  meant,  and  very  sim- 
ply asked  Mr.  Aspland.  He  does  not  object  to  it,  however.  Then 
Bowring  made  a  capital  speech  about  him.  I  wonder  he  could 
say  so  much  before  his  face,  but  it  really  was  beautiful,  particularly 
the  parallel  between  the  Rajah  and  Peter  the  Great.  There  is  some- 
thing about  Rammohun  Roy  that  melts  one  irresistibly,  and  the  more, 
the  more  one  looks  at  him.  He  spoke  briefly  on  account  of  his  chest, 
and  was  heard  only  by  a  few.  Two  sentences,  however,  reached  the 
ears  and  hearts  of  all.  "  I  have  done  nothing  to  cause  all  this,  — 
nothing  for  your  Association.  What  I  have  studied  in  the  Gospels  was 
for  my  own  salvation.  I  have  done  nothing  for  you."  His  upward 
look  at  Mr.  Aspland,  the  meek  expression  of  his  countenance,  his 
majestic  bending  figure,  and  the  peculiarities  of  complexion  and  cos- 
tume, made  it  such  a  picture  as  I  shall  never  again  behold.  The 
enthusiasm  was  beautiful  ;  and  when  the  chairman  requested  assent 
to  the  resolution  of  welcome  to  the  illustrious  stranger  by  rising 
instead  of  the  usual  method,  the  instantaneous  compliance  was  start- 
ling.   The  Rajah  may  well  "  never  forget  it  till  his  latest  breath,"  as 


182 


MEMORIALS. 


he  says.  After  the  resolution  had  been  unanimously  carried,  the 
place  suddenly  thinned  almost  to  emptiness.  It  was  over  by  a  quar- 
ter past  ten,  and  all  agree  that  such  a  meeting  was  never  before  held. 
The  Rajah  left  (through  inability  to  remain)  about  an  hour  and  a 
half  after  he  came  in.  My  party  were  in  the  gallery,  and  when  I 
joined  them  at  the  foot  of  the  stairs,  I  was  delighted  to  see  Ellen  with 
them.  She  had  set  off  in  bare  time,  put  herself  into  an  omnibus,  and 
arrived  just  before  the  business  began.  She  had  leave  of  absence  till 
breakfast-time,  so  we  talked  over  all  affairs  during  the  late  night  and 
early  morning. 

She  writes  again  about  the  Eajah  :  — 

He  always  leads  the  conversation,  and  expects  others  to  follow  ; 
and  he  talks  to  people  in  their  own  way  or  what  he  thinks  such,  with 
exquisite  politeness,  and  a  knowledge  which  appears  almost  miracu- 
lous. With  all  this  cultivation,  the  most  remarkable  thing  about 
him,  his  finest  characteristic,  is  his  intensity  of  feeling.  Nothing  sur- 
prises me  more  than  the  notions  of  some  folks  at  a  distance  who  seem 
to  think  the  Unitarians  must  all  be  on  intimate  terms  with  him  ;  or 
that  we  may  be  kind  to  him  as  we  might  to  refugees.  They  forget 
that  he  is,  by  rank,  a  companion  of  our  Royal  Dukes,  if  they  had  the 

minds  of  a  Brougham  Feeling  as  I  do  about  him,  I  was  better 

pleased  to  hear  of  his  advancing  to  sweeten  Mr.  Fox's  coffee  on  Sat- 
urday, than  of  any  of  his  sayings  about  us  He  looks  as  if  he 

had  gone  the  round  of  human  griefs,  to  perfect  in  himself  the  dignity 
of  meekness. 

I  am  sure  this  letter,  in  spite  of  the  egotism,  will  give  you  great 
pleasure.  I  hope  to  become  more  steadily  and  reasonably  industrious 
in  proportion  to  my  encouragements  ;  and  having  been  granted  the 
honor  of  spreading  my  favourite  principles  in  so  many  strange  lands, 
to  cherish  them  up  into  their  full  perfection  in  my  own  spirit.  How 
few  women  have  had  so  extraordinary  a  stimulus  ! 

Farewell,  dearest  mother. 

Ever  yours  most  affectionately, 

HARRIET  MARTI NEAU. 

Few  women  indeed  !  This  was  the  full,  complete  measure  of 
sectarian  and  provincial  fame,  —  won  at  the  first  grasp.  Here  was 
the  door  flung  wide  open  to  that  tempting  missionary  ground  where 
the  youthful  imagination  loves  to  revel.  The  chosen  expositor 
of  the  faith  to  foreign  lands,  the  main  pillar  of  its  periodical 


WOMANHOOD. 


183 


literature  at  home,  the  leader  of  its  devotions  in  song  and 
prayer,  —  where  she  began,  aged  doctors  of  divinity  are  content 
to  utter  their  nunc  dimittis.  Why  could  not  she  have  sat  down 
with  Carpenter  and  Chalmers  and  Eowland  Hill  and  Robert 
Hall,  a  crowned  ruler  in  her  denominational  realm?  I  find 
nothing  among  her  papers  of  this  date  foreshadowing  any  higher 
destiny.  She  would  then  have  avoided  life,  and  enjoyed  an 
industrious  repose ;  escaped  the  pain  of  that  growth  that  bursts 
the  bonds  of  family  traditions  and  fraternal  dictation,  the  hold  of 
friendship  and  the  habits  of  thought  induced  by  society.  There 
seems  evidence  to  show  that  she  had  very  nearly  begun  her 
work  for  the  world  in  the  cramped  church-fashion  that  can 
reduce  the  strongest  powers  to  its  own  narrowness.  To  one 
sect  it  would  hardly  have  been  possible  to  confine  her ;  but  to  all 
dissenting  ones,  she  might  have  been  an  oracle,  if  not  indeed 
a  centre  of  union.  About  this  time  she  began  to  be  sought  by 
"  highly  evangelical  "  and  "  very  superior "  men.  Students  of 
Oriental  literature,  first  attracted  by  the  "Traditions  of  Palestine," 
were  now  more  deeply  interested  by  the  essays.  Her  "para- 
bles," "  tales,"  and  "  musings  "  were  cited  by  divines  as  ministra- 
tions of  imagination  to  the  cause  of  religion.  These  were  the 
days  when  the  artificial  method  of  sermonizing  seemed  to  her  the 
most  natural  and  effectual  mode  of  approach  to  the  minds  of  edu- 
cated persons ;  and  when  she  could  utter  exclamations  of  delight 
at  fanciful  dogmatism.  "  0  this  sermon  !  "  she  says  of  one  she 
was  so  fortunately  placed  as  to  be  able  to  hear.  "  The  text  was, 
'  He  hath  made  every  thing  beautiful  in  its  time,'  and  after  the 
adaptations  in  the  beautiful  objects  of  nature  were  pointed  out,  we 
had  the  whole  survey  of  all  the  principal  religions  in  the  world, 
with  suggestions  that  each  was  beautiful  in  its  time,  and  that  there 
is  one  whose  time  of  ceasing  to  be  beautiful  can  never  arrive." 
"  I  was  much  struck  with  J.  J.  Tayler's  *  Evidences  of  the  Resur- 
rection.' "  But  Biblical  science  soon  took  the  lead  of  Biblical 
literature,  and  she  now  thought  of  preparing  a  work  on  the 
natural  history  of  the  Bible  ;  and  meeting  the  excellent  Dr. 
Stokes,  who  had  given  up  a  professorship  for  conscience'  sake, 
he  offered  to  place  at  her  disposal  his  valuable  body  of  manu- 


184 


MEMORIALS. 


script  notes  on  the  subject.  Mr.  Kenrick,  too,  "  has  sent  nie 
Jahn's  Biblical  Archaeology,  from  the  York  library,  to  keep 
till  the  close  of  the  vacation.  It  would  cost  three  guineas  ; 
and,  necessary  and  valuable  as  it  is,  I  could  not  afford  that. 
Little  did  I  think  to  make  such  a  use  of  German  already. 
I  am  busy  now,  reading  the  Bible  through  in  course  for  my 
work." 

Singularly  enough,  with  these  alternate  workings  of  fancy  and 
matter-of-fact  within  their  ordinary  range,  comes  a  single  glance 
into  the  less  frequented  region  of  thought  which  became  long  after- 
wards so  delightful  to  her.  "In  conversation  with  Mr.  Fox  he 
spoke  to  me  of  his  illnesses,  and  their  effect  on  the  nerves  and  on 
the  mind.  It  is  well  worth  while  for  philosophers  to  be  ill,  that 
we  may  have  the  benefit  of  their  observations."  In  a  similar 
spirit  was  written  her  review  of  Major  Carmichael's  "  Physical 
Considerations  connected  with  Man's  Ultimate  Destination."  It 
is  the  forerunner  of  the  philosophical  studies  of  her  after  years. 
It  is  a  stretching  after  proof  on  subjects  where  assumption  had 
been  deemed  sufficient,  and  will  be  extremely  interesting  to  all 
who  are  curious  to  see  the  first  workings  of  a  great  mind  in 
search  of  reality  below  the  traditional  limits.  This  paper  was 
afterwards  read  with  great  interest  in  America,  and  was  much 
sought  for  at  the  time  in  England.  A  High-Church  clergyman 
immediately  ordered  the  "Monthly  Eepository,"  and  employed 
another,  his  friend,  to  find  out  the  author.  This  latter  was  so 
much  struck  by  the  article  that  he  thanked  Miss  Martineau  in 
the  church  porch,  where  they  first  met,  for  writing  it.  Such 
things  were  the  beginnings  of  the  discontent  springing  up  in 
England  with  the  diseased  ghostly  element  in  religion. 

The  essays,  meanwhile,  were  at  work,  and  she  writes  thus  to 
her  mother  in  relation  to  the  work  they  did. 

August  28,  1831. 

"  0  my  mother,  one  of  the  greatest  joys  I  have  in  success  is  in  your 
share  of  my  pleasure  and  gratitude.  And  now  I  have  something  to 
tell  you  which  far  exceeds  all  I  have  had  to  relate.  I  was  not  sure  of 
all  the  facts  till  this  hour,  or  I  should  have  told  you  before  ;  and  even 
now  I  am  bound  not  to  tell  names  at  present.    A  Catholic  priest,  a 


WOMANHOOD. 


185 


young,  talented,  educated  man,  has  been  converted  by  my  tract,  and  has 
nobly  renounced  his  office  and  all  his  expectations,  and  avowed  him- 
self a  Unitarian.  He  has  now  but  £  5  in  the  world,  and  no  prospect. 
His  case  is  under  the  consideration  of  the  Unitarian  committees  in 
London  and  here.  They  will  probably  send  him  to  York  for  two 
years,  to  qualify  him  for  our  ministry  ;  but  this  is  uncertain,  and  not 
to  be  repeated,  therefore.  He  belongs  to  a  large  city,  where  he  is 
well  known,  and  where  his  conversion,  when  fully  understood,  may 
produce  a  great  effect,  and  probably  emulation  of  his  conscientious- 
ness. I  cannot  describe  what  I  feel  when  I  read  the  letter  which  says 
that  this  is  all  true,  and  that  the  essay  is  the  cause  of  it  all." 

One  cannot  help  remarking  the  main  elements  of  this  joy  over 
her  convert  to  Unitarianism.  It  was  the  noble  conscientious- 
ness, the  resistance  of  authority,  the  renunciation  of  office  and 
expectations  by  one  who  had  not  £  5  in  the  world.  Righteous- 
ness  was  stronger  in  her  soul  than  sect.  But  one  is  obliged  to 
admit  that,  in  ceasing  to  be  a  Unitarian,  she  burst  as  strong  a  tie 
of  denominational  consideration,  sectarian  attachment,  and  theo- 
logical training  as  ever  held  a  confessor  to  the  shrine  of  his 
faith. 

Why,  why  could  she  not  be  content  to  let  her  spirit  sleep 
upon  her  fame,  and  live  on,  —  half  fancifully,  half  studiously,  — 
an  imitation  life,  such  as  would  have  sent  her  down  to  her  grave 
crowned  with  Unitarian  blessings,  —  a  mother  in  the  little  Israel 
into  which  she  was  born]  Why  could  she  not  have  taken 
warning  from  that  "  look  of  one  who  had  gone  the  round  of 
human  griefs,"  that  sunk  so  deep  into  her  heart  from  the  coun- 
tenance of  Eammohun  Roy, — to  escape  the  bitterest  grief  of  all, 
as  well  as  to  distrust  the  noisiest  praise  1 

It  could  not  be  ;  for  real  life  now  opened  before  her,  strenuous 
and  grand.  And,  happily  for  the  world,  she  shrunk  from  none 
of  its  high  obligations. 


FAME. 


"  Fame  is  the  spur  that  the  clear  spirit  doth  raise 
(That  last  infirmity  of  noble  mind) 
To  scorn  delights  and  live  laborious  days. 

Fame  is  no  plant  that  grows  on  mortal  soil, 

Nor  in  the  glistening  foil 

Set  off  to  the  world,  nor  in  broad  rumour  lies." 

Milton. 

u  The  dignity  of  this  end  (of  endowment  of  man's  life  with  new  commodi- 
ties) appeareth  by  the  estimation  that  antiquity  made  of  such  as  guided  there- 
unto." —  Bacon. 

1 '  They  that  be  wise  shall  shine  as  the  brightness  of  the  firmament ;  and  they 
that  turn  many  to  righteousness  as  the  stars,  for  ever  and  ever." 

Prophecy  of  Daniel. 

And  how  did  life  present  itself  to  the  young  lady  of  twenty- 
eight,  so  quick  to  see  and  feel,  so  clear  to  think,  so  sound  to 
judge,  so  skilled  to  express,  thus  suddenly  emancipated  by 
acclamation,  and  freed,  so  to  speak,  by  imposition  of  hands,  from 
the  family  authority  to  which  her  strong  affections  always  dis- 
posed her  too  readily  to  yield  ]  We  ought  now  to  call  to  mind 
the  daily  events  which  she  had  been  reading  from  childhood 
up,  in  the  distressed  looks  of  the  people  in  the  streets,  in  her 
father's  anxious  face  at  home,  in  the  evening  sky  lighted  up  by 
riot  and  rick-burning,  as  well  as  in  the  parliamentary  and  police 
reports  and  leading  articles  of  the  "  Globe  "  newspaper. 

Only  a  hand's  breadth  before  and  after,  like  the  section  of  a 
battle-field  seen  through  a  mountain  rift,  is  allowed  by  biograph- 
ical limitations  to  the  eye  that  follows  through  the  fight  the 
course  of  one  illustrious  life  :  yet  the  narrow  opening  is  sufficient 


188 


MEMORIALS. 


for  the  same  vision  of  a  land  in  agony,  knowing  neither  why  nor 
wherefore,  that  set  her  strong,  statesman-like  mind  and  feeling 
heart  at  work  to  find  the  cause  and  the  remedy.  The  sight  was 
terrible  indeed.  To  French  statesmen  and  historians  it  then 
seemed  as  if  England  could  not  much  longer  hold  together  as  a 
nation.  To  the  few  American  observers  who  better  knew  the 
quality  of  the  blood  themselves  had  sprung  from,  the  whole 
condition-of- England  question  was  a  frightful  enigma.  There 
were  bloodshed  and  famine  in  the  East  Indies,  and  slavery  in 
the  West.  There  were  twenty-five  millions  of  people  shut  up 
to  starve  in  the  small  area  of  the  British  Isles,  exhausted  by 
war,  and  taxed  up  to  the  war-point  after  the  peace,  in  ways  so 
distressing  and  vexatious  as  to  be  almbst  past  belief.  They  were 
dying  for  want  of  bread,  while  hindered  alike  from  producing 
and  importing  grain,  as  well  as  from  going  to  live  where  it  grew. 
The  straitened  manufacturers  were  compelled  to  witness  the  de- 
struction of  their  property  by  the  starving  workmen,  whenever 
they  attempted  to  economize  by  means  of  machinery.  Enterpris- 
ing merit  was  condemned  to  the  lifelong  heart-sickness  of  hope 
deferred,  by  that  prestige  of  rank  which  enabled  the  great  fami- 
lies to  appoint  their  own  members,  dependants,  and  supporters 
to  the  posts  of  profit  and  honour.  Class  wrought  against  class, 
and  every  man's  hand  was  against  his  brother.  Coast-guard  and 
smuggler,  parson  and  parishioner,  press-gang  and  peasant,  land- 
lord, tenant,  and  poacher,  rioter,  rick-burner,  and  cabinet  minister, 
soldiery  and  mob,  chill  by  turns  with  terror  or  hot  with  the 
sense  of  wrong,  stood  ready  to  clutch  each  other  by  the  throat. 
Men  in  power  saw  no  cure  but  in  killing,  and  they  caused  the 
masses,  driven  into  the  streets  by  ignorance,  starvation,  and 
despair,  to  be  fired  upon  where  they  stood  for  sedition,  or  de- 
stroyed individually  by  legal  process  for  crime.  The  hangman 
had  a  fearful  work  to  do ;  for  men  were  put  to  death  in  rows  at 
Newgate  and  all  over  the  kingdom  for  five-shilling  crimes  com- 
mitted to  sustain  life.  A  half-naked  youth  might  be  taken  to 
the  gallows  for  stealing  a  strip  of  cloth  from  the  bleaching- 
ground.  The  only  remedy  in  use  besides  the  gallows  and  the 
bayonet  was  the  old  poor-law  of  Elizabeth's  time,  so  unequal  to 


FAME. 


189 


the  case  of  the  nineteenth  century  that  it  operated  as  a  millstone 
round  the  necks  of  the  virtuous  and  industrious,  and  as  a  bounty 
on  idleness  and  crime.  England  claimed  to  be  a  Christian  na- 
tion, but  Catholic,  Churchman,  and  Dissenter  each  denied  the 
other  the  name ;  and  Paul's  description  of  Pagans  applied  at  this 
time  to  them  all,  —  "  hateful,  and  hating  one  another." 

In  the  midst  of  all  this  disorder  government  itself  was  com- 
ing to  be  considered  a  curse  by  the  bulk  of  the  people ;  for  class- 
legislation  had  caused  the  poor  —  the  many  —  and  the  rich  — 
the  few  —  to  consider  each  other  as  natural  enemies.  What 
wonder,  amid  the  sharp  fermenting  of  such  a  state  of  mutual 
misapprehension,  that  Treasury,  Council,  and  Chancellor,  Privy 
Seal,  Admiralty,  and  Exchequer,  Boards  of  Trade  and  Control, 
and  all  the  "  departments,"  should  have  been  at  their  wits'  end, 
and  all  sense  of  mutual  obligation  between  them  and  the  people 
have  been  seen  melting  away  1 

In  such  a  crisis  it  was  that  Harriet  Martineau  set  herself  to 
consider  the  cause.  She  found  it  in  the  utter  ignorance  of  the 
highest  and  the  lowest  classes,  and  the  half-informed  apathy  of 
the  middle  one,  in  combination  with  the  selfishness  of  all.  And 
why  might  not  all  be  led  to  feel  for  each  other  as  brothers,  and 
to  perceive  the  universal  applicability  of  the  principles  she  had 
from  childhood  been  studying?  She  was  sure  of  their  power, 
and  felt  the  wisdom  and  greatness  of  the  minds  that  had  dis- 
covered them.  She  would  assail  the  general  prejudice  against 
political  economy  and  its  sages  which  stigmatized  both  as  par- 
tial, hard,  and  cruel.  She  would  appeal  to  that  appreciation  of 
the  noble,  the  heroic,  and  the  holy,  beating  so  high  in  her  own 
breast,  which  she  felt  sure  had  not  yet  died  out  of  the  British 
heart.  How  safe  and  happy  might  the  nation  become,  if  it  could 
once  be  made  to  know  and  adopt  the  course  and  the  principles 
so  exactly  fitted  to  that  time  and  that  people !  They  would 
secure  the  welfare  of  all ;  and  to  all  she  therefore  addressed  her- 
self, in  the  thirty-four  little  volumes  of  "  Illustrations  of  Political 
Economy,"  which  she  sent  to  the  press  monthly  during  the 
ensuing  two  years  and  a  half.  She  has  told  us  the  circum- 
stances of  their  issue,  and  we  have  seen  how  her  resolute  despair 


190 


MEMORIALS. 


conquered  every  public  and  private  obstacle,  as  she  undertook 
to  bridge  the  gulf  of  ignorance  and  class  exclusiveness  which 
kept  Englishmen  at  enmity,  and  to  show  them  how  all  things 
contributing  to  the  support  and  enjoyment  of  life  might  be  pro- 
duced and  conveyed  to  all.  "  The  people  want  this  work,  and 
they  shall  have  it ! "  she  said,  at  the  darkest  hour  of  her  under- 
taking, before  the  attainment  of  the  means.  We  know  from 
the  Autobiography  *  what  was  in  her  heart  at  the  time.  Let  us 
see  if  there  are  tears  in  the  tone  that  reached  the  public  ear,  out 
of  such  depths  of  trial  and  difficulty. 

The  Preface  to  the  "Illustrations"  that  tells  us  is  eighteen 
pages  long,  and  so  close-linked  in  statement  and  reasoning  that 
it  can  with  difficulty  be  divided  or  shortened.  It  declares  the 
everlasting  truth  on  the  chosen  subject.  A  short  extract  will 
show  the  tone  and  temper  of  the  mind  that,  in  view  of  the 
darkness  of  the  past,  was  determined  to  brighten  the  future. 

"  '  Example  is  better  than  precept.'  We  take  this  proverb  as  the 
motto  of  our  design.  We  declare  frankly  that  our  object  is  to  teach 
political  economy  ;  and  that  we  have  chosen  this  [narrative-jrictorial] 
method,  not  only  because  it  is  new,  not  only  because  it  is  enter- 
taining, but  because  we  think  it  the  most  faithful  and  the  most  com- 
plete ;  .  .  .  .  and  when  we  dedicate  our  series  to  all  to  whom  it  may 
be  of  use,  we  conceive  that  we  are  addressing  many  of  every  class.  To 
address  it  to  all  whom  it  may  concern  would  be  the  same  thing  as 
appealing  to  the  total  population  of  the  empire. 

"  13  there  any  one  breathing  to  whom  it  is  of  no  concern  whether 
the  production  of  food  and  clothing  and  the  million  articles  of  human 
consumption  goes  on  or  ceases  ?  whether  that  production  is  propor- 
tioned to  those  who  live  ?  whether  all  obtain  a  fair  proportion  1  Is 
there  any  one  living  to  whom  it  matters  not  whether  the  improvement 
of  the  temporal  condition  of  the  race  shall  go  on,  or  whether  it  shall 
relapse  into  barbarism  ?  Whether  the  supports  of  life,  the  comforts 
of  home,  and  the  pleasures  of  society  shall  become  more  scanty  or 
more  abundant  ?  Whether  there  shall  be  increased  facilities  for  the 
attainment  of  intellectual  good,  or  whether  the  old  times  of  slavery 
and  hardship  shall  return  ?  Is  any  one  indifferent  whether  famine 
stalks  through  the  land,  laying  low  the  helpless  and  humbling  the 

*  Vol.  I.  p.  100. 


FAME. 


191 


proud  ;  or  whether,  by  a  wise  policy,  the  nations  of  the  earth  benefit 
one  another,  and  secure  peace  and  abundance  at  home,  by  an  ex- 
change of  advantages  abroad  ?  Is  there  any  one  living,  in  short,  to 
whom  it  matters  not  whether  the  aggregate  of  human  life  is  cheerful 
and  virtuous,  or  mournful  and  depraved  ?  The  question  comes  to 
this  :  for  none  will  doubt  whether  a  perpetuity  of  ease  or  hardship  is 
the  more  favourable  to  virtue.  If  it  concerns  rulers  that  their  meas- 
ures should  be  wise,  if  it  concerns  the  wealthy  that  their  property 
should  be  secure,  the  middling  classes  that  their  industry  should  be 
rewarded,  the  poor  that  their  hardships  should  be  redressed,  it  con- 
cerns all  that  political  economy  should  be  understood.  If  it  concerns 
all  that  the  advantages  of  a  social  state  should  be  preserved  and  im- 
proved, it  concerns  them  likewise  that  political  economy  should  be 
understood  by  all." 

The  effect  was  instantaneous.  The  wise  and  benevolent  few 
felt  that  they  were  comprehended  and  appreciated  by  a  master 
spirit.  Political  leaders  grasped  the  helm  of  state  with  a  firmer 
hand.  Leaders  of  parties  struggled  to  get  possession  of  the  new 
influence.  The  poor,  selfish  little  publisher  felt  his  bark  float, 
and  laughed  for  joy  that  from  the  king  to  the  cobbler  every  body 
was  buying  the  Series.  The  reviewers  read  up  Smith,  Malthus, 
Mill,  and  Eicardo,  and  qualified  to  the  best  of  their  ability  to 
help  or  hinder,  as  their  respective  party  badges  required.  The 
little-great  strove  to  illustrate  themselves  by  the  reflected  light 
of  the  famous  author  of  the  "Illustrations."  The  really  great 
and  good  gathered  round  the  new  luminary,  rejoicing  in  its 
radiance  and  its  warmth.  Half  the  world  read  these  books 
merely  as  novels  (as,  indeed,  they  were,  and  of  the  rarest  origi- 
nality and  merit) ;  and  while  statesmen  and  members  of  Parlia- 
ment hoped  readers  would  not  lose  sight  of  the  political  problem 
in  the  charm  of  the  characters,  the  witty  and  the  frivolous 
boasted  to  each  other  that,  be  she  clever  as  she  might,  she  could 
not  sift  in  the  science  so  cunningly  as  they  could  contrive  to 
skip  all  but  the  story.  Publishers  in  other  lands  and  languages 
sent  to  demand  biographical  notices  to  prefix  to  their  editions, 
one  of  which  came  back  to  the  author  in  an  absolutely  unknown 
tongue.   Newspapers  at  home  gave  her  pedigree,  and  newspapers 


192 


MEMORIALS. 


abroad  her  history.  Doubts  were  not  unfrequently  expressed 
as  to  the  real  authorship  of  the  series ;  and  it  was  always  attrib- 
uted to  some  leading  statesman  of  the  time,  being  thought  far 
beyond  the  political  ability,  not  merely  of  a  woman,  but  of 
any  except  a  great  legislator.  The  editorial  world  fell  to  advis- 
ing, in  common  with  the  moral  world  and  the  religious  world ; 
all  seeming  to  feel  personally  responsible,  lest  so  great  a  genius 
should  go  wrong  for  lack  of  counsel.  Half  the  gossiping  world 
gave  her  in  marriage  to  the  other  half.  Great  historians,  divines, 
and  church  dignitaries  made  her  the  homage  of  their  works  and 
sought  the  honour  of  her  acquaintance.  She  was  thanked  in 
every  possible  form,  publicly  and  privately,  by  every  body  who 
was  the  better  for  her  work  of  justice  and  mercy.  Compli- 
mentary letters  came  from  all  quarters  like  a  storm  of  snow. 
These  she  uniformly  destroyed,  except  when  it  was  necessary 
to  preserve  them  on  account  of  their  connection  with  moral 
business  and  legislation.  Some  such  remain,  showing  how  deep 
and  decisive  was  the  effect  she  produced  on  the  minds  that  led 
the  political  and  literary  life  of  the  time. 

The  public  at  large  soon  knew  its  favourite  by  sight,  and  she 
could  not  walk  in  public  places  without  being  followed  by  a 
deeply  interested  crowd.  It  is,  perhaps,  the  strongest  charac- 
teristic of  her  works,  —  one  distinguishing  every  word  she  has 
since  written,  —  that,  as  it  came,  full  strength,  from  the  depths 
of  a  heart  filled  with  "  the  spirit  of  love  and  of  power  and  of  a 
sound  mind,"  so  it  went  as  deeply  home  to  every  reader's  bosom. 
This  sort  of  public  homage  was  painful  to  one  so  constitutionally 
timid  and  retiring.  Sometimes,  when  it  drew  the  curious  and 
the  self-seeking  into  her  train,  it  gave  rise  to  comic  incidents  for 
which  she  was  not  responsible.  The  unavoidable  draught  on 
her  time  and  strength  became  so  great  that  it  was  necessary,  at 
length,  to  avoid  the  mere  idlers  who  sought  a  selfish  gratifica- 
tion by  obtaining  an  introduction.  A  Mr.  Burke  begged  to  be 
presented  to  her.  "What  is  your  qualification  1 "  asked  the 
quick-witted  friend  to  whom  he  proposed  it.  "  Sir  !  "  "  I 
mean  what  purpose  have  you  to  answer  ?  Have  you  any  thing 
to  tell  her  1  or  do  you  want  to  know  any  thing  from  her  ]  Only 


FAME. 


193 


give  me  your  qualification."  "  I  know  no  better  than  that  I  am 
the  last  descendant  of  Edmund  Burke."  "  That  won't  do.  That 
is  not  in  Miss  Martineau's  way.  She  has  to  talk  to  far  too 
many  people  already,  with  a  better  title  than  that.  I  cannot 
introduce  you." 

So  great  a  personal  popularity  is  ever  a  severe  trial  of  the 
strength  and  of  the  character ;  but  hers  bore  a  threefold  strain 
uninjured.  She  was  novelist,  political  economist,  and  philan- 
thropist in  one,  and  constantly  receiving  admiration  in  each 
capacity.  It  was  perpetually  said  of  her,  not  by  fools,  but  by 
wise  men,  that  she  was  the  first  woman  of  the  age.  By  those 
who  are  neither  fools  nor  wise,  the  people  at  large,  she  was 
equally  appreciated.  Dean  Milman  could  have  told  an  amusing 
instance  of  it;  and  how  he  was  cheered  at  a  sad  moment  by 
the  mirthfulness  with  which  she  related  to  him,  at  a  dinner  at 
Mr.  Kogers's,  when  the  conversation  drew  it  from  her,  —  the 
amusement  she  had  had  from  a  letter  received  by  that  day's 
post.  It  was  scribbled  all  over,  in  the  way  that  lost  letters  are. 
It  was  addressed  to  "  The  Queen  of  Modern  Philanthropists  " ; 
and  the  post-office  had  put  in  the  corner,  "Try  Miss  Marti- 
neau."  It  reached  her  in  Fludyer  Street;  and  one  could  set 
Dean  Milman  laughing  at  any  time  with,  "Try  Miss  Marti- 
neau." 

Such  is  fame  in  one  of  its  aspects.  A  look  into  her  letter-bag 
on  any  single  morning  of  her  London  life  will  tell  us  something 
of  its  toils  and  temptations,  and  give  us  the  pungent  aroma  of 
the  mingled  incense,  ordinarily  so  intoxicating  to  the  novice, 
which  was  daily  offered  up  to  her.  Here  are  five  invitations  to 
dinner  for  the  same  day>  at  houses  where  the  splendour  of  the 
appointments  "  always  suggests  to  me,  by  contrast,  the  idea  of 
the  factory-children.  Not  that  I  blame  the  rich  and  noble  for 
their  enjoyments,  but  I  would  have  no  huge  inequalities."  "It 
is  the  charming  freedom  from  stiffness  and  pretension  that,  after 
all,  delights  me ;  not  the  blaze  of  lights,  and  the  double  doors, 
and  gold  plate,  and  rare  coffee."  Here  are  patronesses'  tickets 
to  their  fancy-balls  at  Willis's  rooms,  —  if  she  can  be  prevailed 
on,  they  add,  to  give  herself  the  recreation,    Almack's  has  no 

VOL.  II. 


104 


MEMORIALS. 


restrictions  of  costume  for  her.  Here  are  cards  of  barristers, 
parliamentary  commissioners,  and  cabinet  ministers.  Here  are 
all  manner  of  prospectuses  and  plans  for  her  to  "  honour  with 
her  sanction."  Here  are  invitations  from  editors,  to  favour  their 
reviews  and  magazines  with  her  contributions.  Bulwer  has  a 
quick  eye  for  literary  power ;  and  hers  shall  grace  "  the  new 
monthly  "  as  well  as  the  rest.  Little  "  V."  of  the  little  "  Re- 
pository" has  achieved  greatness  among  the  magazines.  Then 
come  heaps  of  concert  tickets,  museum  tickets,  library  tickets  : 
loads  of  blue-books,  reports  of  sanitary,  factory,  and  poor-law 
commissions,  —  there  is  no  end  to  the  variety.  "Here  is  a 
curious  arrival,  come  just  in  time  for  you,  my  dear  mother;  an 
honourary  diploma  from  the  Eoyal  Jennerian  Society,  1  who,  the 
Duke  of  Wellington  in  the  chair,  have  done  themselves  the 
honour  of  unanimously  voting  to  Miss  Harriet  Martineau  the 
diploma  which  constitutes  her  a  member  of  their  body.'  They 
are  right  if  they  think  I  can  help  the  spread  of  vaccination,  and 
I  think  I  can."  These  recognitions  of  her  character  as  a  labourer 
for  the  welfare  of  society  were  ever  far  more  valued  by  her  than 
testimonies  of  mere  literary  estimation.  And  yet  in  after  days 
she  made  light  of  this  :  "  I  am  afraid  such  things  are  sometimes 
a  push  for  subscriptions  to  declining  funds." 

She  now  began  to  feel  the  embarrassments  of  greatness  in 
being  expected  to  dispense  patronage.  Every  one-sided  char- 
acter of  her  acquaintance  looked  to  her  to  bring  his  particular 
insanity  into  a  reputation  for  soundness.  In  reviewing  the 
number  of  opportunities  for  benefiting  others  now  laid  before 
her,  one  cannot  but  think  of  poor  Marmontel,  oppressed  in  like 
manner  by  his  native  village  after  the  success  of  his  first  piece  • 
"  And  all  this  depends  upon  me  !  "  But  she  early  became  aware 
of  the  risk  to  independence  from  incurring  obligations  to  patron- 
age, and  she  never  hesitated  to  utter  the  unwelcome  "  no  "  which 
her  conscience  prompted  when  solicited  to  obtain  advantages  to 
which  no  claim  existed  but  her  request.  The  claims  of  benevo- 
lent associations  with  whose  objects  she  warmly  sympathized 
were  never  resisted.  The  Polish  Association,  in  particular,  owed 
much  to  her  and  to  her  family  for  the  protection  and  mainte- 


FAME. 


195 


nance  of  their  orphans  as  well  as  the  promotion  of  their  cause. 
Her  hymn  written  for  their  exiles,  set  to  very  touching  music, 
made  a  profound  impression  :  — 

PRAYER  OF  THE  POLISH  EXILES  AT  THE  PATRIOTS'  ALTAR  * 

God  !  scorched  by  battle-fires  we  stand 
Before  thee  on  thy  throne  of  snows  ; 

But,  Father  !  in  this  silent  land, 
We  seek  no  refuge  nor  repose  : 

We  ask,  and  shall  not  ask  in  vain,  — 

"  Give  us  our  heritage  again  ! 9 

Thy  winds  are  ice-bound  in  the  sea  ; 

Thine  eagle  cowers  till  storms  are  past ; 
Lord !  when  those  moaning  winds  are  free, 

When  eagles  mount  upon  the  blast, 
O,  breathe  upon  our  icy  chain, 
And  float  our  Poland's  flag  again  ! 

'T  was  for  thy  cause  we  once  were  strong  ; 

Thou  wilt  not  doom  that  cause  to  death ! 
0  God  !  our  struggle  has  been  long  ; 

Thou  wilt  not  quench  our  glimmering  Faith  ! 
Thou  hear'st  the  murmurs  of  our  pain,  — 
"  Give  us  our  heritage  again  ! " 

The  party  struggle  for  her  political  influence  had  by  this  time 
become  so  vehement  that  she  was  obliged  to  write  a  special 
Preface  for  the  Corn-Law  tales,  declaring  her  determination  to 
defend  from  party  what  she  meant  for  mankind. 

These  few  emphatic  words,  it  is  to  be  hoped,  satisfied  the 
"Examiner,"  the  "Critic,"  "Tait's,"  "Fraser's,"  and  all  the 
newspapers  :  they  certainly  did  the  public  at  large. 

It  was  not  merely  the  actual  merit  nor  the  positive  utility  of 
these  publications  that  gave  them  a  world-wide  celebrity  ;  neither 
was  it  their  exquisite  adaptation  to  the  wants  of  England  at  that 
time  ;  nor  their  novelty  in  execution,  or  originality  in  design : 

*  From  "The  Charmed  Sea,"  Illustrations  Political  Economy,  Vol.  V. 


196 


MEMORIALS. 


although  the  idea  of  conveying  the  facts  of  moral  science  by 
this  method  was  so  little  familiar  to  the  public  mind  that  multi- 
tudes supposed  all  science  might  be  taught  in  a  similar  manner, 
and  felt  wronged,  as  by  a  feminine  caprice,  that  Miss  Martineau 
refused  to  move  their  souls  a  second  time  by  a  series  of  illustra- 
tions of  natural  philosophy  j  while  at  the  same  time,  although  some 
of  the  tales  are  comic  in  parts,  they  remonstrated  against  the 
great  preponderance  of  painful  interest  in  what  she  had  written. 
They  needed  to  have  it  explained  to  them  that  the  evil  institu- 
tions that  wring  the  human  heart  are  the  only  subjects  of  a  nature 
to  permit  a  scientific  demonstration  in  the  form  of  fiction ;  that 
although  an  imperfect  smelting  apparatus  may  be  as  fatal  to 
the  purity  of  gold  as  mistaken  methods  of  government  are  to 
national  virtue,  yet  fiction  cannot  be  made  the  vehicle  of  metal- 
lurgy ;  nor  the  miseries  of  mistaken  legislation  be  gayly  set 
forth  in  a  story  of  happy  conclusion.  There  had  been  tales 
before  these,  awakening  sympathy  with  suffering ;  but  tales 
showing  the  causes  of  suffering  in  the  neglect  of  those  principles 
of  government  which  men  in  given  circumstances  must  adopt 
in  order  to  be  happy  were  a  new  thing  under  the  sun.  To 
this  especial  originality  of  purpose  they  owed  a  part  of  their 
unprecedented  popular  success. 

These  books  were  also  new  in  their  special  literary  aspect,  as 
well  as  the  beginnings  in  England  of  a  science  of  sociology. 

A  feeling  of  resistance  had  long  been  gathering  in  Harriet 
Martineau's  mind  against  that  law  of  the  kingdoms  of  poetry 
and  romance,  generally  observed  by  all  their  rulers,  from  Homer 
to  Scott  inclusive,  of  filling  the  scene  with  the  great  and  the 
powerful,  —  the  occupants  of  thrones  and  the  leaders  of  armies  ; 
and  bidding  the  intricacies  of  the  plot  bear  them  along  through 
"  high  feastings  of  kings  with  nobles  and  dancing  of  knights 
with  ladies ; "  till  a  reproach  from  the  majority  of  middle-aged 
readers  had  gone  forth  against  novels  and  poetry  as  untrue 
to  any  life  that  came  within  the  observation  of  whole-minded 
human  beings  then  living.  Going  to  the  root  of  the  matter,  she 
found  them  untrue,  by  reason  of  their  one-sided  partialities  and 
aristocratic  prejudices.    Kow,  as  on  so  many  subsequent  occa- 


FAME. 


197 


sions,  she  showed  the  genius  that  directs  public  thought  and 
feeling  ;  pointing  out  in  advance  the  way  in  which  she  took  the 
lead,  and  proving  while  proclaiming  the  power  of  fiction  as  the 
agent  of  morals  and  philosophy,  —  the  servant  of  the  poor  and 
the  lowly. 

I  need  but  refer  to  certain  passages  from  those  remarkable 
productions  so  much  talked  of  in  their  time  as  "the  Scott  pa- 
pers ; "  in  which,  while  giving  to  "Walter  Scott,  with  all  the 
enthusiasm  of  a  grateful  heart,  his  full  due,  and  more  than  he 
himself  ever  dreamed  of  claiming,  she  points  out  his  lack  of  the 
deeper  moral  insight,  and  calls  on  his  successors  in  the  field  of 
romantic  literature  to  make  good  his  deficiencies.  Every  reader's 
memory  will  bear  witness  to  the  effect  her  criticism  and  her 
example  have  had  on  novel-writing  since  that  time ;  but  few, 
except  the  watchers  by  the  springs  of  great  social  changes,  can 
tell  upon  what  multitudes  fell  the  awakening  music  of  her 
affirmation  of  all  that  is  great,  noble,  and  heroic  in  woman.  It 
met  a  response  in  the  universal  heart.  America  above  all  felt 
the  grandeur  and  beauty  of  the  appeal.  Ella  of  Garveloch, 
Cousin  Marshall,  Mary  Kay,  Letitia,  little  Harriet,  with  all  the 
troops  of  the  high-minded  poor  and  the  high-hearted  lowly  that 
rose  from  every  pictured  page,  became  the  friends  and  educators 
of  the  young  matronage  of  the  United  States.  As  manuals  of 
political  economy,  the  "  Illustrations "  were  not  then  so  much 
needed  there.  The  Transatlantic  world  was  already  in  possession 
of  all  (save  one)  of  the  blessings  they  demanded.  But  as  illus- 
trations of  high  character  and  lofty  virtue  and  heroic  endurance 
and  uncompromising  integrity,  they  possessed  an  incisive  power, 
as  welcome  as  it  was  timely,  to  restore  the  features  of  the  antique 
virtue  of  our  earlier  Kew  England  time,  fast  softening  and 
wearing  down  beneath  unmarked  abuses.  The  observation  of 
English  critics  was  that  she  understood  the  springs  of  the 
machine  of  state.    American  ones  said,  "  she  knew  how  to 

'  Ope  the  sacred  source  of  sympathetic  tears.'  " 

As  far  as  criticism  can  be  a  benefit,  she  was  to  be  congratu- 
lated ;  for  no  writer  ever  received  a  larger  share  of  it.    From  the 


198 


MEMORIALS. 


leading  reviews  and  great  London  dailies,  down  to  the  most 
obscure  provincial  and  sectarian  journals  and  magazines,  all  were 
full  of  the  "Illustrations."  The  "Edinburgh  Review"  was  per- 
fectly amiable  in  the  spirit  of  its  criticism,  though  utterly  incom- 
petent, in  this  instance,  to  its  function,  for  want  of  breadth  and 
power  to  comprehend  the  mind  of  the  writer.  The  editor  had 
at  first  admired  Harriet  Martineau  as  a  lady,  and  afterwards 
esteemed  her  as  a  friend;  but  his  attempts  to  reconcile  her 
action  with  the  feeble,  narrow  social  views  of  the  time  were 
amusing  instances  of  unconscious  insult.  He  hardly  knew  how 
to  excuse  her  as  a  student  and  a  teacher  of  what  he  had  thought 
exclusively  manly  truths.  He  was  obliged  to  justify  her  to 
himself  by  a  syllogism.  "  Women  might,  and  it  was  becoming 
they  should,  protect  and  comfort  the  poor  ;  political  economy  has 
an  immediate  connection  with  this  ;  therefore  a  woman  may  be 
a  political  economist  without  being  supposed  to  have  abated  any 
natural  and  right  horror  of  Amazons  in  politics."  But  he  con- 
demned any  thing  which  could  be  called  public  life  out  of  her 
own  village,  —  the  circle  of  a  Lady  Bountiful  among  her  poor. 
A  certain  kind  of  knowledge  is  even  here  necessary,  and  so 
political  economy  might  come  in.  He  shuddered  a  little  at 
Miss  Martineau's  sense  and  spirit,  but  he  "  rejoiced  to  acknowl- 
edge that  she  had  more  than  the  fancy  and  feeling  of  Miss 
Edgeworth,"  and  he  thought  he  had  saved  his  admired  author's 
credit.  How  far  was  he  from  seeing  that  the  most  public  of  all 
public  life  was  the  one  on  which  she  had  just  entered  !  The 
life  commonly  called  public  of  an  ordinary  member  of  Parliament 
was  private  in  comparison.  Her  very  thoughts  were  fast  becom- 
ing of  more  public  importance  than  all  their  doings  for  the 
public  weal.  Their  doings  were  of  importance  as  the  comple- 
ment of  her  feelings  and  thoughts. 

The  criticisms  were  as  various  as  the  powers  and  purposes  of 
the  men. 

A  critic  is  but  a  man  like  another  ;  and  when  he  chances  to 
be  the  man  of  some  specialty,  most  likely  proves  less  able  than 
another  to  pronounce  a  general  judgment.  He  is  so  often  obliged 
to  "  cram  "  for  all  but  his  own  special  questions,  he  is  so  often 


FAME. 


199 


tempted  to  cover  with  a  strain  of  brilliant  sarcasm  his  want  of 
power  to  appreciate  his  author,  and,  above  all,  he  so  often  permits 
the  actual  power  of  judgment  he  may  possess  to  be  blunted  by 
the  retaining-fee  of  a  party,  or  at  best  imperceptibly  worn  away 
by  the  continual  suggestions  of  self-interest,  that,  in  the  field 
of  real  thought  and  action,  he  becomes  a  hindrance  rather  than  a 
helper  to  both  author  and  public.  In  the  field  of  mere  literature 
he  may  promote  public  pleasure  by  the  perpetual  attrition  that 
polishes  and  perfects  the  individual  writer,  whose  works  thus 
formed  and  finished  react  in  refinement  on  the  public  mind  ; 
but  it  is  not  in  the  field  of  literary  criticism  that  the  man  capa- 
ble of  appreciating  the  great  ethical  natures  of  any  time  will  be 
found  :  for  the  sympathies  of  such  a  man  will  draw  him  into 
their  field  of  action.  Hence  it  was  that,  with  all  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau's  immense  popularity,  she  found  but  little  competent 
criticism  at  this  period.  The  crowd  of  review  and  newspaper 
writers  were  competent  to  only  one  half  the  case.  They  were 
profuse  of  eulogy  because,  without  embracing  the  whole,  for  lack 
of  depth  and  grasp,  they  were  honestly  and  enthusiastically 
pleased  with  all  they  could  comprehend.  They  welcomed  her 
exactly  as  they  might  a  great  painter  or  musical  artist  who  had 
charmed  and  won  the  public  mind  in  taking  it  by  surprise. 
Here  was  something  at  once  out  of  their  way  and  beyond  their 
limitations  ;  but  they  were  pleased,  with  the  rest  of  the  world, 
and  it  was  safe  and  agreeable  to  say  so.  In  conquering  the 
public  she  had  conquered  all  the  critics  except  the  unscrupulously 
partisan  ones.  Without  comprehending  her  nature  or  object  in 
life,  these  felt,  by  mere  oppugnancy,  one  quality  of  her  power,  — 
its  freedom.  It  was  neither  to  hold  nor  to  bind  nor  to  buy. 
They  were  afraid  of  it,  and  they  tried  to  destroy  it.  Empson 
and  Lockhart  — "  The  Edinburgh"  and  "The  Quarterly"  — 
were  fit  types  of  the  professionally  critical  power  of  that  time. 
To  the  shallow  but  highly  cultivated  mind  that  could  dwell  in 
the  tents  of  the  Whigs,  Harriet  Martineau  was  a  puzzle.  How 
could  she  work  month  after  month,  and  year  after  year,  upon  the 
most  abstruse  problems  of  civil  polity  and  legislation,  growing 
fresher  and  fresher  as  she  went  on  1    How  could  she  make  these 


200 


MEMORIALS. 


dry  bones  live  and  dwell  in  the  scenes  and  cities  of  all  lands, 
painting  them  into  pictures  in  which  the  beauty  of  the  colour- 
ing and  the  force  of  the  feeling  were  all  used  to  prove  the  accu- 
racy of  the  perspective,  and  yet  remain  so  rich,  so  full,  so  free  ] 
Mr.  Empson  could  not  even  imagine  the  power  gained  by  living 
for  the  truth.  She  herself  was  less  clear  as  to  cause  and  effect 
(perhaps  merely  less  precise  in  nomenclature)  at  this  time  than 
she  afterwards  became ;  while  occupied  in  serving  the  world  in 
this  strenuous  manner,  she  called  the  great  source  and  stimulus  of 
her  life  by  the  names  of  "principles"  and  "science"  alternately. 

Lockhart,  as  the  editor  of  the  Tory  Quarterly,  was  of  course 
hostile  ;  that  was  only  to  have  been  expected.  But  he  disgraced 
himself  and  the  review  by  an  utter  want  of  decency  and  hon- 
esty. The  preceding  Autobiography  is  not  very  clear  as  to  the 
precise  point  of  Lockhart's  evil  doing.  The  sensitive  and  the 
high-minded  shrink  from  the  details  of  falsehood  and  abuse 
which  they  have  endured,  till  to  do  so  passes  into  a  habit  of 
mind,  almost  into  a  principle  of  duty.  Their  great  thoughts 
and  great  objects  bear  them  above  and  beyond  the  sphere  and 
feeling  of  insult.  They  do  not  care  even  to  understand  the 
meaning  of  a  vicious  animal's  attempt  to  throw  them.  The 
biographer  has  a  different  duty. 

The  worst  feature,  then,  of  Lockhart's  servility  to  his  party  — 
the  party  to  which,  as  a  hanger-on,  he  looked  for  literary  patron- 
age and  pecuniary  support  —  was  his  attempt  to  crush  the  rising 
young  advocate  of  the  people,  by  identifying  her  by  all  the 
weight  of  the  great  Tory  party's  organ,  with  the  advocacy  of 
vice  and  crime.  Because  one  political  economist  was  said  to 
have  circulated  papers  encouraging  young  servant-girls  and  their 
seducers  of  rank  to  licentiousness,  Mr.  Lockhart  thought  to 
fling  his  mud  and  dust  so  dexterously  as  to  attach  to  Miss  Mar- 
tineau  the  same  imputation.  The  reaction  of  the  indignant  pub- 
lic mind  against  this  baseness  was  such  that  this  article  of  the 
"  Quarterly  "  greatly  promoted  the  popularity  of  the  series  of 
"  Illustrations  of  Political  Economy  "  it  was  intended  to  destroy. 

Aside  from  its  falsehoods,  there  is  nothing  that  strikes  one  so 
singularly  in  Mr.  Lockhart's  criticism  of  Miss  Martineau's  M  Illus- 


FAME. 


201 


trations,"  or  in  the  subsequent  criticisms  of  the  "  Quarterly,"  as 
their  strain  of  ironical  eulogy.  His  severest  attempts  now  seem 
simple  historical  statements.  It  is  curious,  too,  to  remark  at  the 
outset  the  two-edged  appeal  to  bigotry  whetted  sharper  by  mas- 
culine assumption,  —  well  known  as  Lockhart  was  in  those  days 
as  one  of  the  orthodox  who  believe  in  nothing. 

"  This  young  lady  has  the  high  recommendation  of  being  a 
Unitarian."  "  Her  theological  works  are  all  published,  we  be- 
lieve, at  the  expense  of  the  Unitarian  Association  ;  at  least, 
such  is  the  case  with  the  1  Essential  Principles  of  Christianity,' 
addressed  to  her  '  dear  Roman  Catholic  brethren.' "  It  shows  the 
coarseness  of  his  nature  that  in  this  very  article  he  calls  Ella  of 
Garveloch  —  one  of  the  most  nobly  and  beautifully  conceived 
beings  in  literature  —  "a  bare-legged  Scotch  quean  ! " 

However  unable  to  appreciate,  even  such  a  man  is  compelled 
by  mere  intellectual  conviction  and  a  politic  reference  to  the 
same  in  other  men  to  acknowledge  ' 1  the  praiseworthy  inten- 
tions," "  benevolent  spirit,"  "  varied  knowledge,"  "  acute  discrimi- 
nation of  character,"  and  "  power  of  entering  into  and  describing 
the  feelings  of  the  poorer  classes." 

"  Demerara,"  he  admits,  is  powerfully  written,  "  but  the  picture 
is  drawn  from  the  imagination,  and  from  the  accounts  of  anti- 
slavery  missions and  he  scoffs  at  the  "notion  "  that  man  is  not 
property,  as  one  who  considers  the  claim  of  ownership  in  man 
founded  in  the  eternal  laws  of  nature,  to  which  those  of  states 
cannot  but  conform.  And  this  very  year,  helped  to  the  work 
by  this  very  tale,  which  popularized  the  principles  of  freedom  as 
the  only  sound  political  economy,  while  painting  the  slaves  as 
outraged  human  beings,  the  British  Parliament  abolished  West 
Indian  slavery.  And  so  in  like  manner  the  three  great  ques- 
tions touching  the  factories,  the  poor-laws,  and  the  currency, 
were  successively  agitated,  and  the  question  of  the  corn-laws 
fairly  roused.  To  one  so  absorbed  in  successful  public  service 
as  to  be  personally  important  to  all  the  wronged  and  suffering 
classes,  and  proportionately  beloved  and  honoured  by  them, 
criticism  was  what  it  ought  to  be,  —  desired  as  a  thing  to  learn 
by ;  and  abuse,  when  its  purpose  was  once  understood,  but  of 
the  slightest  moment. 


202 


MEMORIALS. 


By  this  article  of  Lockhart's  I  seem  to  see  thrown  into  the 
mind  of  Harriet  Marti neau  the  first  germ  of  her  afterthoughts 
on  the  general  subject  of  property.  Quoting  from  the  summary 
of  principles  in  "  Demerara,"  he  says  :  "  Property  is  held  by 
convention,  not  natural  right.  As  the  agreement  to  hold  prop- 
erty in  man  never  took  place  between  the  parties  concerned,  — 
i.  e.  is  not  conventional,  man  has  no  right  of  property  in  man." 
On  this  he  goes  on  to  comment :  "  Why,  by  this  rule,  what  have 
we  a  right  to  hold  as  property  1 "  "  Let  Miss  Martineau  say 
where  the  convention  sat  which  agreed  to  make  the  Marquis  of 
Westminster  a  present  of  his  stud  or  his  streets.  Miss  Marti- 
neau is  said  to  be  high  authority  in  the  law  courts.  Let  the 
next  thief  plead  at  the  Old  Bailey  that  he  never  agreed  the 
prosecutor  should  hold  property  in  his  silk  handkerchief,  and 
therefore  he  has  no  more  right  to  it  than  he,  Timothy,  the 
thief." 

Miss  Martineau  was  never  one  to  stop  thinking  because  an 
enemy  of  truth  (so  ignorant  of  it  at  the  same  time  as  to  be 
unable  to  discriminate  between  a  just  inference  and  a  reductio 
ad  ahsurdnm)  found  it  for  his  interest  to  come  forward  to  pre- 
vent, with  a  mixture  of  sophistry  and  defiance  like  this ;  and 
we  shall  see  hereafter  to  what  conclusions  she  came  on  this 
matter  of  property  in  after  years.  The  blank  astonishment  of 
conservatives  at  such  plain  incontrovertible  statements  of  facts 
as  these,  —  that,  shut  up  in  an  island,  population  going  on  at 
geometrical  rates,  and  production  in  arithmetical  ones  according 
to  their  wont,  there  will,  without  prudence,  be  famine,  is  in  the 
mean  time  amusing.  Neither  could  they  comprehend  any  more 
clearly  that  their  poor-laws  were  degrading  and  self-defeating, 
their  lying-in  hospitals  a  bounty  on  improvidence,  and  their  alms- 
houses a  temptation  to  idleness.  They  dreaded,  apparently,  to 
see  the  feudal  system  broken  up  by  the  development  of  a  ca- 
pacity in  the  people  to  do  without  it ;  and  seemed  to  mourn  the 
lost  occupation  of  Lord  Lansdowne  and  the  Duke  of  Devonshire, 
when  Ireland  should  become  well  educated  and  industrious. 
The  attempt  to  confound  Miss  Martineau  with  the  low  and 
criminal  distributors  of  demoralizing  publications  and  the  like, 


FAME. 


203 


was  fatal  to  his  gentlemanly  character.  He  concluded  by  adjur- 
ing Miss  Martineau  to  burn  her  little  books  ;  and,  after  quoting 
in  a  scurrilous  way  a  quantity  of  ridiculous  doggerel,  winds  up 
thus  :  "  Did  Miss  Martineau  sit  for  this  picture  %  No.  Such 
a  character  is  nothing  to  a  female  Malthusian  :  a  woman  who 
thinks  child-bearing  a  crime  against  society ;  an  unmarried 
woman  who  declaims  against  marriage  :  (!  !  !)  a  young  woman 
who  deprecates  charity  and  a  provision  for  the  poor.  (!  !  !) " 

This  was  the  sort  of  moral  gauntlet  to  be  run  in  undertaking 
to  illustrate  a  principle  "as  undeniable  as  the  multiplication- 
table  ; "  and  this  the  tenderest  and  most  keenly  feeling  heart  I 
ever  knew  did  not  shrink  from ;  because  to  teach  prudence  as 
one  among  many  means  of  chasing  away  pauperism  was  to  do 
the  nation  service.  What  the  excellent  Malthus  had  been  seen 
to  undergo  of  calumny  and  abuse  (and  it  seemed  to  her  so 
repulsive  as  to  make  her  ask  him  how  he  bore  it)  would  have 
been  sufficient  to  deter  one  less  high-minded  than  herself.  But 
now  seems  to  have  begun  to  take  ultimate  shape  that  heroic 
type  of  character  which  became  in  after  life  so  recognized  a  part 
of  her  greatness,  that  the  persecuted  for  whatever  right's  sake 
felt  the  glorious  reproach  of  their  cross  to  be  a  claim  she  could 
not  set  aside.  Her  infant  visions  of  martyrdom,  little  as  she 
respected  their  memory,  as  mingled  with  childish  vanity  and 
unbalanced  by  the  sound  knowledge  and  vigorous  judgment  of 
the  after  time,  were  yet  the  basis  of  the  noble  temple  of  life  she 
was  always  at  work  in  building.  Whether  this  stepping  to  the 
front  under  fire,  publicly  to  express  the  reverence  and  gratitude 
felt  for  those  who  have  aroused  to  noble  work  or  shown  the 
excellent  way,  be,  as  church  and  clergy  claim,  a  special  trait  of 
Christianity,  or  as  nobles  feel,  an  evidence  of  nobility,  is  of 
little  consequence  to  decide.  That  it  was  the  only  way  that 
became  her  to  "  fulfil  all  righteousness  "  was,  in  brain  and  blood, 
a  part  of  Harriet  Martineau's  being.  As  Gibbon  says  of  Bayle, 
"  Xature  meant  her  to  think  as  she  pleased,  and  to  speak  as 
she  thought." 

All  the  reviews  of  this  period,  hostile  as  well  as  friendly,  took 
for  granted  the  fact  of  her  great  genius.    Unquestioned  as  it  was 


204 


MEMORIALS. 


by  the  world,  by  herself  it  was  always  steadily  denied,  not  only 
at  this  time,  but  ever  afterwards.  Her  friendly  critic  of  the 
"  Edinburgh  Review  "  was  so  impressed  by  her  as  a  woman  of 
genius,  that  he  vigorously  contested  the  point  with  her  in  argu- 
ment. And  surely  if  genius  be  the  faculty  called  divine,  of 
creating  in  literature,  from  what  life  actually  is,  the  vision  of 
what  it  may  be,  —  if  it  be  the  intellectual  force  or  creative  inspi- 
ration in  life  itself,  which  brings  forth,  directs,  and  organizes, 
whether  by  "  a  special  instinct  or  faculty,"  by  "  grace  from 
on  high,"  or  by  "  superiority  of  organization "  (as  different 
schools  might  express  the  same  fact),  —  if  it  be  that  inspiration 
of  great  thoughts  and  great  things  which  instantly  distinguishes 
from  the  crowd  and  arrays  inferiority  against  itself,  —  if  it  be 
that  power  in  action  which,  to  whatever  department  of  human 
life  it  come,  seems  to  change  the  nature  of  things,  or  that  power 
in  utterance  which  drives  a  keener  tide  of  blood  through  them 
that  read  or  hear,  —  then  surely  Harriet  Alartineau  was  in  truth 
the  genius  that  popular  enthusiasm  declared  her  to  be.  Nor  the 
less  so  because  the  popular  definition  of  the  word  has  taught  her 
countrymen  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean  (if  I  may  say  so)  that  "  genius 
is  that  talent  or  aptitude  that  men  receive  from  nature  to  excel  in 
any  one  thing  whatever,"  while  she  excelled  in  many.  Nor  is 
she  the  less  "a  genius"  because  the  Sheridans,  the  Fieldings, 
the  George  Sands,  have  habituated  the  world  to  associate  genius 
with  selfishness,  disorder,  and  licentiousness,  and  caused  a  doubt 
whether  it  can  exist  in  even  balance  with  perfect  self-control  and 
wise  and  steady  self-devotedness.  Thus  I  have  often  argued  with 
herself,  but,  I  am  bound  in  truth  to  state,  without  effect.  She 
always  persisted  in  the  same  final  reply,  "I  am  pained  and 
ashamed  when  any  body  I  care  for  talks  of  my  possessing  gen- 
ius." I  think  the  difference  between  her  and  others  on  this 
point  arose  from  her  want  of  general  self-esteem,  of  which  defi- 
ciency I  have  seen  a  thousand  instances ;  she  held  so  tenaciously 
to  the  •  French  proverbial  opinion,  that  "  le  genie  doit  /aire  ses 
preuves"  that  she  obtained  at  this  time  of  a  reviewer  whose 
article  came  to  her  knowledge  before  publication,  that  his  high 
estimate  of  her  genius  as  a  writer  of  fiction  should  be  sup- 


FAME. 


205 


pressed.  "  Not,"  she  said,  "  till  I  have  succeeded  in  making  a 
plot."  Thus  much  I  was  willing  to  concede  in  the  argument; 
that  a  character  less  truly  proportioned,  faculties  less  accurately 
balanced,  might,  even  while  weakening  its  actual  effect,  have  pro- 
duced a  higher  general  estimate  of  her  genius,  — just  as  we  are 
most  struck  by  the  disproportion,  the  deformity  or  caricature  that 
lessens  the  goodness  of  a  face  or  the  real  value  of  a  portrait ;  for 
I  observed  this  known  effect  of  perfect  proportion  in  reducing 
the  popular  estimate  of  size,  in  her  elder  and  grander  time ; 
and  as  her  faculties  were  taking  a  wider  and  stronger  range,  I 
seemed  to  see  them  less  generally,  though  more  worthily  appre- 
ciated. But  if  genius  be  the  perfection  of  good  sense,  she  pos- 
sessed it  as  few  others  have  done.  How.  many  have  we  seen 
proclaimed  geniuses,  on  the  American  side  of  the  ocean,  by  mere 
dint  of  deficiency  or  irregularity,  who  would  never  have  been 
named  in  that  category,  had  they  been,  like  her,  subjected  to 
the  remorseless  English  higher-middle-class  training  which  at 
once  grinds  down  oddity,  nor  likes  to  spare  even  originality, 
and  which  only  true  genius  can  survive  and  profit  by. 

Had  Harriet  Martineau  been  only  a  reviewer  or  essayist,  — 
only  a  great  religious,  political,  or  philosophical  writer,  —  only 
a  novelist,  traveller,  or  historian,  —  she  would  have  necessarily 
seemed  greater  as  an  author  to  the  generality  of  readers.  They 
love  to  see  power  pushed  in  one  direction.  They  can  only  judge 
of  it  so.  They  measure  only  length,  so  to  speak,  and  take  little 
account  of  breadth  and  depth.  They  have  been  so  accustomed 
to  minute  subdivision  in  mental  as  in  other  labors,  as  to 
have  enchained  their  minds  by  a  proverb,  that  "the  Jack  at 
all  trades  is  good  at  none  ; "  and  this  very  means  of  exclusive 
application  which  they  take  to  avoid  mediocrity  is  the  reason 
why  this  century  affords  so  few  universally  admirable  per- 
sons like  Harriet  Martineau.  This  variety  of  mental  accomplish- 
ment, this  natural  and  cultivated  capacity  to  meet  each  man 
on  his  own  ground,  made  her  one  of  the  most  popular,  while  her 
overflowing  sympathy  of  the  heart  made  her  one  of  the  most 
beloved  of  authors.  She  pleased  and  amused  the  public,  though 
she  never  made  it  an  object  to  do  so. 


206 


MEMORIALS. 


She  was  thus  early  the  most  substantially  successful  author 
of  her  time,  without  ever  having  sacrificed  to  success.  She  had 
deliberately  chosen  her  part,  —  to  utter,  as  fast  as  she  attained 
it,  what  seemed  to  her  good  and  true,  let  the  personal  result  be 
what  it  might.  Her  works  had  brought  round  her  the  leading 
men  of  her  time,  and  she  began  to  judge  them  as  fit  or  unfit  for 
the  times,  with  continual  personal  and  political  effect.  Her  in- 
fluence many  a  time  put  the  right  man  in  the  right  place,  who 
came  to  thank  her  and  ask  her  advice  as  to  how  he  should  best 
fulfil  his  duty  in  it.  She  could  and  did  sway  from  time  to  time 
the  administration,  while  counselling  the  leaders  of  opposition. 
A  less  comprehensive  mind  could  have  done  but  one  of  these 
things.  But  both  sidles  felt  that  she  was  warmly  with  them  as 
men,  while  free  from  "entangling  alliance"  with  either  as  par- 
ties. Now  came  the  moment  when,  strong  in  her  knowledge  of 
the  general  public  mind,  —  its  tastes,  its  habits,  its  views,  its 
leaders,  —  the  temptation  might  have  come  to  her  that  wrecks  so 
many  first-rate  writers,  — the  temptation  of  giving  to  the  public 
sentimental  expressions  and  agreeable  drollery  signifying  noth- 
ing, but  all  the  more  enriching,  in  the  pecuniary  sense,  for  its 
want  of  reality.  Xow  might  well  have  come  the  temptation  to 
leave  unturned  the  last  uncompromising  screw  that  takes  the 
writer  out  of  the  hands  of  his  readers,  and  lays  upon  him  the  re- 
sponsibility of  leading,  instead  of  leaving  him  in  the  exercise  of 
the  subaltern  function  of  amusing  them.  But  she  never  seems 
to  have  felt  it.  Literature  remained  ever  to  her  a  sacerdocy ; 
and  through  its  most  trying  phase,  —  that  of  becoming  through 
its  means  world  famous,  —  her  sheet-anchor  of  secret  resolutions* 
never  dragged.  She  does  not  need,  like  Dr.  Young's  man  of  the 
world,  to  "  resolve  or  re-resolve."  Without  doing  either,  she  will 
clearly  "  die  the  same." 

Before  inserting  such  of  the  few  letters  as  I  rightfully  and 
dutifully  may,  from  the  great  mass  of  those  of  this  period  which 
now  lie  before  me,  I  will  gather  up  a  few  of  the  recollections  of 
that  time.  Some  of  her  old  friends  (not  the  most  intimate)  were 
astonished  at  her  coolness  in  these  new  circumstances ;  while 

*  See  page  of  resolutions,  ante. 


FAME. 


207 


others,  superficial  observers,  pronounced  her,  on  account  of  it, 
the  proudest  person  living.  Of  these  she  said,  "  They  little  know- 
how  utterly  I  sometimes  despise  my  work,  —  its  execution,  I 
mean.  But  not  the  less  do  I  mean  to  avail  myself  coolly  and 
amply  of  all  the  advantages  of  society  it  brings  me."  And  this 
work,  of  whose  execution  she  speaks,  was  the  one  thing  the  world 
was  so  delighted  with.  Mrs.  Bellenden  Ker  tells  of  a  pretty 
little  illustrative  scene,  which  shows  how  it  seized  the  minds  of 
the  least  impressible.  "  My  father  came  in  to  dine  with  us  just 
as  dinner  was  served.  '  How  do  you  do,  my  love  ] '  says  he,  and 
takes  up  "  Demarara."  In  vain  did  we  call  him,  and  remind  him 
that  dinner  was  waiting.  He  was  like  one  under  strong  posses- 
sion, and  never  thought  of  dinner  or  laid  down  the  book  till  he 
had  read  it  through." 

I  must  not  forget  to  say  that  the  "  Series  of  Illustrations  of 
Political  Economy  "  was  printed  at  a  cheaper  rate  than  it  would 
have  otherwise  been,  on  account  of  the  clearness  of  the  writing ; 
a  thing  worthy  to  be  put  on  record  in  vindication  of  the  rights 
of  printers. 

All  the  compliments  and  admiration  of  the  early  period  of 
these  years  of  fame,  —  phrenologists  declaring  her  head  incom- 
parably the  best  female  head  they  had  a  cast  of,  both  for  size  and 
harmony ;  admission  for  the  first  time,  in  her  person,  of  a  lady 
to  the  distribution  of  prizes  at  the  London  University  (this  year 
by  Lord  John  Russell),  the  head  professor's  family  declaring  "  her 
presence  gave  it  a  consequence  which  they  wished  to  secure  for 
it;"  huntings-up  of  her  early  writings,  —  "the  Chancellor  wants" 
the  '  Traditions  '  sent  after  him  to  Bath  ; "  Coleridge  watching 
anxiously  for  the  numbers ;  family  consultations  in  so  many  dis- 
tinguished households  about  who  was  sufficiently  distinguished 
to  make  one  with  herself  at  the  same  dinner-party,  and  what 
great  previous  celebrity  should  be  spared  such  a  wound  to  his 
self-complacency  as  witnessing  the  homage  paid  to  the  new 
one,  and  the  like  sweet  social  flatteries  ad  infinitum,  —  all  this 
had  no  ill  effect  on  her  appearance  or  character.  At  the  end 
of  her  first  London  year  Sydney  Smith  said,  "  She  has  gone 
through  such  a  season  as  no  girl  before  ever  knew,  and  she  has 


208 


MEMORIALS. 


kept  her  own  mind,  her  own  manners,  and  her  own  voice. 

She 's  safe." 

And  so  the  last  year  of  the  first  London  life  left  her ;  though 
the  trial,  from  being  merely  superficial,  as  at  first,  and  such  as 
literary  ladies  and  gentlemen  were  all  in  their  lesser  measure 
subjected  to,  had  become  the  deeper  one  that  statesmen  only,  in 
conscious  possession  of  the  nature  that  is  a  power  in  the  land, 
can  feel.  Xow  there  was  much  buzzing  and  flinging  the  sound- 
ing-line about  a  pension.  Lord  Brougham  evidently  did  not 
like  the  result.  He  clearly  saw  the  inconvenience  to  the  govern- 
ment of  having  one  standing  in  the  relation  of  pensioner  on 
whom  it  could  never  reckon  with  any  greater  security  than  its 
own  adherence  to  the  people's  interests  might  claim.  The  lan- 
guage of  friends  whose  characters  had  been  moulded  by  personal 
aspirations  and  political  expediency  was  not  likely  to  bring  her 
own  mind  into  a  state  to  be  pensioned.  "  Provided,"  said  one 
of  them,  "  that  you  do  nothing  in  the  mean  time  to  upset  your 
dish  with  the  government,  you  are  sure  of  one."  Without  com- 
ing to  any  decision  on  the  general  subject  of  literary  pensions, 
the  thoughts  such  experiences  suggested  made  her  only  the  more 
solicitous  to  preserve  her  own  independence  as  the  advocate  of 
the  people's  interests,  and  naturally  pointed  out  her  course  in 
after  years  as  often  as  the  time  for  decision  came. 

Appreciation  in  the  highest  quarter  was  not  wanting  to  her. 
"  Lord  and  Lady  Durham  told  me,"  she  said,  "  how  delighted 
the  Princess  Victoria  was  with  my  series,  and  this  took  place. 
"I  told  Lord  Durham  that  that  particular  young  lady's  reading 
was  of  some  consequence,  and  that  it  was  worth  something  for 
her  to  know  what  the  inside  of  a  workhouse,  for  instance,  was 
like ;  but  that  I  did  hope  she  did  not  read  for  the  story  only. 
In  her  position  it  really  would  be  a  very  good  thing  that  she 
should  understand  the  summaries  and  trace  them  in  the  stories. 
He  agreed,  and  in  a  few  days  he  sent  me  a  note  to  say  that  my 
hint  had  been  well  taken  and  was  attended  to.  Lady  Durham 
told  me  how,  one  evening,  the  little  girl  (then  eleven  years  old) 
came  with  hop,  skip,  and  jump  from  the  inner  drawing-room  to 
6how  her  mother  the  next  paper,  with  the  advertisement  of  the 


FAME. 


209 


1  Illustrations  of  Taxation/  whereby  her  pleasure  was  extended, 
when  she  thought  the  series  was  just  done.  The  Queen  has 
always  said  that  '  Ella  of  Garveloch '  was  her  favourite." 

Harriet  Martineau's  Autobiography  gives  the  impression  the 
world  made  upon  her  :  a  memoir  ought  to  give  the  impression 
she  made  on  the  world.  Of  this  there  would  be  no  end  of 
books  :  —  a  few  traits  must  suffice  in  the  space  afforded  by  one. 
She  was,  Mr.  Carlyle  used  to  say,  an  instance,  and  the  only  one 
he  knew,  of  clear  activity  being  compatible  with  happiness.  He 
could  not  talk  before  her,  he  added,  about  every  effort  being  pain- 
ful and  all  labour  sorrow.  "  You  are,"  he  said  to  herself,  "  like 
a  Lapland  witch  on  her  broomstick,  going  up  and  down  as  you 
will.  Other  people,  without  broomsticks,  drop  down,  and  can- 
not come  up  when  they  would ;  and  that 's  the  difference  between 
them  and  you.  Hartley  Coleridge  declared  her  to  be  "  a  mono- 
maniac  about  every  thing."  Sydney  Smith  was  of  a  similar 
opinion.  "  A  true  heroic  nature,"  he  said.  But  it  was  not  re- 
markable men  alone  who  were  stirred  to  admiration.  She  made 
a  profound  impression  on  every  body  she  met.  The  busy  mother 
of  a  family  of  a  dozen  children,  cumbered  with  much  serving, 
with  whom  she  was  one  evening  taking  tea,  forgot  every  thing 
else  in  the  charm  of  her  conversation,  and  said,  while  following 
her  to  the  door  as  she  took  leave,  "  I  am  so  sorry,  — so  sorry  you 
came,  for  I  cannot  bear  to  have  you  go  !  " 

It  was  after  the  completion  of  "the  series"  that  Monsieur 
Guizot,  then  Minister  of  Public  Instruction  in  France,  was  estab- 
lishing a  new  periodical  for  its  promotion.  He  directed  that  the 
numbers  should  each  open  with  a  biographical  sketch,  as  always 
sure  to  interest  the  readers,  and  he  ordered  the  first  to  be  a 
memoir  of  Harriet  Martineau ;  she,  he  said,  affording  the  only 
instance  on  record  of  a  woman  having  substantially  affected 
legislation  otherwise  than  through  some  clever  man. 

The  public  action  of  this  period  directly  to  be  traced  to  Harriet 
Martineau's  political  influence  may  be  seen  in  the  reform  song, 
sung  with  uncovered  heads  by  what  were  called  the  "  monster 
meetings,"  —  the  immense  assemblages  of  the  people  that  in 
1831  shook  the  kingdom  into  a  speedy  but  pacific  and  consti- 
tutional reform  in  1832. 


210 


MEMORIALS. 


"  Demerara "  told  upon  slavery  j  "  Cousin  Marshall,"  upon 
strikes,  in  conjunction  with  the  author's  constant  testimony 
against  them  to  the  people.  The  "  Charmed  Sea  "  was  influential 
upon  the  Polish  cause.  The  Corn-Law  ai}d  other  tales  told 
upon  monopolies.  For  the  influence  of  "  The  Tenth  Haycock  " 
upon  tithes,  and  for  the  effect  upon  the  house  and  other  taxes, 
the  new  postage  and  Canada,  reference  being  had  to  the  Auto- 
biography and  to  the  "  History  of  the  Peace,"  there  need  be  no 
further  mention  of  them  here.  An  amusing  dialogue  between 
Lord  Althorp  and  "  an  adviser  "  may  be  found  in  the  "  History  of 
the  Peace,"  —  the  adviser  being  Harriet  Martineau  herself. 

Some  of  her  letters  to  her  mother  here  subjoined  were  written 
during  the  publication  of  the  "  Illustrations." 

London,  Tuesday  night,  June  11,  1833. 

I  thought  I  should  have  nothing  to  tell  you,  dear  mother,  for  some 
time,  so  quiet  a  life  as  this  fortnight  is  to  be  ;  but  some  little  matters 
usually  turn  up  which  it  strikes  me  you  would  like  to  hear,  and  you 
see  I  always  fill  a  letter  somehow. 

Yesterday  I  read  diligently  for  the  Corn-Laws.  Mr.  Malthus,  pass- 
ing the  door  at  nine  o'clock,  inquired  when  I  was  to  return  from 
Paris,  where  he  saw  by  the  papers  /  now  am  ;  and  to-day  he  came 
and  stayed  an  hour.  Mrs.  Coltman  sent  for  me  to  dinner,  and  Mrs. 
Malthus  and  I  had  much  pleasant  talk,  and  at  dinner  I  sat  between 
father  and  son.  This  morning  I  corrected  proof,  made  summary  of 
Corn-Laws,  and  drew  out  some  of  my  story.  It  is  to  be  in  the  pictu- 
resque part  of  Yorkshire,  near  Sheffield,  where  there  are  hills  for  my 
miller,  foundries  for  my  artisans,  meadows  for  my  farmers,  sheep- 
walks  and  farms  for  my  land-owners,  black  moors  and  grouse  for 
their  sons,  and  so  on.  I  do  believe  that  as  an  illustration  it  will  be 
perfect,  whatever  it  may  turn  out  in  other  respects.  I  will  give  free 
course  to  my  feelings  and  opinions  on  this  tremendous  subject,  and  it 
shall  go  hard  with  me  but  I  will  make  others  think  and  feel  too.  I 
wonder  whether  you  ever  heard  the  story  Mr.  Potter  tells  of  a  college 
companion  of  his,  who  blundered  dreadfully  under  his  examination 
for  ordination.  As  a  last  resource,  he  was  asked  if  he  could  repeat 
any  one  text  from  the  Old  or  New  Testament.  He  readily  quoted 
"  And  Moses  said,  when  he  was  in  the  whale's  belly,  Almost  thou 
persuadest  me  to  be  a  Christian."  It  is  long  since  I  heard  a  jumble 
that  tickled  me  so  much.    And  now  good  night. 


FAME. 


211 


Wednesday. 

It  is  late,  dear  mother,  and  I  have  had  a  hard  day's  work  ;  but 
I  cannot  let  my  birthday  pass  without  a  line  to  you.   I  was  reminded 

of  it  by  a  sweet  letter  from  ,  thought  of  and  written  with  her 

accustomed  grace  of  sisterly  love.  I  never  passed  so  quiet  a  birthday, 
and  never,  assuredly,  so  happy  a  one.  I  had  set  it  apart  for  work,  and 
much  work  I  have  done  with  pen  and  needle,  and  much  more  with 
thoughts.  These  are  the  days  when  I  can  scarcely  believe  my  own 
destiny,  and  when  I  feel  that  I  can  never  work  too  diligently  or  dis- 
interestedly for  my  own  great  responsibilities.  Good  Janetta  writes 
her  congratulations  and  wonder  at  my  not  being  altered.  If  she 
was  here  she  would  see  that  there  is  that  in  my  office  which  forbids 
levity  as  much  as  it  commands  cheerfulness,  and  that  I  have  more 
need  than  ever  of  old  friends  and  their  supporting  love,  as  gazers  and 
admirers  of  my  efforts  crowd  round  me.  When  my  efforts  relax, 
these  last  will  retreat ;  and  then  what  would  become  of  me  if  I  was 
"  altered,"  or  had  lost  my  old  friends  1  What  a  year  this  has  been  ! 
"  Ella "  was  published  this  day  twelve  months,  but  how  little  way 
had  I  made  compared  to  what  I  have  now !  I  trust  this  Corn- 
Law  story  will  carry  me  on  further  ;  and  if  it  helps  to  open  eyes  and 
soften  hearts  on  the  tremendous  question  which  involves  millions 
of  lives  and  centuries  of  happiness  or  misery,  my  birthday  will  have 
been  well  spent  in  working  upon  it.  To  make  quite  sure,  I  have  for 
the  half-dozenth  time  compared  the  summary  and  the  plan,  and  I  am 
certain  that  the  summary  contains  the  whole  question,  and  that  the 
story  illustrates  every  bit  of  the  summary.  I  am  also  sure  that  the 
characters  are  characters,  if  I  can  but  keep  them  up.  I  mean  to  get 
it  all  into  one  number  if  possible,  and  shall  therefore  condense  the 
emotion  into  great  depth  and  retrench  the  description  as  much  as 
possible.  Every  page  shall  tell.  How  singular  is  the  faculty  of  con- 
ception !  That  Yorkshire  vale  with  its  people  is  become  as  perfect  a 
real  existence  to  me  since  yesterday  morning  as  if  I  had  lived  there. 
May  it  soon  be  so  to  you  !  And  may  I  be  permitted  for  yet  another 
year  thus  to  handle  God's  works  for  the  good  of  those  who  so 
unhappily  and  unconsciously  abuse  them  !  To-morrow  is  to  be 
quiet  too,  the  only  engagement  being  to  take  William  Stoker*  to 
see  the  model  of  the  copper-mine  in  the  Strand.    This  we  can  do 

between  dinner  and  tea.    Cresson  called  to-day  ;  t  so  did  Mr.   , 

bringing  me  a  pretty  coffee  apparatus  for  making  my  own  breakfast 

*  William  Stoker,  then  a  boy  of  thirteen,  the  only  son  of  her  landlady. 
+  Elliot  Cresson,  who  tried  to  deceive  her  about  the  colonization  society. 


212 


MEMORIALS. 


without  a  fire,  in  first-rate  style.  He  also  offers  an  order  for  the 
opera  for  Monday  or  Tuesday  next,  which  I  accept.  Mr.  Evans 
called  to  fix  on  to-morrow  for  a  final  sitting.*  I  have  done  a  chapter 
to-day  of  "  Sowers  not  Reapers."  Now  for  tea,  and  then  filling  up  my 
frank,  and  to  bed.  One  of  the  funniest  things  is  the  number  of  trades- 
men's cards  that  pour  in,  beautifully  sealed  and  directed,  puffing 
a  hundred  things  I  shall  never  want,  —  lamps  and  stays,  china,  shoes, 
and  soaps,  harps,  divine  oils,  and  celestial  essences. 

Mr.  says  I  should  suit  his  purpose  as  a  critic  much  better  if  I 

was  more  vain.  If  he  could  find  a  sore  place  he  would  rub  and  rub, 
as  he  declares  he  delights  to  do.  But  I  see  all  the  faults  of  my 
books,  he  says,  as  plainly  as  he  does.  I  tell  this  only  to  you,  as  I 
know  it  will  please  you.  I  do  believe  more  has  been  done  for  me 
and  my  books  by  my  being  glad  of  enlightened  criticism,  than  by 
any  one  part  of  me  besides. 

Pardon  this,  dear  mother,  and  take  it  not  as  vanity,  but  the 
communicativeness  which  you  ever  command  from  your  most  affec- 
tionate 

H.  MARTIXEAU. 

P.  S.  I  find  the  newspapers  report  me  as  in  Paris  ;  and  Mr. 
Fisher  has  just  sent  to  know  when  I  am  expected  to  return  from 
Paris !  The  Jeffreys  have  just  called,  and  are  kind  and  pleasant. 
The  Lord  Advocate  is  in  a  thorough  panic  about  the  country.  The 
Queen  t  and  royal  family  are  behaving  abominably.  The  King 
will  not  make  peers,  and  the  House  of  Lords  can  and  will  throw  out 
the  Ministry.  Will  they  get  back  as  quietly  as  before  ?  Every  body 
is  full  of  this  to-day.  Lady  Mary  Shepherd  was  surprised  to  hear 
yesterday  that  I  am  not  in  Paris.  Had  told  Lord  Henley  I  was. 
Now  I  am  to  meet  him  there  next  week. 

Monday. 

0,  but  do  you  know  Coleridge  told  me  yesterday  that  he  watches 
"  anxiously"  for  my  numbers  from  month  to  month  1  Can  it  be  that 
I  am  paying  him  in  any  measure  for  what  he  has  done  for  me  ?  He 
now  never  stirs  from  his  Highgate  abode.  He  is  not  sixty,  and 
looks  eighty,  —  and  such  a  picture  of  an  old  poet !  He  is  most 
neatly  dressed  in  black  ;  has  perfectly  white  hair  ;  the  under  lip 
quivering  with  the  touching  expression  of  weakness  which  is  some- 

*  This  was  the  unsatisfactory  full-length  portrait  that  hung  so  long  at  Lord 
Londonderry's  ;  and  which  was  pronounced  by  brother  painters  "  an  atrocity." 
t  Queen  Adelaide. 


FAME. 


213 


times  seen  in  old  age  ;  the  face  neither  pale  nor  thin  ;  and  the  eyes  — 
I  never  saw  such  !  —  glittering  and  shining  so  that  one  can  scarcely 
meet  them.  He  read  me  (most  exquisitely)  some  scraps  of  antique 
English  ;  and,  talking  about  metres,  quoted  some  poetry  so  as  to 
make  my  eyes  water.  He  talked  some  of  his  transcendentalism, 
which  I  wanted  to  hear.  He  talks  on  and  on,  with  his  eyes  fixed  full 
on  you,  and  distinctly  as  possible.  He  told  me  wherein  he  differed 
and  wherein  he  agreed  with  me  ;  but  this  is  too  transcendental  for  a 

letter  He  begged  me  to  see  him  again.    I  must  go. 

Mr.  Hallam  has  just  been  giving  me  a  comfortable,  long  call.  I 
like  him  much,  with  all  his  contradictiousness.  Did  I  tell  you  how 
popular  the  whole  story  of  Vanderput  is  ?  —  i.  e.  Mrs.  B.  Wood,  Mr. 
William  Smith,  Mr.  Hallam,  and  many  others  love  "  Christian  "  to 
my  heart's  content.  Mr.  Hallam  says  the  whole  story  is  one  of  my 
best,  —  the  idea  new,  the  picture  faithful,  and  Christian  exceeding 
almost  any  thing  preceding.  I  hope  he  is  right.  But  Whately  and 
the  poor-law  commissioners  pronounce  "  The  Parish  "  *  the  best  thing 
I  have  done. 

I  am  delighted  at  the  number  of  people  who  now  ask  me  about 
Mr.  Fox  and  Finsbury  Chapel,  and  go  to  hear  him.  Nothing  could 
exceed  him  yesterday,  and  there  were  plenty  to  hear  him.  It  was  on 
the  different  ways  of  loving  the  world,  —  the  duty  and  delight  of  lov- 
ing it  in  its  upward  tendency,  and  the  guilt  and  despicableness  of 
seeking  it  in  its  defilements  and  sinking  into  them.  Paul  and 
Demas  were  the  examples.  This  is  a  good  thought  to  sleep  upon  ; 
so  good  night,  dearest  mother. 

You  see  more  notices  of  me  than  I  do,  I  believe.  I  have  not  seen 
the  "  Spectator"  for  months  ;  and  the  "  Englishman's"  dedication  has 
not  met  my  eye. 

And  now  my  candle  is  just  burnt  out,  and  it  is  bedtime  ;  so  good 
night,  dearest  mother.  Fancy  me  always,  in  the  midst  of  clamour 
and  applause,  merrily  at  work  by  "  my  ain  fireside."  When  I  first 
lose  five  minutes'  sleep  by  night  or  tranquillity  by  day  from  any  thing 
the  world  says,  I  shall  think  myself  in  a  bad  way.  I  sleep  "  like  an 
infant,"  to  use  your  own  expression,  and  am  as  happy  as  the  day  is 
long.    This  once  for  all. 

Dear  love  to  your  home  party,  and  love  abroad  where  due,  from 
your  most  affectionate 

H.  MAKTINEAU. 

*  The  poor-law  tale. 


214 


MEMORIALS. 


What  between  the  scoffing  of  the  "  Quarterly  "  and  the  scepticism 
of  the  "  Edinburgh,"  the  hungry  people  are  ill  fed.  I  hope  a  third 
quarterly  will  some  day  arise,  wherein  the  people  may  be  grounded 
in  the  grand  truth  that  faith  in  God  — in  his  PRINCIPLES  — is 
inseparably  connected  with  faith  in  man.  This  will  soon  happen, 
now  that  circumstances  are  teaching  us  the  utter  helplessness  of  a  sys- 
tem of  expediency.  Meantime  I  have  chosen  my  lot.  It  is  to  teach 
principles,  let  what  will  come  of  it.  Nothing  but  good  can  eventu- 
ally come  of  it,  and  I  have  and  shall  have  many  helpers  

Dearest  mother,  never  mind  the  "  Quarterly." 

 called,  and  requested  me  to  mark  out  the  line  of  inquiry 

I  wish  him  to  pursue.    I  have  promised  to  ponder  the  matter.  The 

idea  was  not  only  my  own.   and  others  suggested  to 

me  as  the  man  ;  but  my  having  written  on  factory-children  gives  me 
a  sort  of  claim  to  suggest. 

Wednesday  night. 

I  breakfasted  with  this  morning,  and  have  since  had  a 

letter  from  that  precious  little  lady.  She  sends  her  kind  regards  to 
your  party.  Old  Niemcewicz  called  yesterday,  which  he  is  fond  of 
doing.  Fine  old  man  !  As  a  poet  he  is  pleased,  he  says,  with  "  the 
Tare  union  of  imagination  and  logic"  in  my  tales,  and  would  fain 
translate  them  into  Polish,  if  there  were  any  book-market  in  that 
unhappy  land.  They  are  actually  translated  into  German,  which  you 
will  be  glad  to  hear.    A  large  party  to-morrow. 

Thursday  night. 

It  was  a  sort  of  compromise.  The  Chancellor  was  there,  but  went 
away  early.  I  was  placed  between  the  Chief  Justice  and  Malthus, 
Loth  of  whom  were  very  talkative  to  me.  What  a  fine  face  Denman's 
is  !  We  were  eleven.  Mr.  Wishaw  was  going  to  Holland  House,  and 
offered  to  bring  me  home,  calling  by  the  way  on  Mrs.  Marcet  at  the 
Edward  Romilly's.  They  are  just  home  from  Ludlow,  of  which  place 
Mr.  E.  R.  is  member.  Mrs.  Marcet  is  sorry  to  find  that  Mr.  E.  R. 
and  I  are  of  the  same  opinion  about  the  Factory  Bill,  and  I  am  very 
glad.  She  ought  to  hold  the  same,  namely,  that  legislation  cannot 
interfere  effectually  between  parents  and  children  in  the  present  state 
of  the  labour-market.  Our  operations  must  be  directed  towards 
proportioning  the  labour  and  capital,  and  not  upon  restricting  the 
exchange  of  the  one  for  the  other,  —  an  exchange  which  must  be  volun- 


FAME. 


215 


tary,  whatever  the  law  may  say  about  it.  We  cannot  make  parents 
give  their  children  a  half-holiday  every  day  in  the  year,  unless  we  also 
give  compensation  for  the  loss  of  the  children's  labour.  The  case  of 
those  wretched  factory-children  seems  desperate  ;  the  only  hope  seems 
to  be  that  the  race  will  die  out  in  two  or  three  generations,  by  which 
time  machinery  may  be  found  to  do  their  work  better  than  their  mis- 
erable selves.  Every  one's  countenance  falls  at  the  very  mention  of 
the  evidence  which  has  lately  appeared  in  the  papers. 

,    June  17. 

A  note  from  Lady  Mary  Shepherd  this  morning,  to  say  she  would 
send  the  carriage  for  me  between  three  and  four  o'clock,  which  was 
done.  I  have  had  a  long,  pleasant  confab  with  Lord  Henley,  whom  I 
like  very  much.  We  had  lunch,  coffee,  and  much  talk,  —  we  two, 
Lady  Mary,  and  her  daughter.  The  real  object  of  the  interview  evi- 
dently was  to  urge  me  to  America  instead  of  on  the  Continent, 
when  the  series  is  done.  Lord  Henley  says  that  however  inferior  the 
Americans  are  in  some  respects,  in  others  they  have  got  down  to  prin- 
ciples of  justice  and  mercy  in  their  institutions  better  than  we  have. 
....  He  thinks  our  Church,  in  its  present  state,  the  dead-weight  on 
our  improvement,  and  instances  our  cathedral  towns  as  being  worse 
than  others.  He  told  me  that  till  he  read  "  Cousin  Marshall "  he 
never  thought  of  any  thing  more  in  the  way  of  charity  than  easing 
sorrow  when  it  was  before  him,  and  had  at  first  much  difficulty  in 
reconciling  me  with  his  Christianity. 

Wednesday. 

Now  the  plot  of  my  extraordinary  life  thickens,  dearest  mother  ! 
I  can  give  you  no  idea  of  the  scramble  which  is  going  on  for  me 

among  parties  The  poor-law  information  on  which  I  proceed 

is  ten  times  what  is  published,  and  the  publication  was  not  contem- 
plated when  I  undertook  the  work.  The  Chancellor  tried  in  vain  to 
persuade  Lord  Melbourne  to  delay  it  till  mine  was  out.  I  am  glad  it 
was  published,  as  it  corroborates  me,  and  leaves  me  plenty  of  material 

which  cannot  be  published  except  in  my  tales  However  it  may 

take  away  my  breath  to  see  my  early  guides  and  friends  taking  away 
my  supports  from  under  me,  and  leaving  me  to  stand  or  fall  by  my 
principles  alone,  I  will  not  allow  my  weakness  to  overcome  me,  while 
I  see  clearly  what  those  principles  are,  and  feel  that  they  are  trust- 
worthy But  what  strength  they  must  suppose  in  me  while  they 

bring  these  conflicting  principles  to  bear  upon  me  !  It  would  not  be 
politic  in  the  Radicals  thus  to  prove  me  if  they  did  not  believe  I 


216 


MEMORIALS. 


could  stand  it ;  and  they  shall  end  in  respecting  me  for  my  independ- 
ence, as  the  Tories  do  under  all  their  sarcasms,  and  as  the  Whigs  do 
amidst  all  their  regret  for  my  "  exaltation  of  sentiment "  and  what 
not.  Mr.  Fox's  mission  is  to  lead  a  party,  and  nobly  he  discharges  it. 
Mine  is  to  keep  aloof  from  party,  to  take  my  stand  upon  science  and 
declare  its  truths,  leaving  it  to  others  to  decide  whether  these  be  Tory, 
Whig,  or  Radical.  One  by  one  I  shall  surmount  hindrances  if  I 
live.  Ridicule  has  been  tried,  has  failed,  and  is  done  with.  I  trust  to 
disprove  Whig  prognostications  by  completing  my  work  regularly, 
rationally,  and  consistently  ;  and  the  Radicals  will  presently  find  I  am 
not  under  their  control.  Here  I  am,  placed  in  an  unparalleled  posi- 
tion, left  to  maintain  it  by  myself,  and  (believe  me)  able  to  maintain 
it ;  and  by  God's  grace  I  will  come  out  as  the  free  servant  of  his 
truth.  This  language  is  not  too  high  for  the  occasion.  The  more 
my  connections  enlarge,  the  more  I  see  the  eagerness  of  speculation  as 
to  what  I  am  to  turn  out  ;  and  (for  your  sake  I  add)  the  more  affec- 
tionate is  the  respect  and  the  more  cordial  is  the  confidence  of  my 
reception  wherever  I  have  once  appeared.  There  is  no  misinterpre- 
tation of  me  by  any  who  have  seen  me.  They  see  and  admit  that  the 
ground  of  my  confidence  is  principles  and  not  my  own  powers  ;  and 

they  therefore  trust  me,  and  eagerly  acquit  me  of  presumption  

I  send  you  the  Preface  to  the  Corn-Law  story.  I  dare  say  you  will 
find  an  opportunity  of  sending  it  back  before  printing-time  next 

month.    I  think  you  will  all  like  it.         _  „ 

Farewell,  H  M 

I  am  confident  it  is  not  the  partiality  of  friendship  which 
makes  me  see  in  the  package  of  letters  from  which  I  have  made 
these  random  selections  material  for  a  most  interesting  and  in- 
structive volume.  But  the  writer  meant  them  only  as  material 
for  something  which  I  might  write,  and  I  do  not  know  enough 
of  the  private  or  public  relations  of  the  vast  numbers  of  persons 
whose  lives  at  this  period  touched  hers,  to  venture  to  give  this 
revelation  of  them  to  the  press,  even  if  I  were  doubtful  as  to 
her  intentions.  But  my  instructions  left  no  doubt.  "  Read 
them,"  she  told  me,  "as  throwing  light  upon  my  life  at  that 
time.  How  much  or  how  little  I  cannot  tell,  for  I  dare  not  read 
them  myself;  and  I  dread  to  think  that  you  may  find  them 
full  of  egotism  and  vanity."  I  do  not  so  find  them ;  what 
would  be  so,  if  said  to  another,  is  only  dutiful  to  mother,  brother, 


FAME. 


217 


and  sister,  husband,  child,  or  next  friend.  And  for  the  rest,  it 
is  a  self-confidence  as  rare  as  well  deserved,  when  one  on  the  con- 
fines of  age  can  thus  confide  to  another's  eye  the  records  of  youth. 
But  she  knew  they  were  all  right  when  they  were  written,  — 
true,  that  is,  to  her  light  and  judgment  of  that  time  :  and  this 
committal  of  them  to  help  my  knowledge  of  her  before  we  met 
seems  to  me  in  fact  an  illustration  of  her  courageous  integrity. 

The  pride  and  satisfaction  of  the  mother,  so  constantly  kept 
informed  of  the  happenings  of  each  day,  was  too  great  to  remain 
satisfied  at  a  distance,  and  the  hazardous  step  was  taken  by  Har- 
riet Martineau  of  adding  to  all  the  public  cares  and  private  labours 
of  her  London  life  the  care  of  a  household.  I  find,  by  reference 
to  these  letters,  how  trying  the  position  became,  to  which  she  so 
tenderly  alludes  in  the  Autobiography  as  a  "troubling  of  the 
affections."  The  more  she  loved  and  honoured  her  mother,  the 
more  truly  she  estimated  the  many  really  admirable  qualities  that 
made  her  character,  the  more  she  must  naturally  have  suffered 
from  a  fretful  and  domineering  temper  which  claimed  continually 
what  it  was  absurd  and  wrong  in  the  daughter  to  yield.  She 
was  not  a  second  time  guilty  of  the  folly  of  sacrificing  her  career 
of  life  and  duty  to  her  mother's  insufficient  judgment,  but  she 
suffered  profoundly  from  the  pain  of  resisting  it ;  and  in  com- 
bining her  mother's  wishes  and  her  own  loving  sense  of  filial 
duty  with  the  exigencies  of  her  position  as  one  owing  a  duty  to 
the  world,  took  every  proper  precaution  against  the  readily  fore- 
seen ill  consequences  of  the  new  step. 

TO  MRS.  MARTINEAU. 

July  8, 1833. 

Dearest  Mother,  —  I  have  rather  put  off  writing,  feeling  that  I 
have  much  to  say,  and  now  I  must  write  after  all  more  briefly  than 
usual.  Mrs.  Ker  has  told  you  that  I  am  well,  and  so  I  go  on  to 
what  you  most  want  to  know  next.  About  our  future.  I  know  of  no 
risks  that  you  are  not  at  present  aware  of,  and  I  have  no  fresh  doubts. 
You  are  aware  that  I  must  travel,  after  1834,  for  a  year  or  little  short 
of  it ;  and  we  all  know  that  my  resources  depend  on  health,  and 
in  some  degree  on  popularity.  I  say  "  in  some  degree,"  because  I  am 
pretty  sure  that  I  can  now  never  be  without  employment  unless  I 

VOL.  II. 


218 


MEMORIALS. 


choose.  I  wish  to  put  the  pension  out  of  the  question  because,  though 
it  is  as  fully  designed  for  me  as  ever,  I  am  just  as  likely  to  refuse  as 
to  accept  it ;  and  besides,  it  is  intended  for  purposes  of  improvement, 
unless  sickness  should  oblige  me  to  live  upon  it.  But  I  incline  more 
and  -more  to  refuse  it,  though  I  need  not  make  up  my  mind  till  I  see 
how  I  am  circumstanced  with  respect  to  the  people  when  it  is  offered. 
I  have  every  hope  of  being  able  to  supply  my  annual  £  150,  and  you 
are  as  well  aware  of  the  chances  against  it  as  myself.  I  shall  be  very 
happy  to  invest  £  200  in  furniture,  in  addition  to  that  of  my  own  two 
rooms,  and  you  can  take  it  out,  if  that  plan  will  make  you  easy,  at 
your  convenience.  If  not,  we  shall  not  differ  about  these  matters,  I 
am  sure.  My  advice  is  that  we  begin  modestly,  —  with  a  house 
which  we  may  keep  after  a  time,  when  our  income  may  be  reduced. 
With  prudence  I  think  we  may  hope  to  live  comfortably  on  our 
means,  while  I  may  be  laying  by  something  against  a  time  of  rest,  if 
it  should  please  God  to  preserve  my  health.  I  see  no  other  plan 
which  promises  equal  comfort  for  the  three  parties  concerned,  and  if 
you  are  willing  to  trust  to  our  industry  and  care,  so  am  I ;  and  I  have 
no  doubt  we  shall  make  one  another  happy,  if  we  at  once  begin  with 
the  change  of  habits  which  our  change  of  position  renders  necessary. 
I  fully  expect  that  both  you  and  I  shall  occasionally  feel  as  if  I  did 
not  discharge  a  daughter's  duty,  but  we  shall  both  remind  ourselves 
that  I  am  now  as  much  a  citizen  of  the  world  as  any  professional  son 
of  yours  could  be.  You  shall  be  most  welcome  to  my  confidence,  as 
ever,  and  to  any  comfort  that  may  be  derived  from  living  in  the  same 
house,  and  meeting  at  the  same  table,  and  taking  frequent  walks,  and 
having  many  mutual  friends.  My  hours  of  solitary  work  and  of 
visiting  will  leave  you  much  to  yourself  ;  this  you  know  and  do  not 
fear  ;  so  now  the  whole  case  is  before  you,  and  you  know  exactly 
under  what  feelings  I  say  "  Come."  I  may  just  mention  that  I  see  no 
sign  of  disapprobation  on  any  hand,  though  there  are  naturally  doubts 
here  and  there  as  to  how  a  removal  from  a  place  where  you  have 
lived  so  many  years  may  affect  you.  We,  however,  know  that  re- 
moval to  be  necessary,  whether  you  come  to  London  or  fix  your  abode 
elsewhere  ;  there  is  another  chance,  dear  mother,  and  that  is,  of  my 
marrying.  I  have  no  thoughts  of  it.  I  see  a  thousand  reasons  against 
it.  But  I  could  not  positively  answer  for  always  continuing  in  the 
same  mind.  It  would  be  presumptuous  to  do  so  ;  and  I  especially  feel 
this  when  I  find  myself  touched  by  the  devoted  interest  with  which 
some  few  of  my  friends  regard  my  labours.  I  did  not  know  till  lately 
any  thing  of  the  enthusiasm  with  which  such  services  as  I  attempt 


FAME. 


219 


can  be  regarded,  nor  with  what  tender  respect  it  could  be  testified. 
I  mean  no  more  than  I  say,  I  assure  you  ;  but,  strong  as  my  convic- 
tions are  against  marrying,  I  will  not  positively  promise.  As  for  my 
money  prospects,  the  sale  cannot  now  fall  below  the  point  of  profit, 
and  large  profit  ;  and  there  is  the  cheaper  edition  to  look  to,  which 

every  body  says  will  yield  an  income  for  years  to  come  

Do  not  trouble  yourselves  about  the  vagabond  who  took  my  name 
at  the  police-office  the  other  day.  Nobody  but  "  The  Age  "  will  take 
her  to  be  me. 

Then  follows  the  usual  journal  of  the  week.  Visitors,  dinners, 
evening  parties,  work  completed.  It  was  at  this  time  that  the 
fine  incense  of  the  eighteenth  century  was  made  to  smoke  around 
her  by  Mrs.  Berry  and  her  friends.  It  appears  to  have  been 
delicately  done ;  for,  after  a  long  list  of  distinguished  names,  — 
"  a  charming  little  party  to  meet  me,"  —  she  acknowledges  that 
it  was  very  pleasant,  "  though  I  was  made  the  principal  person, 
quite."    She  goes  on  :  — 

I  have  been  doing  again  about  the  factory  business.  What  a  sweet 
letter  from  Ellen  !  I  am  much  obliged  by  Aunt  Rankin's  bag. 
Dear  love  to  you  two  from 

Yours  most  affectionately, 

H.  MARTINEAU. 

The  above  letter  is  dated  "  July  8,"  from  the  house  of  a  lady 
who  tells  her  mother,  on  the  same  sheet,  of  the  merry  time  they 
are  having  together,  —  "  rather  noisy,  sometimes  romping  even, 
but  on  the  whole  reasonable,"  —  "  freaks  of  opera-dancing,"  etc., 

which  Mrs.  wishes  might  last  a  month.    This  lady 

always  saw  with  the  most  painful  sympathy  how  sad  a  thing  it 
was  that  one  like  Harriet  Martineau,  with  a  head  so  clear,  hands 
so  busy,  and  a  heart  so  tender,  —  constantly  devoting  herself  for 
her  family,  and  feeling  as  if,  in  fact,  she  could  never  do  enough 
for  their  interests  and  pleasure,  —  should  have  been  subjected  to 
the  trial,  to  her  the  greatest  possible,  of  a  deficiency  in  tender- 
ness. But  "  that  which  is  wanting  cannot  be  numbered."  Mrs. 
Martineau,  always  a  severe  mother,  had  now  become  an  exacting 
and  jealous  one,  and  no  precautionary  measures  could  avail.  As 


220  MEMORIALS. 

her  daughter's  sphere  of  duty  outgrew  her  own,  she  again  became 
as  really  unable  to  sympathize  with  her  as  when,  in  childhood, 
she  had  so  fatally  mismanaged  her. 

A  loving,  dutiful,  and  reverential  nature  never  sees  at  the 
time  where  the  cause  of  such  a  difficulty  as  this  lies,  especially 
when,  as  in  this  case,  the  place  of  the  string  wanting  is  filled 
with  all  the  vigour  and  activity  of  a  strong  character. 

It  is  wide  of  the  present  purpose,  the  harmonious,  mournful 
verse  of  the  finely  endowed  Felicia  Hemans,  that 

"  Bought  alone  by  gifts  beyond  all  price, 
The  trusting  heart's  repose,  the  paradise 
Of  home,  with  all  its  loves,  doth  fate  allow 
The  crown  of  glory  unto  woman's  brow  "  ; 

since  the  same,  as  far  as  it  is  true,  is  equally  so  of  illustrious 
persons  of  both  sexes ;  as  the  lives  of  so  many  great  men  show, 
notwithstanding  the  public  opinion  of  these  centuries  ;  which, 
favouring  the  notion  that  it  is  man's  exclusive  privilege  to  do 
great  things,  has  hindered  woman  in  doing  them  by  abundance 
of  morbid  statements  like  the  above. 

But  greatness,  in  man  or  woman,  must  bear  its  special  bur- 
dens. They  are  neither  heavier  nor  widely  different  from  those 
imposed  by  littleness.  It  is  a  very  common  thing  to  see  family 
peace  wrecked  where  there  is  no  greatness  to  awaken  jealousy. 

Though  all  her  devotedness  failed  to  satisfy  her  mother's  un- 
reasonable requisitions,  one  thing  could  be  and  was  done  by 
Harriet  Martineau  at  this  time.  She  relieved  literature  of  the 
reproach  of  making  human  character  undomestic  and  irritable, 
and  showed,  in  her  own  instance,  that  public  duty  does  but  fit 
the  better  for  private  life.  It  needed  as  high  a  motive,  joined  to 
all  her  filial  tenderness,  to  go  on  to  the  very  end  of  possibility 
with  this  suffering  family  life.  It  was  not  (as  we  who  look  back 
upon  it  can  now  readily  see)  the  best  thing  to  have  done  for 
the  parties  concerned ;  but  it  shielded  literature  and  the  charac- 
ter of  woman  from  a  reproach  which,  at  that  period  —  the  birth- 
day of  a  new  public  question  —  it  was  of  the  utmost  consequence 
to  avoid.    Her  "  unvarying  sweetness  of  temper,"  so  often  men- 


FAME. 


221 


tioned  by  early  friends,  enabled  her  to  fulfil  to  the  utmost  the 
domestic  duty  of  this  period. 

Happily,  the  heavy  trial  of  the  time  was  divided  to  Harriet 
Martineau  by  her  American  life.  On  leaving  London  she  seized 
the  opportunity  of  visiting  her  good  elder  brother  Robert  and 
his  wife,  her  early  friend,  with  their  numerous  young  family,  at 
Birmingham.  It  was  an  hour  of  delightful  heart's  ease  and 
recreation.  Before  leaving  them  for  Liverpool,  to  embark,  she 
begged  the  beloved  little  flock  to  say  what  they  wished  her  to 
bring  them  from  America.  The  same  shy,  dutiful  answer  from 
all,  —  "  whatever  Aunt  Harriet  pleased,"  except  the  little  Maria, 
who  said,  "  Bring  me  a  humming-bird's  nest."  It  was  this  child 
who,  twenty  years  after,  joined  her  in  London,  at  the  time  that 
her  recovery  was  pronounced  hopeless,  with  the  devoted  deter- 
mination of  never  leaving  her  again ;  who  was  unto  her  as  a 
daughter,  and  who  died  by  her  side. 

But  I  must  not  anticipate. 

Meanwhile,  amid  present  anxieties  and  future  hopes,  proofs  of 
the  success  of  her  labours  for  the  public  welfare  were  continually 
reaching  her.  Not  only  did  the  Manchester  workmen  declare 
that  "  her  hero  was  their  hero,"  and  their  conviction  that  "  she 
must  have  passed  her  life  in  a  mill,"  to  have  written  of  their 
hopes  and  wrongs,  their  sorrows  and  temptations,  their  rights 
and  their  needs,  in  a  manner  so  experimental  and  effectual.  The 
most  influential  among  the  employers  were  of  the  same  mind, 
and  co-operated  to  their  utmost  in  the  way  she  indicated.  Her 
mind  was  of  the  high  mediatorial  character  that  can  seize  the 
truth  and  the  right  amid  conflicting  interests,  and  make  it  seen 
and  felt  of  all.  About  this  time  her  friend,  Lord  Durham, 
wrote  to  her  thus  :  — 

Lambton  Castle,  January  18,  1834. 
Dear  Miss  Martixeau,  —  I  have  desired  a  Newcastle  paper  to  be 
sent  you,  with  an  account  of  some  observations  of  mine  on  the  unions 
of  this  district,  and  of  the  steps  taken  to  counteract  their  bad  tendency 
by  the  institution  of  an  association  carrying  into  effect  all  the  good 
objects  of  the  old  unions,  without  their  accompanying  evils.  I  will 
send  you  the  rules,  etc.,  when  they  are  printed.  Hitherto  the  attempt 


222 


MEMORIALS. 


has  succeeded  well.  There  were  1200  members  when  I  addressed 
them,  and  many  have  joined  since,  on  the  mere  hearsay  report  of  what 
I  had  said.  No  doubt  it  is  expensive,  for  it  will  cost  me  £  200  per 
annum  at  least  ;  but  so  much  is  at  stake  that  I  do  not  grudge  it,  I 
hope  to  engraft  on  this  association  schools  and  libraries.  The  funds 
are  flourishing  ;  at  the  end  of  this  their  first  year  they  have  a  balance 
of  more  than  ,£'5()0. 

I  assure  you  when  I  was  addressing  the  men  I  could  not  help 
thinking  how  much  more  effective  it  would  have  been  had  I  merely 
read  to  them  an  extract  from  your  Manchester  strike. 

I  hope  you  will,  however,  enable  me  soon  to  circulate  amongst  them 
that  which  will  compensate  for  my  deficiency. 

Yours  very  truly, 

DURHAM. 

The  members  only  subscribe  4d.  a  week.  They  collected,  in  1833, 
£  1,170  13s.  2d.,  and  spent  .£663  15s.  9d.t  leaving  a  balance  on  hand  of 
.£506  17s.  5  d.  I,  as  proprietor,  name  the  president,  and  the  mem- 
bers elect  the  committee  and  stewards. 

Lambton  Castle,  January  1st,  1834. 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  I  have  read  your  excellent  paper  with 
great  pleasure,  and  thank  you  most  sincerely  for  having  spared  us  a 
portion  of  your  valuable  time.  I  shall  see  Mr.  Morton  to-day,  and 
arrange  with  him  as  to  the  best  mode  of  circulating  it.  Its  style  and 
tone  is  perfectly  adapted  to  win  the  confidence  and  convince  the  un- 
derstandings of  the  working  classes.  No  time  is  to  be  lost,  for  on 
the  Tyne  the  combination  is  spreading  rapidly,  and  the  most  violent 
and  bloody  measures  are  openly  avowed. 

I  leave  Lambton  to-morrow,  and  expect  to  be  in  London  on  Mon- 
day night  I  am  endeavouring  to  unite  our  three  great  parishes 

of  Chester,  Houghton,  and  Gateshead  under  one  overseer,  with  a  lib- 
eral salary,  to  carry  into  effect  the  Southwell  principle  of  administer- 
ing the  poor-laws,  —  in  fact,  that  which  is  illustrated  in  your  works. 
If  I  succeed,  you  might  perhaps  tell  me  where  I  could  find  the  proper 
person.  The  salary  would  be  large  enough  to  tempt  a  first-rate  per- 
son to  undertake  the  office. 

Yours  very  truly, 

DURHAM. 

The  fearful  "  Condition-of-England  Question,"  which  Harriet 
Martineau  thus  confronted  in  her  active  time,  was  not  without 


FAME. 


223 


cause ;  one  of  its  causes  was  the  ignorance  and  apathy  of  the 
middle  class. 

Persons  of  the  highest  intelligence,  literary  cultivation,  and 
religiously  trained  thought,  like  Sara  Coleridge,  took  such  a  mis- 
taken and  merely  literary  view  of  the  matter  as  this  :  — 

"  What  a  pity  it  is,  that,  with  all  her  knowledge  of  child-nature,  she 
should  try  to  persuade  herself  and  others  that  political  economy  is  a 
fit  and  useful  study  for  growing  minds  and  limited  capabilities,  —  a 
subject  of  all  others  requiring  matured  intellect  and  general  informa- 
tion as  its  basis  !  This  same  political  economy  which  quickens  the 
sale  of  her  works  now,  will.  I  think,  prove  heavy  ballast  for  a  vessel 

that  is  to  sail  down  the  stream  of  time  And  she  might  have 

rivalled  Miss  Edgeworth !  .  .  .  .  And  then,  what  practical  benefit  can 
such  studies  have  for  the  mass  of  the  people  for  whom,  it  seems,  that 

Miss  M  intends  her  expositions  ?    They  are  not  like  religion, 

which  may  and  must  mould  the  thoughts  and  acts  of  e very-day  life, 
the  true  spirit  of  which,  therefore,  cannot  be  too  much  studied  and 
explained.  But  how  can  poor  people  help  the  corn-laws,  except  by 
sedition  I " 


FOEEIGN  LIFE,  —  WESTERN". 


"  Rough  are  the  steps,  slow-hewn  in  flintiest  rock, 
States  climb  to  power  by  ;  slippery  those  with  gold 
Down  which  they  stumble  to  eternal  mock  : 
No  chaff erer's  hand  shall  long  the  sceptre  hold, 
Who,  given  a  fate  to  shape,  would  sell  the  block." 

James  Russell  Lowell. 

"  Henceforth  thou  art  the  genius  of  the  shore." 

Milton. 

"  He  that  would  bring  back  the  wealth  of  the  Indies  must 
carry  out  the  wealth  of  the  Indies  : "  and  the  knowledge  of  this 
was  what  caused  the  unusual  excitement  in  the  public  mind  of 
America  when  it  became  known  there  that  Harriet  Martineau 
was  about  to  visit  the  United  States.  They  had  been  annoyed 
by  incompetent  persons  assuming  to  be  their  factors  and  inter- 
preters to  Europe,  but  here  was  one  of  a  different  type  ;  and  the 
single  thought  was  of  the  return  freightage.  No  English  traveller 
had  before  visited  the  country  with  so  brilliant  a  prestige.  She 
brought  out  such  a  reputation  for  learning  as  well  as  genius, 
for  piety  as  well  as  power,  for  trained  critical  ability  as  well 
as  natural  observing  faculty,  for  thorough  knowledge  of  Eng- 
land as  well  as  kindly  dispositions  towards  America,  that  the 
statesman-like  acquirements  and  literary  success  which  had  con- 
stituted her  greatness  at  home  were  but  few  among  many  of 
the  considerations  that  made  her  fame  abroad. 

She  came  with  a  social  prestige  to  the  showy  dwellers  of 
Atlantic  cities.  These  were  the  persons  whose  ambition,  or 
rather  lack  of  genuine  self-esteem,  was  shown  by  their  efforts,  in 
humble  imitation  of  the  obnoxious  class  distinctions  which  the 


226 


MEMORIALS. 


best  Englishmen  think  the  least  worth  perpetuating,  to  keep  up 
among  themselves  dim  traditional  notions  and  literary  illusions 
unrecognized  by  the  land  at  large.  Her  aristocratic  friendships 
were  better  known  to  them  than  her  democratic  sympathies ; 
and  they  desired  the  reflected  light  of  such  glories.  She  came, 
too,  with  an  unequalled  religious  prestige  to  her  own  denomina- 
tion ;  which,  unlike  Unitarianism  at  that  time  in  England,  was 
here  an  influential  one  for  its  wealth,  social  position,  and  liter- 
ary culture.  She  came  with  unexampled  claims  on  the  minds 
of  leaders  in  national  and  state  politics ;  while  our  "  millions," 
the  reading  public,  who  were  to  succeed  to  this  leadership  in 
their  turn,  were  longing  to  express  their  grateful  acknowledg- 
ments for  the  pleasant  awakening  she  had  given  to  their  moral 
sense. 

For  the  thing  that  had  principally  marked  the  few  years  im- 
mediately preceding  her  arrival  was  a  singular  moral  apathy  or 
paralysis  of  the  public  mind,  which  made  its  literature,  politics, 
and  religion  all  seem  either  formal  and  unreal,  or  dispropor- 
tioned  and  extravagant,  —  the  smooth,  relenting  movement  of  the 
spent  engine,  with  great  noise  and  bustle  among  the  conductors. 
Life  was  fast  degenerating  into  insipid  sentimentalism  or  ridicu- 
lous caricature  among  all  who  were  not  actually  struggling  for  a 
living.  There  was  no  advance,  for  that  part  of  the  nation  that 
ought  by  position  and  cultivated  intelligence  to  have  led  had 
lost  the  way. 

But  popularly  accepted  and  borne  onward  by  the  admiration 
of  all,  Harriet  Martineau  enjoyed  unequalled  opportunities 
for  coming  to  just  conclusions  about  America.  She  landed 
in  Kew  York  in  the  middle  of  September,  1834,  and  travelled 
first  in  the  states  of  New  York,  Xew  Jersey,  Massachusetts, 
and  Pennsylvania,  examining  their  cities,  villages,  and  manufac- 
tories, visiting  friends  and  making  pilgrimages  to  every  scene  of 
interest,  from  its  sublimity  and  beauty,  or  from  its  moral  associa- 
tions. She  remained  six  weeks  in  Philadelphia,  where  there  are 
as  many  circles  of  society  as  at  Geneva,  each  personally  unknown 
to  the  other,  having  constant  intercourse  with  most  of  them ; 
and  she  stayed  three  weeks  in  Baltimore  before  establishing  her- 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


227 


self  at  "Washington  for  the  session  of  Congress.  While  in  the 
capital  of  the  nation,  she  was  earnestly  sought  by  all  the  eminent 
men  of  all  parties  among  senators,  representatives,  and  judges  of 
the  Supreme  Court,  and  was  on  terms  of  friendship  and  intimacy 
with  the  leading  minds  of  the  whole  Union.  She  enjoyed  the 
advantage  of  intimate  and  confidential  intercourse  with  a  class 
of  men  of  whom  none  now  remain,  —  the  founders  of  the  Eepublic 
and  their  immediate  successors.  She  was  in  Richmond  while 
the  Virginia  Legislature  was  in  session,  and  then  made  a  long 
winter  journey  through  North  and  South  Carolina.  Thence  she 
traversed  the  State  of  Georgia  to  Augusta,  and  from  that  capital 
to  Montgomery,  Alabama,  descending  the  river  afterwards  to 
Mobile.  Her  route  led  thence  to  New  Orleans  and  up  the  Mis- 
sissippi and  Ohio  to  Nashville,  Tennessee,  on  the  Cumberland 
River,  and  to  Lexington,  averaging  a  fortnight  in  each  place. 
After  visiting  the  wonderful  Mammoth  Cave  in  Kentucky  she 
descended  the  Ohio  to  Cincinnati,  and  after  making  a  visit  of  ten 
days  there,  and  again  ascending  that  river,  she  landed  in  Vir- 
ginia, visiting  all  the  natural  wonders  and  beauties  of  the  re- 
gion. She  arrived  a  second  time  at  New  York  about  the  middle 
of  July,  1835.  The  autumn  she  spent  in  the  smaller  towns  of 
Massachusetts,  not  neglecting  to  visit  its  principal  cities,  making 
a  long  visit  in  the  family  of  Dr.  Channing  at  Newport,  and  an 
excursion  to  the  mountains  of  New  Hampshire  and  Vermont. 
All  this  time  the  newspapers  were  zealous  heralds  and  homagers, 
so  that  it  might  have  been  a  refreshment  to  her  to  take  up  one 
that  did  not  follow  her  progress  with  praise.  One  winter  she  passed 
in  Boston,  during  the  session  of  the  Massachusetts  Legislature, 
always  in  the  houses  of  persons  who  had  become  intimate  and 
dear  friends ;  who,  though  of  opposite  parties,  sects,  and  aims, 
had  the  common  feeling  of  affection  for  her,  and  the  common 
wish  to  put  in  her  possession  every  means  of  information,  or 
opportunity  for  becoming  acquainted  with  New  England.  Plym- 
outh, the  landing-place  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers  in  1620,  she 
saw  at  the  celebration  of  "  Forefathers'  Bay,"  December  22, 
1835 ;  and  the  day  completed  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years 
since  the  ancestors  of  the  people  she  had  been  studying  emerged 


228 


MEMORIALS. 


from  their  little  vessel  with  that  independence  of  mind  which 
made  of  their  posterity 

"  A  church  without  a  bishop,  and  a  state  without  a  king." 

Another  two  months'  visit  in  New  York,  with  another  month 
of  New  England  farm-house  life,  and  then  came  her  last  Ameri- 
can journey  into  the  "West  by  ship  across  the  great  inland  seas, 
and  along  to  the  prairies  beyond  the  far  lake-shore  ;  again, 
through  the  State  of  Ohio,  taking  the  river  at  Beaver  and  visiting 
Kapp's  Communist  settlement,  thence  onward  by  Pittsburgh  and 
the  canal  route  through  Pennsylvania,  and  by  railroad  over  the 
Alleghanies,  reaching  New  York  in  time  to  sail  for  England  on 
the  1st  of  August,  1836. 

An  amount  of  life  was  crowded  into  these  two  years  which 
her  six  volumes  on  America  could  by  no  means  fully  tell,  nor 
her  Autobiography,  nor  her  voluminous  private  journal,  now  lying 
under  my  hand.  She  had  entered  by  sympathy  and  insight  into 
the  lives  of  so  many  families  and  the  secrets  of  so  many  hearts, 
as  to  have  been  to  them  like  a  sister,  daughter,  and  next  friend 
and  counsellor.  The  society  of  a  foreign  country  is  to  few  trav- 
ellers more  than  a  stage  procession,  to  most  an  enigma  ;  but  to 
her  it  was  a  field  of  action  and  a  host  of  friends  for  life.  She 
had  formed  no  special  plans  of  American  travel,  not  even  the 
common  one  of  not  venturing  to  take  a  living  interest  in  the 
land  while  she  remained  in  it,  nor  to  write  a  book  about  it  when 
she  should  return.  She  came  for  rest  and  the  refreshment  of 
change ;  and  in  order  to  learn  what  were  those  principles  of  jus- 
tice and  mercy  towards  the  less  fortunate  classes  which  the  Ameri- 
cans had  been  thought  by  good  men  in  her  own  country  to  have 
more  truly  ascertained  than  themselves. 

"  As  to  actual  knowledge  of  their  country,"  she  says,  "  my 
mind  was  nearly  a  blank.  I  remember  the  vague  idea  I  had, 
before  this  expedition  to  the  United  States,  that  there  were  thir- 
teen of  them,  and  that  was  almost  the  only  idea  about  them  I 
did  possess."  Her  journal  is  a  full  memorandum  of  facts,  events, 
statistics,  experiences,  and  all  those  special  "  happenings "  of 
which  some  persons  have  to  a  proverb  more  than  others ;  and 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


229 


she  was  one  of  those  who  have  most.  The  best  knowledge  ever 
is  the  knowing  how  and  what  to  learn :  and  this  she  possessed 
in  snch  an  abundant  measure,  that  her  two  American  years  were 
better  than  the  ignorant  and  careless  lifetime  of  many  another. 
Her  letters  and  journals  are  rilled  with  sketches  of  personages, 
traits  of  character,  and  pictures  of  scenery,  — jottings  of  the 
salient  points  of  the  new  life  she  was  living,  and  its  consequent 
ideas,  thoughts,  and  queries.  They  are  not  a  record  of  feelings 
or  opinions,  but  texts  for  the  long  running  commentary  of  con- 
versation with  family  and  friends  on  return. 

Her  first  care  is  seen  to  be  the  acquirement  of  a  thorough 
knowledge  of  American  parties  and  American  politics,  and  the 
morals  of  both  as  shown  in  all  the  action  and  inaction  of  the 
country.  She  studied  the  theory  and  the  apparatus  of  the  gov- 
ernment, she  watched  the  office-seekers  and  the  office-holders, 
and  the  state  of  the  citizens'  minds,  as  shown  in  speeches  and 
conversation,  in  silence,  and  in  various  public  life.  She  observed 
to  what  motives  the  newspapers  appealed  or  declined  to  appeal, 
what  were  the  sectional  and  caste  prejudices  shown  in  the  politi- 
cal non-existence  of  certain  classes.  In  looking  into  the  social 
economy  of  the  United  States  she  shared  the  life  of  the  solitary 
pioneers  of  civilization,  and  the  life  of  the  fashionable  watering 
places ;  the  various  life  of  the  far  West ;  the  plantation  and 
city  life  of  the  South  j  the  life  of  the  New  England  farming 
and  manufacturing  populations  and  fishing  villages ;  the  life  of 
the  leading  statesmen,  magistrates,  and  literary  men  ;  the  family 
life  of  its  fashion,  of  its  gentry,  and  of  its  ministers  of  religion. 

She  especially  studied  the  agriculture  of  the  country,  and  all 
the  land  and  labour  questions  it  involves,  with  its  markets, 
means  of  transport,  and  internal  improvements. 

This  was  a  time  of  masonic  and  anti-masonic  strife ;  of  bank 
and  anti-bank  excitement ;  of  tariff  and  anti-tariff :  and  she 
enjoyed  every  possible  facility  for  life-studies  of  the  commerce, 
manufactures,  and  currency  of  the  country.  Slavery,  as  a  part 
of  its  economy  and  as  interwoven  with  its  morals,  a  subject  too 
on  which  she  had  so  recently  written  and  thought,  she  could  not 
of  course  overlook. 


230 


MEMORIALS. 


But  what  most  deeply  interested  her  was,  what  new  type  of 
civilization  is  to  evolve  from  these  new  institutions  ]  Is  suffrage 
to  remain  subject  to  its  present  restrictions'?  Is  woman  to  remain 
subordinate  1  Is  property  to  remain  subject  to  its  present  laws, 
or  shall  there  be  better  mutual  arrangements  1  Does  the  evident 
dissatisfaction  of  all  classes  with  the  present  prophesy  a  reorgan- 
ization of  society  on  a  better  basis  in  the  future  1  She  looked  to 
see  what  are  the  points  of  honour  among  the  people ;  what  the 
position  of  the  women;  what  the  standard  of  elegance  and  polite- 
ness ;  what  the  treatment  of  children  ;  what  degree  of  happiness 
is  the  result  of  marriage  as  existing  among  them.  She  was  full 
of  thought  about  the  suffering  classes,  —  whether  through  crime, 
or  by  reason  of  deficiency  or  infirmity  of  organization,  or  misfor- 
tune of  position.  One  of  her  main  objects  was  to  observe  the 
workings  of  slavery.  The  religion  of  America  in  its  science, 
spirit,  and  administration  was  closely  observed  by  her ;  and  the 
book  of  which  her  mind  was  then  full,  and  which  was  published 
after  her  return,  is  entitled  "  How  to  Observe."  It  gives  her 
methods  of  obtaining  facts  and  coming  at  the  truth  by  their 
means.  Her  powers  of  observation  were  enlarged  by  greater 
exercise  than  other  persons  undergo,  for  her  deafness  compelled 
a  persistent  course  of  inquiry,  —  a  more  careful  inspection  and  a 
more  thorough  examination  than  they  think  of  exercising.  It 
obliged  her  also  to  take  the  precaution  of  being  always  accom- 
panied by  a  friend.  This  gave  a  double  strength  to  her  testi- 
mony ;  for  although  one  may  be  presumed  to  be  sometimes  mis- 
taken, in  the  mouth  of  two  witnesses  every  word  is  established. 
She  was  thus  obliged  to  know  every  thing  at  first  hand,  and  too 
soon  and  too  certainly  learned  how  little  persons  in  general  know 
of  their  own  country,  to  feel  any  temptation  to  take  second-hand 
information.  Previous  to  coming  to  the  United  States  she  had 
written  that  letter  to  the  deaf,  which  brought  her  very  near  the 
hearts  of  all  afflicted  like  herself  with  that  exclusion  through  the 
failure  of  the  sense  of  hearing  of  which  none  but  the  sufferers 
can  know  all  the  sadness.  One  natural  reward  of  the  frank,  self- 
regulated  course  which  made  her  example  so  powerful  a  seconder 
of  her  precepts  was,  to  be  placed  on  all  public  occasions  so  as  to 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


231 


hear  the  speakers.  One  natural  consequence  of  her  inability 
to  hear  general  conversation  was  that  intimate  interchange  of 
thought  and  feeling  which  made  her  the  confidential  friend  of  all 
the  eminent  persons  she  met ;  and  their  number  was  very  great. 
There  was  not  an  eminent  statesman  or  man  of  science,  not  an 
active  politician  or  leading  partisan,  not  a  devoted  philanthro- 
pist, not  a  great  jurist,  nor  university  professor,  nor  merchant- 
prince,  nor  noted  divine,  nor  distinguished  woman  in  the  whole 
land  who  did  not  to  the  fullest  measure  of  their  natures  pay 
homage  to  the  extraordinary  compass  of  hers.  At  the  South  she 
was  in  every  city  she  visited  the  honoured  guest  of  its  most  dis- 
tinguished families.  The  Madisons  and  the  Clays,  Calhoun  and 
the  Porters,  were  especially  devoted  to  her.  Her  visit  to  the  Mad- 
isons was  never  to  be  forgotten  by  them  or  by  herself.  All  parties 
possessed  the  eminent  social  gift  of  talking  and  letting  talk.  Of 
this  time  the  whole  of  each  day  was  spent  in  rapid  conversation. 
Mr.  Madison,  for  his  share  of  it,  discoursed  on  the  principles  and 
history  of  the  Constitution  of  the  United  States  ;  and  his  insight 
respecting  the  condition  of  foreign  nations,  and  his  dispassionate 
survey  of  that  period,  with  his  abundant  household  anecdotes  of 
Washington,  Franklin,  Jefferson,  were  an  invaluable  privilege. 
Judge  Marshall  was  the  daily  guest  of  Mr.  Madison  during  these 
profoundly  interesting  days.  Their  interest  was  not  confined  to 
the  past  nor  to  the  present,  but  stretched  far  into  the  future,  and 
Harriet  Martineau  always  spoke  of  this  period  with  delight :  she 
came  at  a  happy  hour,  —  the  last  possible  one  for  the  enjoyment 
of  these  privileges,  which  brought  her  into  the  line  of  our  American 
traditions,  while  yet  these  founders  of  the  state  were  living  to  give 
her  the  key-note  of  the  American  Eepublic.  Of  Judge  Marshall 
she  never  spoke  without  emotion.  He  had  at  once  felt  in  hers  a 
kindred  mind;  and  she  had  instantly  reverenced  in  him  that 
majestic  grace  of  departing  days  that  attends  the  close  of  a  grand 
and  virtuous  life.  There  was  too  much  of  mutual  respect  in  their 
first  meeting ;  and  it  was  not  until  succeeding  ones  had  made 
them  intimate  friends  that  she  learned,  in  addition  to  her  general 
knowledge  of  his  character  and  services,  how  rare  were  his 
individual  merits  :  and  in  after  times  she  was  never  tired  of 


232 


MEMORIALS. 


describing  "  the  tall,  majestic,  bright-eyed  old  man."  "  Old," 
she  somewhere  says,  "  by  chronology,  and  by  the  lines  on  his 
composed  face,  and  by  his  services  to  the  Republic,  but  so  digni- 
fied, so  fresh,  so  present  to  the  time,  that  no  feeling  of  compas- 
sionate consideration  for  age  dared  to  mingle  with  the  contem- 
plation of  him."  Of  the  admiring  friendship  that  she  saw  existing 
between  himself  and  Mr.  Madison,  so  strongly  tried,  yet  never 
touched  by  their  long  political  opposition,  and  of  his  reverence  for 
woman,  seldom  seen  so  impressive  in  kind  or  in  so  high  a  degree, 
founded  on  his  extensive  knowledge  and  experience  as  the  father 
and  grandfather  of  women,  she  never  spoke  without  enthusiasm. 
"  Made  clear-sighted  by  his  purity,"  she  said,  "  and  by  the  love 
and  pity  which  their  offices  command,  he  had  a  deep  sense  of 
their  social  injuries,  and  a  steady  conviction  of  their  intellectual 
equality  with  men."  One  cannot-  find  space  even  to  name  the 
multitudes  at  Washington  with  whom  she  became  intimately 
acquainted.  She  was,  among  many  other  such  happenings,  in- 
vited to  assist  in  doing  the  honours  of  the  British  Legation 
to  the  seven  judges  of  the  Supreme  Court  and  seven  great 
lawyers  besides  :  "  The  merriest  day  that  could  well  be. 
There  is  no  merrier  man  than  Mr.  Webster,  who  fell  chiefly  to 
my  share,  and  Judge  Story  would  enliven  a  dinner-table  at 
Pekin." 

The  letter  of  moral  credit,  so  to  call  it,  which  Judge  Marshall 
gave  to  Harriet  Martineau  on  every  inhabitant  of  the  land, 
expressing  in  advance  his  gratitude  to  any  and  all  who  should 
do  her  service,  was  with  him  no  customary  form  or  idle  compli- 
ment. It  was  the  expression  of  his  sense  of  the  value  of  her 
character  to  the  nation  through  which  she  was  passing. 

Without  a  reference  to  the  map  of  the  United  States,  and  a 
sketch  of  their  origin,  chronology,  and  modes  of  life,  I  could  not 
give  to  a  European  an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  wide  sections 
of  country  visited  by  Harriet  Martineau  during  the  years  of  her 
American  life.  It  is  a  nation  as  various  as  its  territory  is  vast ; 
and  such  geographical  particulars  as  I  have  found  space  for  are 
given  merely  to  show  the  great  opportunities  that  her  genius  then 
opened  to  her,  and  which  she  had  the  eye  to  see  and  the  tact  to 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


233 


seize.  It  is  impossible  to  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  influ- 
ences she  set  in  motion,  both  by  origination  and  sympathy. 
She  visited  the  prisons,  the  hospitals,  the  asylums,  the  educa- 
tional institutions  :  the  factories,  the  farms,  the  plantations,  and 
the  courts  of  law  were  equally  familiar  to  her.  She  was  in  ball- 
rooms and  drawing-rooms  in  alternation  with  senates  and  legis- 
latures. She  was  the  beloved  and  venerated  guest  of  the  richest 
and  the  poorest,  —  dwelling  by  turns  in  all  America  had  to  show 
for  palaces,  and  in  the  log-houses  of  the  pioneer  settlements. 
She  saw  the  two  proscribed  races  —  the  negroes  and  the  Indian 
tribes  —  in  all  their  aspects,  and  the  dominant  one  in  all  its 
forms.  She  met  men  in  their  families,  churches,  and  markets, 
at  their  festivals,  funerals,  and  weddings,  at  their  land-sales, 
political  gatherings,  and  slave-auctions. 

There  are  persons  whose  gift  it  is  to  teach,  lead,  influence ; 
persons  of  so  loving  a  nature  that,  without  a  thought  of  popu- 
larity, they  make  themselves  generally  and  passionately  beloved : 
and  of  these  she  was  chiefest.  I  could  not  count  the  American 
families  who  held  her  dear  as  one  of  their  own  members  :  and 
who  ever  spoke  of  her  as  one  whose  intercourse  brightened  their 
whole  past.  In  some  instances  there  was  a  tone  of  regret  that 
she  had  not  always  remained  as  they  knew  her  first.  Like  dot- 
ing families  who  dread  to  see  their  youth  outgrowing  youth's 
peculiar  charm  to  man  and  womanhood,  they  wished  her  always 
to  remain  an  inquirer  into  their  institutions.  They  were  ready 
to  weep  on  seeing  her  depart  from  the  region  of  Sabbath  rest 
where  she  found  and  left  them  in  this  season  of  refreshment  from 
toil  and  preparation  for  battle.  But  this  feeling  of  course  dimin- 
ished in  exact  proportion  as  her  influence  made  them  worthier ; 
and  at  length  even  slaveholders  seemed,  in  after  days,  in  some 
instances  to  have  forgotten  their  anger  at  the  time  when  her  care- 
fully formed  judgment  was  pronounced  upon  the  agitating  and 
in  after  years  successfully  solved  problem,  though  the  conse- 
quences of  delaying  the  solution  are  still  strongly  felt  in  Amer- 
ica. They  began  to  fancy  her  philosophy  the  only  bar  to  friend- 
ship between  them  and  herself. 

The  subjoined  letter  from  one  of  the  Southern  cities  in  which 


234 


MEMORIALS. 


she  passed  a  delightful  period  "will  show  how  she  was  esteemed 
there.  It  is  from  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Gilman  of  South  Carolina,  to 
her  mother,  in  England. 

TO  MRS.  MARTINEAU. 

Charleston,  S.  C,  1835. 

Dear  Madam,  —  An  hour  "before  parting  from  your  daughter  I 
offered,  in  the  fulness  of  my  heart,  to  write  to  you.  Knowing  the 
feelings  of  a  mother,  I  send  you  this  letter  as  I  would  give  a  piece  of 
bread  to  a  hungry  man,  not  because  it  is  the  most  savoury  thing  in 
the  world,  but  because  a  good  appetite  will  make  it  sweet.  —  The 
fortnight  Harriet  passed  with  us  (you  know  she  loves  that  appella- 
tion) we  shall  never  forget  :  not  from  the  development  of  her  fine 
powers  in  general  society,  but  from  the  winning  manner  in  which  she 
gave  and  inspired  confidence  at  home.  I  love  to  remember  the  frank 
and  hearty  air  in  which,  when  we  had  fought  through  a  day  of  varied 
and  sometimes  exhausting  engagements,  she  threw  aside  her  cloak  and 
said  to  my  husband  and  myself,  at  eleven  o'clock  at  night,  "  Come, 
now,  let  us  have  a  little  talk  !  "  How  far  we  looked  down  into  each 
other's  hearts  in  those  winged  midnight  hours !  and  what  a  treasure 
of  friendship  was  garnered  up,  not  for  this  world,  —  for,  alas,  we  shall 
probably  never  meet  again,  —  but  for  another,  where  no  wide  sea 
shall  separate  us  ! 

I  had  written  thus  far  when  an  unusually  rapid  scratching  of  my 
husband's  pen  attracted  my  attention,  and  peeping  over  his  shoulder 
I  perceived  that  he  was  writing  on  the  same  subject  as  myself  to  his 
brother,  E.  G.  Loring  of  Boston.  It  saves  me  a  little  embarrassment 
to  copy  his  letter,  because  I  cannot  pour  out  my  thoughts  as  unreserv- 
edly to  you  on  your  daughter's  merits  as  I  would  to  another. 

"  Dear  Friend  and  Brother,  —  I  have  been  for  some  days 
meditating  a  letter  to  you  on  the  subject  of  Miss  Martineau.  It  was 
a  true  and  happy  impulse  which  caused  both  Caroline  and  myself  to 
think  of  sending  her  a  letter  of  invitation  to  stay  with  us  as  long  a3 
she  remained  in  Charleston.  The  letter  met  her  in  Richmond  ;  and,  as 
she  has  since  repeatedly  said,  gave  her  great  pleasure.  We  expected 
an  elegant,  talented,  good  woman.  We  did  not  expect,  in  addition 
to  all  this,  a  lively,  playful,  childlike,  simplicity-breathing,  loving 
creature,  whose  moral  qualities  as  much  outshine  her  intellect  as 
these  last  do  those  of  the  ordinary  run  of  mankind.    But  exactly  so, 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


235 


and  without  any  exaggeration  or  enthusiasm  in  my  picture,  we  found 
her.  On  account  of  the  necessary  irregularity  and  dissipation  of  her 
present  mode  of  life,  I  gave  her  full  liberty  to  keep  her  own  hours, 
and  to  be  free  from  the  rules  of  the  family.  But  no  ;  she  found  out 
our  hours  of  family  prayer,  and  always  came  in  most  punctually  with 
her  favourite  Bible,  the  Porteusian  edition,  which  she  reads  more  than 
any  other  book.  In  fact,  though  intending  to  be  with  us  only  a  fort- 
night, she  at  once  domesticated  and  ensconced  herself  among  us  as 
quietly  and  closely  as  if  she  had  come  for  ten  years.  Dining  out  fre- 
quently and  passing  the  evening  at  one  or  two  parties,  as  soon  as  she 
came  home  at  night,  and  had  read  at  my  request  a  devotional  hymn  in 
her  own  sweet  and  primitive  manner,  she  would  take  Caroline  on  one 
side  and  me  on  the  other,  and  there,  fixed  eye  to  eye  and  soul  to  soul, 
would  she  enchain  and  enchant  us  until  long  after  midnight,  when 
we  were  obliged  to  tear  ourselves  away,  only  out  of  tenderness  to  her. 
I  do  not  think  a  woman  ever  lived  who  had  such  power  to  inspire 
others  with  affection.  So  you  will  say  when  you  know  her  ;  so  every 
body  says  who  has  passed  two  hours  in  her  society.  —  One  peculiar 
bond  of  interest  between  us  was  that  all  her  early  attempts  at  publica- 
tion, which  laid  the  foundation  of  her  subsequent  fame,  were  issued 
in  the  1  Monthly  Kepository,'  just  about  the  time  when  I  used  to  con- 
tribute to  that  periodical  a  series  of  papers  called  the  Critical  Synop- 
sis of  the  '  Monthly  Kepository,'  consisting  of  remarks  on  every  piece 
inserted  in  that  work.  We  passed  several  hours  in  looking  over  those 
volumes.  She  never  knew  the  author,  or  his  name  ;  but  told  me  she 
used  to  figure  him  as  a  fat  old  gentleman  in  New  England,  sitting  in 
his  easy-chair,  with  a  blue  coat  and  yellow  buttons,  pronouncing  de- 
cisions on  her  youthful  compositions.  On  the  second  of  the  two 
Sundays  she  passed  with  us  I  taught  her  a  part  of  John's  first  chapter 
in  Greek.  Her  accuracy  and  determination  to  pass  over  not  a  single 
principle  in  grammar  or  criticism,  however  minute,  was  astonishing. 
—  When  I  asked  my  Caroline,  who  was  with  us  at  the  time,  if  she 
was  not  jealous  of  my  growing  too  fond  of  Harriet  Martineau,  my  glori- 
ous wife*  said,  '0,  no!  take  all  the  comfort  in  her  that  you  can.'  She 
has  a  wonderful  power  of  inspiring  confidence,  and  extorting  from  those 
in  whom  she  is  interested  the  whole  history  of  their  past  lives.  This 
power  was  exercised  over  several  of  our  leading  politicians  at  Wash- 
ington and  elsewhere,  as  well  as  over  us.  Mr.  Calhoun  took  infinite 
pains  to  indoctrinate  her  into  the  system  of  nullification.  When  we 
dined  with  General  H.  we  were  invited  an  hour  before  the  other 

*  "  I  tell  the  tale  as 't  is  told  to  me."  — Note  by  Mrs.  Gilman. 


236  MEMORIALS. 


guests,  that  he  might  give  her,  at  her  request,  his  views  on  slavery. 
She  studiously  avoided  arguing  on  these  subjects,  but  quietly  and 
keenly  directed  her  attentions  and  questions  to  gentlemen  of  all 
parties  in  such  a  manner  as  to  bring  out  the  whole  scope  of  detail  of 
their  several  opinions.  She  made  no  secret  of  her  aversion  to  slavery. 
She  perceives  and  acknowledges,  however,  that  the  movements  of  the 
abolitionists  have  injured  and  retarded  the  cause  of  slaves  here. 
Many  little  presents  were  sent  her  and  Miss  J.  while  here,  and  the 
mode  of  attention  would  probably  have  been  manifested  much  more 
frequently  had  she  remained  longer.  Mrs.  Ws.  gift  (your  Louisa  will 
be  interested  to  know)  was  six  linen  cambric  handkerchiefs,  marked 
with  various  emblems  of  Harriet's  character  and  fame.  She  threw  out 
many  little  pleasantries  on  the  six  carriages  that  were  offered  for  her 
use  (one  of  which  stood  regularly  at  our  door  at  eleven  o'clock  daily), 
threatening  to  make  a  procession  of  them  and  sit  in  the  first.  We 
gave  her  no  party  on  account  of  our  accumulated  engagements,  but 
invited  friends  to  breakfast  with  her.  She  loves  children,  and  children 
love  her.  She  has  brought  ours  a  Bible  play  for  Sunday  evenings,  in 
which  adults  join  with  great  interest.  On  the  last  day  of  her  being 
in  Charleston  she  resisted  several  invitations  in  order  to  comply  with 
our  girls'  desire  to  have  her  visit  their  dancing-school.  Caroline  and 
I  accompanied  her  eighteen  miles  out  of  town,  where  we  spent  the 
day  in  rambling  in  the  woods  or  reading  her  works.  We  could  not 
have  done  any  thing  else.  On  our  return  home  at  night  we  found 
that  our  Louisa  (fourteen  years  old)  had  beguiled  the  time  by  com- 
posing her  first  piece  of  music  and  calling  it  the  'Martineau  Cotillon.' 
I  have  purchased  the  Boston  edition  of  her  1  Illustrations '  for  my 
wife,  and  Miss  M.  has  written,  after  a  little  coaxing  from  her,  one  or 
more  sentences  in  every  number,  giving  a  precious  bit  of  history  or 
remark  respecting  the  tales.  She  could  hear  most  of  my  sermons 
through  her  horn,  and  has,  I  trust,  benefited  me  by  her  remarks  and 
encouragements.  She  is  a  deep  adept  in  the  philosophy  of  Carlyle, 
the  reviewer  of  Burns,  and  the  characteristics,  in  the  Edinburgh. 
She  devoted  several  reading  evenings  to  these  articles  for  us  and 
Colonel  C.'s  family,  our  charming  neighbours.  She  will  speak  of 
Coleridge  and  Wordsworth  and  spiritual  growth  to  your  heart's  con- 
tent. Colonel  P.,  the  senator  from  Columbia,  who  says  to  her  in  a 
recent  letter,  1  How  can  you  make  people  love  you  so  V  has  purchased 
her  portrait,  by  Osgood.  General  H.  sent  her  a  set  of  the  '  Southern 
Review,'  and  we  had  a  delicious  evening  after  she  went  away  marking 
the  author's  names  and  talking  her  over  with  the  C.'s.  —  She  contrived 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


237 


to  run  through  several  books  in  one  fortnight,  besides  writing  to  her 
numerous  correspondents  and  bringing  up  her  journal  ;  yet  she  never 
was  in  a  hurry,  never  kept  people  waiting,  and  seemed  only  to  hanker 
for  long,  sweet,  private  conversations  with  Caroline  and  myself.  Her 
friend,  Miss  J.,  is  an  original,  keen,  frank,  intelligent  young  lady,  and 
secures  friends  in  every  quarter ;  my  wife  abandoned  herself  to  the 
pleasure  of  intercourse  with  them.  Her  deportment  to  them  was  that 
of  resistless  hilarity,  while  mine  was  more  solemn,  under  the  painful 
consciousness  that  our  interview  must  soon  be  over.  My  letter  is  a  poor, 
faint  idea  of  what  you  will  find  her.  Her  laugh  is  exquisitely  amia- 
ble, frequent,  and  joyous.  Wife  is  going  to  write  to  Harriet's  mother. 
She  adores  her  brother  James,  a  young  Liverpool  minister,  more  than 
any  body  else  in  the  world,*  and  next  to  him  Mr.  Furness  ;  but  E.  G. 
Loring  will  step  in  between  brother  James  and  Mr.  Furness." 

My  long  extract,  dear  madam,  will  give  you  a  correct  impression  of 
the  nature  of  the  intercourse  with  your  daughter  on  our  part.  I  will 
only  add  that  her  journey  through  the  United  States  has  thus  far 
been  one  of  triumph,  —  the  best  kind  of  triumph  too,  for  she  has  been 
borne  along  on  our  hearts. 

Remember  us  to  "  brother  James  and  sister  Ellen  "  and  the  other 
members  of  a  family  whom  u  not  having  seen  we  love." 

Yours  respectfully, 

CAROLINE  GILMAN. 

Harriet  Martineau  was  deeply  impressed,  on  arrival  in  the 
United  States,  with  a  society  basking,  as  she  somewhere  says,  in 
one  bright  sunshine  of  good-will.  Such  sweet  temper,  such 
kindly  manners,  such  hearty  hospitality,  such  conscientious  re- 
gard for  human  rights,  received  from  her  a  warm  tribute  of 
admiration.  Her  journals  and  letters  record  it  all ;  and  room 
should  be  found  for  a  few  passages,  all  in  harmony  with  the  pre- 
ceding letter. 

65  Broadway,  New  York,  September  22,  1834. 
....  General  Mason  and  family  are  loading  us  with  attentions.  He 
is  one  of  the  most  finished  gentlemen  I  ever  saw  ;  and,  if  I  am  not  mis- 
taken, one  of  the  most  sensible  of  men  He  is  guiding  us  as  to 

our  route,  and  insists  on  our  whole  party  to  Niagara  taking  posses- 
sion of  his  country-house  on  Lake  Erie,  which  he  writes  to  direct  his 
son  to  prepare  for  us.    His  son  is  governor,  and  lives  at  Detroit. 

*  Except  her  mother.  —  Note  by  Mrs.  Oilman. 


238 


MEMORIALS. 


How  shall  I  ever  tell  you  what  we  are  doing  ?  At  the  table  of 
honour  appropriated  to  us  I  am  compelled  to  take  the  highest  place. 
Half  our  day  is  taken  up  with  callers.  Such  trains  of  them  !  The 
late  mayor,  to  bid  me  welcome,  members  of  Congress,  lawyers  and 
candidates  for  office,  interested  in  poor-laws  and  what  not,  —  you 
must  fancy  all  this.  Some  of  my  honours  are,  having  three  special 
orders  issued  for  my  things  to  pass  the  custom-house  untouched  ; 
tributes  from  Bryant  and  others  ingeniously  placed  under  my  eyes  ; 
a  letter  from  the  principal  booksellers  of  the  State,  asking  leave  to 
negotiate  for  any  work  I  may  think  of  publishing,  and  begging  me 
to  designate  from  their  book-list  what  works  they  shall  have  the 
pleasure  to  present  me  with.    And  every  copy  of  my  books  is 

snapped  up  To-morrow  we  dine  with  the  Carys  Mr. 

Furness  preached  at  Mr.  Ware's  chapel  on  Sunday.  It  was  most  de- 
lightful. The  chapel  is  large,  cool,  and  well  planned  and  well  filled. 
The  pews  are  beautifully  disposed,  and  the  white  building  with  its 

large  green  blinds  might  tempt  in  wanderers  on  a  hot  day  

The  quiet,  deep  tones  of  Mr.  Furness's  fine  voice  suited  my  ear  so  well 

that  I  heard  every  syllable  without  effort  Mr.  Furness  came 

straight  clown  from  the  pulpit  to  me,  in  much  agitation,  —  begged  me 
to  accept  the  hospitality  of  his  house  first  when  I  go  to  Philadelphia. 
He  was  almost  in  tears,  and  so  were  we,  it  was  so  like  a  brotherly 
meeting.  I  have  had  divers  invitations  to  Philadelphia,  but  Mr. 
Furness  is  to  entertain  us  first. 

I  am  told  that  the  violence  about  the  slavery  question  is  all  among 
the  Irish  and  low  labourers,  who  are  afraid  of  the  coloured  people 
being  raised  to  an  equality  with  them.  If  this  is  true,  it  alters  the 
state  of  the  case. 

There  is  no  bringing  away  any  thing  about  Jackson,  they  contradict 
one  another  so  flatly. 

Within  five  minutes  after  I  had  crossed  the  threshold  of  my  Broad- 
way lodgings  I  was  informed  that  the  institutions  of  the  country  will 
have  fallen  into  ruin  before  I  leave  ;  that  "the  levelling  spirit"  is 
desolating  society  here  ;  and  that  America  is  on  the  verge  of  a  military 
despotism  !  Such  were  the  first  politics  I  heard  in  America  !  I  need 
not  tell  you  my  informant  was  not  over  wise. 

JOURNAL. 


New  York,  September  24.  —  Mr.  Gallatin  called.  Old  man.  Be- 
gan his  career  in  1787.  Has  been  three  times  in  England.  Twice  as 
minister.    Found  George  IV.  a  cipher.    Louis  Philippe  very  differ- 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


239 


ent.  Will  manage  all  himself,  and  keep  what  he  has.  William  IV. 
silly  as  Duke  of  Clarence.  Gallatin  would  have  the  President  a 
cipher  too,  if  he  could,  i.  e.  would  have  him  annual,  so  that  all  would 
be  done  by  the  ministry.  As  this  cannot  yet  be,  he  prefers  four 
years'  term  without  renewal,  to  the  present  plan,  or  to  six  years.  The 
office  was  made  for  the  man,  —  Washington,  who  was  wanted  (as  well 
as  fit)  to  reconcile  all  parties.  Bad  office,  but  well  filled  till  now. 
Too  much  power  for  one  man  :  therefore  it  fills  all  men's  thoughts  to 
the  detriment  of  better  things.  Jackson  "a  pugnacious  animal." 
This  the  reason  (in  the  absence  of  interested  motives)  of  his  present 
bad  conduct. 

New-Englanders  the  best  people,  perhaps,  in  the  world.  Prejudiced, 
but  able,  honest,  and  homogeneous.  Compounds  elsewhere.  In 
Pennsylvania  the  German  settlers  the  most  ignorant,  but  the  best 
political  economists.  Give  any  price  for  the  best  land,  and  hold  it 
all.  Compound  in  New  York.  Emigrants  a  sad  drawback.  Slaves 
and  gentry  in  the  South.  In  Gallatin's  recollection,  Ohio,  Illinois,  (?) 
and  Indiana  had  not  a  white  except  a  French  station  or  two  :  now  a 
million  and  a  half  (?)  of  flourishing  whites.  Maize  the  cause  of  rapid 
accumulation,  and  makes  a  white  a  capitalist  between  February  and 
November,  while  the  Indian  remains  in  statu  quo,  and  when  accu- 
mulation begins,  government  cannot  reserve  land.  The  people  are 
the  government,  and  will  have  all  the  lands.  [Ponder  this.]  Drew 
up  a  plan  for  selling  lands.  Would  have  sold  at  $2.  Was  soon 
brought  down  to  $  1^,  with  credit.  Then,  as  it  is  bad  for  subjects  to 
be  debtors  to  a  democratic  government,  reduction  supplied  the  place 
of  credit,  and  the  price  was  brought  down  to  j  dollar. 

All  great  changes  have  been  effected  by  the  democratic  party,  from 
the  first,  up  to  the  universal  suffrage  which  practically  exists. 

Aristocracy  must  arise.  (?)  Traders  rise.  Some  few  fail,  but  most 
retain,  with  pains,  their  elevation.  Bad  trait  here,  —  fraudulent  bank- 
ruptcies, though  dealing  is  generally  fair.  Beason,  that  enterprise 
must  be  encouraged,  —  must  exist  to  such  a  degree  as  to  be  liable  to 
be  carried  too  far. 

Would  have  no  United  States  Bank.  Would  have  free  banking 
as  soon  as  practicable.  It  cannot  be  yet.  Thinks  Jackson  all  wrong 
about  the  bank,  but  has  changed  his  opinion  as  to  its  powers.  It  has 
no  political  powers,  but  prodigious  commercial.  [Is  not  this  political 
power  in  this  country  ?]  If  the  bank  be  not  necessary,  better  avoid 
allowing  this  power.    Bank  has  not  overpapered  the  country. 

Gallatin  is  tall,  bald,  toothless,  speaks  with  burr,  looks  venerable 


240 


MEMORIALS. 


and  courteous.  Opened  out  and  apologized  for  his  full  communi- 
cation.   Kissed  my  hand. 

Van  Buren  is  the  chief  of  the  tones.  Clay  is  the  father  of  the 
tariff  system.  A  hearty  orator.  Is  it  the  Irish  and  low  labourers 
who  riot  against  abolition  ? 

September  24,  1834. — Rode  to  the  James  King's,  at  High  Wood, 
two  miles  beyond  Hoboken.  Saw  bullocks  yoked  ;  ridge  of  rock  and 
wood  ;  splendid  sunset,  with  crimson  sky  ;  pretty  white  wooden  cot- 
tages, with  thatched  verandas.  View  from  Mr.  King's  garden  beauti- 
ful ;  down  to  the  Narrows,  and  up  twelve  miles.  Glass-factory  flaming 
among  woods  opposite,  and  elegant  sloops  moored  in  soft  red  light  on 
river.  Pretty  and  free-and-easy  young  people.  Once  made  a  quali- 
fication for  office  that  the  candidate  should  never  have  fought,  and 
should  never  hereafter  fight,  any  duel.  Got  rid  of  by  moving  that 
promissory  oaths  are  unlawful.  Fight  at  Hoboken,  and  escape  into 
New  York.  Robert  Sedgwick  thinks  Webster  equal  to  Demosthenes, 
and  Clay's  warmth  external.  Saw  Miss  Sedgwick's  picture  at  his 
house,  —  fine  expression,  thoughtful  and  sweet. 

September  25.  —  Colonel  Johnson  maimed  in  war.  Likely  to  be 
President,  General  M.  says.  Saw  Cass,  Secretary  of  War.  Shrewd, 
hard-looking  man.  Once  vehement  in  politics,  but  tongue  stopped  by 
Jackson.  Has  been  Secretary  only  this  term.  Irish  driving  of  stage. 
Civility  and  freedom  of  manners.  Rail-cars  very  comfortable.  Snake 
Hill  beautifully  wooded.  Many  butterflies.  Profusion  of  other  animal 
life  compared  with  human.  Dwellings  dotted.  Indian  corn.  Hay 
left  on  ground  to  be  carried  in  frost.  Smooth  Hackensack  and  Pas- 
saic. Alternate  salt  plains  and  wood.  Fine  weeds  and  elegant  poke- 
berry,  used  (and  hops  too)  as  asparagus  when  young.  Cattle  feeding 
in  enclosure  where  stumps  are  gray  and  like  rocks.  Paterson  stands 
in  a  basin  ;  but  basin  above  level  of  stream.  Rough  and  good  people. 
Most  immoral  before  manufactures  were  established.  Now,  drunken- 
ness, but  great  improvement  in  other  respects.  Stand  made  by  Mr. 
Collet  against  factory  immorality.  When  currency  troubles  came,  and 
all  but  three  factories  closed,  young  folks  dropped  into  parents'  farms. 
When  business  was  gradually  resumed,  dropped  in  again,  so  no  want 
of  hands.  Difficult  to  get  servants,  from  girls  preferring  factory- 
work.  No  place  to  deposit  money  ;  so  often  lost.  The  maid  to-day 
with  no  cap.  Pretty  girl  of  fourteen  nursing  baby.  Tall,  and  not 
awkward.  Very  simple.  All  seem  to  think  that  repeal  of  our  corn 
laws  would  break  up  aristocracy.  Also  that  they  themselves  are  be- 
coming too  democratical.    Must  educate  the  people,  and  not  legislate 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


241 


against  democracy.  All  think  Brougham  mad  or  drunk.  Cooper 
vain  and  petulant,  Mrs.  Griffith  says.  Lady  fell  from  rocks  at  Passaic. 
Husband  married  again,  and  proposed  bringing  his  second  wife  the 
day  after  their  marriage  !  Fire-works  at  the  falls ;  little  water 
to-day  ;  but  wooded  hills  and  rocks  beautiful.  Different  levels 
of  water,  some  turbulent,  some  still.  Stumps  in  field.  Fine  fern. 
View  of  Paterson,  under  amphitheatre  of  ridges.  Fine  situation. 
Figures  crossing  turf,  —  "  plodding  homewards."  Young  girls  earn 
three  or  four  dollars,  and  can  board  for  one  and  a  quarter.  Talk  on 
female  education,  &c,  with  Mr.  Collet.  Curd  and  preserves,  cheese 
and  fruit,  for  dessert.  Eaw  beef  and  cakes  and  biscuits  for  tea.  De- 
licious ice  at  eight. 

October  10.  —  We  must  remember  this  day  for  having  seen  our  first 
log-hut,  and  got  some  idea  of  forest  sights.  0,  the  dark  shades  of 
those  thronging  trees,  with  their  etherealized  summits  !  The  autumn 
woods  have  hitherto  seemed  too  red  and  rusty  ;  these  were  the  melt- 
ing of  all  harmonious  colours.  And  the  forms  !  drooping,  towering,  — 
all  sorts  :  and  the  tallest  bare  stems  with  exquisite  crimson  creepers. 
The  cleared  hollows  and  slopes,  with  the  forest  advancing  or  reced- 
ing, but  ever  bounding  all,  is  as  fine  to  the  imagination  as  any  natural 
language  can  be.  I  looked  for  an  Indian  or  two  standing  on  the 
forest  verge,  within  a  shade  as  dusky  as  himself.  I  have  written  of 
utility  being  transmuted  into  beauty  as  time  modifies  tastes.  This 
country  must  be  the  scene  ;  for  here,  while  utility  is  advancing 
gigantically,  there  is  no  time  to  impair  the  wild  beauty  of  nature. 
The  two  will  be  found  in  new  and  natural  combination.  Should 
there  not  grow  up  from  this  a  new  order  or  period  in  the  fine  arts  ? 
Ought  the  Americans  long  to  go  on  imitating  ?  Ponder  how  much, 
and  speculate  on  new  orders  of  architecture,  &c  

No  beggary,  but  universal  decency.  I  have  seen  girls  barefoot, 
but  they  carried  umbrellas  !  To-day  we  saw  a  pig-driver  in  spec- 
tacles !  Reached  Auburn  in  the  middle  of  the  day,  and  walked  about. 
New  houses  on  outskirts  pretty,  as  usual,  and  beautiful  bounding 
forest.  6,000  inhabitants  ;  many  of  them  contractors  for  prison  manu- 
factures, namely,  clocks,  combs,  cabinet  and  chair  work,  weaving, 
tailoring,  shoemaking,  machinery,  making  carpeting,  stone-cutting, 
&c.  The  contractors  furnish  the  materials  and  superintend  the 
work. 

October  14. 

Niagara.  You  must  not  expect  a  description  from  me.  One  might 
as  well  give  an  idea  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven  by  images  of  jasper 

VOL.  II. 


242 


MEMORIALS. 


and  topazes  as  of  what  we  have  been  seeing  by  writing  of  hues  and 
dimensions.  Except  the  hurricane  at  sea,  it  is  the  only  sight  I  ever 
saw  that  I  had  utterly  failed  to  imagine.  It  is  not  its  grandeur  that 
strikes  me  so  much  ;  but  its  unimaginable  beauty.  All  images  of 
softness  fail  before  it.  Think  of  a  double  rainbow  issuing  from  a 
rock  one  hundred  feet  below  one,  and  almost  completing  its  circle  by 
nearly  lighting  on  one's  head.  The  slowness  with  which  the  waters 
roll  over  is  most  majestic.  There  is  none  ot  the  hurry  and  tumble  of 
common  waterfalls,  but  the  green  transparent  mass  seems  to  ooze  over 
the  edges.  The  ascent  of  the  spray,  seen  some  miles  off,  surprised 
me  ;  it  did  not  hang  like  a  cloud,  but  curled  vigorously  up,  like 
smoke  from  a  cannon  or  a  new  fire.  We  have  crossed  the  ferry,  and 
done  more  than  in  my  present  state  of  intoxication  I  can  well  re- 
member or  tell  you  of.  On  the  spot,  I  felt  quite  sane,  —  sure-footed 
and  reasonable  ;  but  when  I  sat  down  to  dinner,  I  found  what  the 
excitement  had  been.  I  could  not  tell  boiled  from  roast  beef,  and 
my  only  resource  was  to  go  out  again  as  soon  as  we  could  leave  the 
table  ;  and  now  I  am  very  sleepy.  I  expected  I  should  be  disap- 
pointed, and  told  Miss  Sedgwick  so.  She  was  right  in  saying  that  it 
was  impossible.  If  one  looks  merely  at  a  cataract,  it  would  be  easy 
to  say,  "  Dear  me !  I  could  fancy  a  rock  twice  as  high  as  that,  and  a 
river  twice  as  broad,"  but  I  do  not  think  any  imagination  could  con- 
ceive of  such  colouring  ;  and  I  was  wholly  unprepared  for  the  beauty 
of  the  surrounding  scenery.  Fragments  of  rainbow  start  up  and  flit 
and  vanish,  like  phantoms  at  a  signal  from  the  sun.  We  have  watched 
the  growth  of  this  moon,  "  the  Niagara  moon  ; "  and  there  she  is,  at 
her  very  brightest !  What  pleasure  there  is  in  a  wholly  new  idea ! 
It  never  occurred  to  me  before  that  there  can  never  be  a  cloudless 
sky  at  Niagara.  A  light  fleecy  rack  is  always  in  the  sky  over  the 
falls  ;  and  the  watcher  may  here  see  the  process  of  cloud-making. 
No  more  now.    Rejoice  with  me  that  I  have  now  seen  the  best  that 

my  eyes  can  behold  in  this  life  

Yours  most  affectionately, 

H.  MARTI  NEAU. 

Meadville.  Hotel,  October  29,  1834.  —  Waiting  for  breakfast, 
and  then  sitting  down  with  labourers,  but  civil  and  respectable  men. 
Then  most  hearty  reception  by  the  Huidekopers  ;  father,  and  fine, 
handsome  son  and  daughters.  Pretty  situation  of  the  house,  with 
woody  hills  opposite.  A  walk  to  the  college.  Mr.  Huidekoper  anti- 
Jackson, —  strong.    Gave  a  list  of  things  that  J.  has  protested  against, 


FORETGN  LTFE. 


243 


and  then  done.  Patronage  can't  be  done  away.  150,000  interested 
persons,  with  all  their  influence  to  contend  against. 

Methodist  college  (purely  literary)  finely  placed  ;  has  been  opened 
just  a  year.  Poor  students  pay  by  working  at  increasing  the  build- 
ing, which  is  not  new  (twenty  years  old  about).    The  Rev.  

is  a  pleasant  specimen  of  Methodist  minister.  Library  of  8,000  vol- 
umes, presented  by  Winthrop,  and  seems  choice.  Some  Oriental 
specimens.  Beginning  of  museum  :  Indian  axe  and  arrow-heads. 
Peep  into  store  in  coming  home.  Drover  raised  from  being  a  very 
poor  boy,  and  likely  to  be  wealthy.  Now  making  $4,000  per  month, 
of  which  half  goes  to  the  friends  who  advanced  money  to  set  him  up. 
Meadville  is  on  French  Creek  ;  has  canal,  and  about  1,400  popula- 
tion.   Good  tea  ;  English  news  in  American  papers,  inundation  of 

ladies,  unexpectedly.    Beautiful  Miss  .    Fire  in  comfortable 

room  ;  journal  amid  much  sleepiness,  and  now  to  bed. 

October  30.  —  Glorious  weather.  Talk  and  callers  during  morning  till 
noon,  when  Mr.  Huidekoper,  Anna,  and  Mr.  Wallace  and  I  went  out. 
A  fine  rapid  walk  of  five  miles,  over  opposite  hill  and  through  wood. 
Two  black  squirrels.  Sweet,  rich  fields  stretching  under  shelter  of 
woods  down  to  creek.  Drive  in  afternoon.  Long  covered  bridge, 
once  shattered  by  a  freshet ;  but  children  of  two  years  play  safely. 
Accidents  don't  happen  to  little  Americans.  Walked  to  the  C.'s  to 
tea.  Pleasant  evening,  with  few  strangers.  Bad  cold,  and  so  to  bed. 
Gentleman  from  Philipsburg  says  it  is  a  forced  settlement  ;  poor  land. 

October  31.  — Read  Norton's  excellent,  but  supercilious,  truth-telling 
Preface  to  work  in  disproof  of  Trinitarian  doctrines,  and  some  of  the 
chapters.  He  gives  up  Revelations  as  a  prophecy.  Read  some  of 
Palfrey's  sermons.  Read  Reports  of  Blind  Institution  at  Philadel- 
phia :  of  House  of  Refuge,  interesting,  (why  are  not  the  children  kept 
longer  than  from  a  few  months  to  two  years  ?)  and  of  Penitentiary  ; 

interesting.    Came  down  and  found  Mrs.  ,  Mrs.  H.'s  deaf 

sister,  a  cheerful,  shy  woman,  very  good,  I  should  think.  Lent  her 
my  spare  tube  for  two  days.  Sweet  drive  after  dinner.  Rich  valley, 
and  the  softest  woods  when  the  red  evening  sun  shone  out.  Saw  good 
house  building  for  a  farmer  who  lost  his  by  fire  last  winter.  Neigh- 
bours bear  the  loss  among  them,  so  that  he  is  better  off  for  a  house  than 
before.  Much  talk  on  politics  and  morals  in  evening,  with  Messrs. 
H.  and  D.  Horror  here  of  ministers  meddling  in  politics  beyond  just 
voting.  Mr.  H.  a  dismal  looker-on  in  politics.  Believes  that  thirty 
years  hence  they  will  be  under  a  despotism  :  now  coming  under  mob 
law.    Asked  him  why  he  did  not  go  elsewhere  ;  answer,  where  could 


244 


MEMORIALS. 


he  be  better  off  ?  Cannot  cut  off  President's  patronage  without  alter- 
ing the  Constitution,  and,  besides,  opposition  is  too  strong.  Sure  that 
all  the  intelligence  of  the  community  is  against  Jackson.  Attributes 
the  evil  to  universal  suffrage.  Would  have  property  represented 
instead  of  both  property  and  person.  Thinks  ill  of  trial  by  jury. 
Here  jury  are  paid  a  dollar  per  day,  besides  mileage.  Hence  needy 
men  say,  "  Put  my  name  in  the  wheel,"  —  thirty-six  names  for  petty, 
twenty-four  for  grand  jury.  Lenient  to  criminal  so  far  as  to  encourage 
crime.  Also,  protection  wanted  for  prosecutor.  If  he  fails  to  con- 
vict, culprit  brings  action  for  false  imprisonment.  (Dr.  Follen  dis- 
believes this,  as  a  general  statement.)  Mr.  H.  upholds  tariff  system. 
During  the  war,  America  prospered  from  large  markets  for  her  corn. 
Then,  no  country  would  take  it,  and  there  was  extensive  ruin  from 
want  of  subdivision.  Relief  brought  at  once  by  tariff,  and  since,  New 
England  has  bought  more  corn  than  all  other  places,  while  she  has 
been  better  employed  than  in  growing  it.  This  is  the  argument  which 
Mr.  H.  seems  to  think  will  hold  good  for  ever.  Mr.  Huidekoper  says 
Jackson  would  give  away  lands,  which  are  already  sold  too  low. 
This  would  afford  another  premium  on  agriculture,  which  is  too  much 
pursued  (he  thinks)  already.  He  says  it  is  impossible  to  get  on  with- 
out a  Central  or  National  Bank,  which  must  necessarily  have  great 
commercial  power  ;  but  Jackson  wants  that  it  should  be  political 
power,  and  would  have  a  treasury  bank.  (If  it  be  true  that  the  nation 
is  verging  towards  anarchy  and  despotism,  can  I  do  any  thing  to  show 
them  what  they  have  been,  what  they  are,  what  they  might  be  ? ) 

We  are  going  to  visit  Miss  Sedgwick  for  two  days.  I  wish  Miss 
Mitford  knew  that  we  were  going. 

After  speaking  of  the  American  women  she  had  met,  "  some 
perfect  ladies,"  "some  pale-faced,  indolent  folk  who  make  a 
point  of  their  shoes  above  all  things,"  "some  pedants," — she 
says  :  — 

"  It  seems  right,  dear  mother,  to  tell  you  that  they  are  not  at  all  shy 
of  me.  In  all  the  letters  we  carry  from  one  place  to  another  the  sen- 
timent is  amusingly  uniform,  namely :  1  The  authoress  and  instructress 
of  statesmen  is  forgotten  in  the/  &c,  &c.  This  looks  as  if  pedantry 
was  the  common  consequence  of  acquirement  among  the  women. 

Miss  J  's  cheerful  intelligence  makes  her  friends  every  where. 

We  have  begun  a  regular  plan  of  Bible-reading  and  discussion  to- 
gether, and  are  quite  disposed  to  rest  invariably  on  the  Sundays. 
When  I  told  the  General  what  is  thought  among  us  (and  especially 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


245 


by  Lord  Durham)  of  the  American  Report  on  Sunday  travelling,  he 
was  highly  delighted,  the  author  being  his  most  intimate  friend.  He 
will  introduce  him  to  us  at  Washington,  and  thinks  he  has  a  good 
chance  for  the  presidency  next  time  ;  but  every  man  thinks  so  of  his 
particular  friend. 

"  We  have  been  exquisitely  happy  at  Stockbridge,  with  the  Sedg- 
wicks.  Miss  Sedgwick  is  all  I  heard  of  her,  which  is  saying  every 
thing.  All  these  Mr.  Sedgwicks,  her  brothers,  with  their  wives  and 
blooming  families,  are  an  ornament  to  their  State.  They  are  among 
the  first  people  in  it,  gracing  its  literature  and  its  legislation,  and 
spreading  their  accomplishments  through  the  fair  country  in  which 
they  dwell.  Such  a  country,  of  mountain  and  lake  and  towering 
wood !  I  was  1  Layfayetted,'  as  they  say,  to  great  advantage.  All 
business  was  suspended,  and  almost  the  whole  population  was  busy  in 
giving  me  pleasure  and  information.  I  never  before  was  the  cause  of 
such  a  jubilee.  If  Ellen  thought  much  of  my  mode  of  leaving  Liver- 
pooL,  what  would  she  think  here  ?  We  were  carried  to  Pittsfield,  to  an 
annual  agricultural  assemblage,  where  I  learned  much  of  the  people, 
and  was  made  to  drink  the  first  out  of  a  prize  cup.  O,  the  bliss  of 
seeing  not  a  single  beggar,  —  not  a  man,  woman,  or  child  otherwise 
than  well  dressed !  Captain  Hall  says  no  women  appear  at  these 
public  meetings,  and  that  they  are  dreadfully  solemn.  We  saw  as 
many  women  as  men,  and  few  but  smiling  faces  ;  but  Captain  Hall 
went  to  one  meeting,  on  a  wet,  cold  day,  and  drew  a  general  con- 
clusion, as  is  his  wont  I  am  told  he  was  asked  if  he  would  take  a 
piece  of  something  at  dinner,  and  answered  that  he  wrould  have  a  bit, 
—  that  was  the  proper  word  ;  piece  sounded  very  improper  to  English 
ears  !    What  a  traveller  ! 

"  I  have  learned  more  than  I  well  know  how  to  stow,  at  Stockbridge, 
the  unrivalled  village,  where  the  best  refinements  of  the  town  are 
mingled  with  the  wildest  pleasures  of  the  country.  We  are  to  go 
again  and  again  if  they  say  true ;  and  this  morning  at  six  we  departed 
from  amid  a  throng  of  tearful  friends,  feeling  that  we  shall  never  meet 
with  kinder.  I  never  saw  so  beautiful  a  company  of  children  as  were 
always  offering  me  roses,  or  lying  in  wait  for  a  smile  or  an  autograph, 
or  to  bring  me  lamp  or  water,  or  whatever  I  might  want.  Miss  Sedg- 
wick is  the  beloved  and  gentle  queen  of  the  little  community.  They 
gave  me  letters  to  Van  Buren  (the  Vice-President,  and  centre  of  all 
the  political  agitation  here),  expecting  that  I  should  meet  him  at 
Washington  ;  but  on  arriving  here  I  found  that  he  has  just  returned 
from  the  Falls,  and  had  been  inquiring  for  me,  and  after  dinner  he 


246 


MEMORIALS. 


called  with  his  son.  He  is  simple  in  his  manners,  and  does  not 
look  the  wily  politician  he  is  said  to  be,  nor  as  if  he  had  the  cares  of 
this  great  Republic  on  his  shoulders.  He  hopes  to  welcome  me  to 
Washington." 

LETTER  TO  HER  FAMILY. 

Philadelphia,  December  12,  1834. 

I  do  not  know  where  to  begin,  dear  ones  all,  in  my  pleasant  story, 
but  seem  to  have  lived  half  a  lifetime  when  I  think  of  my  intercourse 
with  these  friends,  and  yet  it  appears  but  a  day  since  I  sealed  my 
last  to  England.  Briefly  and  from  my  heart  thanking  you  for  your 
full  communications,  I  proceed  to  give  you  a  few  scraps  of  my  de- 
lights. First,  we  are  still  here  and  likely  to  be.  I  should  have 
been  torn  to  pieces,  or  I  should  have  set  people  by  the  ears  together, 
if  I  had  gone  elsewhere.  We  are  also  so  ineffably  happy  together, 
that  we  all  banish  the  thought  of  parting  as  often  as  it  obtrudes  itself. 
All  Philadelphia  has  called  upon  me,  —  people  of  many  ranks  and  all 
opinions,  religious  and  political.  We  have  been  to  dinners  and  balls 
among  "  the  high  fashionables,"  while  through  our  host  we  have  seen, 
I  fancy,  more  of  the  enlightened  men  of  the  city  than  we  could  have 
met  elsewhere.  The  Biddies  and  other  great  men  have  made  much 
of  me  for  my  Political  Economy,  and  the  best  of  the  Quakers  on 
account  of  "Demerara."  So  that  I  do  believe  I  have  been  in  the  best 
circumstances  for  accomplishing  my  object,  while  I  cannot  imagine 
that  I  could  any  where  else  have  found  the  deep  repose  with  which  I 
solace  myself  in  this  blessed  house,  after  the  vanities  and  toils  of  the 
day.  [Then  follows  a  charming  description  of  a  charming  family.] 
0,  those  precious  children  !  I  must  not  now  write.  Our  days  are,  — 
breakfast  at  half  past  eight  (after  worship),  a  lingering  breakfast, 
and  more  talk  than  eating.  Out  early,  to  see  sights,  return  calls,  and 
escape  callers,  a  pack  of  whose  cards  daily  awaits  us  when  we  return 
to  dress  for  dinner.  We  dine  somewhere,  drink  tea  somewhere  else, 
and  then  go  to  an  evening  party,  finishing  with  a  delicious  talk,  till 
twelve  or  one,  over  the  fire.  A  lady  here  placed  a  carriage  and  black 
coachman  at  my  command  the  first  day  I  came. 

We  stay  here  over  the  twenty-third,  which  is  the  anniversary  of 
the  young,  admirable  blind  school,  for  which  I  have,  by  request  of 
the  patriarch  Vaughan,  written  a  prologue. 

We  see  no  difficulties  before  or  behind,  or  on  either  side  of  us,  and 
are  full  of  happiness.  Yet  I  have  seen  much  sorrow  here.  If  I  have 
been  much  among  the  great  and  the  gay,  I  have  been  also  among  the 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


247 


wretched.  Not  only  have  I  been  much  in  hospitals  and  such  places, 
but  there  are  daily  appeals  to  me  to  visit  some  who  are  sick,  that 
want  to  talk  to  me  about  the  "  Traditions ; "  or  some  who  are  deaf, 
that  want  to  follow  up  with  me  the  letter  in  Tait  ;  or  the  managers  of 
the  insane,  who  want  to  know  more  about  Han  well  Lunatic  Asylum. 
If  I  did  not  know  the  vanity  of  all  these  things,  I  should  think  I  had 
been  able  to  do  more  good  here  than  in  any  year  of  my  life  before. 
There  is  such  an  ordering  of  tubes  from  Baltimore,  such  a  zeal  to  get 
a  copy  of  our  Poor-Law  Bill,  and  such  an  earnest  seeking  after  my 
opinion  about  their  public  institutions  !  The  best  of  all  is,  that  after 
one  interview  we  all  forget  that  I  am  a  foreigner.  The  inquiries 
about  my  "  impressions  "  are  dropped,  and  we  get  at  once  to  our  sub- 
ject, without  any  tendency  to  institute  comparisons.  The  honours  of 
a  stranger  are  offered  me  without  the  penalties.  The  nearest  place 
(that  I  may  hear)  is  left  for  me  every  where  ;  but  there  is  a  thorough 
union  of  hearts  as  to  what  is  going  on.  I  have  now  intimate  inter- 
course with  two  or  three  valuable  people,  who  had  vowed  to  keep 
out  of  the  way  of  the  English,  but  who,  finding  others  dropping  all 
mention  of  the  book  I  was  to  write,  have  come  out  of  their  holes,  and 
laid  open  themselves  and  their  country  to  me.  I  really  believe  this 
never  happened  to  Hall  or  any  other  of  our  travellers  ;  and  I  am 
truly  thankful  for  it,  for  more  reasons  than  I  can  mention  now. 
Patriarch  Vaughan  and  the  venerable  Bishop  White  (called  here  the 
bishop  of  all  the  churches)  have  done  me  the  honour  of  seeking  me  ; 
and  when  they  are  gone  (as  they  must  soon  be),  it  will  be  a  tender 
pleasure  to  think  of  it.  I  have  presents  of  books  and  flowers,  and 
tickets  to  public  institutions,  &c. ;  and  this  morning  I  have  been 
touched  (in  spite  of  the  absurdity)  by  a  letter  from  an  insane  gentle- 
man, of  Ohio  (gone  mad  on  high  subjects),  appointing  me  high  priest- 
ess of  God  and  nature,  if  I  dare  undertake  the  charge. 

The  most  interesting,  perhaps,  of  my  employments  has  been  visiting 
the  penitentiary,  for  the  sake  of  discovering  the  causes  of  crime  here. 
I  am  almost  the  first  who  has  been  admitted  alone  to  the  solitary 
prisoners.  The  board  ordered  that  I  should  do  as  I  pleased  at  all 
times  in  the  prison,  and  I  have  been  shut  up  with  murderers,  burg- 
lars, forgers,  and  others,  listening  to  their  eager  and  full  confidences 
about  their  crimes  and  their  miseries.  It  is  all  I  can  do  to  command 
my  feelings  for  them  when  I  see  them  look  up  in  amazement  at  my 
unexpected  entrance,  and  struggle  with  the  tears  which  spring  at  the 
first  kind  word  I  speak  to  them.  What  revelations  will  I  give  you, 
some  day,  of  the  lives  of  these  poor  creatures  !    But  it  is  too  large  a 


i 


248 


MEMORIALS. 


subject  for  this  letter.  The  worst  thing  is,  that  the  relations  of  the 
prisoners  sometimes  hear  of  my  visits,  and  they  come  and  insinuate 
family  tidings  to  me,  which  I  am  bound  in  honour  not  to  communi- 
cate. It  is  hard  upon  me  to  refrain  from  telling  a  prisoner  how  his 
wile  is,  and  how  she  is  labouring  for  his  release.  My  rule  is  to  tell 
all  this  to  the  governor,  who  can  do  as  he  thinks  proper,  and  to  keep 
the  confessions  of  the  prisoners  to  myself.  It  is  a  noble  institution. 
But  what  must  be  the  state  of  society  where  it  is  humanity  to  prepare 
such  an  elaborate  apparatus  of  human  misery ! 

Of  slavery  and  public  affairs  I  cannot  write  to-day.  Only  take  care 
how  you  suppose  you  understand  the  case  of  the  Bank  till  you  hear 
from  me  at  full  length.  I  have  never  given  an  opinion  on  their  poli- 
tics since  I  came,  nor  is  there  any  need.  People  bring  theirs  to  me 
abundantly  ;  but  when  they  question  me,  it  is  not  of  their  politics,  but 
something  which  they  rightly  suppose  I  know  more  about.  I  have 
fully  ascertained  that  at  Washington  one  may  mix  freely  with  the 
leading  men  of  all  parties  and  not  be  liable  to  the  charge  of  treachery 
or  partisanship. 

Farewell,  all  my  precious  family  !  Dearest  Helen,  kiss  you  bairns 
for  me,  and  don't  let  them  forget  me  !  God  bless  you,  and  keep  you 
all  as  happy  as  I  am  ! 

Yours  most  tenderly, 

H.  M. 

And  now,  furnished  with  half  a  hundred  letters  from  every 
body  worth  having  known  to  every  body  worth  knowing,  and 
anxiously  expected  by  Webster,  Calhoun,  Clay,  and  all  the  rest, 
Miss  Martineau  took  leave  of  Philadelphia,  where  she  had  been 
so  much  beloved.  "  I  am  sure  I  am  a  more  virtuous  person  for 
all  this  happiness,"  she  said  at  the  time. 

I  have  succeeded  in  my  search  for  the  "  prologue  "  which  Miss 
Martineau  wrote,  at  the  request  of  Mr.  Vaughan,  for  the  anniver- 
sary of  the  Philadelphia  institution  for  the  blind,  because  it 
"  would  save  Mr.  Furness  the  trouble." 

The  blind  man  sat  beside  the  way 
Hopeless  and  helpless,  day  by  day, 
While  joy  and  music  passed  him  by, 
And  all  the  shows  of  earth  and  sky. 
And  while  he  listened,  they  were  gone, — 
He  could  not  follow,  —  dark,  —  alone. 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


249 


And  so  the  wise  complain  —  that  they 
Linger  and  listen  by  life's  way, 
And  painfully  their  tidings  glean, 
And  wonder  what  all  things  may  mean. 
Almost  as  weak  and  blind  as  we, 
They  long  to  follow  on  and  see. 

But  He  who  heard  the  beggar's  cry, 

And  raised  his  wondering  gaze  on  high, 

Calls  on  us  also  to  arise,  — 

Alike  the  helpless  and  the  wise,  — 

And,  hand  in  hand,  not  faint  and  slow,  — 

Learn  whence  we  come  and  where  we  go. 

'T  is  by  the  love  that  Jesus  taught, 

And  by  the  wisdom  that  he  brought, 

That  we  are  shielded  here  from  harm, 

And  roused  to  life's  and  music's  charm  ; 

From  strength  to  strength  our  way  can  win, 

And  feel  our  hearts  grow  glad  within, 

And  gather  light  from  day  to  day, 

To  follow  in  that  living  way 

Where  purest  pleasures  throng  and  dwell,  — 

How  pure,  how  rich,  no  tongue  can  tell. 

Pleasures  too  fine  for  ear  or  eye, 

That  perish  not,  though  every  sense  should  die. 

EXTRACTS  FROM   THE   PHILADELPHIA,   BALTIMORE,  AND 
WASHINGTON  JOURNAL. 

It  seems  to  me  that  reporters  of  the  state  of  society  here  forget 
how  heterogeneous  it  is,  and  what  a  marvel  it  is  that  there  is  any 
common  mind  at  all,  among  so  many.  If  the  bigotry  that  marks  the 
religious  world  extended  to  other  matters,  there  would  be  no  living 
in  such  a  Babel  as  it  would  be. 

Christmas.  —  Called  on  the  Fortins.  Mr.  Fortin  dusky,  with  white 
hair.  Told  us  his  history.  By  sail-making  he  has  raised  himself  to 
competence.  His  son-in-law,  Mr.  Purvis,  has  been  to  England.  Told 
us  of  O'Connell's  greeting.   Would  not  shake  hands  with  an  American 


250 


MEMORIALS. 


till  he  knew  what  part  be  had  taken  about  slavery,  but  held  out  his 
hand  instantly  to  one  of  the  proscribed  race.  It  is  painful  to  hear  them 
speak  of  their  proscription.  Purvis  is  a  fine  young  man.  The  number 
of  coloured  people  in  the  States  in  Mr.  Fortius  youth  -was  350,000  ; 
now  between  two  and  three  millions. 

January  1.  —  Snow  piled  up  every  where  and  the  sleighs,  with  their 
belled  horses,  very  lively.  Mr.  Read  gave  me  for  a  New-Year's  gift 
an  original  letter  of  "Washington,  and  has  sent  me  Washington's  ac- 
count-book, presented  to  Congress,  containing  his  account  of  expenses 
during  the  war,  when  he  would  have  no  salary.  Very  small  mem- 
orandums, and  characteristic  from  their  exactitude  and  justice. 
Mr.  Latrobe  means  to  inform  me  fully  on  colonization,  —  from  this 
State. 

January  2.  —  Sight-seeing, —  infirmary, —  medical  school.  Subjects 
almost  exclusively  supplied  from  the  coloured  people,  because  they 
can't  resist  ;  —  taken  chiefly  from  the  graves.  So  these  dusky  bodies 
are  not  contemptible  when  they  are  dead.  Home.  Found  Mr. 
Read  and  Mrs.  Cumberland  "Williams,  who  won  my  heart  by  her 
praise  or  rather  love  of  my  Philadelphia  friends.  She  was  Pinek- 
ney's  daughter.  Met  Governor  Barbour,  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Collins,  and 
Mr.  Kennedy  at  the  Skinners'.  A  merry  party  of  little  folks  at 
the  Shaws'  in  the  evening.  Plenty  of  the  little  beauties  came  and 
gossiped  with  me. 

January  6.  —  Sleighed  round  the  outskirts  for  an  hour.  Pleasant  par- 
ty, and  Mr.  Latrobe  full  of  information  about  colonization.  He  knows 
what  he  is  about.  It  is  plain  that  the  North  has  one  set  of  interests  and 
the  South  another,  and  that  the  Colonization  Society  loses  by  trying  to 
reconcile  the  two.  Maryland  is  interposed,  and  what  she  does  is  most 
important.  Mr.  Latrobe  wants  to  establish  a  cordon  sanitaire  of  colo- 
nization States  round  the  worst  ;  and  believes  they  are  ready.  In- 
dividual State  action  is  the  way  If  abolition  were  ordained  in 

any  State,  the  blacks  would  only  be  sold  into  the  South  ;  and  if  every 
where,  they  would  die  of  vice.  The  rule  here  is  that  all  freed  slaves 
must  go  away  ;  so  the  more  manumission  there  is  the  more  oppo- 
sition from  the  slave  States,  unless  colonization  be  provided  as  an 
outlet  

The  state  of  feeling  about  these  poor  creatures  is  monstrous. 

There  seems  no  rest  for  the  soles  of  their  feet  0,  what 

a  retribution  !  Very  pleasant  day  if  I  had  been  well  ;  but  I 
would  have  incurred  worse  illness  for  the  sake  of  what  Mr.  Latrobe 
told  me. 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


251 


January  14.  —  Mr.  S.  C.  Phillips  took  me  to  the  Senate  Chamber, 
where  Sir  C.  Vaughan  welcomed  me  heartily.  A  beautiful  room  and 
forty-eight  fine  heads.  Webster  conspicuous.  He  and  Clay  spoke. 
It  was  the  French  Question, — against  the  President's  recommenda- 
tion of  reprisals.  Webster's  voice  beautiful.  More  to  my  ear  than 
Clay's.  My  head  ached  vehemently,  and  so  we  went  home.  Mr. 
and  Mrs.  Calhoun  and  Colonel  and  Mrs.  Preston  called,  and  were 
most  affectionate.  Mr.  Sprague  ;  —  model  of  an  American  legislator. 
Thinks  Calhoun  not  practical,  though  theoretically  complete.  After- 
noon, calls, —  calls,  —  calls.  Evening,  Mr.  Palfrey,  Judge  Story, 
Mr.  Everett.  The  rest  went  to  a  great  party  which  we  declined, 
and  Mr.  Everett  remained.  We  talked  on  Furness,  Dewey,  Chan- 
ning  ;  on  the  Senate,  on  English  reviewing,  on  Mr.  Gallatin,  on  Jack- 
son, on  prisons.  Mr.  Phillips  tells  me  that  Massachusetts  hopes  to 
get  Edward  Everett  to  be  either  governor  of  Massachusetts  or  senator 
with  Webster. 

Read  Carlyle's  article  on  Burns.  Was  mightily  cheered  and  lifted 
up  by  it.    I  must  read  it  again  when  I  find  myself  growing  worldly. 

So  few  travellers  feel  at  home  in  a  foreign  land,  so  many 
make  it  a  principle  to  suspend  actual  life  till  their  return,  sub- 
sisting meanwhile  as  spectators,  and  hardly  feeling  the  odd,  unac- 
countable beings  by  whom  they  are  surrounded  to  be  fellow- 
creatures,  that  one  cannot  help  wishing  for  the  publication  of  all 
Harriet  Martineau's  American  letters  j  for  they  are  all  filled  with 
the  same  live  element  of  personality  which  shows,  as  in  these 
few  that  can  with  propriety  be  copied,  how  differently  she  took 
foreign  life.  She  stood  in  no  need  of  Voltaire's  reminder  to  his 
friend  on  the  eve  of  sailing  for  Japan  :  "  2s  ever  forget,  mon 
enfant,  that  the  whole  world  are  exactly  like  your  father  and 
mother ; "  and  this  makes  the  peculiar  charm  of  those  ingenuous 
outpourings  of  the  worshipper  of  nature  and  the  lover  of  humanity, 
sharing  with  her  kindred  what  she  reserved  for  them  alone,  — 
the  innocent  satisfaction  of  her  nobly  earned  success,  and  the  joy 
of  new  friendships,  scenes,  and  thoughts  in  the  new  half-civilized 
world. 

What  the  old  over-civilized  world  would  think  of  it  all  was 
the  natural  anxiety  on  both  sides.  Harriet  Martineau  was  the 
representative  to  all,  of  the  mother  country,  which  stood  to  them 


252 


MEMORIALS. 


as  the  representative  of  civilization.  The  United  States  seemed 
for  the  moment  a  mere  whispering-gallery  for  the  transmission  of 
her  opinions.  In  addition  to  her  English  fame,  she  had  by  this 
time  attained  an  American  popularity,  and  made  herself  every- 
where felt  by  an  especial  adaptation  or  natural  fitness  in  her 
character  to  influence  that  of  our  people.  One  gentleman  "  had 
heard  from  her  such  striking  thoughts  on  prison  discipline  and 
criminal  legislation  as  would  modify  his  whole  future  political 
life."  Another  "  had  found  the  Bible  a  new  book  since  reading 
it  in  the  light  of  what  she  said  to  him  of  its  depth  and  power." 
"  The  whole  subject  of  family  discipline  has  taken  a  new  aspect 
to  me,"  said  a  lady  to  whom  she  spoke  of  the  power  of  love 
and  the  evil  effect  of  punishment  in  creating  in  a  child  the  spirit 
of  fear  and  bondage.  She  awakened  whole  societies  to  new  and 
important  ideas  about  health.  She  had  sown  deep  in  a  thousand 
hearts  new  and  grand  thoughts  of  the  nature,  sphere,  duties,  and 
rights  of  woman  ;  and  wherever  she  went,  the  splendour  of  truth 
and  the  value  of  religious  liberty  and  the  importance  of  moral 
independence  were  talked  of  and  felt  as  never  before.  All  these 
things  came  daily  to  our  ears,  —  every  one  telling  with  a  sort  of 
rapturous  veneration  what  an  awakening  to  the  spirit  her  con- 
versation had  been.  But  with  all  this  came  from  time  to  time 
reports  of  her  condemnation  of  the  abolitionists.  "  She  says 
they  have  done  the  cause  of  the  slave  great  injury."  "  She 
says  your  language  and  your  measures  are  unjustifiable."  "  She 
says  you  do  not  understand  the  matter."  All  this  made  no  im- 
pression on  my  mind  to  her  discredit,  for  how  should  one  com- 
ing to  learn,  see  these  things  otherwise  than  as  presented  by  the 
authorities  on  such  subjects  :  —  the  first  people,  —  the  best  peo- 
ple, —  the  leading  people.  But  one  of  her  penetration  could  not 
be  sent  out  of  the  country  hoodwinked,  however  she  might  be 
led  blindfolded  through  it;  yet  it  might  well  take  long  to 
understand  this  "  mystery  of  iniquity."  We  had  lived  all  our 
youth  under  the  benumbing  vassalage  of  slavery,  and  never 
dreamed  it  was  so,  till  Garrison's  voice  "  broke  the  deep  slumber 
in  our  brain."  How  should  she  see  at  a  glance  what  had  been 
so  skilfully  wrapped  up  in  darkness  for  wellnigh  half  a  century  ? 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


253 


One  of  the  clearest  minds  connected  with  the  cause  took  the 
responsibility  of  entreating  her  to  delay  judgment  till  she  should 
have  examined  thoroughly,  in  the  following  letter. 

ELLIS  GRAY  LORING  TO  HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Boston,  April  18,  1835. 

My  brother,  the  Rev.  Mr.  Gilman  of  Charleston,  S.  C,  has  encour- 
aged me,  in  a  late  letter,  to  venture  the  invitation  I  make  to  you  of 
being  my  guest  during  your  expected  visit  in  Boston.  He  tells  me  he 
has  spoken  to  you  of  his  sister,  my  wife,  and  of  myself,  and  I  therefore 
take  this  way  of  recalling  to  you  our  names,  and  of  expressing  the 
hope,  which  would  otherwise  have  appeared  to  me  only  a  fruitless 
wish,  that  we  may  know  you  intimately.  We  have  heard  much  of 
you  personally  from  our  correspondents,  and  we  are  as  ready  to  love 
you  cordially  as  a  friend  as  we  have  long  been  to  admire  and  respect 
the  author  of  your  works. 

Your  tour  through  the  United  States  is  contemplated  with  great 
interest  by  all  who  know  the  weight  your  opinions  of  us  and  our 
institutions  will  have  both  in  Europe  and  America.  A  continual 
attempt  will  be  made,  and  is,  I  know,  now  made,  to  prevent  your  see- 
ing them  in  any  but  their  most  becoming  attitude.  I  trust  you  will 
duly  estimate  the  amount  of  compensation  this  circumstance  requires. 
All  that  hospitality  can  do  to  win  the  heart  and  to  seduce  the  judg- 
ment will  of  course  be  done.  But  your  head  as  well  as  your  heart 
is  to  act  an  important  part  in  marking  the  destinies  of  this  young 
empire.  You  know  your  responsibilities,  and  will  observe,  judge,  and 
act  accordingly. 

You  must  see  all  around  you  illustrations  of  my  meaning, —  but 
one  is  so  near  my  heart  that  I  cannot  but  suggest  it.  The  apologists 
for  slavery  in  this  country  are  thoroughly  alarmed  at  your  journey  of 
observation.  The  author  of  "  Demerara  "  is  a  formidable  personage 
in  the  Southern  States.  Your  coming  was  hailed  with  delight  by  the 
friends  of  the  slaves  and  of  the  true  interests  of  the  country,  and  was 
looked  to  with  dismay  by  those  whose  interest  here  is  oppression. 
What  is  the  course  taken  by  these  last  ?  You  are  received  with  the 
most  marked  attention,  writer  as  you  are  of  the  best  antislavery  tale 
ever  written,  —  while  a  New  England  man  who  should  have  written 
that  work  would  have  been  (pardon  the  truth)  indicted  and  im- 
prisoned, if  nothing  worse,  had  he  set  his  foot  for  the  next  twenty 


254 


MEMORIALS. 


years  into  South  Carolina  or  Georgia.  The  highest  literary  rank  and 
•worth  could  not  have  wholly  saved  one  of  us  from  the  consequences 
of  such  an  unpardonable  offence.  But  Miss  Martineau  is  the  world's 
property,  and  as  she  cannot  be  crushed,  she  must,  if  possible,  be 
blinded.  —  Forgive  my  zeal  if  I  say  to  you,  do  not  judge  of  slavery  as 
you  see  it  in  the  drawing-rooms  of  the  men  of  refinement  and  perhaps 
of  principle  whom  you  visit,  —  of  course  the  very  elite  of  the  South- 
ern country  ;  but  look  at  it  among  the  field  slaves  of  Carolina,  the 
semi-civilized  back  settlements  of  Alabama  and  Mississippi,  or  in 
the  New  Orleans  slave-market.  Alas  !  you  cannot  see  it  in  these 
aspects  ;  — your  standing  with  its  inevitable  associations,  but  far  more 
your  sex,  must  prevent  your  catching  more  than  partial  glimpses 
of  what  it  is  not  meant  you  should  see.  I  might  better  ask  you 
to  keep  in  mind  the  dreadful  statistics  of  our  domestic  slave-trade  : 
6,000  (chiefly  young  persons)  annually  exported  from  Virginia 
alone,  away  from  relations  and  home,  to  die  in  the  unwholesome 
Southwest. 

You  will  have  heard,  before  you  return  to  the  North,  stories  of  the 
fanaticism  and  indiscretion  of  the  antislavery  party,  from  many 
sources,  —  from  the  ambitious  statesmen,  who  wish  to  serve  and  be 
rewarded  by  two  masters,  who  would  stand  well  with  the  North 
and  the  South  ;  from  the  "  wise  and  prudent,"  who  think  the  whole 
truth  on  any  subject  inexpedient,  and  regard  it  as  more  dangerous 
even  to  talk  of  remedying  an  abuse  than  to  wait  for  it  to  tumble 
down  destruction  on  their  own  heads.  You  will,  of  course,  be  asked 
to  measure  the  violence  and  recklessness  of  our  Northern  attacks  on 
slavery  by  the  irritation  they  cause  in  the  slaveholder.  Most  of 
these  accounts  are  exaggerations  or  falsehoods.  But  this  would  be 
comparatively  unimportant,  except  as  it  may  insensibly  affect  our 
view  of  the  great  controversy  of  principles  which  is  awakening 
throughout  the  land.  For  the  sake  of  the  cause,  I  ask  you  to  suspend 
your  opinion  of  the  antislavery  measures  and  men  till  you  can  look 
at  them  for  yourself.  .... 

I  live  in  a  retired  and  quiet  manner  at  671  "Washington  Street.  Your 
welcome  there  would  be  most  cordial.  It  would  be  a  true  gratifica- 
tion to  my  wife  and  myself  to  have  you  come  to  our  house  on  your 
arrival  in  Boston,  and  to  make  it  your  home  as  long  as  we  could  suc- 
ceed in  making  you  happy  there. 

I  feel  that  I  have  taken  an  unusual  liberty  in  writing  you  such  and 
bo  long  a  letter.  I  have  no  apology  to  offer  but  the  gratitude  and 
regard  I  feel  for  one  to  whom  I  have  owed  both  delight  and  im- 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


255 


provement,  and  who  has  done  so  much  to  make  society  wiser  and 
happier. 

With  renewed  apologies  and  the  truest  esteem  I  am  your  obedient 
servant, 

ELLIS  GRAY  LORING. 

Between  the  time  of  her  receiving  Mr.  Loring's  letter  and  the 
date  of  this  reply  her  private  journal  is  extremely  interesting. 
It  was  at  this  period  that  she  was  applied  to  to  make  a  con- 
stitution for  Texas,  and  there  one  sees  all  the  passion  of  her 
enjoyment  for  natural  scenery.  The  record  all  along,  of  each 
day,  ends  thus  :  "  Read  the  New  Testament." 

Subjoined  is  Miss  Martineau's  answer. 

Lexington,  Kentucky,  May  27,  1835. 

Dear  Sir,  —  Your  kind  and  gratifying  letter  followed  me  from 
New  Orleans,  and  has,  at  length,  met  me  here,  at  Mr.  Clay's.  Mrs. 
Gilman  led  me  to  hope  that  I  should  hereafter  have  the  pleasure  of 
becoming  acquainted  with  yourself  and  Mrs.  Loring  ;  but  I  did  not 
anticipate  so  early  an  intercourse  as  you  have  kindly  offered  me  the 
means  of  holding  with  you.  I  have  already  engaged  myself  at  Boston 
to  Dr.  Tuckerman  and  to  your  namesakes,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Charles  G. 
Loring  ;  but  I  hope  to  remain  there  long  enough  to  avail  myself  also 
of  your  offered  hospitality,  and  shall  consider  myself  engaged  to  spend 
a  little  time  with  you  when  I  have  passed  a  week  with  each  of  these 
friends  I  have  mentioned.  I  am  sure  we  shall  have  a  great  deal  to 
say  to  each  other,  and  I  shall  say  my  share  with  peculiar  ease  and 
pleasure  under  your  own  roof.  We  should  no  doubt  have  known 
each  other  without  the  intervention  of  our  dear  friends  the  Gilmans  ; 
but  that  we  share  their  love  is  a  sufficient  reason  for  dispensing  with 
the  usual  preliminaries  of  a  friendship. 

We  shall  spend  many  a  half-hour  in  talking  over  the  principal  sub- 
ject of  your  letter.  It  is  too  copious  a  one  to  be  entered  upon  now, 
but  I  cannot  honestly  let  you  suppose  that  I  agree  with  you  in  think- 
ing that  there  has  been  any  attempt  or  wish  to  blind  me  as  to  the  real 
state  of  things  at  the  South.  I  have  been  freely  shown  the  notoriously 
bad  plantations  because  they  were  bad,  and  have  been  spontaneously 
told  a  great  number  of  dreadful  facts  which  might  have  just  as  well 
been  kept  from  me,  if  there  had  been  any  wish  to  deceive  me.  I 
have  seen  every  variety  of  the  poor  creatures,  from  the  cheerful,  apt 
house-servant,  to  the  brutish,  forlorn,  wretched  beings  that  crawl 


256 


MEMORIALS. 


along  the  furrows  of  the  fields.  The  result  has  been  a  full  confirma- 
tion of  the  horror  and  loathing  with  which  I  have  ever  regarded  the 
institution,  and  a  great  increase  of  the  compassion  I  have  always  felt 
for  those  who  are  born  to  the  possession  of  slaves  ;  a  compassion 
which  has  something  of  respect  mingled  with  it,  when  I  see  them 
persecuted  by  a  foreign  interference,  which  is  now  the  grand  hindrance 
to  their  freeing  themselves  from  their  intolerable  burden.  How 
Christians  can  exasperate  one  another  under  the  pressure  of  so  weary 
a  load  of  shame  and  grief  I  can  scarcely  understand  ;  and  I  have 
been  fancying,  all  through  the  Southern  States,  how,  if  Jesus  himself 
were  to  rise  up  amidst  them,  he  would  pour  out  his  compassion  and 
love  upon  those  who  are  afflicted  with  an  inheritance  of  crime.  If 
his  spirit  were  in  us  all  the  curse  would  be  thrown  off  in  a  day  ;  and 
as  it  is,  I  am  full  of  hope  that  the  day  of  liberty  is  rapidly  approach- 
ing, notwithstanding  the  mutual  quarrels  of  colonizationists  and  abo- 
litionists, and  the  hard  thoughts  which  the  friends  and  masters  of  the 
slaves  entertain  of  each  other.  The  reasons  of  my  hope,  —  my  con- 
fidence, I  will  tell  you  when  we  meet.  I  have  had  the  honour  of  a 
slight  correspondence  with  Mrs.  Child,  and  look  forward  with  much 
pleasure  to  meeting  her.  Dr.  and  Mrs.  Follen  are  well  known  to  me 
by  name,  which  is  the  same  thing  as  saying  that  I  want  to  know 
more  of  them.  We  (my  friend  Miss  J.  and  myself)  have  had  the 
pleasure  of  travelling  over  many  hundred  miles  with  Mr.  and  Mrs.  C. 
G.  Loring.  They  are  now  at  Cincinnati,  and  are  going  to  the  Vir- 
ginia Springs,  while  wre  turn  westward  as  far  as  St.  Louis  at  least. 
We  hope  to  be  at  Cambridge  by  Commencement,  and  then  to  travel 
through  New  England  during  September  and  October,  previous  to 
our  settling  down  in  Boston  for  a  long  visit. 

I  beg  to  present  my  respects  to  Mrs.  Loring,  and  to  assure  you  that 
I  am  truly  vour  obliged 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Here  were  reproduced  the  very  sentiments,  and  for  the  most 
part  the  phraseology  of  the  more  decent  slaveholding  world  and 
its  allies,  —  yet  with  a  difference.  None  of  them  had  ever  said 
that  11  if  all  had  the  spirit  of  Jesus  the  curse  would  be  thrown  off 
in  a  day."  That  they  would  have  rebuked  as  " immediatism" 
—  a  thing  impossible  to  be  so  explained  as  not  to  be  liable  to 
misapprehension,  and  therefore  not  proper  for  the  time.  As 
to  the  spirit  of  Jesus  in  itself  considered,  all  their  logic  went  to 
prove  that  the  slaveholders  unquestionably  possessed  it  j  while 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


257 


the  abolitionists  were  destitute  of  it  in  the  precise  proportion  of 
their  devotedness  as  such. 

For  the  rest,  these  ideas  were  identical  with  the  American 
ones.  Just  so  the  world  that  hated  and  despised  the  aboli- 
tionists viewed  with  mingled  compassion  and  respect  the  men 
born  to  the  possession  of  slaves.  Just  so  it  called  our  anti- 
slavery  efforts,  justified  by  our  own  guilty  complicity,  through 
the  constitutional  compact,  "foreign  interference."  Just  so  it 
laid  the  crime  of  the  longer  continuance  of  slavery  at  our 
door.  Just  so  it  claimed  the  peculiar  love  and  compassion  of 
Jesus  for  a  blameless  set  of  men,  loaded  down  with  the  shame 
and  grief  of  a  burden  they  could  not  get  rid  of;  —  not 
sinners,  but  afflicted  with  the  consequences  of  anterior  transgres- 
sion. 

All  this  wrought  somewhat  painfully  on  the  minds  of  many 
of  the  abolitionists,  particularly  when  they  found  it  gave  intense 
delight  to  every  body  but  themselves.  Every  body  "  hated  and 
loathed  slavery  "  too,  but  that  was  all.  It  was  the  step  farther 
that  was  to  cost,  and  therefore  could  never  be  taken.  So  men 
went  on  talking  of  the  gentleness  of  Jesus ;  and  of  the  Sunday 
schools  for  slaves,  which  antislavery  violence  had  put  a  stop  to  ; 
and  of  the  revivals  of  religion  at  the  South,  which  showed  how 
Christ  owned  and  accepted  as  his  people  the  persecuted  slave- 
holders :  "  And  so  Miss  Martineau  thought,  and  she  had  been 
through  the  whole  Southern  country  ; "  and  they  never  failed  to 
inquire,  thereupon,  what  we  thought  of  the  pious  John  ISTewton, 
"  who  had  sweet  seasons  with  God  while  he  was  engaged  in  the 
slave-trade."  "  I  think  he  was  an  old  Antinomian  ! "  was  the 
reply  furnished  us  by  the  Rev.  Dyer  Burgess,  one  of  our 
excellent  coadjutors  from  Ohio,  who  had  been  assisting  at  our 
five-o'clock  morning  prayer-meetings  for  the  cause.  There  might 
have  been  seen  representatives  of  every  shade  of  opinion,  from 
rationalism  to  the  most  extreme  Calvinism,  drawn  together  by 
the  strength  of  a  common  desire.  Dr.  Watts's  description  of 
heaven  would  in  a  sense  have  characterized  these  assemblies  :  — 

"Ten  thousand  thousand  are  their  tongues, 
But  all  their  joys  are  one." 


258 


MEMORIALS. 


The  humanitarian  said  amen  to  prayers  offered  in  the  name  of 
the  Holy  Trinity,  for  the  triumph  of  the  principles.  Evangelical 
Orthodoxy  embraced  as  brethren  in  the  cause  the  Unitarians  and 
philosophers  who  were  ready  to  shed  their  own  blood  for  its 
sake.  One  after  another,  with  but  little  variation  of  form,  they 
prayed  the  same  prayer.  "  Bear  with  our  many  repetitions,"  — 
prayed  the  hater  of  sentimental  religion,  faith  without  works, 
the  antinomianism  of  a  slave-trading  piety,  —  "  Thou  who  didst 
pray  unto  thy  Father,  in  thine  agony  on  man's  behalf,  three  times 
so ying  the  same  words  t "  We  only  wished  Harriet  Martineau 
could  have  heard. 

Then,  too,  the  "  quarrels "  of  colonizationists  and  abolition- 
ists !  So  she  understood  "  that  death-grapple  in  the  darkness 
'twixt  old  systems  and  the  Word  ! " 

It  was  a  great  breach  of  conventionalism  to  thrust  in  at  this 
stage  of  the  correspondence  between  herself  and  Mr.  Loring,  but 
I  felt  sure  of  the  real  character  of  the  illustrious  personage,  and 
that  she  would  not  fail,  after  having  seen  all,  to  discern  the 
unusual  stress  of  the  time,  and  to  find  in  it  a  reason  and  an 
excuse  for  so  unusual  a  procedure. 

I  returned  again  and  again  in  memory  to  her  declaration, 
"  If  all  had  the  spirit  of  Jesus  it  would  be  abolished  in  a  day ;  " 
for  I  knew  that  to  her  mind  "the  spirit  of  Jesus"  was  the 
synonyme  of  all  that  was  authoritative  by  reason  of  excellence. 
I  did  not  build  so  much  as  others  upon  her  having  written  the 
best  antislavery  tale.  It  would  not  follow  because  Mrs.  Behn 
and  Steele  and  the  Duchess  de  Duras  were  equal  to  the  concep- 
tion of  "  Orinoko,"  "  Inkle  and  Yarico,"  and  14  Ourika,"  that  they 
could  be  true  to  human  nature,  under  the  severest  ordeal,  —  as 
that  certainly  was  to  which  slavery  in  the  United  States  sub- 
jected every  foreigner  of  distinction.  But  the  writer  of  44  the 
Scott  papers,"  the  true  painter  of  woman,  the  exalter  and 
consoler  of  poverty,  —  no,  I  never  could  doubt  that  she  must 
eventually  see  things  as  they  really  were.  I  wrote  to  her,  but  I 
have  no  recollection  of  her  reply  as  differing  in  tone  or  spirit 
from  her  letter  to  Mr.  Loring,  nor  do  I  find  it  among  the  collec- 
tion of  her  letters  to  myself.    I  suppose  it  was  lent  at  the  time, 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


259 


and  worn  out,  as  the  other  letters  had  wellnigh  been.  They 
were  not  private  letters.  Whatever  it  was,  it  did  not  shake 
my  faith  in  her,  and  I  awaited  her  coming  with  undiminished 
interest. 

How  well  I  remember  the  first  sight  of  her  so  long  ago  ! 
We  had,  as  it  were,  a  long  sitting,  for  we  first  saw  her  at 
church,  —  Dr.  Channing's.  It  was  a  presence  one  did  not 
speedily  tire  of  looking  on,  —  most  attractive  and  impressive  ; 
yet  the  features  were  plain,  and  only  saved  from  seeming  heavily 
moulded  by  her  thinness.  She  was  rather  taller  and  more 
strongly  made  than  most  American  ladies.  Her  complexion  was 
neither  fair  nor  sallow,  nor  yet  of  the  pale  intellectual  tone  that 
is  thought  to  belong  to  authorship.  It  was  the  hue  of  one 
severely  tasked,  but  not  with  literary  work.  She  had  rich, 
brown,  abundant  hair,  folded  away  in  shining  waves  from  the 
middle  of  a  forehead  totally  unlike  the  flat  one  described  by 
those  who  knew  her  as  a  child.  It  was  now  low  over  the  eyes, 
like  the  Greek  brows ;  and  embossed  rather  than  graven  by  the 
workings  of  thought.  The  eyes  themselves  were  light  and  full, 
of  a  grayish  greenish  blue,  varying  in  colour  with  the  time  of 
day  or  with  the  eye  of  the  beholder,  —  les  yeux  pers  of  the  old 
French  Eomance  writers.  They  were  steadily  and  quietly  alert, 
as  if  constantly  seeing  something  where  another  would  have  found 
nothing  to  notice.  Her  habitual  expression  was  one  of  serene 
and  self-sufficing  dignity,  —  the  look  of  perfect  and  benevolent 
repose  that  comes  to  them  whose  long,  unselfish  struggle  to 
wring  its  best  from  life  has  been  crowned  with  complete  victory. 
You  might  walk  the  livelong  day  in  any  city  streets,  and  not 
meet  such  a  face  of  simple,  cheerful  strength,  with  so  much  light 
and  sweetness  in  its  play  of  feature.  And  the  longer  one  knew 
her  the  more  this  charm  was  felt ;  for  it  was  the  very  spirit  "  of 
love  and  of  power  and  of  a  sound  mind." 

In  intimate  conversation  she  was  free  and  winning  beyond 
any  one  we  had  ever  seen.  Her  one  great  gift  seemed  then  to 
be  utterance  ;  not  rhetoric,  not  elocution,  not  eloquence,  not 
wit,  — though  her  talk  was  full  of  short  corner- touches,  —  but 
the  faculty  of  rapidly  communicating  thought  and  feeling.  Her 


260 


MEMORIALS. 


fulness  of  sympathy  made  it  natural  to  her  to  meet  every  mind 
in  private  society  just  as  she  unfailingly  did  the  public  mind  in 
her  writings,  —  exactly  where  it  laboured.  She  could  not  help 
saying  to  every  person  something  not  to  be  forgotten ;  and  see- 
ing how  many  there  were  whose  after-lives  she  acted  upon  by  a 
word,  her  one  great  gift  seems  to  have  been  to  influence  and  to 
teach.  There  was  something  in  her  which  broke  down  the 
American  caution  and  reserve.  Give  her  ten  minutes,  and  it  all 
melted  away.  She  was  surprised  to  find  the  New-Englanders  so 
merry  a  people ;  but  interchange  of  thought  in  a  free  country, 
where  each  is  sovereign,  was  then  less  safe  than  under  a  despot- 
ism ;  and  a  paid  government-spy  in  every  social  circle  less  a 
check  on  intercourse  than  the  American  dread  of  public  opinion 
under  the  rule  of  slavery  ;  and  so  we  laughed  together,  because 
we  could  do  that  without  risk.  We  had  a  jesting  spirit  in 
conformity  to  our  institutions,  when  slavery  was  one  of 
them.  It  was  neither  the  English  humour  nor  the  French  wit, 
but  a  droll  narrative  humourousness  of  our  own,  —  wit  forced 
out  of  dangerous  channels  into  safe  ones.  It  was  our  refuge 
from  the  dulness  of  "  non-committal "  intercourse.  Ladies 
might  not  avail  themselves  of  it  without  so  much  of  limitation 
that  it  then  made  them  seem  stiff  and  pedantic.  And  though 
at  that  time  we  were  a  friendly  hearted,  we  were  not,  on 
the  whole,  a  social  people.  And  all  this  made  Harriet  Marti- 
neau's  cheerful,  free  simplicity  like  a  fresh  breeze  in  a  stagnant 
place.  Discussion,  debate,  monologue,  and  dialogue  are  all  more 
natural  to  us  than  conversation.  So  little,  in  fact,  was  it  then  in 
our  nature  or  habits,  that  we  thought  conversible  Europeans  must 
have  been  trained  to  it  as  an  art.  Parties  not  being  permanent, 
no  protection  existed  for  the  one-sided  freedom  of  intercourse 
which  could  exist  in  England. 

Then,  in  addition  to  whatever  there  was  of  natural  inapti- 
tude, increased  by  whatever  might  be  the  effect  of  institutions, 
came  in  the  check  of  incessant  strife  between  our  theory  and 
our  practice.  All  this  made  a  comparatively  wintry  state  of 
heart ;  which,  however  it  might  warm  up  in  the  actual  conflict 
of  life,  could  seldom  cast  off  in  society  the  conversational  mufflers 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


2G1 


of  health,  weather,  light  literary  criticism,  fine-art  pedantry, 
and  fun. 

The  passage  through  our  society  of  one  so  full  and  free  was  a 
season  of  refreshing.  Harriet  Martineau  did  New  England  good 
wherever  she  went,  entering  with  the  liveliest  pleasure  into  all 
the  interests  of  the  hour.  At  Salem,  where  she  was  the  guest  of 
Mr.  Stephen  C.  Phillips,  then  our  Massachusetts  member  of  Con- 
gress, she  became  the  influencing  friend  of  many.  It  was  for 
the  Sunday  school  there  that  she  wrote  a  new  "  tradition  of  Pal- 
estine," the  little  story  of  "  Elec  and  Eachel ; "  and  the  children 
gathered  round  to  touch  her  dress  unawares,  as  if  she  could  put 
them  in  nearer  communication  with  Christ.  And  she  could  not 
only,  on  occasion,  make  the  young  serious,  but  their  elders  gay. 
The  annexed  jeu  cCesprit  pleased  her  so  much  on  account  of  its 
ingenuity,  that,  much  as  she  herself  deprecated  flattery,  she  pre- 
served it  for  her  mother.  It  was  given  her  after  an  evening's 
conversation,  by  Dr.  Flint,  a  Unitarian  minister  and  a  poet,  who 
had  made  numberless  inquiries  about  English  living  authors. 

It  was  of  these  lines  that  an  amused  friend  remarked,  "  They 
would  have  been  capital  for  the  nonce,  if  it  had  not  been  so  dif- 
ficult to  read  them  effectively." 

DR.   FLINT'S  SONNET  TO  MISS   H.  MARTINEAU' S  EAR- 
TRUMPET. 

Thrice  precious  tube  !  thou  faithful  voice-conveyer 

Through  thy  accomplished  mistress'  outward  ear 

To  that  within,  —  wont  other  sounds  to  hear 

Than  those  of  earth  ;  —  for  all  the  Nine  obey  her 

Oft  as  she  wills  their  promptings  to  rehearse 

In  tale,  or  tract,  or  choice  morceaux  of  verse  :  — 

Through  thee,  quick,  clear,  and  sweet  response  I  win 

From  more  than  Delphic  oracle  within. 

For  spirits  o'er  the  vasty  deep  I  call 

Through  thee  ;  and  Endor's  witch  to  royal  Saul 

The  prophet's  form  not  sooner  brought  than  she 

The  gifted  minds  of  her  fair  isle  to  me. 

My  heart's  warm  thanks  to  her  I  fain  would  speak, 

But  words  to  tell  their  warmth  are  all  too  poor  and  weak. 


262 


MEMORIALS. 


We  gathered,  from  the  surprise  she  seemed  to  feel  at  finding 
the  abolitionists  to  be  persons  of  good  sense  and  education,  — 
freer  than  the  rest  of  the  world  from  narrowness,  violence,  and 
fanaticism,  —  through  what  a  course  of  misrepresentations  of  them 
she  must  have  passed.  Indeed,  it  could  have  been  no  otherwise. 
The  whole  land  rung  with  the  abuse  of  them  that  preceded  and 
prepared  for  violence,  and  not  a  voice  had  spoken  for  the  absent. 

"  Mr.  Clay  ought  to  have  told  me,"  she  said,  "  of  such  a  man 
as  Mr.  Birney,  living  within  thirty  miles  of  him."  This  was 
Judge  Birney  of  Alabama,  in  poverty  and  exile  in  a  free  State 
for  having  emancipated  his  slaves,  although  surrounded  by  a 
young  family  dependent  on  him  for  education  and  support ; 
and,  what  was  far  more  a  trial  of  faith  and  principle  (as  he,  alas ! 
afterwards  found),  he  had  joined  the  antislavery  movement,  to 
which  he  owed  the  happy  impulse. 

She  was  told  the  abolitionists  were  unsexing  woman,  so  that 
good  men  found  it  necessary  to  republish  in  America  good  little 
English  books  on  her  appropriate  moral  sphere. 

"  But  what  is  her  appropriate  moral  sphere  ] " 

"  Why,  certainly  a  special  and  different  one  from  man's." 

"  But  if  so,  she  would  have  had  a  special  and  different  Christ." 

11  But,  dear  Miss  Martineau,  is  it  possible  you  think  women 
have  the  same  duties  and  rights  as  men  ] " 

"  I  think  their  powers  ought  to  settle  that  question." 

Circumstances  coeval  with  the  settlement  of  the  country  had 
been  preparing  it  for  that  question,  but  it  was  Harriet  Martineau 
who  took  the  initiative  in  presenting  it  for  a  practical  solution  in 
the  United  States,  by  her  conversation  and  example,  seconding 
her  writings. 

Then,  the  abolitionists  were  "  people  of  one  idea."  "  But  you 
Americans,"  she  replied,  11  all  seem  to  have  a  special  mission.  Is 
it  not  natural  we  should  all  have  one,  in  accordance  with  our 
individual  capacities  ]  Some  devote  themselves  respectively  to 
temperance,  education,  peace,  or  the  propagation  of  the  gospel  in 
foreign  parts  ;  why  should  not  Freedom  be  the  mission  of  oth- 
ers ] "  This  made  so  wide  an  impression,  that  we  became  at 
length  wearied  with  the  echo  of  this  saying  about  a  "  mission  " 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


263 


among  persons  who  still  refused  to  let  abolitionists  have  the  bene- 
fit of  it. 

Once  the  conversation  falling  upon  endurance,  and  what  men 
might  be  called  by  a  sense  of  duty  to  encounter  in  consequence 
of  doing  right,  and  what  prospects  the  mind  could  be  brought  to 
dwell  on  with  composure,  she  said,  "  I  have  often  thought  that 
the  worst  thing  that  could  befall  me  would  be  to  die  of  starvation 
on  a  doorstep  ;  and  (gleefully)  I  think  I  could  bear  it." 

Talking  of  the  difficulties  that  beset  ^Xecessarianism  as  com- 
pared with  the  Boston  Unitarian  ideas,  she  said,  "  /  find  no  dif- 
ficulty so  great  as  a  God  that  did  not  hinder  what  happened 
to-day  and  does  not  know  what  is  going  to  take  place  to-morrow." 
Once  when  atheism  was  the  subject  of  conversation,  she  was 
told  there  was  but  one  avowed  atheist  in  the  State.  "  I  wish 
there  were  a  thousand,"  she  said ;  "  for  what  depths  of  conceal- 
ment and  suffering  the  fact  implies  !  " 

This  one  avowed  atheist,  Abner  Kneeland,  was  then  under 
prosecution  for  blasphemy,  for  having  declared  in  his  newspaper, 
"  The  Investigator,"  that  he  thought  "  the  God  of  the  Univer- 
salists,  with  all  his  moral  attributes  (aside  from  nature  itself),  a 
chimera  of  their  own  imagination." 

Harriet  Martineau's  conversation  with  her  friend,  Mr.  Ellis 
Gray  Loring,  on  the  subject  of  freedom  of  speech  and  of  the 
press  in  connection  with  this  case,  resulted,  on  Mr.  Kneeland's 
subsequent  conviction,  in  the  preparation  of  a  petition,  signed 
by  Dr.  Channing  and  a  hundred  and  sixty-seven  others,  all 
Christians,  and  some  of  them  evangelical  Christians,  for  .the 
pardon  of  the  offender.*    This  petition  was  rejected  by  the  gov- 

*  There  was  great  difficulty  in  obtaining  this  number  of  signatures.  Not  a 
single  one  was  furnished  from  any  theological  seminary,  while  a  counter  peti- 
tion was  numerously  and  spontaneously  signed  by  most  prominent  and  influen- 
tial men  in  the  community.  In  Mr.  Loring's  original  draft  there  were  two  addi- 
tional grounds  of  opposition  to  religious  prosecutions  :  1.  That  belief,  not 
being  voluntary,  cannot  rightfully  be  rewarded  or  punished ;  2.  That  in  so 
important  a  matter  as  what  a  man  believes  to  be  true,  on  subjects  of  a  practical 
bearing,  the  expression  of  it  is  not  only  his  right,  but  a  clear  duty  to  others. 
These  seemed  to  Dr.  Channing,  who  headed  the  petition,  to  savour  too  much  of 
the  metaphysics  of  Unitarianism  to  be  admissible  in  a  document  intended  for 
general  signature.  (!)   To  one  neither  metaphysician  nor  Unitarian  it  would 


264 


MEMORIALS. 


ernor  and  council,  but  the  end  was  not  yet.  Xot  only  was  it 
the  last  prosecution  of  a  theological  opinion  in  Massachusetts ; 
it  set  in  motion  a  demand  for  equal  legal  rights  irrespective  of 
theology ;  and  what  is  popularly  called  "  the  Atheist  Witness 
bill"  —  agitated  from  time  to  time  in  our  Massachusetts  Legisla- 
ture for  two-and-twenty  years  —  passed  both  branches,  to  the 
statute-book,  and  was  only  prevented  from  formal  record  as  a 
law,  in  accordance  with  the  public  conviction  of  its  everlasting 
need,  by  the  electioneering  necessities  of  the  moment. 

At  this  time  there  was  no  discordance  between  herself  and  our 
L'nitarians  generally  on  the  subject  of  a  First  Cause  other  than 
the  approximation  to  the  Orthodox  world  occasioned  by  her 
Necessarianism.  Yet  I  think  her  mind  must  have  begun  to 
transcend  their  usual  forms  of  thought.  To  one  who  spoke  to 
her  of  the  importance  of  sympathy  with  God  she  replied, 
"  Yes !  —  for  it  is  the  love  of  truth."  "  We  must  be  true  to 
our  own  consciences,"  continued  the  first.  "Yes, — but  con- 
viction is  not  truth." 

She  was  puzzled  about  our  "  harsh  language,"  as  it  was  called 
by  the  tender-hearted  country  at  large,  that  bore  to  look  on 
torture  and  dare  not  look  on  truth.  "  Why  don't  they  prose- 
cute you  for  defamation?"  she  said.  "Because  we  don't  de- 
fame." Tliat  then  was  not  it;  and  she  finally  seemed  to  settle 
into  the  opinion  that  it  was  our  bad  taste  that  made  the  diffi- 
culty, —  an  unfortunate  defect  on  our  part  to  be  deprecated  as 
lessening  the  force  of  the  idea.  We  were  not  prepared  to  make 
our  defence  on  the  score  of  taste.  "  Tastes  differ,"  to  so  pro- 
verbial an  extent,  that  Lord  Chesterfield  forbade  so  rude  a  thing 
in  society  as  finding  fault  with  them.  We  only  stated  the  fact 
that  ours  was  the  accepted  mode  of  preaching  of  the  vast  ma- 
jority of  the  clergy  of  the  country,  the  evangelical  custom,  — 
not  to  say  fashion ;  though  to  English  Episcopacy  and  Unita- 
rianism,  and  all  who  "never  mention  hell  to  ears  polite,"  it 

certainly  seem  that  if  there  ever  did  exist  practical  universal  truths,  making  a 
part  of  the  very  nature  of  things,  these  are  they.  In  deference  to  him,  they 
were,  however,  omitted.  But  this  was  the  character  of  that  good  man's  mind. 
He  constantly  needed  the  admonition  of  the  French  statesman,  conveyed  in  his 
definition  of  a  betise,  —  *  C'est  oublier  la  chose  essentielle." 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


265 


of  course  seemed  to  be  removed  from  the  category  of  profane 
swearing  only  by  being  couched  in  Biblical  language.  And 
though  we  loved  the  Hebrew  sound  of  it,  she  might  be  allowed 
to  find  fault.  But  we  refused  to  grant  the  same  immunity  to 
Andover  and  Princeton,  whose  mother  tongue  it  was,  without 
a  scorching  exposure  of  their  hypocrisy. 

"  Now  tell  me  how  much  of  the  'Liberator'  you  really  write1?" 
said  she,  seeing  I  had  defended  it  on  both  principle  and 
expediency,  and  on  the  very  grounds  for  which  it  was  generally 
condemned.  "  One  would  think,  to  hear  you,  that  there  was 
but  one  duty  in  life,  —  rebuke."  "Exactly  so,"  I  was  about  to 
say  ;  "  these  are  of  the  times  when  rebuke  is  '  wisdom,  holiness, 
goodness,  justice,  and  truth.'  "  But  something  of  elevated  emo- 
tion in  her  look  stopped  me;  and  I  only  said,  "I  desire  no 
further  special  conversation  with  you  on  this  subject.  I  am 
sure  of  your  determination  to  see  and  know  all  things  for  your- 
self, and  of  your  determination  to  act  rightly  and  justly  in  every 
emergency."  Again  she  had  used  the  very  words  of  the  ene- 
mies of  the  cause,  but  with  a  spirit  so  foreign  to  the  moral 
toadyism  of  Unitarian  sentimentality  and  evangelical  hypocrisy, 
that  one  could  only  hail  it  with  satisfaction.  The  abolitionists 
had  been  reviled  without  exception  for  their  sweeping,  unmiti- 
gated censures,  but  always  most  unjustly.  The  blessing  be- 
sought by  the  old  Massachusetts  divine  had  been  vouchsafed  to 
them,  — "  Lord,  grant  us  thy  crowning  mercy  to  discriminate 
between  things  that  differ."  By  their  fruits  we  knew  men. 
Their  words  were  merely  their  disguises  at  this  time ;  and 
often  plausible  enough  "  to  deceive,  if  it  were  possible,  the  very 
elect." 

I  only  added  that  I  wished  she  knew  Mr.  Garrison,  whose 
journal  I  had  been  defending  as  a  means  of  the  highest  degree 
of  excellence  and  adaptation  in  American  affairs  and  character. 
I  had  no  long  conversation  with  her  after.  Previous  to  her 
accepting  our  invitation  to  attend  the  antislavery  meeting  of 
which  she  has  given  an  account,  she  asked  if  the  ground  we 
had  taken,  of  opposition  to  slavery,  had  cost  us  many  friends  ] 
We  said  yes..   "  Eemember  not  to  be  unjust,  and  say  that  they 

VOL.  II. 


266 


MEMORIALS. 


deserted  you ;  for  it  is  you  who  have  deserted  them.  It  is  you 
who  are  changed.  They  remain  the  same."  It  was  very  true ; 
only  men  do  not  long  remain  the  same  under  such  circumstances, 
—  they  inevitably  grow  worse  ;  and  that  she  had  opportunity  to 
see  afterwards,  though  the  time  was  not  yet. 

We  have  seen  what  England  was  when  she  came  into  it;  now 
let  us  look  back  to  the  condition  of  America  when  she  entered 
it.  It  was  during  her  first  sojourn  in  Massachusetts,  at  the  time 
such  thoughts  as  these  were  revolving  in  her  mind,  that  we  made 
our  first  attempt  to  see  Harriet  Martineau.  We  too,  with  the 
rest,  were  drawn  to  meet  her,  whose  way  it  had  never  been,  as  a 
family,  to  seek  strangers  of  distinction,  and  who  were  now  too 
busy  with  our  antislavery  conflict  to  have  taken  up  an  ordinary 
guest.  But  in  this  case  our  family  elders  encouraged  us.  Was 
she  not  of  their  own  faith,  —  the  "  essential,"  "  unfolded,"  "  mani- 
fested "  faith  of  the  prize  essays  1  Had  she  not  established  a  claim 
on  them,  and  so  on  us,  by  her  letter  to  the  deaf  ?  Had  she  not 
created  Cousin  Marshall,  and  Letitia,  and  Ella  of  Garveloch,  and 
Cassius  of  Demerara  1  And  while  the  Tories  had  been  taunting 
the  English  abolitionists,  up  to  the  very  hour  when  dawn  broke 
into  the  windows  of  Parliament  upon  their  victory,  with  having 
done  nothing  all  these  forty  years,  was  she  not  one  of  them? 
Her  they  encouraged  us  to  seek,  and  her  we  determined  to  see. 
Chiefs  of  all  parties  and  advocates  of  all  schemes  were  thronging 
to  her  for  sanction,  and  what  should  hinder  us  ?  They  had  en- 
throned her  under  the  palm-tree  (and  even  under  the  palmetto), 
and  all  our  American  Israel  was  trooping  up  to  her  for  judgment, 
and  why  not  we  among  the  rest  ]  Xay,  I  inwardly  felt,  why 
not  we  especially,  of  all  the  rest  ?  for,  being  what  her  works 
proclaimed  her  to  be,  I  knew  our  lives  could  not  fail  to  be  of  one 
substance,  nor  our  lot  of  being  cast  in  together. 

But  the  hearts  of  some  misgave  them  on  the  way.  "  We  are 
young,"  we  said,  "  and  unknown.  "  "  No  matter,"  we  made 
answer  to  ourselves,  with  all  the  preoccupation  of  Sisera's  mother, 
"we  understand  her!  and  all  these  troops  of  homagers  do 
not."  Here  we  were  doubtless  mistaken.  We  did  but  feel,  in 
common  with  the  rest,  the  lift  and  sway  of  the  powerful  nature 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


267 


that  was  passing  by.  We  went,  in  the  joy  of  our  hearts,  to  meet 
it,  forecasting  the  coming  interview  as  we  went. 

"  But  the  trumpet ! "  said  one  of  the  young  girls  of  the 
band;  "how  shall  we  venture  to  speak  to  her  through  thai?" 
And  our  ignorance  and  our  imaginations  of  what  we  had  never 
seen  magnified  it  into  an  instrument  of  dreadful  resonance, 
drawing  every  eye  upon  the  speaker.  But  we  were  not  in  a 
state  of  mind  to  be  daunted  by  trifles,  and  quickly  gathered  up 
our  courage.  "  Xo  matter  how  much  noise  it  makes ;  we  shall 
have  altogether  the  advantage  of  others,  for  we  have  something 
to  say.  Only  we  have  hold  of  the  root  of  all  American  problems, 
— '  we  few,  we  happy  few ! '  Others  will  take  the  trumpet 
as  she  presents  it,  and  in  their  confusion  will  fail  to  make  them- 
selves understood.  (We  had  previously  had  minute  accounts  of 
the  manner  of  her  receptions,  and  how  gray-headed  statesmen 
lost  their  presence  of  mind  as  they  took  it  from  her  hand.) 
1  What  did  you  observe  ] '  she  will  inquire.  1 1  merely  re- 
marked that  it  was  a  very  fine  day.'  It  will  give  no  such  uncer- 
tain sound  when  we  take  it  in  hand  !  1  /  said  they  are  men- 
steal  ers  ! '  will  bear  repeating  twice  ! " 

Since  the  Vision  of  Alnaschar  there  had  not  been  so  clear  a 
foreshadowing  of  what  was  not  to  come  to  pass.  She  was  not  at 
home  :  and  Mrs.  Tuckerman,  her  hostess  for  the  day,  told  us  that 
she  would  be  able  to  see  no  more  visitors  till  after  her  return 
from  the  South. 

It  was  no  freak  of  calling  their  elders  names  that,  just  before 
Harriet  Martineau's  arrival,  had  unaccountably  seized  a  set  of 
well-bred  young  people  of  much  hope  and  promise ;  no  sudden 
fit  of  insanity,  destroying  their  usefulness  and  blighting  their 
prospects  in  life.  A  grander  prospect  was  opening  to  them,  and 
the  most  exalted  uses.  To  a  nation  blindly  wandering  to  no 
end,  after  blind  guides,  or  deluded  by  deceivers,  a  leader  had 
now  arisen,  —  it  was  hoped  in  season  to  arouse  the  United  States 
to  a  sense  of  their  condition.  They  had  been  delivered  over, 
bound  hand  and  foot,  to  the  service  of  slavery,  and  they  neither 
knew  nor  felt  the  ruin  and  dishonour  of  submitting  to  such  a 
tyranny.  Under  its  corrupting  influence  the  country  had  actually 


2G8 


MEMORIALS. 


lost  the  sense  of  moral  distinctions.  The  terms  good  and  evil, 
right  and  wrong,  sin  and  holiness,  vice  and  virtue,  no  longer 
represented  the  original  ideas  when  Garrison,  the  first  to  whom 
this  fresh  inspiration  of  freedom  came,  undertook  to  awaken  in 
the  people  a  feeling  of  guilt  and  danger.  Now  for  the  first  time 
was  heard,  on  the  soil  of  the  New  AVorld,  an  appeal  to  the  higher 
and  exclusively  human  instincts,  —  mightier  than  penalties  and 
arms:  — 

"  I  determined  to  lift  up,  at  every  hazard,  the  standard  of  emanci- 
pation, within  sight  of  Bunker  Hill  and  in  the  birthplace  of  liberty. 
That  standard  is  now  unfurled  —  till  every  chain  be  broken  and  every 
bondman  set  free  !  Let  Southern  oppressors  tremble,  —  let  their  secret 
abettors  tremble,  —  let  their  Northern  apologists,  —  let  all  the  ene- 
mies of  the  persecuted  blacks  tremble  ! 

"  T  am  aware  that  many  object  to  the  severity  of  my  language  ;  but 
is  there  not  a  cause  for  severity  ?  I  will  be  as  harsh  as  truth,  and  as 
uncompromising  as  justice.  On  this  subject  I  do  not  wish  to  think, 
or  speak,  or  write  with  moderation.  No  !  No  !  Tell  a  man  whose 
house  is  on  fire  to  give  a  moderate  alarm  ;  tell  him  to  moderately 
rescue  his  wife  from  the  hands  of  the  ravisher  ;  tell  the  mother  to 
gradually  extricate  her  babe  from  the  fire  into  which  it  has  fallen  ;  — 
but  urge  not  me  to  use  moderation  in  a  case  like  the  present.  I  am 
in  earnest,  —  I  will  not  equivocate,  —  I  will  not  excuse,  —  I  will  not 
retreat  a  single  inch  —  and  I  will  be  heard. 

*  It  is  pretended  that  I  am  retarding  the  cause  of  emancipation  by 
the  coarseness  of  my  invective  and  the  precipitancy  of  my  measures. 
The  charge  is  not  true.  On  this  question  my  influence,  humble  as  it 
is,  is  felt  at  this  moment,  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  shall  be  felt 
in  coming  years,  —  not  perniciously,  but  beneficially  ;  not  as  a  curse, 
but  as  a  blessing  ;  and  posterity  will  bear  testimony  that  I  was  right 
I  desire  to  thank  God  that  he  enables  me  to  disregard  '  the  fear  of 
man  which  bringeth  a  snare,'  and  to  speak  his  truth,  in  its  simplicity 
and  power." 

At  first  not  more  than  a  Spartan  three  hundred  heard  and 
heeded,  —  small  force  to  battle  for  three  millions,  against 
the  whole  land  on  the  other  side,  —  but  they  did  not  shrink 
abashed  in  their  insignificance  from  the  magnitude  of  the  under- 
taking, although  its  ultimate  import  loomed  up  brighter  and 


FOREIGN  LIFE.  269 

broader  every  instant  before  their  gaze,  till  it  speedily  took  the 
grand  proportions  of  the  salvation  of  a  world,  —  involved  in  the 
question  of  human  freedom.  All  questions,  all  rights,  all  futurity, 
became  visible  in  its  radiance.  These  were  strong  hours  in  a 
land's  destiny,  but  not  a  doubt  or  fear  perplexed  them  that 
came  forward  to  give  it  shape.  The  intimate  conviction  of  each 
one  of  them  seemed  to  be, 

"  For  this,  amongst  the  rest,  was  I  ordained  ! " 

and  they  gave  themselves  to  the  work  with  a  joyful  disregard  of 
the  personal  cost,  which  entirely  took  from  their  deed  the  charac- 
ter of  sacrifice.  They  wrought  their  righteous  will,  and  took  the 
consequences.  "  One  to  a  hundred  thousand  "  (they  were  told), 
"  you  are  mad  to  expect  success."  "  We  should  be  worse  than 
mad  to  doubt,  for  that  one  is  in  the  right."  "  Nobody  else  sees 
a  chance  of  success  for  you."  "  Nobody  else  knows  what  we 
are  willing  to  pay  for  it." 

The  work  they  had  undertaken  was  to  them  not  only  an 
enterprise  and  an  association  :  it  was  also  a  principle,  a  cause,  a 
religion.  Every  heart  and  brain  was  under  the  charm  of  all  the 
great  thoughts  and  feelings  that  have  ever  stirred  humanity.  As 
they  battled  with  the  thousand  shifty  pretences  men  took  to 
escape  the  truth  and  avoid  doing  justice  to  the  slaves,  it  was  to 
make  an  enemy  and  meet  a  calumny  at  every  blow  ;  and  thus, 
amid  church-craft  and  state-craft,  and  over  all  the  crafty  special 
defences  of  slavery,  built  up  around  it  by  a  people  it  had  utterly 
corrupted  and  subdued,  the  fight  went  on.  France  is  logical, 
and  England  is  compromising ;  but  free,  slaveholding  America 
was  both:  and  hence  the  keen  scholastic  strife,  the  energy  of 
holy  warfare,  unknown  in  union  in  the  day  of  Peter  the  Hermit, 
Abeillard  and  William  de  Champeaux.  But  it  was  no  barren 
subtlety  or  mad  crusade  that  occupied  our  minds.  Though  each 
was  for  himself  in  search  of  absolute  truth  and  absolute  right, 
yet  all  were  as  one  in  refusing  longer  to  brook  that  broad  gross 
insult  to  a  Saviour-Christ,  that  outrage  against  the  moral  sense 
offered  by  the  reigning  public  opinion  of  the  land,  —  the  justifi- 
cation of  slaveholders  as  good  Christians.    They  pronounced  a 


270 


MEMORIALS. 


slaveholder  a  blot  upon  Christianity,  and  condemning  the  Ameri- 
can slave  system  as  the  vilest  that  ever  saw  the  sun,  they  de- 
manded that  it  should  be  immediately  abolished.  "  But  the 
nation  is  not  ready."  "  The  slaves  are  ready.  Every  good  man 
is  ready."  "  But  the  obstacles  !  "  "  There  are  none  but  your 
selfish  injustice."  "  But  the  preparation  !  "  "  The  demand  is 
the  preparation ;  and  the  only  preparation  indispensable  : "  and 
they  made  it ;  —  in  every  form  of  argument,  appeal,  entreaty, 
reproof,  statistics,  petition  ;  through  such  a  variety  of  instru- 
ments, all  tuned  to  concert-pitch,  as  left  nothing  to  be  desired  for 
the  completeness  of  the  harmony.  They  claimed  for  the  slaves 
liberty  and  equality  before  the  law.  "  You  are  amalgamation- 
ists."  They  demanded  the  abolition,  by  the  nation,  of  all  slavery 
within  its  jurisdiction.  "You  are  disunionists  and  incendiaries." 
They  demanded  the  withdrawal  of  all  religious  sanctions  from 
the  system.  "You  are  infidels."  And  the  reverend  and  ap- 
proved good  masters  of  the  South  became  furious  and  lawless, 
and  the  hollow  hearts  and  cardinal  sins  of  the  North  felt  rebuked 
and  outraged,  and  both  took  counsel  together  how  they  might 
destroy  us  out  of  the  land,  before  we  shoidd  succeed  in  implant- 
ing in  it  a  hatred  of  slavery. 

At  this  time  it  was  that  Harriet  Martineau  was  telling  her 
mother,  and  noting  in  her  private  journal,  what  she  saw  of  the 
"theory  and  practice  of  society  in  America."  Among  merchants 
speculating  in  Alabama  lands,  or  involved  by  mortgages  in  the 
ownership  of  slaves;  among  planters,  with  their  capital  in  cotton- 
raising  and  slave-breeding ;  among  tender-spirited  clergymen, 
enjoying  the  spaniel's  privileges  in  the  midst  of  such  ;  among 
politicians,  gambling  for  the  high  offices  which  give  the  means 
to  buy  their  tools  with  petty  places;  among  manufacturers  and 
land-owners,  possessing  wealth  enough  to  make  tools  of  rival  sects 
by  paying  the  heaviest  proportion  of  the  preaching-tax,  —  among 
these  and  such  as  these  she  was  likely  to  find  better  theory  than 
practice.  The  former  can  be  learned  in  a  day  :  the  latter  is  less 
obvious.  The  rending  antislavery  battle  then  going  on  had  for 
its  object  to  show  the  world  how  the  whole  land  was  sown  with 
invisible  sharp  instruments  to  wound  whatever  feet  should  press 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


271 


too  near  the  political  and  religious  machinery  of  despotism  in 
America.  It  took  years  of  severe  conflict  to  carry  these  out- 
works and  lay  the  springs  of  slavery  bare. 

Meanwhile,  the  very  best  men  Harriet  Martineau  met,  — 
whose  natures  should  have  instantly  kindled  at  our  call,  — 
seized  with  misplaced  modesty,  were  breathing  a  quieting  senti- 
mentalism  over  the  country ;  while  others,  of  hardier  spirits, 
while  they  trampled  down  this  true  revival  of  religion,  were 
setting  in  motion  the  idle  machinery  of  sectarian  "  revivalism," 
with  strictest  care  to  put  nothing  between  its  millstones  to 
grind.  The  more  compassionate,  the  more  cunning,  and  the 
statistically  given,  were  busy  with  that  lie  with  circumstance,  — 
the  Colonization  Society.  It  was  difficult,  indeed,  to  rouse  such 
men  to  the  burden  and  heat  of  so  great  a  day.  The  curse  of 
knowing  better  than  they  lived  came  upon  them ;  and  the  few 
who  laid  the  cause  of  liberty  to  heart  were  left  to  stand  by  it 
alone,  and  bide  the  brunt  of  every  calumny  that  could  be  heaped 
on  "  ignorant  and  mischievous  fanatics,"  —  "  the  vulgar  and  de- 
based dregs  of  the  land." 

And  men  who  could  have  undeceived  Harriet  Martineau  at 
every  step,  because  they  personally  knew  the  honour  and  excel- 
lence of  the  persons  thus  maligned  on  account  of  their  best  qual- 
ities, —  men  who  would  themselves  have  been  abolitionists  but 
for  the  loss  and  glorious  shame  of  the  thing  to  which  they  were 
not  equal, — were  meanly  mute  when  their  silence  endangered  the 
lives  of  their  best  fellow-citizens  :  and  when  at  length  they 
spoke,  it  was  to  endanger  them  still  more.  The  model  states- 
man and  scholar  suggested  their  indictment  at  common  law, 
and  sold  their  rights  of  speech,  and  of  the  press,  and  of  associa- 
tion, to  his  slaveholding  dictators  for  a  future  senatorship  and 
foreign  embassy.  The  pattern  saint  authenticated  the  street  cal- 
umny that  the  abolitionists  were  in  favour  of  cruel  vengeance  on 
the  part  of  the  slaves.  The  leading  jurist  said  law  was  not  for 
the  protection  of  abolitionists,  —  only  for  the  safe  guarding  of 
slave-property.  The  model  gentleman  sneered  at  them  as  very 
low  in  the  social  scale, — "ancillary,"  he  thought,  for  he  was  too 
much  a  gentleman  to  call  the  ladies,  his  neighbours,  servant-maids, 


272 


MEMORIALS. 


—  and  he  suffered  himself  to  be  driven  stupidly  with  the  rest  into 
this  disgrace,  by  infamous  editors,  hired  to  do  the  work  of  mer- 
chants whose  Southern  land-speculations  and  carrying-trade  might 
be  more  or  less  productive  as  slavery  was  more  or  less  firm  in  the 
market.  And  all  the  wealth,  official  station,  literary  prestige, 
religious  authority,  in  short  (to  use  a  New  England  provincial- 
ism), "all  the  property  and  standing"  of  the  country,  rose  up 
against  the  abolitionists.  They  thought  of  that  strange,  impres- 
sive utterance  —  satire  at  once  and  psalm  —  of  David:  "The 
mighty  are  gathered  against  me,  —  not  for  my  transgression,  nor 
for  my  sin." 

Harriet  Martineau  used  to  laugh  at  us  Americans  for  our 
habit  of  beginning  at  the  beginning  in  our  talk.  "  I  ask  a 
question  here,"  she  said,  "  and  you  begin  at  the  creation  and  go 
on  to  the  day  of  judgment."  But  yet  what  we  did  in  talk  she 
always  did  in  reality.  She  was,  I  think,  the  most  whole- 
minded,  large-minded,  right-minded  person  I  ever  met  in  any 
country ;  the  most  capable  of  discerning  the  end  from  the 
beginning  in  human  affairs  ;  and  hence  her  instinctive  power  — 
confiding  and  free  from  suspicion  as  her  nature  was  —  to  discern 
halfness,  untruth,  and  insufficiency  in  human  character. 

She  had,  I  think,  but  one  personal  interview  with  Mr.  Garri- 
son (then  unknown,  except  in  an  unfavourable  manner,  as  a 
tenant  of  the  Maryland  state-prison,  and  as  the  "  low  criminal " 
on  whose  head  a  price  of  $5,000  had  been  set  by  the  State  of 
Georgia),  while  she  was  long  the  favoured  guest  and  beloved 
friend  of  Dr.  Channing,  and  the  admired  and  honoured  guest  or 
associate  of  Mr.  Clay  and  Judge  Story,  Mr.  "Webster  and  Mr. 
Everett  and  a  hundred  others,  —  the  representative  great  men 
of  America,  But  her  mind  carefully  and  surely  discriminated 
between  the  good  great  man  and  the  good  men  who  were  not 
great ;  between  the  grand,  uncompromising  spirit,  working,  giant- 
like, to  turn  the  current  of  an  evil  age,  and  the  bad  great  men 
of  the  hour,  whether  bold  or  timid,  who  did  but  float  upon  it  to 
some  selfish  end. 

Dr.  Channing,  between  whom  and  Harriet  Martineau  a  true 
friendship  subsisted  to  the  day  of  his  death,  was  a  good  man, 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


273 


but  not  in  any  sense  a  great  one.  With  benevolent  intentions, 
he  could  not  greatly  help  the  nineteenth  century,  for  he  knew 
very  little  about  it,  —  or  indeed  of  any  other.  He  had  neither 
insight,  courage,  nor  firmness.  In  his  own  church  had  sprung 
up  a  vigorous  opposition  to  slavery,  which  he  innocently,  in  so 
far  as  ignorantly,  used  the  little  strength  he  had  to  stay.  He 
was  touched  by  Brougham's  eloquent  denial  of  the  right  of  prop- 
erty in  man,  and  he  adopted  the  idea  as  a  theme,  but  he  dreaded 
any  one  who  claimed,  on  behalf  of  the  slaves,  that  their  masters 
should  instantly  renounce  that  right  of  ownership ;  he  was 
terror-stricken  at  the  idea  of  calling  on  the  whole  American  peo- 
ple to  take  counsel  on  so  difficult  and  delicate  a  matter  in  anti- 
slavery  associations ;  and  above  all  he  deprecated  the  admis- 
sion of  the  coloured  race  to  our  ranks.  He  had  been  selected  by 
a  set  of  money-making  men  as  their  representative  for  piety, 
as  Edward  Everett  was  their  representative  gentleman  and 
scholar,  Judge  Story  their  representative  gentleman,  jurist, 
and  companion  in  social  life,  and  Daniel  Webster  their  repre- 
sentative statesman  and  advocate,  looking  after  their  business 
interests  in  Congress. 

And  herein  lay  the  secret  of  these  great  American  reputations. 
Not  one  of  them  was  of  power  to  have  made  his  way  against 
public  opinion.  The  public  acclamation  that  sustained  them 
was  not  hero-worship,  but  self-adulation.  "  Surely  "  (it  meant, 
being  interpreted),  "the  vigorous  money-making  power  is  the 
greatest  of  all,  and  we  ourselves  as  good  as  great  preachers,  ora- 
tors, lawyers,  and  scholars  ;  since  they  act  according  to  our  direc- 
tions, and  never  transcend  our  convictions.  These  are  our  prox- 
ies ;  and  while  we  drive  them  along  before  us  in  the  sight  of  the 
world,  we  too  are  famous  in  their  fame." 

Herein,  too,  lay  the  secret  of  the  public  rage  when  the  fact 
appeared  that  the  illustrious  stranger  —  however  drawn  to  one 
by  a  like  conscientious  piety,  to  another  by  similarity  in  social, 
scientific,  or  legislative  powers,  and  to  a  third  by  appreciation  of 
belles-lettres  scholarship  —  had  not  found  these  men  themselves 
illustrious ;  while  she  bore  with  the  greatest  composure  to  be 
laughed  at  for  pointing  out  the  despised  youth  Garrison  as  the 
great  man  of  the  age. 


274 


MEMORIALS. 


It  was  a  pleasure  to  see  her  honest,  earnest  abandonment  of 
her  mind  to  the  power  of  evidence,  and  how  patiently  she 
would  settle  herself  to  listen  to  another  side  of  a  question  of 
which  she  thought  she  had  already  seen  enough  to  justify  her 
conclusion ;  ready  to  go  over  again  with  the  whole  case  as 
affected  by  the  new  element.  You  saw  she  had  but  one  desire, 
—  the  fact  :  but  one  object,  —  the  truth.  "  Is  it  so,  or  is  it  not 
so  1  "  was  the  unmingled  expression  of  her  face  while  listening  to 
the  various  testimony  that  came  before  her. 

She  possessed  a  singular  mobility  of  countenance.  It  was  sim- 
ple, compound,  or  changeful,  with  the  occasion,  keeping  exact 
pace  with  the  movement  of  her  thought.  I  recollect  once  read- 
ing to  her  a  few  verses  I  had  written  expressing  the  feelings  of 
three  hundred  delegates  of  antislavery  societies  in  the  country 
towns  of  New  England,  for  whose  reception  we  could  obtain  no 
hall  in  Boston,  their  Mecca,  their  Jerusalem,  "the  city  of 
their  solemnities."  I  have  forgotten  entirely  the  verses,  but  I 
remember  the  change  of  her  face  with  each  as  I  repeated  them, 
as  something  extraordinary  for  sincerity  and  strength.  But  I 
was  speaking  of  her  impartiality.  It  was  from  experience  that 
she  wrote  at  that  time  her  essay  on  Moral  Independence  —  as 
one  of  them  that  "  know  what  it  is  to  rise  in  the  morning  with  a 
strong  persuasion  of  something,  to  be  shaken  before  noon,  to  per- 
ceive a  troublesome  amount  of  evidence  on  the  other  side  before 
night ;  .  .  .  .  who  know  what  it  is  to  mix  alternately  with  the 
friends  and  foes  of  some  institution,  and  have  their  sympathies 
engaged  by  each,  till  they  begin  to  wonder  if  there  are  any 
bounds  to  the  conflicting  evidence  which  may  be  offered,  any 
unity  of  principles  in  the  case,  or  any  power  of  judgment  in 
themselves.  They  know  that  the  only  hope  of  rational  and 
steadfast  conviction  lies  in  diligent  study,  patient  thought,  and  a 
faithful  comparison  of  new  facts  with  old  principles,  —  a  process 
which  few  are  able  and  fewer  still  are  willing  to  carry  out  with 
perfect  fidelity  If  such  be  the  weakness  of  the  strong- 
est, such  the  difficulties  of  the  most  resolute,  what  is  authority  1 
.  ...  It  is  only  by  taking  our  stand  on  principle,  keeping 
ourselves  free  to  act  untrammelled  by  authority,  that  we  can 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


275 


retain  any  power  of  resolving  and  working  as  rational  and 
responsible  beings. 

"Not  only  does  individual  peace  depend  on  freedom  from 
authority,  but  the  very  existence  of  society  rests  on  individual 
rectitude."  * 

In  this  essay  she  speaks  of  those  who  for  various  reasons  for- 
feit their  moral  independence ;  "  Those  who  are  so  overpow- 
ered by  an  idea  of  the  greatness  of  man  in  the  abstract  that 
their  own  individuality  shrinks,  and  they  submit  to  authority 
under  the  idea  of  doing  homage  to  humanity ;  .  .  .  .  those  who 
relinquish  it  by  moral  perversion  of  some  kind,  whether  called 
selfishness,  timidity,  or  mistake  as  to  the  right  objects  of  pur- 
suit; ....  those  who  fail  for  lack  of  nerve,  taking  pledges 
they  know  they  shall  forfeit,  deny  principles  they  know  to  be 
true,  hide  truths  confided  to  them  to  be  revealed,  uphold  insti- 
tutions their  Maker's  hand  is  pulling  down,  hold  their  peace 
when  they  should  speak,  and  shut  their  eyes  against  the  light, 
and  all  '  because  they  cannot  meet  the  questioning  eye,  or 
bear  the  pointing  finger,  or  contemplate  the  petty  instruments 
of  man's  persecution those  who  uphold  with  clamor  a 
barbarous  institution,  if  it  only  keeps  up  a  demand  for  their  mer- 
chandise ;  .  .  .  .  the  office-seekers  who,  in  reptile  degradation, 
prey  upon  the  honours  of  society  ;  .  .  .  .  those  who  act  for  fame, 
profaning  with  the  breath  of  men  the  power  that  ought  to  be 
sanctified  to  the  service  of  truth,  putting  their  manhood  up 
for  sale,  and  actually  begging  a  place  in  the  great  slave-market  of 
society." 

Eloquent,  beautiful,  and  true;  capable  of  making  the  pro- 
foundest  impression  :  but  all  this  and  more,  covering  their  whole 
case,  New  England  men  could  bear,  at  any  time,  of  a  writer  or 
a  preacher,  and  remain  entirely  unmoved,  —  nay,  boast  mean- 
while, in  virtue  of  having  listened  to  it,  that  they  were  "  as 
much  antislavery  as  any  body." 

Harriet  Martineau  was  soon  to  learn  what  it  was  they  would 
not  bear. 

Although  it  seemed  to  us  at  that  time  —  what  it  really  was  — 
*  Essay  on  Moral  Independence.    Miscellanies,  p.  179,  Boston  edition. 


276 


MEMORIALS. 


the  greatest  possible  privilege  to  serve  the  antislavery  cause, 
we  should  have  shrunk  as  from  dishonour  from  dragging  any  one 
unwittingly  into  its  service  ;  and  in  offering  to  Harriet  Martineau 
every  opportunity  for  observation  and  information,  it  never 
darkened  my  mind  that  it  would  bring  her  into  the  same  position 
of  danger  and  difficulty  with  ourselves,  to  make  use  of  them.  I 
thought  her  immense  personal  popularity  would  be  her  protec- 
tion in  obtaining  personal  knowledge  of  the  crisis,  even  at  an 
antislavery  meeting.  I  wished  her  to  see,  that  she  might  be 
able  to  say  in  England,  after  her  return,  that  the  abolitionists, 
though  few  in  number,  were  a  fair  specimen  of  all  classes  and 
conditions  of  Americans  ;  and  I  thought  she  might  do  so  safely. 
I  was  mistaken.  My  country  was  even  more  corrupted  by 
slavery  than  I  had  thought.  I  did  not  know  what  the  paper 
contained  that  was  given  her  to  read  at  the  antislavery  meeting 
which  she  has  described,  at  the  house  of  Mr.  Francis  Jackson, 
but  I  never  saw  severer  pain  (with  a  touch  of  displeasure  too) 
on  any  human  countenance  than  was  then  expressed  for  a 
moment  by  hers;  and  once  more  I  saw  that  there  are  two 
different  hours  of  righteous  witness  for  the  truth  :  one  glad  and 
joyful  like  our  own,  and  one  like  His  who  said,  "  If  it  be  possi- 
ble, let  this  cup  pass." 

It  was  whispered  round  the  room  that  this  was  a  request  on 
the  part  of  Mr.  Loring  that  Miss  Martineau  would  address  the 
meeting.  I  remembered  words  of  hers  to  which  I  had  listened 
in  a  previous  conversation, —  "The  martyr's  real  trial  is  the  doubt 
whether  he  is  right,"  —  and  I  rejoiced  to  see  that  hers  was  not 
that  trial.  It  was  but  a  moment,  and  she  was  ready,  with  no 
trace  of  pain  or  displeasure  on  her  face.  She  spoke  with  un- 
equalled simplicity  and  dignity ;  and  the  few  words  she  uttered 
conveyed  the  grounds  of  that  momentary  look  of  reproach 
(which,  if  legitimate,  she  never  afterwards  felt  or  made),  and 
marked  the  limitations  of  her  testimony  to  the  exact  degree  of 
her  feeling  and  knowledge. 

"  I  have  been  requested  by  a  friend  present  to  say  something,  if 
only  a  word,  to  express  my  sympathy  in  the  objects  of  this  meeting. 
I  had  supposed  that  my  presence  here  would  be  understood  as  show- 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


277 


ing  my  sympathy  with  you.  But,  as  I  am  requested  to  speak,  I  will 
say  what  I  have  said  through  the  whole  South,  in  every  family  where 
I  have  been,  that  I  consider  slavery  as  inconsistent  with  the  law  of 
God,  and  as  incompatible  with  the  course  of  his  providence.  I  should 
certainly  say  no  less  at  the  North  than  at  the  South  concerning  this 
utter  abomination  ;  and  I  now  declare  that  in  your  principles  1  fully 
agree." 

A  sublimer  act  of  self-renunciation  for  the  sake  of  right  it  had 
never  been  my  happiness  to  witness ;  for  never  have  I  seen,  be- 
fore or  since,  one  who  had  so  much  to  renounce.  I  had  not 
thought  to  afford  occasion  for  it,  nor  did  I  suppose  my  friend 
Mr.  Loring  to  have  acted  in  foreknowledge  of  the  immediate 
consequences  to  herself.  But  this  I  know,  that  one  circum- 
stanced as  Harriet  Martineau  then  was  may  well  bless  the  chance 
and  thank  the  instrument  that  makes  way  for  dealing  so  effectual 
and  heroic  a  blow  for  a  land's  redemption.  She  took  her  life  in 
her  hand  and  deliberately  cast  it  from  her  into  coming  time,  and 
the  nobility  of  the  deed  will  give  light  to  all  in  need  of  the 
strength  of  a  bright  example  forever! 

The  country  was  again  in  arms,  and  against  her  as  an  indi- 
vidual. Abuse  was  exhausted.  The  organ  of  the  Boston  self- 
styled  aristocracy,  the  "Daily  Advertiser,"  "the  respectable 
daily,"  as  it  was  then  for  distinction's  sake  called,  heading  the 
vulgar  pack.  A  harder  thing  to  bear  was  the  grief  of  the  timid 
good  at  the  immediate  consequences  of  an  action  whose  scope 
and  nature  they  no  more  comprehended  than  the  born  blind 
the  day ;  while  the  obtrusive  and  officious  betrayed,  by  their 
anxiety  to  nullify  her  testimony,  their  own  opposition  to  the 
cause. 

Very  few  beyond  the  thin  ranks  of  the  abolitionists  ventured 
to  approve,  and  efforts  were  made  to  persuade  her  that  they  too 
were  regretting  the  step  she  had  taken.  Of  these  few  the  ex- 
cellent Stephen  Clarendon  Phillips,  who  had  hung  her  portrait, 
painted  for  the  place,  at  his  home  in  Salem,  when  she  bade  that 
town  farewell,  wrote  thus  to  her  from  Philadelphia,  on  his  way 
from  Washington,  where  he  had  left  the  question  of  slavery  agi- 
tating Congress  through  all  its  ranks  :  — 


278 


MEMORIALS. 


We  shall  have  an  agitating  session,  but  what  of  that  ?  Do  you 
not  already  understand  enough  of  our  institutions  to  know  that 
excitement  is  often  salutary,  and  may  always  be  rendered  so  ?  Let 
there  be  free  discussion  ;  give  us  the  power  of  truth  and  moral 
courage,  just  as  much  as  is  wanted,  and  the  more  excitement  the 
better.  I  have  no  fears  from  bringing  the  slavery  question  into  Con- 
gress ;  my  only  fears  are  from  its  being  kept  out.  The  sooner  the 
opposite  opinions  can  meet  each  other  the  better.  Till  then,  truth 
cannot  vanquish  error.  But  the  question  cannot  be  long  kept  out. 
The  votes  for  laying  upon  the  table,  and  for  the  previous  question, 
will  grow  weaker  and  weaker.  The  project  of  rejecting  petitions  ex- 
pired in  its  first  attempt  to  breathe.  Petitions  will  crowd  in  upon 
each  other,  knocking  for  admission,  and  presently  they  will  be  heard, 
discussed,  and  granted.  I  care  not  if  it  be  the  work  of  years.  I  re- 
joice that  I  have  lived  to  see  the  work  commenced  

I  meant  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  your  letter,  and  to  have  told 
you  what  I  thought  about  your  speech.  But  it  is  of  no  consequence. 
I  believe  that  you  are  fulfilling  your  mission.  Is  that  enough  ?  May 
I  not  hear  from  you  very  shortly  ?    Believe  me  sincerely  yours, 

S.  C.  PHILLIPS. 

The  Eev.  Ephraim  Peabody,  of  whom  at  his  death,  twenty 
years  after,  it  was  told  in  the  journals  of  the  succeeding 
day,  as  his  greatest  distinction,  that  he  was  "the  friend  of 
Harriet  Martineau,"  wrote  to  her  thus  from  his  sick-bed  in 
Xew  Orleans,  weighed  down  by  thoughts  of  the  opposition 
of  his  fellow-Christians  every  where  :  — 

New  Orleans,  February  17,  1834. 
My  dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  I  received  your  letter  just  as  I  was 
starting  South,  and  I  pray  that  sickness  may  never  make  you  know 
the  worth  of  such  a  letter,  nor  of  your  kind  acts  and  words  at 
Watertown.  You  warn  me  not  to  answer  your  letter.  —  It  was 
kindly  done  ;  but  the  truth  is,  that  in  the  feverish  wakefulness  of  long 
nights  and  days  too  I  have  written  in  thought  more  than  a  hundred 
letters  to  you,  and  I  wish  (and  shall  I  not  ?)  to  write  one,  on  paper, 
to  say  how  large  a  place  you  fill  in  my  mind  and  in  my  heart ;  how 
much  I  would  give  for  the  sound  of  your  voice,  —  and  that  not  so 
much  for  the  wisdom  or  beauty  of  what  you  might  say,  but  for  the 
same  reason  that  in  this  city  of  strangers  my  wife's  voice  or  sister's 
would  be  music  from  heaven,  because  I  love  them.    I  know  you  will 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


279 


pardon  me  for  saying  this,  as  it  is  very  likely  the  last  time  I  may 
speak  or  write  to  you.  I  wish  to  write  also  to  say  that  the  little  and 
contemptible  newspaper  persecution  you  were  subjected  to  for  speak- 
ing your  thoughts  of  abolition  has  made  me  think  of  the  subject  till 
all  my  sympathies,  and  to  a  very  great  extent  my  judgment,  is  with  the 
abolitionists,  —  entirely  so,  if  Dr.  Channing  is  one.  I  know  you  acted 
from  a  good  conscience,  and  conscience  is  "a  strong- siding  champion," 
that  needs  not  the  aid  of  others  ;  but  if  others  have  criticised  what 
you  did  in  attending  an  abolition  meeting,  I  also  may  say  that, 
though  at  that  time  *  my  opinions  were  very  different  from  yours,  I 
could  not  but  from  the  bottom  of  my  soul  honour  you  for  what 

you  did  May  God  bless  you  and  prosper  you  ;  it  is  the  prayer 

of  your  friend, 

EPHRAIM  PEABODY. 

Others  there  were  who  expressed,  like  Nicodemus,  by  night, 
the  feelings  it  would  have  cost  too  much  to  proclaim  by  day. 

I  would  here  fain  group  together  the  words  of  glowing  charac- 
tery  from  a  hundred  strong  minds  and  hearts,  each  of  so  different 
a  strain  that  their  combination  would  show  better  than  the  best 
words  of  the  most  graphic  description  the  impression  this  great 
heart  made  while  it  dwelt  among  them.  A  few,  at  least,  I  may 
preserve. 

Of  us,  though  not  among  us,  he  who  had  years  before  made 
himself  first  known  to  the  world  as  of  all  things  best  judge  of 
bravery  and  truth,  —  Emerson,  — now  approved  himself  a  judge 
once  more.  "  Joy,"  he  said,  "  that  you  exist.  Honour  to  your 
spirit,  which  is  so  true  and  brave." 

Mary  Ware,  the  last  of  that  fine  race  of  New  England  women 
that  was  true  to  New  England's  noble  old  standard  of  womanly 
excellence  before  the  proclamation  of  a  nobler,  wrote  thus  :  — 

"  I  know  not  how  to  be  grateful  enough  that  I  have  known  you. 
That  you  have  given  us  pleasure  you  cannot  but  know  ;  but  you 
cannot  know  how  much  good  you  have  also  done  us." 

Dr.  Follen,  the  patriot  hero  of  Germany,  the  student,  the 
poet,  the  philosopher,  the  victim  of  the  Holy  Alliance,  the 
Christian  teacher,  the  American  abolitionist,  and  the  victim  of 

*  Three  months  previous. 


280 


MEMORIALS. 


American  despotism,  had  undergone  an  experience  which  enabled 
him  to  appreciate  that  of  Harriet  Martineau.  He  was  one  of 
those  rare  great  spirits  that  find  no  alternative  at  the  call  of  a 
great  cause  but  obedience.  He  was  the  only  European  exile  of 
that  vintage  who  declined  to  prosper  as  an  American  by  flatter- 
ing the  nation's  sin,  —  so  rare  is  the  virtue  that  can  pour  out  its 
life-blood  twice.  While  suffering  proscription  from  the  land  of 
his  birth,  he  identified  himself  with  Garrison  among  the  earliest, 
and  suffered,  with  the  rest,  a  fresh  proscription  from  the  land  of 
his  love  and  his  adoption.  When  the  venal  journal  of  Boston 
corruption  was  used  to  persecute  and  insult  Harriet  Martineau 
as  the  friend  of  freedom  and  the  friend  of  the  slaves'  only  advo- 
cates, as  the  practical  defender  of  the  imperilled  right  of  speech 
and  of  association,  he  saw,  though  without  help  from  the  example 
of  his  friend,  Dr.  Channing,  that  it  is  no  sin  against  the  freedom 
of  the  press  instantly  to  cease  to  support  a  tool  of  slavery.  His 
charming  American  wife,  no  less  devoted  to  the  cause  than  him- 
self, strove,  like  him,  to  turn  the  tide  of  malediction,  but  in 
vain. 

Their  friend's  popularity  among  the  outraged  ladies  and  gen- 
tlemen was  gone. 

This  is  Dr.  Follen's  letter  to  her  on  that  strange  occasion,  when 
the  most  highly  bred  nation  on  earth,  in  its  treatment  of  women, 
rose  up  as  one  man  to  insult  and  injure  the  most  distinguished 
woman  of  another  land  for  an  act  that  would  have  saved  it  from 
the  curse  of  slavery  if  any  one  act  could. 

EXTRACT  OF  LETTER  FROM  DR.  FOLLEN  TO  H.  MARTINEAU. 

November  30,  1835. 
....  You  are  now  experiencing  what  cannot  be  new  to  you, 
though  you  may  not  have  met  with  it  in  this  country  :  how  little  in 
times  of  trial  we  can  rely  on  those  whose  affection  for  us  is  grounded 
on  other  things  than  our  principles  ;  who  cannot  bear  to  hear  any 
evil  spoken  against  us  ;  who  fear  our  influence  may  be  impaired  by 
an  ill-timed  assertion  of  unpopular  truth,  &c.  !  Those  principles  in 
which  we  live  and  move  and  have  our  being,  though  as  old  as  the 
creation  of  man,  are  still  a  new  doctrine,  the  elements  of  a  new  cov- 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


281 


enant,  even  in  civilized,  republican,  Christian  America.  They  are  as 
the  bread  and  wine  of  the  altar,  to  which  all  are  invited,  but  of  which 
few  partake,  because  they  dread  to  sign  in  their  own  hearts  the 
pledge  of  truth  which  may  have  to  be  redeemed  by  martyrdom.  For 
is  it  not  true  that  those  who  maintain  that  all  men  have  an  innate 
divine  right  to  all  the  means  of  improvement  and  happiness  within 
the  reach  of  man,  and  that  all  have  a  corresponding  divine  obligation 
to  claim  that  innate  right  for  each  human  being,  are  either  shunned 
with  silent  condemnation  as  abolitionists,  democrats,  agrarians,  or 
hailed  with  the  cries  of  "  Crucify  !  Crucify  !  "  as  fanatics  and  incen- 
diaries ?  But  if  the  world  separate  itself  from  us,  it  leads  us  to  find  a 
world  in  ourselves  and  in  each  other  ;  not  to  form  a  new  aristocracy 
of  a  somewhat  higher  stamp,  but  to  unite  our  strength  to  break  down 
every  wall  of  our  partition  that  interferes  with  man  and  our  fellow- 
man. 

Our  meeting  with  you,  dear  Harriet,  was  a  blessed  recognition, 
rather  than  a  new  acquaintance  ;  our  friendship  had  a  pre-existence  in 
kindred  principles.  Were  it  otherwise,  I  should  tenderly  regret  that 
your  late  conscientious  "  indiscretion  "  should  have  brought  upon  you 
censure,  and  acquainted  you  with  the  weight  and  measure  of  many 
professions  and  sentiments.  But  you  have  "  settled  your  points  and 
acted  thereupon,"  and  that  is  sufficient  to  compensate  you  for  all  the 

world  can  give  and  take  away  

Yours  very  truly, 

C.  FOLLEN. 

We  were  never  able  to  perceive  a  shadow  of  dissatisfaction  or 
impatience  under  all  this  outcry  and  clamour  j  yet  she  was  one 
who  delighted  in  public  sympathy,  and  desired  approbation  as 
much  as  she  disliked  flattery  and  the  homage  of  selfishness.  All 
the  more  serious  inconvenience  of  the  derangement  of  her  travel- 
ling plans,  by  the  risk  of  life  incurred  if  after  this  she  attempted 
to  carry  them  out,  with  the  continual  disquiet  of  a  threatening 
danger,  —  all  were  borne  with  a  perfect  composure. 

Dr.  Follen,  her  most  intimate  American  friend  of  that  time, 
who  knew  her  by  parity  of  greatness  as  none  other  could,  said 
she  was  like  Joan  of  Arc ;  and  so  indeed  she  was,  by  a  thousand 
traits  of  resemblance.  There  was  the  same  great  public  spirit, 
with  the  same  strong  domestic  affections  and  skill  in  all  domestic 
arts,  yet  unsustained  by  family  appreciation.    There  was  the 


282 


MEMORIALS. 


same  keen  political  sagacity,  with  the  same  infantine  candour 
and  simplicity  that  historians  tell  of,  in  every  look  and  gesture. 
There  was  the  same  obedience  to  her  "  voices,"  the  dictates  of 
her  combined  faculties  personified  by  a  reverential  imagination, 
in  conformity  with  the  teachings  of  the  time,  with  the  same 
initiatory  anguish  in  view  of  the  consequences  of  obedience ;  and 
with  a  final  sense  of  so  great  a  joy  in  that  obedience  as  in  like 
manner  to  wish  the  interior  monitor  might  never  cease  to  speak. 
She  was  attended,  too,  in  like  manner,  by  the  adoration  of  the 
many  and  the  hatred  of  the  few ;  and  the  sign  she  gave  of  her 
mission  was  the  same,  —  always  to  raise  the  siege.  There  was  in 
her  nature  the  same  sensitiveness  to  suffering,  and  the  same 
inability  to  avoid  it  by  unfaithfulness.  There  was  the  same 
bravery  in  conflict,  the  same  avoidance  of  controversy,*  the 
same  tenderness  to  the  vanquished.  There  was  the  same  rare 
unconsciousness  which  can  only  accompany  that  genius  in  action 
which  is  an  inspiration  of  the  heart ;  and  there  was  the  same 
power  of  sacred  companionship  — 

"  Holy  amid  the  knighthood  of  the  land  "  — 

with  all,  of  whatever  sect  or  sex  or  race  or  nation,  to  whom  the 
welfare  of  mankind  was  dear.  And  while  she  was  thus  un- 
consciously informing,  enlightening,  and,  so  to  speak,  inspiring 
those  to  whom  real  interchange  of  thought  and  communion  of 
heart  was  a  new  thing,  — unconscious  of  mere  feature,  they  felt  a 
presence  like  that  of  the  Maid  of  Orleans,  radiant  with  joy  and 
fame. 

It  fell  often  to  my  lot  in  those  days  to  defend  the  right  of 
woman  to  do  whatever  good  she  could ;  and  I  used,  in  speaking 
of  woman  as  she  should  be,  the  words  of  Beattie  when  he  charac- 
terizes Scotland,  — 

"  Zealous  yet  modest,  innocent  though  free, 
Patient  of  toil,  serene  amidst  alarms, 
Inflexible  in  faith." 

*  "  Je  sais  bien  que  batailler  n'est  pas  mon  ouvrage,"  says  the  old  chron- 
icle, of  Joan  of  Arc. 


FOREIGN  LIFE. 


283 


The  words  exactly  described  Harriet  Martineau. 

The  time  of  her  departure  was  now  at  hand,  and  the  whole 
country  awaited  anxiously  her  next  words  from  the  other  shore. 
Eor  ourselves,  our  uncertainties  were  over.  The  mission  of  her 
life  to  the  United  States  of  America  had  begun  ;  and  with  her, 
words  are  nothing  distinct  from  life.  The  symphony  predicts 
the  coming  strain. 

With  all  the  confidence  we  felt  in  knowing  her  so  well,  we 
yet  knew  her  with  so  little  personality  that  we  could  not,  like 
others,  follow  her  to  the  last  with  blessing  and  adieu.  We  could 
but  say  in  our  own  hearts,  as  she  departed,  "  Farewell,  stead- 
fast-hearted one,  —  so  wise,  so  tender,  so  simple,  grand,  and 
true ! " 

And  we  turned  to  meet  the  coining  battle  with  a  loftier  joy. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,— 
WITHOUT. 

"  But  when  one  is  attempting  noble  things,  it  is  surely  noble  also  to  suffer 
whatever  may  befall  us  to  suffer."  —  Ph^drus. 

"Warned  by  her  saying  about  beginning  at  the  creation  and 
going  on  to  the  day  of  judgment,  I  am  not  going  to  anticipate 
the  final  consequences  of  Harriet  Martineau's  American  life. 
The  ultimate  rehabilitation  of  a  race  and  the  redemption  of  a 
continent  are  events  in  which  these  after  times  are  tracing  dis- 
tinctly her  influence  as  one  important  link  in  the  chain  of 
causes  still  producing  happy  effects.  I  have  only  to  relate  the 
consequences  to  herself,  and  show  the  impression  she  made  on 
her  contemporaries. 

It  seldom  happens  that  men  reap  precisely  what  they  expect 
from  any  carefully  planned  course.  Harriet  Martineau's  Ameri- 
can harvest  was  certainly  to  her  an  unexpected  one.  She  had 
merely  hoped  to  gather  seed  for  English  sowing,  —  to  scatter  in 
her  own  land  those  principles  of  justice  and  mercy  to  the  least 
favoured  classes  which  ours  was  thought  to  have  discovered ; 
and  she  found  herself  obliged,  by  her  allegiance  to  all  that  is 
just  and  merciful,  to  put  her  hand  to  the  breaking  of  our  stub- 
born clods,  for  the  implanting  of  the  common  principles  of  mercy 
and  justice  to  a  sixth  part  of  our  whole  population,  composing 
a  class  utterly  overlooked  except  in  the  estimate  of  property, 
or  in  the  scramble  for  office,  when  planters  must  be  propitiated 
in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  their  human  stock. 

Such  an  experience  as  hers  in  America,  besides  being  incalcu- 
lably blessed  to  our  people,  was  influential  on  all  her  after  life. 


286 


MEMORIALS. 


In  the  first  place,  it  could  not  but  greatly  modify  all  the  opinions 
she  at  first  formed,  when  she  took  our  prominent  Americans 
on  trust,  for  what  they  seemed  to  be,  as  travellers  always  natu- 
rally do. 

She  said,  in  the  frankness  of  her  admiration  of  the  American 
celebrities  as  she  first  saw  them,  —  men  of  parts,  standing  tall 
upon  the  institutions  placed  for  them,  like  pedestals,  by  their 
great  fathers,  —  "  It  is  such  a  substantial  comfort  to  find  that 
the  American  great  men  are  great  men."  But  the  same  experi- 
ence that  deprived  her  of  so  comforting  a  persuasion  gave  her 
also  to  know  that  (to  use  the  Hebrew  Scripture,  which  is  as  the 
mother  tongue  of  the  American  people)  "  the  Lord  did  not  lack 
a  man  to  stand  before  him,"  although  those  whom  the  land 
called  its  great  ones  were  so  manifestly  unequal  to  the  emer- 
gency. "With  the  exception  of  the  Rev.  S.  J.  May,  and  those 
she  has  named  in  a  previous  volume,  she  was  in  like  manner 
disappointed  in  the  Unitarian  ministry.  The  first  year,  her 
journal  says  of  such  :  "  They  seem  superior  men."  "  They  all 
seem  like  fathers  and  brothers."  "  They  take  such  broad 
ground,  not  preaching  against  specific  sins,  but  enunciating  great 
principles  ! "  Not  the  least  of  the  great  benefits  of  her  life 
among  us  was  to  show  by  its  contrast  with  theirs  the  unmeaning 
character  of  the  inanities  which  these  fathers  and  brothers  were 
in  the  habit  of  uttering,  with  a  tender,  laborious  emphasis  which 
they  called  "  earnestness,"  at  a  moment  when  an  earnest  man's 
conscience  would  have  flown  in  his  face  at  such  a  paltering  with 
manly  duty.  But  the  observing  world,  translating  these  pulpit 
manoeuvres  into  the  language  of  the  corrupt  of  old  time,  —  "  put 
me,  I  pray  thee,  into  one  of  the  priests'  offices,  that  I  may  have 
a  piece  of  bread,"  —  never  failed,  while  it  left  their  few  high- 
minded  brethren  to  starve,  to  throw  them  the  morsel  they  had 
so  richly  merited.  They  compelled  Harriet  Martineau  to  recog- 
nize in  them  at  last,  not  the  emulators  of  the  mobbed  and 
exiled  Priestley,  not  the  peers  of  the  Synod  of  Ulster,  who 
"  loved  the  light  of  truth  more  than  the  praise  of  men,"  not 
the  Christians  of  the  New  Testament  stock,  whom  the  truth 
had  made  free,  but,  in  the  newer  testamentary  phrase  of  the 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  287 


South,  "the  slaves  of  the  church  and  congregation."  The 
nobler  Unitarians  never  ceased  to  feel  the  direct  influences  of  her 
spirit  of  benevolence  and  activity.  A  Channing  was  informed 
and  stirred  by  it  to  stay  for  a  short  time  the  enslavement  of 
Texas  :  —  the  South  mistakenly  thought  his  wealthy  townsmen 
and  parishioners  —  their  fellow-gamblers  for  place  and  profit  — 
were  crowding  behind  him.  A  Furness  came  far  in  advance  of 
the  cowardly  ranks  of  American  Unitarianism,  into  practical  fel- 
lowship with  the  American  abolitionists ;  but  the  vast  majority 
of  those  she  met  she  was  obliged  to  leave  as  she  found  them, 
and  their  last  state  was  worse  than  their  first. 

Harriet  Martineau  has  been  sometimes  called  dogmatic  and 
opiniated  by  incompetent  acquaintances  and  opposition  politi- 
cians, in  both  countries  ;  but  I  think  it  would  be  difficult  to  cite 
an  instance  where  her  preconceived  opinions,  however  warmly 
cherished  (as  her  high  ideas  of  prominent  Americans  certainly 
were),  did  not  immediately  yield  to  facts.  Pride  of  opinion  she 
had  not :  it  was  clearness  of  sight  and  consequent  strength  of 
conviction.  But  till  insight  and  experience  came  to  justify  the 
conclusions  of  sight,  she  held  them  subject  to  correction,  with  a 
readiness  to  renounce  error  that  I  have  never  seen  equalled. 

A  clear  vision  of  what  is  fatal  to  humanity,  like  a  view  of  the 
fabled  basilisk,  is  very  dangerous  to  them  that  obtain  it ;  but  it 
is  a  sight  worth  all  the  risk  as  a  preparation  for  future  service. 

Full  of  mingled  hope  and  anxiety  for  the  country  whose  inter- 
ests she  had  so  truly  made  her  own,  somewhat  worn  by  all  the 
risks,  responsibilities,  and  fatigues  of  what  she  had  undergone  in 
this  new  stage  of  her  progress,  distressed  by  its  many  revelations 
and  pained  by  its  many  partings,  and,  notwithstanding  all,  fur- 
nished with  the  humming-bird's  nest  for  the  little  Maria,  she 
reached  her  family  in  safety  before  the  end  of  the  month  of 
August,  1836. 

As  the  scenes  and  sayings  and  doings  and  personages  began  to 
settle  into  their  true  perspective  in  her  mind,  and  while  she  went 
over  with  her  home  friends  the  masses  of  information  she  had 
accumulated,  separating  what  stood  the  two  years'  experience  from 
what  had  fallen,  she  began  to  feel  herself  competent  to  write  the 


288 


MEMORIALS. 


American  book  she  had  been  so  many  times  questioned  about, 
and  so  often  had  doubted  whether  she  should  ever  feel  qualified 
to  give  to  the  world. 

"  Society  in  America "  is  not  only  by  far  the  best  book  of 
travels  in  that  country,  in  the  judgment  of  the  best  qualified 
Americans  and  Englishmen,  but  it  must  needs  remain  of  perma- 
nent value  as  a  picture  of  the  United  States  towards  the  middle 
of  the  nineteenth  century.  Painted  at  a  moment  when  the  land 
dared  neither  to  see  nor  to  know  itself,  and  when  ordinary  travel- 
lers —  whose  knowledge  and  vision  is  of  course  limited  by  that  of 
their  surroundings  —  walked  as  blindly  with  the  nation  in  the 
road  to  its  destruction  as  the  hosts  of  Sennacherib  against  Israel, 
it  is  the  only  existing  "  portrait  of  the  times  "  of  any  sufficient 
degree  of  completeness,  and  must,  as  such,  become  more  and  more 
valuable  with  the  passage  of  time.  Her  own  recent  valuation  of 
it,  in  view  of  its  American  metaphysical  foundation  and  its  essay- 
like style,  does  not  touch  this  estimate.  Its  fairness,  its  large- 
ness and  accuracy,  the  truth  and  beauty  of  its  impartial  repre- 
hension of  all  that  was  bad  and  its  sympathetic  admiration  of  all 
that  was  good,  are  not  only  universally  acknowledged  among 
intellectual  Americans  at  the  present  time,  but  they  were  so  at 
the  very  period  of  publication,  when  moral  opposition  was  at  its 
hottest.  Hostile  as  these  critics  were,  and  able  as  they  will  be 
seen,  through  their  madness  of  the  hour,  to  have  been,  there  is 
scarcely  one  of  them  (except  the  mouthpieces  of  Philadelphia 
fashion  and  Boston  trade  and  manufactures,  collectively  called 
u  property  and  standing  ")  who  did  not  afterwards,  like  Balaam 
rising  on  Zophim  to  curse,  find  himself  constrained  altogether 
to  bless  three  times  over. 

Those  old  newspapers  and  reviews,  yellow  and  dusty  with 
years  (records  of  a  hot  moral  battle  of  which  so  many  of  the 
ranks  are  dead  and  so  many  more  buried  out  of  sight  and  past 
resurrection  by  their  proslavery  course  at  that  time)  bring  to 
mind  the  melting  away  of  the  embattled  foes  of  Israel  before  the 
invisible  powers  that  stood  across  their  path. 

They  are  all  gone,  —  the  Websters,  the  Everetts,  and  the  Clays  j 
the  mayors  of  cities  that  presided  at  such  enormous  gatherings  as 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT. 


289 


that  in  Faneuil  Hall,  convoked  at  the  demand  of  the  governors  of 
Southern  States  by  fifteen  hundred  of  the  leading  gentlemen  of 
Boston,  to  guarantee  slavery  against  the  abolitionists.  It  was  to 
oblige  the  South  that  these  outrages  and  those  of  the  newspapers 
were  perpetrated,  which  I  find  in  the  great  folio  collection  now 
under  my  hand. 

The  following  letter  gives  Harriet  Martineau's  state  of  mind  on 
the  reception  of  her  book  in  England  :  — 

LETTER  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

"  When  I  was  just  beginning  my  book  some  Quaker  acquaintances 
of  ours  introduced  George  Thompson  to  my  married  elder  sister, 
with  the  express  design  of  having  him  and  me  brought  together,  in 
order  that  he  might  keep  me  up  to  my  resolution  on  the  slavery 
question.  My  sister  very  properly  refused  to  introduce  any  dis- 
turbing influence  into  my  mind  on  an  occasion  which  she  knew 
was  considered  by  me  as  one  of  the  most  solemn  of  my  life.  She 
knew  that  my  testimony  would  lose  half  its  value  if  there  was  the 
least  colour  for  supposing  that  I  had  given  it  under  dictation  or  stimu- 
lus from  without.  So  I  have  not  seen  Mr.  Thompson.  All  alone 
and  in  the  religious  quiet  of  my  study  it  has  been  written,  and  in  it 
you  have  the  reflection  of  my  very  soul  ;  as  for  my  expectations  from 
it,  I  am  ashamed  of  them  already.  I  thought  the  book  would  ruin 
me  ;  and  this  thought  was  confirmed  by  the  importunity  which  has 
been  used  to  prevail  upon  me  to  keep  back  some  things  which  it  was 
supposed  I  might  say.  I  kept  back  nothing  which  it  was  in  my 
heart  to  say.  The  book  has  been  out  only  ten  days,  and  its  success 
seems  to  be  quite  complete.  It  has  received  the  warmest  welcome 
from  those  whom  I  think  the  most  valuable  part  of  our  society,  and 
a  generous  construction  from  the  timid,  second-rate  people.  All 
seem  to  trust  me,  and  do  me  justice  even  when  they  most  differ 
from  me.  My  hopes  are  therefore  strong  that  I  have  not  been 
working  for  you  in  vain.  I  do  not  think  I  should  have  had  one 
dark  hour  if  I  had  failed  to  help  you  and  had  ruined  myself ;  but 
I  own  that  my  heart  is  very  light  at  this  conclusion  of  the  greatest 
affair  I  was  ever  engaged  in.  Not  that  it  is  yet  concluded  here,  and 
I  shall  be  some  time  yet  in  hearing  from  your  side  of  the  water.  I 
know  that  the  stings  will  come  when  the  honey  is  all  had  ;  but 
whatever  happens,  dear  friend,  do  not  feel  one  moment's  concern  for 

VOL.  II. 


290 


MEMORIALS. 


me.  Let  us  work  on,  and  trust  each  other  for  bearing  as  well  as 
doing.  —  Thank  you  for  all  the  interesting  things  you  have  sent  me. 
I  do  not  like  to  delay  writing  till  I  have  read  them,  for  I  think  you 
will  consider  the  good  reception  of  my  book  good  news." 

Good  news  indeed !  The  book  reached  George  Thompson  as 
he  was  sealing  a  letter  to  America  of  this  same  date.  The  letter 
lay  on  the  table  while  he  read,  and  it  reached  the  American 
friends  with  this  exclamation  written  round  the  seal,  "  Well 
done,  Harriet ! " 

"We  had  none  of  us  doubted  that  it  would  be  so.  In  propor- 
tion to  the  satisfaction  of  the  abolitionists  was  the  discomfiture 
of  her  slaveholding  friends.  A  storm  of  disapprobation  came 
from  that  quarter  quite  sufficient  to  nullify  any  undue  self- 
esteem  which  their  previous  enthusiasm  of  affection  for  her 
might  well  have  excited. 

It  will  be  easier  to  learn  how  America  received  this  true 
presentment,  from  the  aforesaid  heap  of  reviews  and  newspapers, 
than  in  any  other  way  ;  and  the  colour  of  Philadelphia  fashion 
may  be  first  learned,  by  giving  precedence  to  the  "  American 
Quarterly  Keview,"  —  whig  in  politics,  orthodox  in  religion,  — 
which  reflected  the  opinions  of  its  patrons  in  an  article  of  some 
thirty  pages.  After  asserting  that  Miss  Martineau  had  declared 
in  the  most  unequivocal  terms  that  she  did  not  mean  to  write, 
while  a  part  of  her  book  was  actually  ready  for  the  publisher 
before  she  left  the  country,  (!)  the  reviewer  goes  on  thus :  — 

"  No  stranger  since  the  days  of  Lafayette  was  more  cordially  enter- 
tained, —  the  more  fools  we  for  our  easiness  of  access  !  —  and  Miss 
Martineau  adds  another  to  the  list  of  her  spiteful  predecessors.  This 
work  of  hers  makes  us  quits,  as  the  children  say,  and  we  shall  there- 
fore imitate  her  freedom  of  remark.  The  book  has  a  ready  sale  in 
these  dull  times,  —  duller,  perhaps,  to  booksellers  than  to  any  other 
class.  They  at  least  should  thank  her  for  this  diversion  in  their 
favour.  She  will  hear  from  us  more  than  once  ;  for  she  cuts  right 
and  left,  sparing  none  but  abolitionists  and  negroes." 

After  several  pages  of  extremely  low  abuse  of  Miss  Martineau 
for  being  deaf,  and  for  having  spoken  of  the  food  of  the  country, 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  291 


the  reviewer  proceeds  to  speak  of  "  that  unwomanly  act  of  hers, 
—  the  delivery  of  a  speech  at  an  abolition  meeting." 

"  The  consequences  of  this  made  her  put  gall  in  her  ink,  and  raised 
that  unjust,  imbecile,  and  untrue  statement  when  speaking  of  Mr. 
Everett's  oration  to  the  '  handful,'  or  small  flock,  in  the  field.  As  she 
could  not  by  any  possibility  hear  what  he  said,  she  must  have  been 
indebted  to  some  of  Mr.  Everett's  malignant  political  opponents  for 
the  subject-matter  of  the  discourse,  who  must  have  insinuated  that 
'  Mr.  Everett  was  an  anti-abolitionist  and  anti-amalgamationist,  an 
anti-Malthusian,  and  an  anti-half-and-half-woman-man.'  It  was  to 
this  that  Mr.  Everett  owes  the  honourable  notice  that  this  Mal- 
thusian  lady  took  of  him.  The  abuse  has  certainly  rendered  him 
more  conspicuous,  but  in  a  way  which  Miss  Martineau  never  con- 
jectured nor  intended  ;  she  would  have  consigned  him  to  silence 
and  oblivion  rather  than  have  added  to  his  popularity.  We  have 
not  many  to  look  up  to  in  cases  of  extremity,  but  when  we  find  such  a 
man  as  Everett  expressing  his  opinions  honestly,  even  to  the  discom- 
fiture of  a  woman,  —  a  circumstance  which  is  more  distasteful  to  an 
American  gentleman  than  anything  which  could  occur,  —  we  know  to 
whom  we  can  resort  if  the  evil  theme  of  sudden  emancipation  should 
ever  be  gravely  discussed." 

It  is  well  to  note,  for  the  better  comprehension  of  this,  that 
those  "  opinions  "  Mr.  Everett  expressed  in  those  times  to  the 
discomfiture  of  women  were  the  ones  which  obliged  them  to 
send  their  children  from  their  houses  for  safety  when  threatened 
with  mob- violence ;  which  subjected  them  to  showers  of  stones 
in  the  streets  of  their  own  city ;  which  filled  those  streets  with 
a  mob  of  his  friends  and  supporters  when  women  said  slav- 
ery was  a  sin,  while  he  declared  from  the  Senate  that  he 
was  ready  to  "  buckle  on  his  knapsack  "  to  defend  it,  and  sug- 
gested from  the  governor's  chair,  to  a  community  ready  to  lynch 
the  abolitionists,  a  resort  to  indictment  at  common  law  as  suffi- 
cient to  convict  them,  while  the  Southern  gentlemen  were  de- 
manding special  legislation  by  which  to  crush  them,  and  the 
Philadelphia  gentlemen  pledging  him  their  support  for  any 
appointment  they  could  influence,  as  one  trustworthy  in  his 
allegiance  to  Southern  interests. 

After  going  on  to  reproach  Miss  Martineau  with  her  "  robust 


292 


MEMORIALS. 


health  and  tough  nerves,"  with  "  being  able  to  race  through  the 
country  with  the  frame  of  a  moss-trooper  for  toughness  of  mus- 
cles and  wiriness  of  frame,  with  being  able  to  wade  through 
a  stream  and  sit  in  her  wet  clothes  without  fear  of  disastrous 
consequences,  and  overcoming  difficulties  which  the  stoutest  male 
travellers  considered  almost  insurmountable,  the  reviewer  pro- 
ceeds :  — 

"We  do  not  object  to  Miss  Martineau's  health.  We  wish  every 
woman  on  earth  could  boast  of  such  hardiness.  But  we  do  object  to 
such  scamperings  over  strange  lands  for  the  purpose  of  procuring 
materials  for  a  book  which  is  to  vilify  the  very  people  who  give  her 
the  freedom  of  the  country." 

Then  follows  much  reprobation  of  Miss  Martineau's  "  cruelty  ? 
and  "disrespect." 

"  She  sneers  at  the  metaphysics  of  the  Boston  women,  and  speaks 
disparagingly  of  their  talent  ;  shows  her  malignant  feelings  by  say- 
ing that  there  exists  a  whine  and  a  twang  in  the  voices  of  American 
women,  —  and  that  in  the  very  district  where  she  happened  to  be  on  the 

most  cordial  and  intimate  footing  with  some  of  its  inhabitants  

How  she  vents  her  malignant  and  bitter  feelings  against  all  who 
have  shown  her  hospitalities,  and  treated  her  with  such  marked 
respect  and  kindness  !  .  .  .  .  How  could  any  but  a  heartless  and 
cold-blooded  being  finish  off  her  anecdote  against  duelling  by  say- 
ing of  the  young  man  of  nineteen,  whose  family  decided  that  he 
should  accept  a  challenge,  '  that  a  lesson  of  low  selfishness  and  moral 
cowardice  was  thus  impressed  upon  him  by  the  guardians  of  his 
youth,  and  the  society  in  which  he  lives  has  seen  the  strongest 
testimony  to  false  principles  borne  by  two  of  its  most  respected 
members '!'....  We  protest  against  the  hateful  practice  of  duelling. 
It  is  not  to  extenuate  that  offence  that  we  condemn  this  woman. 
It  is  to  show  how  she  vents  her  bitter  and  malignant  feelings 
toward  all  who  have  shown  her  courtesies  and  hospitalities.  She 
well  knew  that  the  eminent  families  of  any  one  State  are  known  to 
the  whole  Union.  Every  person  in  the  United  States  who  reads  her 
book  will  know  to  whom  she  alludes ;  and  to  have  an  affair,  now  con- 
signed to  oblivion,  ripped  up  with  a  harsh  hand,  for  no  earthly  pur- 
pose but  to  inflict  a  sting  upon  the  hearts  of  the  parents,  is  so  great 
an  insult  to  civilized  feelings,  that  all  who  read  will  shrink  from  the 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  293 


hand  that  penned  it  She  might  deem  herself  called  upon  to  reprobate 
duelling,  and  describe  its  horrible  consequences  ;  but  to  point  out  the 
parties  almost  by  name,  and  to  give  such  an  offensive  personal  turn 
to  her  remarks,  deserves  the  severest  reprobation." 

This  last  paragraph  illustrates  the  condition  of  American  mor- 
als at  that  period.  The  reserve  on  the  subject  of  slavery  which 
mingled  shame  and  good  faith  had  compelled  at  the  North 
on  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution,  and  which  a  continually 
strengthening  claim  of  self-interest  more  and  more  increased, 
ended  in  subverting  the  religious  and  political  principles  under 
which  the  country  had  existed  previous  to  the  Revolution ;  and 
men  with  the  Bible  in  one  hand  and  the  Declaration  of  Indepen- 
dence in  the  other  sold  slaves  to  raise  money  to  evangelize  the 
Hindoos  and  to  send  standards  to  the  Poles.  Common-sense  was 
considered  madness  when  it  noticed  these  inconsistencies  which 
had  almost  reduced  the  nation  to  moral  idiocy,  and  yet  men  had 
the  instinct  left  to  reckon  with  the  difficulty  under  any  name 
but  the  right  one.  The  word  slavery,  through  this  whole  Re- 
view article,  is  almost  as  carefully  avoided  as  it  was  in  the  Con- 
stitution of  the  United  States. 

An  immense  effort  was  at  this  time  "being  made  to  settle  the 
case  of  slavery  on  general  principles.  Dr.  Channing  was  tri- 
umphantly dragged  into  this  field  of  ethical  distinctions,  and  the 
work  to  be  done  in  the  slaveholders'  behalf  was  to  separate  the 
sinner  from  his  act.  Because  no  man  can  judge  another's  heart 
or  accurately  proportion  his  punishment,  it  was  claimed  that, 
though  slaveholding  was  a  sin,  the  slaveholder  was  not  necessa- 
rily a  sinner.  These  were  the  most  advanced  moralists ;  for  the 
bulk  of  the  Northern  money-making  metaphysicians  claimed 
that  slavery  was  only  an  evil,  while  the  Southern  money-making 
theologians  had  already  received  the  hint  from  statesmen  to  claim 
it  as  an  unmingled  good.  The  average  of  opinion  stood  thus : 
that  though  "  slavery  in  the  abstract "  (as  it  was  the  fashion  scru- 
pulously to  say)  ought  not  to  be  justified,  yet  slavery  in  the 
actuality  ought  not  to  be  condemned.  It  was  a  national  calam- 
ity (to  be  borne  as  such  with  resignation),  but  not  an  individual 
sin,  to  be  repented  of  and  forsaken.    This  is  the  principle  or 


294 


MEMORIALS. 


problem  the  American  Quarterly  was  dealing  with  under  the  name 
of  duelling,  being  straitened  by  the  times  in  its  vocabulary. 

The  sight  of  moral  methods  that  went  straight  through  all 
these  niceties,  as  through  cobwebs,  to  the  work  of  removing  the 
evil  by  awakening  to  the  nature  of  the  wrong,  always  stimulated 
the  Americans  to  frenzy. 

It  goes  on  to  say  :  — 

"  Does  a  woman  of  circumscribed  education  and  recluse  habits  feel 
herself  competent  to  teach  a  whole  nation,  —  a  nation  that  did  not 
think  the  wisest  and  the  greatest  in  her  land  capable  of  giving  them 
sound  instruction  ?  Did  we  not  separate  ourselves  from  them  because 
we  felt  in  advance  of  them  ?  Did  we  not  show  ourselves  superior,  in 
physical  strength  and  moral  strength  ?  And  up  to  this  moment  have 
we  not  outstripped  them  in  wholesome  laws  and  in  many  of  the  arts  ? 
Until  their  demoralizing  Malthusian  and  agrarian  principles  infected 
our  land,  introduced  here  by  these  itinerant  lepers,  were  we  not  pros- 
perous beyond  example  ?  Does  this  poor  flimsy  tool  of  a  nest  of 
poisonous  radicals  suppose  we  are  to  look  upon  the  impertinences  of 
her  pen  as  a  standard  by  which  we  are  to  regulate  ourselves  ?  .  .  .  . 

"  We  must  pass  to  other  portions  of  her  precious  patchwork,  —  for 
patchwork  it  may  be  called,  —  as  every  one  will  perceive  at  once  that 
the  arrangement  of  her  work  into  chapters  and  sections  is  a  mere 
sham.  The  theme  she  has  chosen,  to  be  sure,  has  a  beginning,  middle, 
and  end ;  Aristotle  himself  could  not  have  objected  to  it  on  this  score. 
The  beginning  is  agrarianism,  abolition,  amalgamation,  Malthusian- 
ism,  and  radicalism,  with  a  strong  dash  of  egg-and-milk-ism  ;  the 
middle,  ditto,  with  a  still  stronger  mixture  of  humbugism  ;  and  the 
end,  ditto,  with  a  compound  of  conceit  and  maudlinism  which  sur- 
passes all  that  has  gone  before  it." 

After  a  great  deal  of  personality  about  her  English  friend  Lord 
Durham,  not  only  as  a  "deep,  double-dyed  radical,"  but  "to  let  her 
know  about  his  temper,  —  his  morose  temper,  —  not  so  morose  as 
exciting  and  uncomplying,  nay,  not  so  morose,  exciting,  and  un- 
complying as  harsh  and  passionate,"  and  her  American  friend 
Dr.  Follen,  as  "  eating  the  bread  of  this  people  for  seven  years," 
and  yet  not  having  disabused  the  "poor  insolent  foolish  wo- 
man ; "  the  Quarterly  proceeds  to  call  her  many  names  on 
account  of  her  visiting  the  prisons.  "  Conceit  and  imperti- 
nence," "nauseous  exposure,"  "finding  satisfaction  in  coming 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  295 


in  contact  with  the  most  foul  and  detestable  of  criminals,"  are 
its  gentlest  words.    It  goes  on  thus  :  — 

"  We  do  not  believe  that  another  woman  could  be  found,  who,  out  of 
mere  curiosity,  —  which  any  man  was  as  capable  of  exercising  if  she 
wanted  information,  —  would  choose  to  come  in  contact  with  such  ruf- 
fians. If  prisons  were  conducted  as  they  used  to  be  in  the  days  of 
Howard  or  Mrs.  Fry,  a  woman  might  be  found  who  would  step  out 
of  the  sphere  of  her  sex  and  administer  relief  to  that  1  great  amount 
of  suffering  '  which  economists  always  talk  about.  But  that  a  woman 
out  of  mere  Malthusian  curiosity  should  pollute  her  person  and  her 
trumpet  by  the  breathings  of  the  depraved  of  humanity,  and  merely 
for  the  purpose  of  asking  a  foolish  question  to  which  she  might  be 
sure  of  getting  a  lying  answer,  is  one  of  the  most  outrageous  insults 
her  sex  has  ever  received." 

To  her  suggestions  about  the  care  of  the  physical,  moral,  and 
mental  health  of  the  prisoners  by  instruction  and  sympathy  the 
Eeview  remarks :  — 

"  It  is  in  vain  that  we  check  our  indignation  at  the  revelations  of 
such  a  crude  and  mischievous  mind.  It  is  in  vain  to  say  it  is  but  idle 
dreaming  and  should  pass  unnoticed.  We  cannot  do  it  ;  we  must 
speak,  and  in  the  strongest  terms  that  propriety  will  admit.  We 
must  warn  our  readers  to  consider  this  woman's  advice  as  mischiev- 
ous and  pernicious  in  the  highest  degree." 

She  is  reproached  also  with  having  given  "  their  first  lessons 
of  rebellion  to  wholesome  restraint  to  many  a  female  servant 
and  underling,"  and  with  having  stimulated  young  men  who 
deprecated  the  tyranny  of  a  moneyed  mob  by  approbation  when 
they  "proposed  to  show  a  cold  front  to  the  insolent  and  power- 
ful rich  men  of  the  country."  This  is  an  allusion  to  Charles 
Sumner  and  others  of  his  young  contemporaries,  —  friends  and 
admirers  of  Harriet  Martineau. 

"  If  there  were  really  such  a  young  man,  we  should  say  he  would 
be  very  much  ashamed  of  such  whining  cant  when  he  comes  to  have 
a  few  dollars  in  his  pocket.  Poor  young  men,  with  a  slender  stock  of 
sense,  are  very  apt  to  hate  the  rich  ;  but  if  it  so  chance  that  they 
ever  get  rich  themselves,  they  are  the  first  to  assist  in  quieting  such 
busybodies  as  Thompson  and  Martineau.    It  was  by  a  hard  struggle, 


296 


MEMORIALS. 


pledging  our  lives,  our  fortunes,  and  our  sacred  honour,  that  we  suc- 
ceeded in  binding  the  States  to  the  close  union  which  now  exists,  and 
the  pledge  remains  in  full  force  still  ;  we  are  not  about  to  sit  quietly 
down  and  see  a  few  turbulent,  needy  foreigners,  —  bad  subjects  at 
home  and  impertinent  visitors  abroad,  —  and  a  few  of  the  discontented 
feeble-minded  of  our  country,  sow  the  seeds  of  disunion,  without 
giving  them  a  rough  shake  or  two  to  bring  them  to  their  senses.  But 
we  should  never  have  done,  if  we  were  to  touch  at  every  point  on 
which  this  Malthusian  butterfly, — no,  dragon-fly,  has  alighted." 

This  allusion  to  "  rough  shakes,"  in  order  to  account  for  past 
mobocratic  violence,  was  a  threat  of  it  for  the  future. 

How  such  an  article  as  this  could  obtain  publication  awakens 
fresh  astonishment  after  the  passing  away  of  the  first  amaze- 
ment at  the  fact  that  such  an  article  could  have  been  written. 

These  are  not  things  that  a  man  wrould  utter  who  had  any 
thing  else  to  say.  They  reveal  the  impeccability  of  Harriet 
Martineau's  work  in  its  general  scope  and  bearing  and  execution. 
They  can  only  be  accounted  for  by  stating  how  near  Philadelphia 
was  to  the  slave  States  in  space,  and  howr  identical  in  spirit.  And 
this  was  a  grave  American  review  of  forty  years  ago,  which  in 
its  normal  state,  the  year  before,  had  expressed  itself  on  the 
appearance  of  her  two  volumes  of  Miscellanies  as  follows  :  — 

"  A  comprehension  of  the  principle  of  social  responsibility  is  the 
great  and  rare  merit  of  Miss  Martineau's  writings,  reappearing  every- 
where in  them,  and  always  bringing  with  it  an  eloquence  of  humanity 
which  rejoices  the  heart.  It  is  this  which  gives  the  glowing  spirit  to 
the  essays  on  Sir  Walter  Scott,  at  the  commencement  of  the  first 
volume.  This  also  gives  their  beauty  to  the  Sabbath  Musings,  which 
in  their  expression  of  this  principle  and  feeling  stand  quite  alone  and 
peculiar  among  devotional  papers. 

"  In  no  place  in  these  volumes,  however,  does  she  do  herself  more 
justice  than  in  the  noble  essay  on  Moral  Independence. 

"  That  the  principle  of  social  responsibility  is  struggling  for  expres- 
sion in  political  events  is  evident  from  the  revolutions  in  Europe  and 
America  ;  the  reform  of  the  English  Parliament  ;  the  struggles  of 
Ireland  for  equality  with  England  ;  of  the  Greeks  for  independence 
of  the  Sultan  ;  of  the  Poles  for  freedom  from  Russian  tyranny  

"  We  do  not  happen  to  agree  with  Miss  Martineau  in  all  her  princi- 
ples of  political  economy  :  on  one  of  them  we  would  make  open  war. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  297 


But  we  cannot  be  insensible  to  the  wonderful  talent  she  has  shown  in 
her  series  of  Illustrations  ;  to  the  glow  of  moral  life  and  beauty  she 
has  shed  over  those  sad  tales  which  show  the  baneful  effect  of  human 
errors  in  legislation  ;  and  to  the  strong-voiced  and  deeply  breathing 
humanity  which  pervades  them  all." 

Glancing  over  the  surpassing  beauty  of  the  Illustrations  as 
works  of  art,  and  confirniing  Miss  Martineau's  idea  of  the  impor- 
tance of  political  economy  as  a  branch  of  moral  science,  the 
Review  goes  on  to  the  importance  of  literature  in  awakening 
new  life  and  purpose  in  the  present  age ;  and  quotes  Miss  Mar- 
tineau's thought  in  the  "  Scott  papers  "  :  — 

" 1  The  grandest  manifestations  of  passion  remain  to  be  displayed  ; 
the  finest  elements  of  the  poetry  of  human  emotion  are  yet  uncom- 
bined  ;  the  most  various  dramatic  exhibition  of  events  and  characters 
is  yet  unwrought,  for  there  has  yet  been  no  recorder  of  the  poor/ 

"  In  this  new  literature  of  the  people  Miss  Martineau  takes  a  high 
rank.  Inspired  with  the  finest  affections  of  a  woman,  and  taking 
her  stand  on  all  in  human  nature  and  the  counsels  of  God  which  her 
affections  reveal,  her  clear  understanding  gives  her  wide  and  true 
views  of  social  relations  and  duties." 

Two  of  the  essays  —  one  on  the  agency  of  feelings  in  the  forma- 
tion of  habits  and  one  on  the  agency  of  habits  in  the  regeneration 
of  feelings  —  are  particularly  commended  as  the  most  valuable 
in  the  book  for  practical  wisdom,  and  the  Review  commends 
them  especially  to  young  women,  because  the  question  between 
principle  and  feeling  is  very  practically  considered  and  satisfac- 
torily settled  in  them. 

Then  follow  the  reviewer's  remarks  on  Miss  Martineau  as  a 
metaphysician,  or  psychologist,  or  philosopher,  expressing  entire 
dissent  with  great  comparative  courtesy,  and  pointing  out  im- 
perfections in  the  best  temper  and  spirit. 

"  Thus  much  for  the  logic  of  a  materialist  who  has  the  feelings  of  a 
Christian  in  her  heart  and  that  faith  in  immortality  which  she  may 
not  let  go,  even  for  her  system  :  for  she  is  a  true  and  humane  woman. 

"We  cannot  leave  these  volumes  without  a  tribute  of  respect  to 
several  articles  that  can  come  neither  under  the  head  of  philosophical 
nor  moral  essays.    We  allude  to  the  very  interesting  letter  upon  the 


298 


MEMORIALS. 


Hanwell  Lunatic  Asylum,  —  the  letter  to  the  deaf,  which  inspires  a 
profound  veneration  for  the  writer  ;  to  the  article  on  Salem  Witch- 
craft ;  to  much  of  the  articles  on  prison  discipline,  1  Nature  and 
Providence  to  communities,'  and  '  Romanism  and  Episcopacy/  —  prac- 
tical subjects  which  call  out  her  good  sense  and  truly  moral  character. 

"  But  we  would  repeat  it,  in  the  department  of  fiction  alone  is  Miss 
Martineau  great  :  we  would  willingly  write  as  much  again  as  we  have 
done  in  setting  forth  the  claims  of  her  '  Illustrations '  as  works  of 
art. 

"It  is  this  conviction  of  ours  that  has  made  us  say  what  we  have 
of  her  want  of  philosophic  genius  [meaning,  as  is  clear  from  the  con- 
text, metaphysical]  ;  perhaps  we  have  been  vain  enough  to  feel  that, 
should  her  eye  ever  fall  on  these  pages,  an  idea  might  be  deposited  in  her 
mind  (to  use  her  own  phraseology),  that  she  had  better  devote  herself 
exclusively  to  that  department  of  writing  in  which  she  is  unquestion- 
ably a  genius,  and  realize  the  idea  of  a  new  class  of  novels,  rivalling 
Scott's  in  beauty  and  interest,  and  grounded  on  a  more  universal  con- 
dition of  humanity  than  the  feudal  system.    As  she  herself  says  :  — 

"  'Why  not  now  take  the  magnificent  subject,  the  birth  of  political 
principle,  whose  advent  has  been  heralded  so  long  ?  What  can  afford 
finer  moral  scenery  than  the  transition  state  in  which  society  now  is  ? 
Where  are  nobler  heroes  to  be  found  than  those  who  sustain  society  in 
the  struggle,  and  what  catastrophe  so  grand  as  the  downfall  of  bad 
institutions  and  the  issues  of  a  process  of  renovation  ? ' " 

And  the  article  winds  up  with  the  whole  animated  passage 
respecting  the  part  which  the  same  human  passions  swaying  the 
same  human  hearts,  and  the  same  virtues  working  to  higher  ends, 
will  have  to  play  in  the  new  order  of  things,  in  which  love  will 
be  more  than  ever  before  lovely,  and  heroism  more  heroic. 

Thus  it  was  through  all  the  showy  front  ranks  of  American 
literature,  politics,  and  religion.  Slavery  had  brought  them  to 
that  degree  of  moral  degradation  that  their  normal  condition  was 
hypocrisy,  when  Harriet  Martineau's  sincerity  and  reality  com- 
pelled the  casting  away  of  the  moral  disguises,  the  ancestral  habits 
of  expression,  so  untrue  to  the  lives  of  the  existing  generation. 

The  "North  American  Review"  answered  to  the  Quarterly's 
abusive  article  in  spirit,  though  it  was  far  from  being  so  amusing; 
for  it  wanted  to  see  what  the  rest  of  the  world  would  say,  and 
the  New  England  world  was  not  in  sufficient  harmony  with  the 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  299 


Quarterly  to  warrant  the  same  expenditure  of  epithets.  In 
the  "  North  American  Keview  "  the  excess  of  caution  forbade  not 
only  the  mention  of  slavery,  but  of  abolition  too. 

It  was  in  the  columns  of  the  "  Daily  Advertiser,"  hight  "  re- 
spectable," that  Boston  answered  to  Philadelphia.  There  was 
the  same  inability  to  discriminate  between  a  great  public  scandal 
before  the  world,  —  legitimate  matter  of  publicity,  —  and  private 
scandal  of  no  importance  to  any  one ;  and  therefore  while  the 
temperance  societies,  the  temperance  advocates,  and  all  the  tem- 
perance physicians,  including  the  most  eminent  in  the  country, 
were  making  strenuous  efforts  to  stay  an  acknowledged  national 
vice,  which  was  creeping  in  among  women  even  of  the  first 
classes,  Miss  Martineau  was  taken  to  task  by  both  these  publica- 
tions, as  if  she  had  betrayed  private  confidence,  for  saying  that 
she  had  witnessed  examples  of  excess  known  to  all  the  world 
about  them.  She  was  seeking  for  the  cause,  in  order  to  find  the 
cure,  in  such  openings  of  various  careers  suited  to  women's  capaci- 
ties and  education  as  should  furnish  them  with  a  truer  stimulus 
than  the  hours  of  pernicious  excitement  which  varied  the  dul- 
ness  of  their  lives.  She  had  fathomed  the  cause  :  American 
women  were  then  educated,  and  had  been  for  half  a  century, 
beyond  the  sphere  of  action  permitted  them  ;  and  while  some  of 
them  were  strenuously  labouring  for  the  temperance  cause  as  a 
safeguard  from  the  danger  of  such  a  life,  others  were  yielding  to 
its  temptations.  Society  in  America  was  then  as  distinctly 
though  less  violently  divided  on  this  question  as  on  the  question 
of  slavery  itself.  All  that  Miss  Martineau  had  said  (and  there 
was  not  the  slightest  personality  in  it)  was  matter  of  public 
notoriety.  But  the  men  of  the  wealthiest  classes  were,  notwith- 
standing, opposers  of  the  temperance  cause,  —  less  as  bon  vivans 
than  as  distillers  and  wholesale  importers  of  wines  and  brandies, 
the  mere  advertisement  of  which  was  a  revenue  to  the  news- 
papers. Miss  Martineau,  meanwhile,  was  looking  deeper  than 
the  temperance  societies  had  then  done  into  the  necessity  in 
human  nature  for  occupations  interesting  to  the  mind  and  to  the 
heart,  if  healthy  action  and  development  of  the  powers  are  to  be 
secured,  and  intemperance  banished  from  society. 


300 


MEMORIALS. 


One  cry  of  indignation  rose  from  all  the  Whig  political  organs 
at  Miss  Martineau's  disappointment  in  Mr.  Everett  as  an  orator. 
But  it  always  was  shared,  during  his  whole  career,  by  all  who 
were  awake  to  the  condition  of  the  country,  while  hearing  him 
speak  on  any  but  the  purely  classical  and  literary  subjects 
which  he  so  much  loved  and  adorned.  On  these  his  speech 
was  as  the  voice  of  a  far-off  Grecian  past ;  but  it  never  roused 
to  march  against  the  invading  Philip  of  the  day,  nor  was  it  like 
the  low,  soul-cleaving  lyric  harmony  to  which 

'•'The  Spartan  from  his  sheath 
Drew  his  devoted  sword,  and  girt  himself  for  death." 

There  was  no  time  in  his  political  life  when  Mr.  Everett  did 
not  necessarily  seem  like  a  mountebank,  as  he  stood  to  talk  of 
freedom  and  the  great  forefathers  before  a  people  whose  liberties 
he  had  betrayed. 

In  excuse  for  the  impeachment  of  her  exactness  as  an  ob- 
server by  the  editors  who  took  exceptions  at  what  she  said  about 
"the  little  flock  of  his  auditors  in  a  green  field  at  Bloody 
Brook,"  it  should  be  remembered  that  none  of  them  knew  any 
thing  about  the  size  of  the  monster  meetings  in  England,  where 
her  reform-song  was  sung,  on  which  her  ideas  of  a  great  crowd 
were  formed. 

To  allay  the  pain  of  these  remembrances,  needful  to  the 
understanding  of  Harriet  Martineau's  character  and  the  im- 
pression it  made,  let  the  American  patriot  call  to  mind  how 
nobly  Mr.  Everett  acknowledged  that  his  propitiatory  course 
towards  the  South  had  been  a  mistaken  one  when  the  im- 
pending war  with  the  South  aroused  him  to  the  fact ;  and  how 
many  persecuting  Sauls  of  this  period  became  the  self-sacrificing 
Pauls  of  a  later  one. 

Harriet  Martineau  had  been  scoffed  at  by  some  of  the  baser  sort 
in  England.  England  rebuked  and  silenced  them,  and  profited 
by  her  instructions,  and  covered  her  with  renown.  The  press 
of  the  United  States  was  wellnigh  unanimous  in  taunting 
England  with  her  goodness  and  greatness,  which  it  called  by 
every  abusive  name,  and  took  the  occasion  to  brand  her  per- 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHOUT.  301 


sonally  with  every  ill  epithet  which  she  least  deserved.  She 
was  a  "  hard,"  "  cold,"  "  pitiless,"  "  Amazonian,"  "  masculine," 
"incendiary,"  "radical"  " amalgamationist,"  and  it  went  back 
to  the  defunct  abuse  of  the  "  Illustrations,"  combining  the  whole 
for  daily  use ;  and  insinuating  threats  of  mob-vengeance  on  future 
visitors  from  England,  unless  they  avoided  any  disapproval  of 
"our  institutions,"  meaning  slavery.  Future  travellers  were 
thus  furnished  with  a  ridiculous  vade  mecum,  which  they 
laughed  at,  but  obeyed  during  the  succeeding  half-century. 

But  the  American  press  was  not  quite  unanimous.  It  would 
be  doing  injustice  to  the  editors  of  that  time  in  the  towns  of 
Plymouth,  Lowell,  Salem,  Lynn,  and  Haverhill  in  Massachu- 
setts, and  Keene  in  New  Hampshire,  besides  the  antislavery 
journals,  not  to  remember  that  they  paid  sensible  and  able 
tributes  to  Harriet  Martineau  as  having  "rightly  divided  the 
word  of  truth."  Her  admiration  and  affection  for  their  country, 
her  appreciation  of  its  sublime  and  beautiful  scenery,  her 
sense  of  the  excellence  of  its  institutions  and  the  amiable 
and  energetic  character  of  its  inhabitants,  her  perception  of  its 
advance  before  the  Old  World  in  all  but  arts,  her  appreciation 
of  the  grandeur  of  its  struggle  with  wrong,  the  fervency  of  her 
trust  in  its  ultimate  success,  her  fidelity  to  right,  and  her  love 
of  human  beings  irrespective  of  any  thing  but  their  deserts, 
unmindful  of  any  reproach  it  might  subject  her  to  of  being  the 
friend  of  little  aristocracies  or  the  friend  of  criminals  or  slaves,  — 
all  made  in  the  New  England  towns  a  profound  impression. 
Her  mission  to  America  had  begun. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  — 
WITHIN. 


"  Crescit  sub  pondere  Virtus." 

During  the  time  that  Harriet  Martineau  was  at  work  upon 
her  books  of  American  experience,  with  two  nations  waiting  for 
what  she  should  say,  and  while  she  in  her  turn  was  listening  for 
their  reply,  one  cannot  help  desiring  to  know  with  what  feelings 
she  worked  and  waited. 

Those  six  volumes  of  "  Society  in  America  "  and  "  Retrospect 
of  Western  Travel "  give  her  previous  outward  life  and  her 
opinions  of  men  and  things  at  that  period  with  a  fulness  that 
neither  this  Memoir  nor  her  Autobiography  can  find  space  for ; 
but  great  effort  was  made  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  to  fit 
those  volumes  to  the  spirit  of  the  time. 

All  the  kingdoms  of  literature  and  fashion  and  religious  dis- 
tinction in  American  cities,  and  in  English  complementary  ones 
too,  where,  as  in  Liverpool,  cotton  was  a  bond  of  union,  were 
proffered  to  her  on  these  simple  conditions  ;  and  "  Vade  retro  " 
was  her  persistent  reply.  It  was  a  costly,  though  so  willing  a 
sacrifice ;  for  the  slaveholders  were  not  to  her  what  Dr.  Chan- 
ning  used  to  say  they  were  to  him,  while  he  was  striving  to  quiet 
the  abolitionists  of  his  own  congregation,  —  "  very  much  of  an 
abstraction." 

"  I  was  unworthy  of  our  cause  at  that  time,"  she  used  after- 
wards to  say,  "  but  they  were  no  abstractions  to  me.  They  were 
my  dear  friends ;  and  I  thought,  as  then  I  said,  that  they  were 
disciples  of  Christ  burdened  with  an  inheritance  of  grief  and 
crime ;  and  I  believed  what  I  was  told,  that  they  were  hin- 
dered from  emancipating  by  the  intermeddling  of  abolitionists." 


304 


MEMORIALS. 


Her  valued  friend  Macready,  whom  she  so  highly  esteemed 
because  of  his  efforts  to  his  own  loss  to  make  the  British  theatre 
what  it  ought  to  be,  did  not  encourage  her,  as  he  himself  tells  us 
in  his  journal,  to  make  her  forthcoming  books  the  transcript  of 
her  feelings  and  her  knowledge  :  — 

London,  November  3,  1836.  —  Called  on  Miss  Martineau,  who  told 
me  of  many  friends  she  had  seen  in  the  United  States,  and  of  her 
intended  book  upon  the  country.  She  liked  Clay  the  best  of  the 
American  statesmen.  She  is  a  very  zealous  abolitionist,  but,  I  think, 
has  got  some  illusive  notions  on  the  actual  state  of  opinion  on  that 
perplexing  question. 

There  was  a  way  to  have  avoided  all  perplexity,  and  to  have 
made  the  American  people  as  much  her  worshippers  after  their 
publication  as  before.  It  was  the  way  urged  upon  her  by  the 
timid  good  and  the  timid  who  were  not  good,  as  well  as  by  the 
ignorant  and  by  the  thoughtless.  She  need  but  have  said,  as 
they  did,  — 

"  I  cannot  but  shrink  from  the  denunciation  of  slaveholding  as  a 
private  immorality.  It  is  the  misfortune  of  the  individual,  —  the 
crime  of  the  State. 

"  I  am  far  from  being  satisfied  that  emancipation  has  any  tendency 
to  diminish  the  aggregate  of  guilt  and  evil  of  slavery. 

"  If  I  had  tidings  to-morrow  of  a  bequest  to  me  of  an  estate  with 
fifty  slaves  on  it,  I  am  not  sure  that  I  should  not  regard  it  as  a  crim- 
inal evasion  of  responsibility  to  manumit  them." 

"  Channing  himself  says  there  are  masters  who  see  slavery  as  it  is, 
wTho  hold  the  slave  chiefly  if  not  wholly  from  disinterested  considera- 
tions ;  and  these  deserve  great  praise." 

Happily  not  so  thought  John  Gorham  Palfrey,  who  gave  his 
inheritance  of  sixty  slaves  their  freedom,  not  considering  his 
responsibility  discharged  till  he  had  placed  them  all  in  suitable 
situations  at  the  North  for  obtaining  their  own  living  ;  nor 
Angelina  and  Sarah  Grimkc,  of  South  Carolina ;  nor  James  H. 
Thorn  of  Kentucky ;  nor  James  G.  Birney  of  Alabama ;  nor 
Mattie  Griffith. 

And,  more  happily  still  for  after  times,  not  so  thought  Harriet 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  305 


Martineau,  who  so  steadily  and  meekly  took  her  stand  with 
Garrison  and  with  them. 

But  full  and  unhampered  as  her  American  books  are,  a  parallel 
record  exists,  to  which  one  may  have  recourse,  that  tells  of  much 
besides,  —  not  only  what  she  saw  and  thought,  but  what  she 
heard,  resolved,  and  felt. 

It  is  a  series  of  small  unlettered  volumes,  thick  and  closely 
written,  —  the  diary  of  the  years  between  1836  and  her  retire- 
ment to  Tynemouth  and  afterwards ;  in  which  the  most  interest- 
ing entries  are  of  things  she  provides  no  place  for  elsewhere,  and 
which  was  furnished  with  this  motto  by#those  who  knew  her  so 
well,  her  intimate  friends  the  Kers. 

"All  my  mind  was  set, 
Serious  to  learn  and  know,  and  thence  to  do 
What  might  be  public  good." 

Her  own  prefatory  sentence  is  as  follows  :  — 

"  I  have  long  been  uneasy  at  the  thought  of  how  many  valuable 
things  I  surfer  to  go  out  of  my  mind  for  want  of  energy  to  record 
them.  I  have  dreaded  beginning  to  keep  a  diary,  for  fear  of  increas- 
ing my  great  fault,  —  bondage  to  rules  and  habits.  I'will  try  whether 
I  can  reconcile  journalizing  with  ease  and  freedom  of  mind." 

This  journal  bears  on  every  page  the  fullest  proof  that  it  was 
kept  for  her  own  use  and  behoof  exclusively;  and  she  would 
then  have  been  startled  at  the  thought  of  its  being  seen  by  other 
eyes  or  after  times ;  and,  excepting  only  as  given  by  the  friend 
to  whose  judgment  she  intrusted  it,  this  feeling  was  paramount 
as  long  as  she  lived. 

Such  a  trust  binds  to  the  nicest  reserve  in  selection,  and 
indicates  the  thoughts  and  the  little  self-confidences  as  the 
portions  rightfully  at  command,  with  such  other  occasional 
entries  as  betray  the  confidence  of  no  one. 

The  date  of  the  beginning  is  at  a  friend's  house  in  Hertford- 
shire, August  31,  1839.  After  many  other  foreign  matters,  is 
the  following :  — 

"  A  friend  [named]  tells  me  that  another  friend  [named]  tells  him, 
that  I  am  now  too  great  to  notice  her.    I  great !    She  might  have 


306 


MEMORIALS. 


taken  the  trouble  to  ascertain.  Yet  I  believe  she  cares  for  me  ;  but 
prejudice,  —  the  prejudice  of  a  coterie,  comes  in  the  way.  Her 
coterie  entertains  the  prejudice  that  people's  convictions  alter  with 
their  circumstances.  The  radicals  want  faith,  and  will  trust  nobody 
from  the  moment  of  elevation  to  title,  wealth,  or  fame.  I  do  not 
feel  myself  altered  in  this  way. 

"We  went  to  Haileybury,  and  dined  with  Mr.  Empson.  Two 
arguments  :  whether  Lockhart  is  justifiable  or  not,  in  printing  the 
letters  which  have  lowered  Scott's  fame.    I  say  he  is  right  in  giving 

us  all  if  any  thing.    Mr.  would  keep  back  solitary  discreditable- 

nesses.  The  other  argument,  —  whether  or  not  things  should  be  said 
before  the  deaf,  or  done  before  the  blind,  which  it  would  be  incon- 
venient for  them  to  know.  The  point  was  afterwards  yielded  to  me, 
that  such  things  should  not  be  done. 

"  Macaulay's  article  on  Bacon,  good  as  to  the  life,  but  superficial  and 
low  as  to  the  philosophy.  But  it  seems  to  make  a  noise.  Macaulay 
has  no  depth,  but  much  glitter.     He  won't  come  to  any  thing. 

Monday  evening,  to  town.    Mrs.  found  her  poor  dog  dead.  A 

favourite  dog  is  a  loss.  Brisk  old  Lady  Cork,  now  ninety-three, 
complains  to  Rogers,  'You  never  take  me  any  where.'  Rogers  re- 
plies, '  0,  I  will  take  you  every  where,  —  and  never  bring  you  back 
again.' 

"  Letters  from  William  Ware  and  the  Follens  about  the  reception 
of  my  book  in  America.  They  like  it,  but  the  whole  newspaper 
press  and  public  seem  out  against  me.  I  do  not  care  for  this,  —  it  is 
temporary,  —  nor  for  these  friends'  objections  to  my  having  mentioned 
female  intemperance,  because  I  do  not  agree  with  them.  But 
my  having  hurt  C.  Sedgwick  is  more  pain  to  me  than  all  the  rest  can 
compensate.  I  really  thought  I  was  right,  and  am  not  sure  now  but 
I  was  ;  but  I  will  look  into  it.  I  must  be  brave  about  the  conse- 
quences of  my  own  mistakes  as  well  as  about  undeserved  blame. 
I  have  ordered  the  note  to  be  cancelled  (Vol.  III.  p.  261).*  Dr. 
Follen  says  there  is  a  split  in  the  Democratic  party  between  the  self- 
seeking  professors  and  the  true  lovers  of  freedom.  This  will  seem 
to  give  an  advantage  to  the  Federalists  ;  but  it  is  very  well.  Took  a 
sweet  walk  on  Monday,  and  felt  my  spirit  revived  by  the  beauty  and 
the  exercise.  I  have  been  less  joyous  than  usual  this  summer.  It 
must  be  from  some  physical  cause,  for  my  lot  is  wholly  bright.  The 
last  week,  however,  has  been  very  cheery.  Mr.  Basil  Montagu 
defends  not  only  Bacon  but  Swift  in  morals,  pleading  that  en- 


English  edition. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  307 


lightened  men  must  be  judged  by  other  rules  in  morals  than  common 
men.    If  by  any  other,  surely  it  should  be  by  higher. 

Thursday,  3lst. — Finished  my  first  volume  of  "Retrospect  of  West- 
ern Travel."  Mr.  Ker  says  it  would  not  do  to  take  duelling  out  of  the 
murder  class,  in  criminal  law.  A  man  asks  his  friend  to  go  out 
with  him,  knowing  that,  if  he  is  tried  for  murder,  he  will  be  acquit- 
ted. But  no  man  could  ask  this  if  he  expected  his  friend  to  be 
actually  transported  for  life.  What  would  be  the  consequence  ? 
Assassination,  or  a  lonely  duel  (unfair  fighting),  or  manly  conduct  of 
the  true  sort  ?  Colonel  Fox  came  to  dinner.  He  brought  me  from 
Lord  Holland,  his  father,  a  capital  motto  for  my  chapter  on  Mount 
Vernon. 

When  Mr.  and  Mrs.  travelled  in  Italy,  they  were  attacked  by 

banditti,  who  meant  to  carry  Mr.  into  the  mountains  for  ran- 
som.   Mrs.  was  bent  on  going  with  him  ;  and  rather  than  have 

her  the  banditti  let  him  go.  Rogers  says  he  did  not  believe  it  till 
he  saw  her  ;  when  he  no  longer  doubted.    How  like  him  ! 

Friday,  September  1.  Talk  at  breakfast  about  schools  and  govern- 
essing.  One  family  has  had  seventeen  governesses.  —  Lady  impe- 
rious. Must  put  a  governess  into  a  novel,  —  a  good  one  ;  and  show 
how  bad  it  is  at  best. 

Wednesday,  6th.  —  Invitation  to  go  out  into  the  sun,  but  I  must 
work  first.  Can't  enjoy  at  ease  till  work  is  done.  I  read  Gibbon.  It 
makes  me  dread  a  single  literary  life,  so  selfish,  so  vain  and  blind,  as 
this  great  man  grew  to  be  !  How  like  a  bully  and  coward  are  his  let- 
ters to  Priestley,  and  how  honourable  the  good  man's  answers  !  .  .  .  . 
In  telling  them  how  I  am  met  and  discouraged  by  ignorance  and  mis- 
take at  every  turn,  I  went  off  into  tears,  which  I  could  not  stop  for 
long.  It  is  wonderful  how  much  less  unhappy  one  often  is  in  tears 
than  at  some  times  when  one  is  laughing  and  seeming  gay  !  Since 
my  memorable  crying-fit  in  Chiswell  Street,  in  December,  1831,  I 
have  cried  only  three  times  heartily,  that  I  remember  :  at  Cheshunt, 
at  something  Mr.  Ker  wrote  (which  I  had  quite  forgotten  till  he  put 
me  in  mind  of  it  to-day)  ;  when  I  bade  the  Follens  good  by  ;  and 
this  morning.  I  wonder  when  the  next  will  be.  Finished  "  A  Month 
at  Sea."  Read  Gibbon's  correspondence.  Selfish,  vain  creature  !  — 
beyond  almost  all  I  ever  read  of.  His  intentions  of  adopting  and 
subjugating  Charlotte  !  Celibacy  is  very  bad,  especially  for  men. 
Walked  out  gathering  blackberries  in  the  field.    I  love  a  real  field. 

Friday,  8th.  —  Now  going  to  write  an  account  of  the  Shakers  :  had  a 
pleasant  walk  in  the  lanes  when  my  work  was  done.    Rather  nervous 


308 


MEMORIALS. 


and  tired  over  my  work,  —  so  resolved  to  rest  for  a  day  or  two.  Looked 
over  frescos  from  the  Niebelungen  Lied,  in  penny  magazine.  Schnorr 
is  painting  them  splendidly  at  Munich.  Mr.  Ker  told  me  an  idea 
which  I  mean  to  evolve  :  Eastlake  opened  it  to  him  :  what  is  fit  for 
poetry  is  not  for  painting ;  painting  must  be  form  and  colour,  which 
does  not  do  in  poetry  :  poetry  is  motion  and  sound,  which  of  course 
will  not  do  in  painting.  Eastlake  followed  this  out  from  all  poetry, 
leaving  only  a  thing  or  two  in  Ariosto  which  will  serve  for  both,  — 
Camilla's  running  over  the  wavy  corn,  Eve's  every  gesture  dignity 
and  love,  and  so  on.  This  all  came  out  of  my  mentioning  St.  Chris- 
topher in  the  Danube,  which  Mr.  Ker  says  won't  paint.  They  call 
Hogarth  delightful,  but  false;  but  this  seems  to  me  arbitrary.  If, 
like  the  Exhibition  artists,  he  had  had  to  label  his  pictures,  it 
would  be  false  ;  but  as  his  pictures  tell  themselves,  surely  the  proba- 
bility is  that  the  division  is  arbitrary.  Eastlake's  own  pictures  are 
full  of  action,  and  tell  themselves  ;  you  see  the  very  heaving  of  the 
chest  in  the  Greek  mother.  We  speculated  on  the  past  and  future 
in  art.  The  department  of  religion  is  closing,  or  being  completely 
changed.  The  Virgin,  Christ,  and  John  have  by  their  fixed  general 
character  become  types,  securing  the  beholder's  recognition  and  sym- 
pathy, and  enabling  the  painter  to  bestow  his  care  in  conveying 
new  and  more  complicated  expressions  under  the  advantage  of  the 
recognized  form.  This  is  over.  There  is  no  more  worship  of  these 
beings,  and  the  intellect  is  beginning  to  contradict  and  will  by  and 
by  dissolve  the  old  associations.  A  republication  of  Christianity  will 
take  place,  —  is  taking  place.  A  new  school  of  poetry  —  the  meta- 
physical —  has  begun  ;  and  mental  acts  are  taken  as  illustrations  of 
nature,  instead  of  the  reverse.  Old  poetry  will  remain,  by  virtue  of 
its  truth  ;  but  a  new  kind  is  rising  up.  Will  it  not  be  so  in  painting 
too  ?  Because  painting  of  the  highest  old  kinds  did  not  represent 
action,  nor  even,  as  Mr.  Ker  thinks,  abstraction,  is  the  art  never  to  do 
so,  though  Hogarth  has  proved  that  it  may?  I  remember  telling 
Eastlake  that  he  must  be  a  metaphysician  to  have  painted  his  Sciote 
picture,  and  he  spurned  the  idea.    Singular  !  —  if  he  works  out  the 

disproof  of  his  own  theory.    The  K  s  have  always  told  me  that  I 

did  not  understand  art.  I  see  now  what  they  mean.  We  have  dif- 
ferent pleasures  in  pictures.  I  love  them  as  types  of  human  feelings  ; 
they,  as  idealized  outward  (what  they  call  real)  beauty. 

Saturday,  9th. —  Talked  of  the  bigotry  of  strong  reasoners;  of  John- 
son's bigotry  and  charity,  his  cruelty  and  kindness  mixed.  Mr.  

remarks  how  he  elucidated  prison  discipline,  imprisonment  for  debt, 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN. 


309 


and  other  things  which  our  reforming  wise  men  and  philanthropists 
have  said  poor  things  about  since.  How  he  would  have  stalked  over 
Channing  and  every  body  about  slavery,  if  he  had  been  here  now  ! 

Two  brothers,  F.  and  E.,  have  sat  in  the  same  office  for  three  years, 
and  never  spoken  to  each  other.  What  a  waste  of  the  fraternal  rela- 
tion !  —  Not  F.'s  fault.  At  a  dinner  about  South  American  independ- 
ence some  years  ago  Wilberforce  and  Mackintosh  spoke.  Wilber- 
force  carried  all  away  by  his  impulse,  —  looking  out  at  the  setting 
sun,  and  alluding  to  the  extinction  of  slavery  in  that  part  of  the  West, 
rejoicing  that  the  freed  thought  first  of  freeing  others.  Mackintosh's 
was  elegant  and  complete,  with  a  touch  about  the  chairman,  a  touch 
about  trade,  &c,  but  a  failure,  and  felt  by  him  to  be  so.  How 

precious  are  these  glimpses  !    Mr.  says  Brougham  is  the  first 

great  statesman  who  has  brought  philosophical  questions  relating  to 
the  general  good  into  the  House.  Lord  Chatham  was  much  of  a  hum- 
bug, after  all ;  Fox  despised  political  economy  and  other  philosophy  ; 
Pitt  knew  nothing  of  the  sort.  Brougham  was  the  first  who  intro- 
duced the  new,  substantial  kind  of  public  speaking  or  action.  If  so, 
this  will  be  his  title  to  immortality.  I  see  the  Newcastle  folks  have 
raised  £  5,200  for  baths  in  their  town  ;  —  Bravo,  Grainger !  Wrhat  a 
benefactor  that  man  has  been! 

Sunday,  10th. —  Read  Gibbon.  Selfish,  vain,  unhappy  man!  but  then 
we  know  nothing  of  his  happiest  times,  —  his  times  of  study.  He 
must  have  enjoyed  these,  for  no  toil  in  getting  facts  was  too  hard  for 
him,  while  his  power  of  generalizing  was  at  the  same  time  great.  He 
studied  law  a  year,  for  the  sake  of  writing  one  chapter.  He  was  a 
good  specimen  of  the  human  being  as  to  its  alternate  power  and 
weakness,  —  enjoyment  from  its  involuntary  excellences  and  suffer- 
ing from  its  lowest  tendencies.  All  Gibbon's  sufferings,  almost,  came 
from  his  selfishness  and  intense  desire  to  be  happy,  —  or  rather  fear 
of  not  being  so.  How  he  plagued  Lord  Sheffield  about  his  money- 
matters  when  he  had  enough  already  !  And  as  soon  as  all  was  settled 
to  his  mind,  he  died.  He  seems  to  have  behaved  well  about  his  last 
illness  ;  but  then  he  liked  life  ;  and  much  might  be  owing  to  his 
being  willing  to  persuade  himself  that  little  was  the  matter.  —  His 
neglect  of  writing  to  his  old  aunt  was  very  bad.    Happily  he  felt 

this  We  three  ladies  talked  over  the  situation  of  housemaids  ; 

and  I  am  to  be  Mrs.  's  whenever  I  want  bread.    I  stipulate  that 

if  she  takes  a  second  it  shall  be  Lady  Mary  Fox.  She  talked  as  ear- 
nestly about  it,  obviating  difficulties,  &c,  as  if  it  were  to  take  place 

to-morrow.    Read  to  Mrs.  my  last  chapters  of  my  first  volume 

of  "  Retrospect."    She  says  the  book  will  do. 


310 


MEMORIALS. 


TJiursday,  14th. — We  went  to  town.  A  very  pleasant  drive.  I  told 
them  of  Lady  Ann  Coke's  (Countess  of  Leicester's)  child,  who  kept 
saying  in  the  queen's  (Adelaide's)  presence,  "  Mamma,  what  an  ugly 
woman  the  queen  is  ! "  and  of  Lady  Stafford's,  who  asked  after 
dinner  about  a  laced  officer,  "  Mamma,  can  that  silver  thing  talk  ? " 
They  told  me  of  a  child,  who,  being  shown  some  curiosities  at  a  gen- 
tleman's house,  asked,  "  But  where  is  the  long  bow  papa  says  you 
shoot  with  ? "    Found  my  mother  well  and  cheerful. 

Letter  from  Dr.  Channing.  Dispassionate,  —  somewhat  cold,  — 
partly  wise  and  partly  mistaken,  —  like  his  letters  usually.  Very 
true  and  wise  man,  but  wanting  knowledge  of  actual  life  and  sympa- 
thy with  other  people's  views. 

Evening.  —  Head  my  mother  all  the  letters  I  have  had  lately. 
Very  pleasant.  Quiet  days  on  Friday  and  Saturday.  On  these  days, 
when  there  is  nothing  to  set  down,  how  full  is  the  life  of  the  mind  ! 
Mine  revolves  the  character  of  work  done,  and  anticipates  the  fate  of 
future  doings.  The  faults  of  my  work  rise  up  and  depress  me,  and  my 
mind  dwells  far  too  much  on  myself.    An  alternation  of  work  and 

society  is,  I  think,  best  for  me.    When  I  am  with  the  's  I  feel 

the  most  how  small  a  space  my  labours  really  fill.  I  don't  get  flattered 
with  them. 

Thursday.  —  I  bustled  among  my  books,  making  room  for  the 
Quarterly  Review  which  is  coming.  It  has  such  exquisite  literary 
articles,  I  hope  to  improve  by  the  study  of  it.  We  had  company  in 
the  evening.  Carlyle  was  in  fine  spirits.  He  made  a  great  laugh  at 
the  scientific  people.  He  calls  them  quacks  and  what  not.  I  wish 
he  had  more  sympathy  and  less  cynicism.    He  has  a  terrible  deal  of 

the  spirit  of  contempt.  told  of  M.  saying  to  Mrs.  Austin 

that  the  five  most  ill-natured  men  in  London  were  made  criminal 
commissioners  :  of  whom  she  named  four,  and  could  not  remember 
the  fifth.  It  was  Mr.  Austin.  We  had  a  charming  evening  with 
these  friends  round  our  table. 

On  Friday,  Mr.  Child  *  called.  He  says  the  Americans  in  Paris  are 
frantic  against  me  and  my  book.  He  agrees  in  the  whole  of  it,  except 
Dr.  Follen  being  the  greatest  man  I  saw  in  the  United  States,  yet 
he  loves  him  much.  He  expects  the  admission  of  Texas  will  be  the 
question  on  which  the  South  will  rise.  He  fears  about  the  integrity 
and  courage  of  the  North. 

Sunday,  September  24.  —  Revelled  in  Lamb's  letters.  What  an  ex- 
quisite specimen  is  that  man  of  our  noble,  wonderful,  frail  humanity ! 

*  David  Lee  Child,  Esq.,  of  the  United  States. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE, —  WITHIN.  311 


These  letters  are  somewhat  unreal,  also  egotistical,  but  a  harmless 
egotism  ;  and  the  genius,  the  exquisite  fancy,  the  human  love,  the 
clinging  to  the  familiar  and  the  dear,  are  delicious.  What  a  lesson  is 
the  series  !  His  disgust  at  work  and  regularity  ;  and  then  his  ennui 
when  released.  Let  us  be  thankful  for  necessary  toil.  With  what 
horror  he  speaks  of  a  dependence  on  literature,  and  of  the  book- 
sellers !  I  feel  nothing  of  this,  but  mine  is  not  a  common  case,  I 
suppose  ;  and  women  find  it  difficult  to  earn  a  subsistence  in  other 
ways.  But  it  should  be  a  hint  to  secure  an  independence  as  soon  as 
I  can.  I  am  vexed  at  his  humility  towards  Southey  about  his  con- 
troversy, and  at  Southey's  acceptance  of  it,  and  at  Talfourd's  letting 
it  pass.  Lamb  was  clearly  right,  and  the  letter  is  a  rare  beauty,  — 
full  of  truth  and  gentleness. 

Evening.  —  Kead  it  over  again  to  my  mother,  and  also  my  Sedg- 
wick article,*  which  she  likes. 

Monday,  25th.  —  These  bright  autumns,  with  pleasant  work,  and 
not  too  much  company  within  doors  and  sunshine  without,  are  de- 
lightful seasons.  My  spirits  have  come  back  again ;  that  is,  I  suppose  I 
am  quite  well ;  the  influx  and  variety  of  work  stimulate  and  do  not 
oppress  me. 

Received  a  rousing  note  about  our  Woman's  Friend  scheme,  the 
success  of  which  is  thought  to  depend  wholly  on  me  ;  and  I  am  asked 
to  give  the  chief  of  my  time  and  attention  to  it.  This  troubled  me  : 
thoughts  of  sacrificing  my  novel  ;  of  entering  into  new  bondage,  &c. 
But,  meditating,  I  found  that  my  conviction  about  the  object  requires 

me  to  make  this  sacrifice  of  money,  ease,  and  purposes.    If  Mr.  

is  to  be  relied  upon  for  his  judgment,  and  all  looks  well,  I  hope  not 
to  fail  in  my  part.  Went  to  sleep  resolving  to  do  right  about  it,  what- 
ever that  right  might  be. 

Tuesday,  26th.  —  Wrote  private  note  of  inquiry  about  Mr.   's 

character  for  judgment  and  steadiness.  Wrote  to  Dr.  Channing.  To 
the  Carlyles.  John  Sterling  there.  A  young  man  next  door  to  death, 
they  say,  but  if  he  lives  a  few  years  sure  to  be  eminent  ;  so  wise,  so 
cheerful,  so  benignant !  I  wish  Carlyle  would  learn  somewhat  of  him, 
for  his  views  are  deplorably  dismal,  and  very  unreasonable  in  my 
eyes.  He  doubts  not  all  being  for  the  best,  but  believes  in  a  pre- 
ponderance, —  a  saturation  of  misery  for  the  best  of  the  race,  and  that 
the  stupid  and  sensual  only  are  happy.  He  does  not  pretend  to  care 
or  presume  to  inquire  whether  there  is  another  life  to  compensate. 
I  asked  him  what  was  his  idea  of  good,  if  he  is  sure  all  is  well,  but 


*  Westminster  Review. 


312 


MEMORIALS. 


the  best  men  miserable.  He  says  he  can  give  no  clearer  reply  than 
that  it  is  found  in  the  New  Testament,  "  The  Worship  of  Sorrow." 

Received  a  silly  tract  against  usury,  based  on  the  Mosaic  law. 
Author  would  have  my  opinion,  so  I  referred  him  to  Calvin  (in 
Dugald  Stewart's  dissertation  on  the  origin  of  political  philosophy) 
for  the  destruction  of  the  Mosaic  part  of  his  argument,  and  to  Bentham 
for  the  rest.  A  Frenchwoman  has  lately  petitioned  the  Chambers  for 
a  participation  by  women  in  the  rights  of  citizenship.  Women  are 
not  excluded,  and  must  therefore  be  supposed  to  be  included.  Mr. 
Child  says  her  positions  are  unanswerable,  her  logic  the  closest. 
Accordingly  there  was  much  "hilarity  on  the  cote  gauche"  They 
could  only  laugh,  for  she  left  them  without  a  plea.  On  this  quarter- 
day  I  find  myself  at  liberty  to  go  on  with  my  book,  as,  indeed,  it  is 
high  time.  How  I  love  life  in  my  study,  —  all  alone  with  my  books 
and  thoughts  !  Books  are  not  sufficient  companions  if  one  only 
reads.  If  one  adds  writing,  one  does  not  want  the  world,  though  it  is 
wholesome  to  have  some  of  it. 

September  30.  —  Mr.  Madge  came  to  tea,  and  brought  some  expensive 
American  letters  from  Liverpool,  —  strips  of  abuse  and  vindication 
from  newspapers,  in  whole  blank  sheets  of  paper.  R.  Sedgwick  sends 
a  paper  with  a  vindication  of  his  sister, —  straightforward  and  unen- 
cumbered. She  did  alter,  however,  leaving  out  the  sailing  part,  so  I 
was  not  far  mistaken.  Discouraging  account  came  in  reply  to  my 
inquiry  into  character  in  the  Woman's  Friend  business.  I  am  sorry, 
but  when  the  drawing  back  is  once  done,  cannot  help  being  glad  of 
having  time  for  my  novel.  I  shall  write  for  it,  if  the  scheme  goes  on, 
but  not  make  myself  responsible. 

October  1.  —  Find  myself  utterly  unaffected  by  blame  of  my  book 
where  I  feel  myself  right ;  deeply  wounded  when  I  am  suspicious  of 
having  been  hasty  and  careless.  I  made  up  my  mind  to  suffer  retri- 
bution cheerfully,  as  well  as  insult,  and  so  I  will.  But  I  have  still 
much  pride  and  some  fear.  I  felt  myself  turn  pale  when  I  found 
what  those  American  letters  were  last  night  ;  but  I  immediately 
recovered.  This  morning  I  read  the  antislavery  documents.  The 
women  are  doing  bravely,  and  thereby  coming  at  a  conviction  of  their 
rights.  Bless  them!  I  don't  mind  the  bad  taste  of  their  orthodox 
mode  of  expression.  In  Angelina  Grimke's  there  is  an  interesting 
account  of  the  intellectual  achievements  of  the  blacks.  But  are  the 
Egyptians  and  Moors  fair  specimens  1  Sent  Mr.  Fox  the  women's 
report. 

Evening.  —  Read  some  of  Pascal's  pense^es.   They  show  great  knowl- 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  313 


edge  of  men,  —  of  their  weaknesses  and  faults  :  they  are  very  gloomy  ; 
but  I  do  love  these  speculative  writers.  It  is  strange  that  Voltaire,  in 
his  notes,  cheers  him  up,  —  actually  seems  to  have  more  faith  and 
more  benevolence.  I  don't  believe  we  do  half  justice  to  Voltaire.  I 
was  struck  with  the  pense'e  on  our  hiding  our  sins,  and  not  being  able 
to  bear  the  benign  ordinance  of  confession,  so  that  the  Catholic  re- 
ligion is  rejected  on  account  of  it.  Could  he  not  see  that  it  is  un- 
natural if  faithful,  and,  where  natural,  sure  to  be  unfaithful  ?  No 
human  virtue  can  survive  the  degradation  of  being  perfectly  known 
to  another  ;  or  rather,  laid  open  ;  for  if  your  confessor  knows  of  a 
bad  thought  of  yours,  he  does  not  know  how  it  came  there,  which  is 
the  chief  thing. 

October  2.  —  Wrote  to  engage  our  places  at  Covent  Garden.  I 
walked  in  the  park  and  found  it  warm  as  June,  and  altogether  deli- 
cious. A  letter  from  Lissey,  with  a  sweet  account  of  Harry's  first 
wound  from  the  wickedness  of  the  world.  Some  boys  stole  his  and 
Willie's  kites,  and  told  lies.  The  kites  were  recovered.  But  Harry 
thought  he  never  could  be  so  happy  again,  from  grief  for  the  boys 
and  dislike  of  them.  Could  not  sleep,  but  cried  in  the  night ;  but 
has  recovered.    Fine  little  fellow  ! 

Mrs.  objects  to  "  Maltravers  "  as  immoral  :  says  she  cannot  give 

it  to  her  young  people.  But  novels  are  not  to  be  judged  by  their  fit- 
ness for  children.  I  object  to  no  real  subjects  into  which  pure  moral 
feelings  of  any  kind  can  enter.  Whether  they  are,  when  finished, 
moral  or  immoral,  depends  on  the  way  in  which  they  are  treated  ; 
whether  in  a  spirit  of  purity  and  benignity,  with  foul  gusto,  or 
with  a  mere  view  to  delineation.  Wrote  a  good  day's  portion  of  my 
second  volume  of  "  Retrospect,"  Mississippi  voyage,  which  it  is  deli- 
cious to  go  over  again. 

Was  surprised  to  find  the  mixture  of  error  and  truth  in  the  opin- 
ions in  natural  philosophy  attributed  to  Anaxagoras.  Penny  Cyclo- 
paedia. —  Now  tired.    A  bit  of  grave  reading,  and  to  bed. 

Thursday,  5th. — To-day,  while  I  was  writing  "Madison,"  in  came  a 
glorious  letter  from  the-Follens,  full  of  heart,  of  wisdom,  and  of  news. 
Dr.  F.'s  criticisms  on  my  book  are  mostly  just ;  how  honest,  pure,  and 
wise  !  It  made  me  more  sure  of  them  than  ever.  The  Union  is  in  a 
great  stir.  The  separation  of  Bank  and  State  is  confirmed  by  this 
time,  I  suppose.  Then  comes  the  tug  of  war.  The  South  is  silent,  — 
the  North  growing  more  clear-sighted  every  day.  Dr.  Channing  has 
put  out  a  capital  letter  to  Mr.  Clay,  on  Texas,  —  sound  and  bold. 
Bravo  !  The  Americans  may  always  be  trusted  to  do  right  in 
time. 

VOL.  II. 


314 


MEMORIALS. 


Mr.  Fox  has  made  a  fine  leading  article  of  the  report  of  the  Wo- 
men's Convention :  and  I  shall  send  it  to  America  to  be  reprinted 
there. 

Mr.  Macready,  who  called  on  her  about  this  time,  mentions  it 
thus  in  his  journal :  — 

"  Called  on  Miss  Martineau :  on  the  arrival  of  the  carriage  drove  her 
home,  talking  the  whole  way.  With  the  exception  of  one  walk  round 
the  garden,  talked  away  the  whole  evening.  The  only  subject  on 
which  I  did  not  cordially  agree  with  this  fine-minded  woman,  and  on 
which  I  do  not  clearly  understand  her,  is  her  advocacy  of  the  restora- 
tion of  the  rights  of  women.  I  do  not  see  what  she  would  have  in 
point  of  political  power,  nor  for  what. 

"  July  22,  1837.  —  Sent  a  note  to  Miss  Martineau,  informing  her  of 
her  box  for  Monday,  enclosing  her  a  book  of  the  '  Bridal,'  and  men- 
tioning our  purpose  of  naming  our  little  babe  after  her." 

Friday,  6th.  —  Wrote  to  Robert  Sedgwick  to  make  my  public  atone- 
ment to  Catherine.  Evening  to  Covent  Garden,  and  saw  the  ";Bri- 
dal."  0,  the  beauty  !  Macready  acted  admirably.  There  was  an  air 
of  hilarity  about  him  which  I  like  to  see.  Success  to  him  !  Home 
to  supper  and  Spectator,  where  there  is  a  shameful  article  against  the 
abolitionists. 

Sunday,  8th.  —  Woke  with  the  idea  of  sending  a  letter  to  the  Spec- 
tator. After  breakfast  did  it.  After  dinner  copied  it.  Showery  day, 
and  did  not  go  out. 

Monday,  9th.  —  Letter  from  America  which  cost  3s.  2c?.  ;  only  a  blank 
sheet  with  a  slip  of  newspaper,  —  an  insulting  copy  of  verses.  Poor 
malice  !  A  letter  from  a  young  man,  consulting  me  whether  to  go 
to  America.  Simple,  fervent,  and  interesting.  He  is  obviously  the 
darling  child  of  parents  from  whom  he  will  have  money,  kept  at 
home  without  sufficient  employment,  and  longs  to  be  doing.  A  note 
from  Macready,  offering  me  my  box  at  Covent  Garden,  whenever  I 
like  to  go.    Truly  kind  and  gentlemanlike  in  the  way  in  which  it  is 

done.    Miss  made  a  long  call,  her  place  for  Paris  being  taken 

for  the  afternoon.  She  has  lived  in  Paris  since  she  was  five  years  old. 
She  says  we  should  not  tolerate  Napoleon  if  we  had  lived  under  him; 
if  we  had  had  to  open  our  room  door  constantly  to  see  that  the  ser- 
vants were  not  listening,  —  half  the  servants  in  Paris  being  spies  ;  if 
we  had  seen  the  youth  of  the  noble  families  of  Italy  brought  to 
France  and  placed  in  the  military  schools,  —  some  too  young,  so  that 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE, — WITHIN.  315 


they  pined  and  died.  She  says  the  great  fault  of  the  French  is  their 
disregard  of  truth  ;  and  that  it  is  difficult  to  make  other  nations  believe 
and  feel  that  people  have  very  good  qualities  with  this  one  great  vice. 
She  likes  the  Germans.  Says  Guizot  understands  elevation  of  soul, 
though  his  own  worklliness  prevents  his  elevation.  I  read  Felkin's 
excellent  report  on  the  working-classes  of  Nottingham,  showing 
clearly  that  there  are  resources  enough  for  all  necessary  comfort 
if  there  were  good  management,  but  that  fathers  spend  all  their 
resources,  almost,  on  themselves.  Wrote  fourteen  pages  with  much 
ease  and  pleasure,  —  "  Country  life  in  the  South."  What  a  blessing  is 
this  authorship !  It  is  pleasanter  than  my  gayest  pleasures  ;  and  it 
helps  me  over  indisposition  and  failure  of  spirits  better  than  any  holi- 
day. The  thing  is,  can  I  now  live  without  it  ?  This  is  always  my 
doubt  and  dread  ;  but  I  will  dread  nothing. 

Tuesday,  10th.  —  A  good  day's  work  done.  Whately  is  the  author  of 
the  "Utopia"  edited  by  Lady  Mary  Fox.  He  wishes  this  to  be  known, 
though  he  could  not,  as  archbishop,  publish  it  himself.  Who  would 
be  an  archbishop  ?  When  I  came  in  from  my  walk  I  found  the  first 
proof  of  my  "  Retrospect."  Pleasant,  the  beginning  this  sort  of  frui- 
tion again !  Read  some  of  Channing's  "  Texas."  I  wish  I  could  write  a 
review  of  my  book,  I  see  so  many  faults  in  it.  There  is  no  education 
like  authorship,  for  ascertaining  one's  knowledge  and  one's  ignorance. 
What  light  is  thrown  into  my  dark  places  by  every  thing  I  publish,  — 
by  the  convictions  of  error  that  follow  !  What  entirely  new  ideas  are 
opened  to  me  !  It  is  the  case  with  this  last  book.  I  dreaded  it 
beforehand,  but  I  enjoy  it  already.  I  do  hope  to  grow  wise  by  mis- 
takes, —  one  way  of  being  made  perfect  by  sufferings. 

TJiursday,  \2th.  —  A  bustling  day,  and  not  a  line  of  my  book  written. 
I  am  too  anxious  on  this  score.  It  is  good  for  work,  —  this  scrupulos- 
ity, —  but  bad  for  freedom  of  spirit.  I  wrote  to  Mrs.  Macready,  and  to 
the  young  man  who  has  made  me  his  confidante.  A  note  from  the 
Review  saying  that  my  article  is  postponed.  It  is  vexatious  ;  but  I 
try  not  to  be  troubled  when  my  pride  or  my  wishes  are  mortified. 
Yet  I  do  prefer  publishing  myself  to  being  at  other  people's  disposal. 
I  wonder  what  ruling  one's  spirit  is.  I  never  show  mortification.  Is 
this  right  or  wrong  ?  There  is  pride  in  these,  my  only  concealments  ; 
yet  they  save  my  mother  pain,  and  help  me  over  things  which  would 
trouble  me  if  dwelt  upon  in  words.  I  really  think  I  do  acquiesce  in 
both  great  and  small  troubles  ;  and  none  sting,  but  where  there  is 
self-blame.  Wrote  at  length  to  the  Follens,  which  always  does  me 
good  and  makes  me  happy.    Wrote  to  several  friends  with  the  pro- 


316 


MEMORIALS. 


spectus  on  the  rights  of  unmarried  women.  Channing's  "Texas"  is  very- 
fine  ;  bold,  solemn,  eloquent ;  and  I  fancy  wiser  in  the-matter-of- 
fact  parts  than  he  usually  is.  It  will  do  the  nation  great  service, 
by  raising  them  to  see  the  truth.  Now,  as  to  Dr.  Channing  himself. 
I  liked  his  letter  to  me  about  my  book  very  well  till  I  saw  this.  But 
he  should  not  have  spoken  slightingly  of  my  book  as  a  mere  book  of 
travels,  and  urged  me  to  get  on  to  something  higher,  if  he  thinks  as 
he  does  of  the  Texas  question,  and  if  my  book  roused  him  to  write 
upon  it.  For  his  own  sake  (never  mind  mine)  he  should  not.  Is  this 
a  return  to  his  old  habit  of  being  shy  of  what  has  moved  him,  and 
shrinking  from  acknowledgment  where  he  has  been  most  stimulated  ? 
I  hope  I  am  doing  him  no  injustice,  yet  ought  I  not  to  hope  that  I 
am  ?  Why  is  this  the  only  occasion,  since  I  knew  him,  when  he  has 
been  wholly  silent  about  what  he  was  doing,  and  has  not  sent  me  his 
publication  1  Mr.  Turnbull  called  with  three  letters  of  introduction. 
He  was  always  hospitable  to  the  English  in  Paris.  He  has  seen  but 
one  American  there  who  likes  my  book.  The  Spectator  has  my  letter 
about  the  abolitionists,  with  a  comment  so  weak  that,  though  the 
facts  are  misstated,  I  think  it  best  to  leave  it  unanswered.  The  world 
may  be  trusted  to  judge  between  them.  E.  dined  with  us.  Charm- 
ing children.  The  change  swept  away  all  my  trumpery  little  cares 
and  anxieties,  unworthy  of  one  who  really  lives.  Kead  some  of 
Beaumont's  "  Marie."    Sentimental  and  un-American.    Little  more 

like  America  than  like  China.    Mrs.          praised  a  single  life,  so  as 

to  surprise  me  much.  I  have  a  very  bad  opinion  of  it  for  other  peo- 
ple, though  liking  it  for  myself.  Yet  the  chances  for  happiness  are 
rare  and  feeble.  The  only  way  is  not  to  care  for  one's  happiness. 
Mrs.  urged  my  answering  the  Spectator's  comments  on  my  let- 
ter ;  or,  rather,  setting  right  their  false  facts.  Did  not  like  it,  but 
found  it  my  duty.  I  must  uphold  the  right  at  the  cost  of  trouble, 
time,  and  unpleasant  feeling.    May  I  never  shrink  ! 

Thursday,  \9th. —  Went  to  town  with  my  mother,  and  answered  the 
Spectator,  avoiding  all  self-reference,  and  being  as  brief  as  I  could. 
Corrected  proof.  At  night,  read  some  of  "  Archy  Moore."  A  terrible 
story,  which  stirred  me  deeply.  I  was  ashamed  of  having  any 
troubles  when  others  are  suffering  so  tremendously.  I  looked  round 
upon  my  luxury,  physical,  intellectual,  and  spiritual,  and  wondered. 
I  felt  as  if  I  could  throw  them  all  away  for  one  solace  to  the  negro. 
It  is  truer  than  any  slave-story  I  ever  read.  Mr.  H.  C.  Robinson 
came  to  dinner.  I  like  his  opinions  of  people  ;  that  is,  his  and  my 
opinions  agree.    He  never  knew  but  one  American  gentleman  to 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  317 


laugh !  —  the  Americans  cannot  be  known  out  of  their  own  country, 
any  more  than  any  other  people.  Joanna  Baillie  is  very  unhappy 
about  the  revelation  of  the  true  Walter  Scott  in  Lockhart's  Life. 
Scarcely  any  one  seems  to  see  what  I  think  the  true  principle, — 
that  it  is  better  to  have  truth  than  any  particular  kind  of  opinion  of 
great  people.  Truth,  or  silence.  If  great  men  fall  below  our  expec- 
tation, let  it  be  remembered  that  there  is  another  point  of  view  from 
which  the  matter  should  be  looked  at,  —  that  we  gain  thus  a  new 
sense  of  the  glory  and  beauty  of  virtue  and  incorruptibleness  in  the 
humble  matter  of  every-day  life.  The  Spectator  has  my  letter,  with 
comments  which  require  no  answer.  This  is  over,  for  which  I  am 
very  glad. 

Monday,  23d.  —  Mr.  Sheridan  Knowles  begs  me,  through  Mr. 
Turnbull,  to  accept  a  stage-box  to  see  his  new  comedy  at  the  Hay- 
market,  —  with  arrangements  about  dinner  where  we  meet  him  at 
the  Turnbull's,  next  door  to  the  theatre.  Very  kind  in  both,  and 
very  pleasant.  I  read  Whately's  review  of  Mis3  Austen.  Good, 
but  not  particularly  striking.  She  was  a,  glorious  novelist.  I  think 
I  could  write  a  novel,  though  I  see  a  thousand  things  in  Scott  and 
her  which  I  could  never  do.  My  way  of  interesting  must  be  a 
different  one. 

Saturday,  4th.  —  Resolved  upon  doing  the  Channing  chapter  in  my 
book.  The  English  ought  not  to  be  deprived  of  an  account  of  the 
man  they  most  care  about,  by  any  difficulties  arising  out  of  my 
friendship  with  Dr.  Channing.  Settled  to  work,  and  found  it  not  at 
all  difficult  to  do  Channing. 

Monday,  6th.  —  Finished  Channing  :  hope  I  have  done  him  and  the 
subject  justice  ;  but  it  is  difficult  to  write  of  one's  intimate  friends. 

Tuesday,  1th.  —  A  note  from  William  Ware,  in  which  he  says  some 
pleasant  and  some  very  kind  things,  and  one  which  convinces  me  by 
its  effect  how  sensitive  I  am  about  my  friends'  opinions  of  what  I  do. 
He  observes  that  a  thorough  reading  of  my  book  convinces  him  of 
what  he  did  not  once  think,  —  that  I  am  greatest  in  the  purely  inven- 
tive ;  in  other  words,  he  does  not  like  the  book  so  well  as  he  expected. 
It  is  astonishing  how  this  stung  me,  and  longer  than  for  the  moment. 
I  was  convinced,  from  the  first,  of  the  absurdity  of  the  feeling,  my 
motives  and  aims  being  what  they  were  and  are  ;  but  I  think  this 
kind  of  pain  has  no  influence  on  my  doings  ;  and  that  the  best  way 
is  to  let  it  alone,  as  if  it  did  not  exist.  Why  should  I  object  to  pain  ? 
What  harm  will  it  do,  if  it  does  not  affect  action  ?  Read  Waldo 
Emerson's  oration.    Though  fanciful,  it  has  much  truth  and  beauty. 


318 


MEMORIALS. 


It  moved,  roused,  soothed,  and  consoled  me.  At  all  events,  he  is 
a  free  and  courageous  man,  and  I  wish  him  God  speed  ! 

Friday,  10th.  —  Corrected  proof  and  wrote  notes.  H.  Crabb  Rob- 
inson called.  He  gave  me  the  good  news  of  the  American  President 
having  declared  against  the  annexation  of  Texas.  How  much  have 
Mr.  Child  and  I  and  Dr.  Channing,  in  succession,  had  to  do  with 
this?  Never  mind  who  did  it,  —  it  is  done,  thank  God!  H. 
Crabb  Robinson  wrote  Goethe  and  Schiller  in  the  Gallery  of  Por- 
traits. Saw  the  aurora,  in  going  to  Carlyle's.  The  others  did  not  see 
it.  Every  one  should  look  at  the  sky  in  the  middle  of  November. 
It  is  a  shame  to  miss  these  sky-sights. 

Tuesday,  21st.  —  Mr.  called.  A  kind-hearted  man,  but  dread- 
fully mean.  He  complains  of  poverty  ;  which  means  that  he  is 
always  increasing  his  real  estate,  so  that  he  has  not  a  guinea  to  spare. 
....  A  busy  life,  and  somewhat  profitable,  I  trust,  I  am  now  living. 

Saturday,  25th.  —  Was  too  busy,  till  to-day,  to  walk  out.  I  must 
cure  myself  of  being  so  busy  as  this.  It  is  desirable  to  walk,  I  always 
feel  in  the  middle  of  the  night.  I  don't  want  to  be  selfish  about 
health,  but  I  am  selfish  the  other  way,  thinking  my  doings  of  too 

much  importance.    A  most  beautiful  account  of  herself  from  . 

I  must  secure  time  to  answer  such  in  the  way  they  deserve.  She 
says  truly,  that  she  thinks  she  never  did  study.  I  scarcely  ever 
have.  The  gift  of  us  all  is  more  imparting  than  gaining  from  books. 
Saw  Werner.  It  made  me  sick,  and  struck  upon  my  very  heart,  and 
it  got  worse  every  moment.  After  all  was  over,  Macready  came  to 
our  box  door,  all  glittering  under  his  cloak.    I  could  not  sleep  well. 

This  morning,  very  heavy  The  "  Leave  me,"  and  "  I  would 

not  send  you  forth  without  protection,"  haunted  me  so  that  I  resolved 
to  go  out  for  a  walk.  Corrected  proof  first,  and  then  went.  Met  Mr. 
C.  Buller,  who  walked  with  me.  The  liberals  are  wholly  taken  by 
surprise  by  Lord  John,  who  speaks  warily,  too  ;  no  sudden  fit.  C. 
Buller  calls  Macready  a  very  great  actor.  Does  not  like  his  Othello, 
which  certainly  moved  me  least.  Complains  of  literary  people,  that 
they  give  in  to  aristocratic  doings,  and  are  unworthy  of  their  callings. 
This  is  too  true  when  I  come  to  think.  May  it  never  be  so  with  me ! 
What  have  I  to  gain  thus  ?  Letter  from  Mackintosh.  Nice  note  from 
Talfourd.  Letters  from  co-operatives,  thanking  me  for  my  book,  and 
account  of  the  Shakers,  and  giving  me  books  and  papers.  Very  good, 
true,  and  hearty  letter.  Wrote  thirteen  pages  in  course  of  the  morn- 
ing ;  had  an  afternoon  talk  and  half  an  hour's  reading.  On  Monday 
Crabb  Robinson  told  me  he  did  not  care  if  he  never  saw  Carlyle 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  319 


again,  he  talked  so  against  antislaveiy  and  philanthropic  exertions. 
Very  withering  to  any  young  persons  who  might  have  heard  him. 
That  contempt  of  all  open  movement  is  a  diseased  part  of  Carlyle's 
mind.  Told  by  Robinson  of  the  complaint  in  the  North  American 
of  my  insisting  on  the  majority  being  in  the  right,  which  Robinson 
calls  the  great  spot  in  my  book.  The  answer  fluttered  me  at  first, 
but  foolishly.  Palfrey's  is  the  Federal  version  of  the  matter.  The 
saying  that  the  king  can  do  no  wrong  is  drawn  from  the  monarchical 
function  ;  but  the  saying  that  the  majority  are  in  the  right  is  neces- 
sarily founded  on  the  general  truth,  literally  taken,  or  the  function 
must  be  a  wrong  one. 

Evening.  —  Robert  and  I  went  to  Covent  Garden  to  Macbeth. 

Tuesday.  —  An  immense  letter  from  Margaret  Fuller.  Sad  about 
herself,  and  very  severe  on  my  book ; — righteously  so,  but  with  much 
mistake  in  it.  The  spirit  is  very  noble.  Do  I  improve  in  courage 
about  learning  the  consequences  of  what  I  do  ?  I  commit  myself 
boldly,  but  I  suffer  a  good  deal.  But  I  do  not  think  I  go  back.  I 
suffered  a  good  deal  from  her  letter. 

Evening.  —  A  party  at  home  ;  several  Americans.  I  talked  a  great 
deal,  —  some  with  every  body.    I  hope  it  went  off  well. 

TJmrsday.  —  The  books  for  the  blind  arrived,  in  fine  order.  I  will 
do  my  utmost  to  get  these  introduced  into  the  daily  life  of  the  blind 
here.  It  is  surely  a  good  work,  worth  trying  for.  Why  was  I  so 
worried  about  getting  my  book  done  ?  The  difficulty  is  in  me,  and 
would  be  about  something  else,  if  not  that.  I  do  struggle  against  it, 
but  the  true  way  is  to  put  myself  into  the  way  of  being  convinced 
how  small  our  doings  are,  and  how  we  must  have  our  affections  and 
anxieties  out  of  ourselves.  This  winter  I  will  read,  and  see  what  a 
vast  world  it  is  that  I  have  nothing  to  do  with.  Especially  let  me 
fill  myself  full  of  the  gospel.  How  one  thirsts  for  it,  after  a  busy 
interval. 

Friday.  —  Finished  the  composition  of  my  book.  Bustled  and  put 
away  pamphlets,  snatched  a  brief  walk  in  the  Park,  and  really  felt  my 
book  was  done  ;  but  did  not  feel  much  relief,  because  of  the  paper  to 
be  done  for  "The  Christian  Teacher "  so  very  soon.  Lord  Durham 
still  gives  a  high  character  to  Nicholas,  saying  that  he  is  coerced  by 
his  nobles.  But  what  great  or  good  man  would  not,  instead  of  yield- 
ing to  the  circumstances,  overcome  them  or  die  ?  If  Nicholas  were  a 
good  man,  he  would  rather  be  strangled  twenty  times  over  than  have 
signed  that  order  about  the  six  hundred  Polish  women.  Mr.  Brew- 
ster, one  of  the  seven  liberals  of  the  kirk  of  Scotland,  came.    He  is  a 


320 


MEMORIALS. 


delegate  to  the  Exeter  Hall  meeting  against  the  apprenticeship  sys- 
tem. Revised  the  remainder  of  my  book,  and  quite  finished  it.  Read 
some  of  Brougham's  education  speech,  but  not  all ;  so  have  no  judg- 
ment to  give.  Walked  in  the  Park.  Letter  about  a  Paris  review  of 
me  in  contemplation,  which  makes  me  think  I  care  less  about  praise 
than  1  did,  —  probably  from  satiety.  Determined  to  say  nothing  about 
it  to  any  one.  Browning  came  to  tea.  I  like  Browning.  I  care  little 
about  this  book  of  mine.  I  have  not  done  it  carelessly  ;  I  believe  it 
is  true  :  but  it  will  fill  no  place  in  my  mind  and  life  ;  and  I  am  glad 
it  is  done.  Shall  I  despise  myself  hereafter,  for  my  expectations  from 
my  novel  1 

Monday,  4th. — Mended  linen  with  much  gusto.  It  feels  like  leis- 
ure. Mrs.  Opie  called.  A  spice  of  dandyism  yet  in  the  demure 
peculiarity  of  her  dress.  She  never  interests  me  much,  or  makes  me 
approve  her  highly.  Richard  Martin eau  called  with  bank-notes  for 
£  1,020  for  me.  Took  the  numbers  of  the  notes  and  locked  them  up. 
Hope  we  shall  have  no  burglars  this  week.  Browning  sent  me  "  Rob- 
inson Crusoe,"  an  original  copy,  very  venerable.  Although  I  have 
read  it,  I  am  going  to  sit  down  to  it  and  be  a  child  again. 

Tuesday,  5th.  —  Read  the  newspaper  aloud.  Mended  black  stock- 
ings. Now  write  to  the  Manchester  co-operatives.  Before  I  had  well 
begun,  came  Mr.  Saunders,  with  bad  news  ;  *  but  somehow  I  did  not 
care  about  it.  How  much  more  fear  of  wrong-doing  affects  than  any 
money  loss  or  any  provocation  ! 

Wednesday,  6th.  —  Mr.  Brewster  brought  his  two  sermons  for  me. 
He  told  me  of  his  standing  alone  in  the  synod  about  church-rates. 
All  were  unwilling  to  give  them  up,  fearing  to  lose  tiends  (tithes), 
next.  He  showed  that  church-rates  were  not  property,  while  tiends 
were  (national  property).  He  declared  that  sooner  than  have  dissent- 
ers burdened  unjustly  with  church-rates,  he  had  rather  see  the  church 
come  down.  There  was  a  cry,  "  Take  down  his  words  ! "  Also,  "  Give 
him  time  to  explain."  He  declared  he  had  nothing  to  explain.  He 
meant  what  he  said,  and  would  abide  by  it.  A  committee  was  ap- 
pointed to  confer  with  him  (supposed  previous  to  deposition),  but  he 
heard  no  more  of  it.  Last  October  the  minute  was  read  at  the  General 
Assembly  ;  but  still  no  notice  taken,  though  he  was  present.  Sound 
man.  Saunders  sent  a  letter,  showing  means  of  getting  the  sheets  of 
"  The  Retrospect "  off  to  America  by  these  packets,  that  I  might  get 
terms  from  a  publisher  there.  But  I  know  no  American  publisher 
whom  I  should  like  to  ask,  and  I  have  declared  that  the  book  is  writ- 

*  Misconduct  of  the  agent  of  the  firm  in  America. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN. 


321 


ten  for  England.  So  I  think  it  better  to  forego  my  gains.  It  will 
not  matter  much  if  I  keep  my  own  counsel,  so  as  not  to  make  my 
own  family  vexed.  I  could  not  satisfy  myself  to  do  this  with  the 
present  feelings  of  the  Americans  towards  me,  for  any  money.  I 
think  I  cannot  be  deceiving  myself.    I  think  I  must  be  right.  Read 

some  of  Hall  in  afternoon,  till  time  to  dress  for  ball.  —  First  to  's, 

—  a  gay  party,  and  very  large.    A  New  Zealand  chief,  tattooed,  and 

gentlemanly  looking,  notwithstanding.  Mr.    asserted  that  every 

thing  in  society  is  wrong.    Mr.  showed  him  that  there  are  degrees 

of  superiority  in  all  societies,  from  New  Zealand  to  England.  Is  there 
any  better  than  England  ?  Are  there  not  many  worse  ?  How  then 
can  all  be  wrong  ?  Have  we  not  co-operation  in  various  ways  already  ? 
Every  insurance,  turnpike,  and  social  achievement  is  from  so  much 
co-operation  :  why  then  begin  de  novo,  when  we  have  so  much 
ready  to  our  hand  ?  The  rooms  were  beautifully  dressed  with  ever- 
greens and  flowers.  O,  how  tired  I  was  !  But  I  always  think  after- 
wards that  I  might  keep  it  more  to  myself.  .... 

Monday,  1 1  th.  —  How  little  do  we  foresee  !  I  finished  my  last  entry 
supposing  the  events  of  the  day  done  with.  Thought  that  nothing 
more  was  likely  to  happen,  when  a  note  from  Mrs.  W.  came,  tell- 
ing me  that  her  husband  could  no  longer  struggle  against  his  convic- 
tion of  the  unlawfulness  of  oaths,  and  that  he  is  going  to  resign  his 
office.  Such  a  testimony  to  the  supremacy  of  conscience  ought  to 
make  one  rejoice  ;  yet  I  cannot  help  grieving.  Such  a  household 
broken  up  !  My  head  was  full  of  them  all  the  evening  and  in  the 
night. 

Evening. — Read  aloud  Southey's  famous  article  in  the  Quarterly  on 
British  Monachism.  Entertaining,  but  with  a  vain  attempt  to  prop 
up  Lady  Isabella  King's  institution.  I  should  like  to  see  the  economy 
of  association  made  use  of  by  women  ;  to  see  them  living  in  a  sort  of 
club-house,  enjoying  comfort  and  luxury,  rather  than  dispersed  in 
poverty  among  boarding-houses  and  schools  :  but  there  must  be  no 
royal  patronage,  no  distinction  between  rich  and  poor,  no  ostentation 
about  schools  attached.  Simple,  living  without  other  restraints  than 
as  to  hours  and  one  or  two  other  particulars.  It  strikes  me  to  write 
on  this. 

Almost  as  soon  as  I  had  written  this,  Saunders  came,  and  filled  my 
head  with  what  will  continue  to  fill  it  for  long.  I  had  been  darning 
stockings  and  brushing  gown  and  cloak  tails,  not  doubting  in  my  easy 
mind  that  I  was  to  have  holiday  for  the  whole  winter,  when  he  came. 
After  some  little  talk  about  business,  he  said,  "  Did  you  not  once  say, 


322 


MEMORIALS. 


ma'am,  that  you  should  like  to  edit  a  periodical  ? "  Then  he  opened 
his  scheme  of  an  economical  magazine,  to  strike  into  Knight's  circu- 
lation and  that  of  my  series.  We  talked  over  the  details  a  good  deal  ; 
I  talked  it  over  with  my  mother  and  aunt.  It  is  an  awful  subject ; 
such  facilities  for  usefulness  and  activity  of  knowledge  ;  such  certain 
toil  and  bondage  ;  such  risk  of  failure  and  descent  from  my  position  ! 
The  realities  of  life  press  upon  me  now.  If  I  do  this,  I  must  brace 
myself  up  to  do  and  suffer  like  a  man.  No  more  waywardness,  pre- 
cipitation, and  reliance  upon  allowance  from  others.  Undertaking  a 
man's  duty,  I  must  brave  a  man's  fate.  I  must  be  prudent,  indefati- 
gable, serene,  good-natured  ;  earnest  with  cheerfulness.  The  possi- 
bility is  open  before  me  of  showing  what  a  periodical  with  a  perfect 
temper  may  be  :  also  of  setting  women  forward  at  once  into  the  rank 
of  men  of  business.  But  the  hazards  are  great.  I  wonder  how  this 
will  end.  Went  to  the  's  :  they  are  serene,  after  their  conscien- 
tious sacrifice  about  the  oaths,  as  they  deserve  to  be.  I  trust  I  di- 
verted them  from  going  to  America.  It  would  never  suit  them.  The 
children  are  very  merry,  but  Irma  was  concerned  at  the  weeping  of 
the  servants,  when  warning  was  given  them.  She  said  the  maids 
were  crying  very  much,  but  she  thought  it  was  not  naughtiness  but 
sorryness.  I  found  them  so  little  engrossed  with  their  own  affairs, 
that,  in  the  evening,  when  conversation  paused,  I  told  them  mine. 
Two  gave  no  opinion, —  two  said  rather  yes  than  no.    Found  notes 

and  letters  at  home.    One  from  Mr.  ,  with  fine  metaphors.  If 

I  can  "get  good  collegians,"  colleagues,  I  suppose,  and  "be  their  queen- 
bee"  he  will  "  enlist  under  my  banners." 

Tuesday,  12th.  —  I  thought  I  must  give  up  this  scheme  in  the  night; 
but  it  was  brighter  in  the  morning.  Went  to  consult  Richard  Mar- 
tineau.  He  is  rather  in  favour  of  it  than  not,  but  will  consider  of  it 
and  let  me  know.    Wrote  to  James  about  it,  and  begged  an  answer 

in  the  course  of  the  week.    Mrs.  called.  —  This  is  a  bad  affair 

about  the  London  University.  Dr.  Arnold  proposed  a  sort  of  relig- 
ious test  :  an  examination  in  the  Greek  Testament.  Otter*  and 
Maltby,*  as  churchmen,  thought  they  must  support  it.  Dr.  Roget 
did  not  like  to  be  the  only  one  to  oppose  it ;  and  Empson  thought 
he  could  not,  because  Arnold  was  his  intimate  friend  !  Lord  John 
Russell  is  very  angry,  and  Booth,  Strutt,f  and  Romilly  are  trying 
to  get  it  rescinded.  —  The  distinctive  principle  of  the  University  is 
violated.    Shame  !    Joined  the  Macreadys  at  the  theatre  to  hear  the 

*  Bishops  of  Chichester  and  Durham, 
t  Lord  Bel  per. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN. 


323 


new  opera.  It  is  indeed  exquisite.  Some  of  the  airs  will  soon  be  in 
every  street  in  England.  "Joan  of  Arc"  followed.  Scenery  splendid 
above  every  thing.  I  never  saw  any  thing  like  it  before.  I  had  the 
thought  of  this  periodical  heavy  at  my  heart  all  the  evening  ;  but 
slept  pretty  well. 

Wednesday,  13th.  —  Wrote  a  set  of  queries  for  Saunders.  I  find  that 
in  the  morning  I  am  pro  and  at  night  con  the  scheme.  I  see  such  an 
opening  for  things  I  want  to  say  ;  I  seem  to  be  the  person  to  under- 
take such  a  thing  ;  I  can  toil  very  hard  ;  I  am  persevering,  and  in 
the  habit  of  keeping  my  troubles  to  myself.  If  suffering  be  the  worst 
on  the  con  side,  let  it  come.  It  will  be  a  fine  discipline  of  taste,  tem- 
per, thought,  and  spirits.  But  I  don't  expect  Saunders  will  accede 
to  my  stipulation  for  money  for  contributors.  If  so,  there 's  an  end. 
If  he  does,  I  think  I  shall  plunge.  Walked  to  Chelsea  to  dine  with 
the  Carlyles.  Found  her  looking  pretty,  in  a  black  velvet  high  dress 
and  blond  collar.  She  and  I  had  a  nice  feminine  gossip  for  two 
hours  before  dinner,  about  divers  domestic  doings  of  literary  people, 
which  really  seem  almost  to  justify  the  scandal  with  which  literary 
life  is  assailed.  The  Carlyles  are  true  sensible  people,  who  know 
what  domestic  life  ought  to  be.  —  I  felt  myself  compelled  to  decline 
meeting  the  Sterlings.*  They  have  just  found  out  that  I  am  not  the 
sort  of  person  the  Times  has  been  making  me  out  to  be,  and  wish  to 
see  me.  But  it  would  be  mean  in  me  to  appear  to  like  persons  who 
have  offered  me  a  long  course  of  public  insults.  I  have  no  means  of 
declining  insult,  but  by  declining  to  meet  those  who  sanction  it. 
Leigh  Hunt  and  Home  came  to  tea. 

Thursday,  14th.  —  Wrote  notes,  settled  business,  and  am  now  going 

to  darning  and  thinking  Darned,  but  did  not  do  much  sober 

thinking.    I  cannot  really  think  without  pen  or  pencil  or  book  in 

hand.    Delicious  weather.    Met  Mrs.  in  the  Park.    She  and  her 

husband  like  Mr.  Harness's  tragedy  exceedingly,  and  praise  it  for  its 
finish.  How  very  narrow  these  classical  people  seem  to  me  to  be  !  I 
do  not  find  in  them  any  sympathy  with  the  high  and  true,  but  only 
regard  to  style  and  "finish."  After  tea,  sat  down  before  my  fire  with 
pencil  and  papers,  to  make  out  a  list  of  subjects,  contributors,  and 
books  for  my  periodical.  Presently  came  a  letter  from  Saunders, 
which  must  much  affect  my  fate  in  regard  to  the  project.  I  distinctly 
felt  that  it  could  not  hurt  me  either  way,  as  the  pros  and  cons  seem  so 
nearly  balanced  that  I  should  be  rather  thankful  to  have  the  matter 
decided  for  me.    Saunders  and  Otley  grant  all  I  have  yet  asked,  and 


*  Editor  of  the  Times. 


324 


MEMORIALS. 


it  looks  much  as  if  we  were  to  proceed.  So  I  went  on  with  mv 
pondering  till  past  ten  o'clock,  by  which  time  I  had  got  a  sheet  full 
of  subjects. 

Saturday,  16th. — A  busy  day.  Morning,  read  one  of  my  own 
stories,  —  "  Loom  and  Lugger."  Was  quite  disappointed  in  it.  It  has 
capital  material,  but  is  obscure,  and  not  simple  enough.  Too  much 
matter  for  the  space,  and  not  well  wrought  out.  Could  do  better 
now,  I  hope.  Mr.  Finlaison  came  at  one,  and  we  went  into  the  city 
about  my  annuity  business.  He  told  me  by  the  way  about  the  re- 
ports of  the  ecclesiastical  commissioners.  Said  that  the  supposed 
average  of  souls  to  a  parson  is  six  hundred,  and  the  income  under 
£300,  but  that  in  Norfolk  the  average  income  is  £800  and  the 
souls  to  each  cure  seventy.  In  Norwich  the  average  income  is  £800. 
This  bears  out  the  worst  that  has  been  said  against  the  church.  Took 
up  my  schedule  at  the  national  debt  office,  and  walked  to  the  bank. 
Never  was  there  before.  What  a  bewildering  suite  of  large  rooms, 
full  of  busy  men !  Glad  to  see  a  boy  carrying  pewter  pots  out.  It 
looked  some  relief  from  business.  Watched  the  carefulness  of  the 
transaction  between  Finlaison  and  the  clerk.  Finlaison  thrust  nearly 
a  thousand  pounds'  worth  of  notes  into  my  hand,  as  if  they  had  been 
waste-paper.  I  watched  the  process  of  weighing  the  gold  and  shovel- 
ling into  bags,  which  were  carried  away  by  the  porter.  We  then 
walked  to  Mr.  Nobeare's  (or  whatever  his  name  is)  to  purchase  the 
annuity  for  a  term  of  twelve  years  ;  having  already  purchased  the 
deferred  annuity  of  £  100,  to  commence  at  the  end  of  that  time.  For 
£906  l.s.  3<i  I  purchase  a  twelve  years'  annuity  of  £95  7s.  6c/.,  which 
being  paid  over  yearly  to  the  national  debt  office,  purchases  the  an- 
nuity of  £  100  to  begin  in  April,  1850.  I  have  also  made  the  first 
payment  to  the  national  debt  office,  so  as  to  have  spent  £  1001  8s.  9d. 
If  I  die  before  the  twelve  years  are  out,  my  heirs  will  receive  the 
remains  of  the  temporary  annuity.  I  think  this  is  good,  and  hope  I 
have  done  right.  Back  to  the  bank,  and  signed  the  transfer  of  stock. 
Mended  my  satin  gown  and  dressed  to  go  to  the  Grotes'.    Met  a 

pleasant  party,  mostly  M.  P.'s  James  is  altogether  against  the 

periodical  plan,  and  I  think  his  reasons  good.  After  getting  off  my 
things  and  settling,  I  wrote  to  Saunders  to  decline  the  enterprise.  So 
this  vision  of  an  enterprise  is  over,  and  I  am  once  more  at  liberty  to 
spend  my  winter  as  I  like.  It  feels  very  delicious  at  present.  Rest, 
reading,  thinking,  and  a  new  enterprise  (a  novel)  when  I  like.  Read 
Midsummer  Night's  Dream  in  the  evening.  Surprised  to  find  how 
completely  I  remembered  it.  How  delightful  to  have  time  to  read 
what  one  likes ! 


n 

CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  325 


Wednesday,  20th.  Afternoon.  — Read  in  the  Pictorial  Bible,  which 
is  to  me  very  interesting. 

Evening. —  South's  sermon,  —  Adam  in  paradise.  Very  beautiful 
as  a  picture  of  perfect  man,  but  how  Adam  came  to  fall  if  he  was  such 
an  one  South  does  not  explain.  Read  "  Katherine  and  Petruchio,"  with 
the  same  effect  that  that  play  ever  has  ;  with  wonder  at  its  fun  and 
cleverness,  and  much  enjoyment  thereof,  but  intolerable  pain  at  the 
treatment  of  Katherine.  Such  a  monstrous  infringement  of  all  rights, 
leading  to  such  an  abominable  submission,  makes  one's  blood  boil  as 
much  as  if  it  were  not  a  light  comedy,  but  a  piece  of  history.  I  have 
always  found  myself  more  sad  at  that  comedy  than  at  any  tragedy. 
Robert  Owen  called.  His  delusion  about  the  adoption  of  his  plans  is 
as  great  as  ever.  Metternich  listened  to  him,  and  said  he  was  right  as 
to  the  present  evils,  and  got  his  secretary  to  copy  Owen's  documents. 
Owen  takes  wonder  and  sympathy  at  the  moment,  and  an  admission 
of  grievances,  for  an  adoption  of  his  plans.  Wrote  five  long  letters. 
Wrote  too  much,  and  had  slight  sick-headache  at  night. 

Saturday,  23d.  —  Read  the  news  from  Canada.  My  heart  is  with 
the  Canadians.  Letters  from  Dr.  Channing,  Mr.  E.  G.  Loring,  and 
Mrs.  Child.  Affairs  in  the  United  States  seem  most  critical.  Love- 
joy  just  murdered  for  abolitionism.  Heaven  aid  the  right !  Brown- 
ing called.  "Sordello"  will  soon  be  done  now.  Denies  himself 
preface  and  notes.  He  must  choose  between  being  historian  or  poet. 
Cannot  split  the  interest.  I  advised  him  to  let  the  poem  tell  its  own 
tale.  Why  do  long  and  full  letters  always  make  my  heart  heavy  ? 
Is  it  the  dislike  to  new  and  grand  ideas,  that  Watts  talks  of  ?  The 
amount  is  oppressive. 

Monday,  25th.  —  The  Polish  children  dined  here.  They  spent  the 
afternoon  with  me  in  my  study,  I  showing  them  the  American  views, 
and  telling  them  about  Niagara,  and  my  going  behind  the  sheet ;  and 
they  telling  me  about  their  school  and  the  little  they  remembered  of 
Poland.  At  Warsaw  the  back  of  their  house  looked  into  a  park,  to 
which  they  had  to  go  some  distance  by  the  street.  They  remember 
that  when  they  spent  the  morning  playing  in  the  park  their  mamma 
used  to  let  down  a  bottle  by  a  piece  of  tape,  for  them  to  drink  when 
they  were  thirsty.  I  love  these  traits.  After  tea  I  found  up  some 
little  presents  for  them,  and  gave  them  each  a  chain  of  my  own 
making,  and  some  odds  and  ends  for  them  to  make  knick-knacks  of. 
They  were  clever  at  the  pictures,  and  examined  American  coins  with 
much  interest.    They  are  fine  children.    Heaven  protect  them !  A 

Polish  gentleman  came  for  them.    Reading  A  pleasant,  quiet 

Christmas-day  ;  blest  enough,  if  the  children  were  happy. 


326 


MEMORIALS. 


Tuesday,  26th.  —  Our  breakfast  gladdened  by  good  accounts  from 
my  aunt.  Talk  of  people  going  through  life  without  being  under- 
stood. I  don't  believe  they  ever  do,  except  by  their  own  fault. 
There  is  always,  I  think,  some  fault  of  temper  or  some  deficiency  in 
frankness  and  simplicity  in  such  cases,  —  if,  indeed,  they  are  more 
than  imaginary.  But  the  unselfish  never  seem  to  fancy  themselves 
misunderstood.    It  is  the  jealous  who  make  the  complaint. 

Wednesday,  27th.  —  Dined  with  the  Kers  ;  met  there  Colonel  Fox, 
Captain  Beaufort,  Eastlake,  and  Mr.  Pettit.  Colonel  Fox  told  me  of 
poor  Mr.  Barrington  having  been  in  great  grief  at  seven  years  old,  at 
the  loss  of  a  younger  brother.  His  nurse  comforted  him  with  saying 
that  his  brother  was  happy  in  heaven.  The  boy  said,  "  If  he  is  happy 
in  heaven,  God  Almighty  must  have  made  him  forget  me."  Mrs. 
Ker's  little  niece  asks  if  Adam  is  not  the  man  who  was  in  a  pigeon- 
house  and  let  out  a  pigeon.    Curious  exhibition  of  the  "  pride  of  life  n 

in  Mr.  's  servants  and  his  next-door  neighbours'.    They  laugh  at 

his  odd  pair  of  horses,. and  his  men  stand  on  the  steps  when  there  is  a 
party  next  door,  crying  out  the  number  of  the  cabs,  —  "  No.  249, 
cab !  "    "  Nice  party  !  plenty  of  cabs." 

Thursday,  28th.  —  Mr.  Ker  begs  me  to  write  "  How  to  Observe," 
but  I  recoil  from  it.  I  don't  think  I  can  or  ought.  I  want  rest,  and 
to  keep  out  of  the  public  view  till  my  novel  is  ready.  Urges  me  to 
read  Smollett  for  his  force ;  but  I  cannot,  it  disgusts  me  so  utterly. 
Read  Defoe's  "  Plague."  Was  somewhat  disappointed.  Robinson  Crusoe 
has  all  the  matter-of-fact-ness,  with  a  world  of  beauty  beside.  The 
best  part  is  where  he  describes  the  reception  of  the  news  of  the  de- 
crease in  the  bills  of  mortality.  Settled  the  accounts  of  the  year. 
Went  to  bed  very  tired. 

Evening.  —  Company.  A  pleasant  evening  of  talk.  The  Vicar  of 
Leeds,  brother  of  Theodore  Hook,,  has  come  out  against  town  missions 
on  account  of  difference  of  religious  opinion.  0,  this  Church  of  Eng- 
land !  What  a  stumbling-block  it  is  now  !  What  is  there  of  the 
gospel  in  the  religious  world !  The  Archbishop  of  Canterbury's 
answer  to  Dr.  Hampden  in  to-day's  paper  is  cool,  cowardly,  and 
church-like  altogether. 

Sunday,  31st.  —  I  have  just  shut  out  the  last  daylight  of  the  year. 
What  a  last  day  !  With  a  September  breeze  and  a  May  sun.  In  the 
park,  how  gay  the  children  looked,  and  the  water-birds  splashing  in 
the  blue  and  gleamy  waters.  How  busy  the  ripple  looks,  when  the 
wind  sweeps  over  !  What  a  busy  year  it  has  been  !  On  many  ac- 
counts a  hapny  one  :  but  not  so  much  as  the  last.    Every  one  is  kind, 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE, — WITHIN.  327 


and  I  love  my  lot.  But  there  is  nothing  here  like  the  character  of 
some  American  friends,  or  the  sympathy  of  others  [Follens  and  Fur- 
nesses  named].  Surely,  if  we  meet  hereafter,  we  shall  not  be  subject 
to  these  impracticable  separations,  I  have  had  a  good  deal  of  disci- 
pline this  year  about  opinion,  —  from  the  publication  of  my  book  ; 
but  have  not  had  to  suffer  nearly  so  much  as  I  expected.  Praise 
seems  to  have  lost  its  power  of  giving  me  pleasure,  which  is  well.  I 
sadly  fear  growing  selfish,  —  fond,  not  of  money,  nor  even  of  fame, 
but  of  ease  and  my  own  favourite  pursuits.  May  I  keep  before  me 
the  single  desire  to  do  what  is  right,  without  longing  or  repining  !  I 
may  soon  have  need  of  this.  People  with  aged  parents  have.  May 
I  balance  my  duties  without  thought  of  self ! 

Thus  passed  the  first  year  after  Harriet  Martineau's  return 
from  America.  Except  the  omission  of  what  was  in  its  nature 
unsuited  for  publication,  I. have  passed  over  nothing  but  repe- 
titions of  the  same  incidents  of  daily  recurrence,  and  the 
record  of  domestic  occupations  which  overloaded  each  day,  and 
thus  occasioned  a  constant  difficulty  and  anxiety  in  getting 
through  with  the  daily  authorship.  This  journal,  with  that  of 
the  succeeding  year,  marks  the  time  while  the  English  public 
was  finding  out  the  real  character  of  its  favourite  writer.  The 
world  had  learned  already  that  she  was  not  born  for  its  amuse- 
ment. It  was  now  learning  that  she  was  not  born  to  serve  and 
save  it  in  its  own  inefficient  ways.  Take  up  any  small  scheme 
of  doing  individual  good,  —  carefully  following  in  footsteps 
that  have  previously  broken  the  path,  and  you  will  receive  ap- 
plause and  support,  from  the  throne  to  the  poorest  dwelling ; 
but  follow  the  indications  of  the  times,  with  the  large  principles 
of  statesmanship  which  settle  all  questions  and  remove  all  abuses, 
and  men's  ignorance,  self-interest,- .and  wounded  pride  take  the 
alarm.  If  there  has  been  so  much  prudence  in  the  course,  power 
in  the  intellect,  and  charm  in  the  character  of  the  person  whose 
views  run  counter  to  the  public  ones,  as  to  make  fault-finding 
manifestly  absurd,  there  will  nevertheless  have  been  a  check 
given  to  applause.  Harriet'  Martineau  had  long  entertained  the 
thought  that  persecution  and  opposition  might  be  as  much  the 
fault  of  the  reformer  as  of  the  times.  "  Why  should  not  a 
perfect  being  go  through  the  world  to  serve  and  save  it  honoured 


328 


MEMORIALS. 


and  beloved  in  the  exercise  of  those  functions  1 "  "  What  hin- 
ders each  one  of  us  from  being  such  an  one  ?w  *  She  was  indeed 
that  being,  and  it  could  not  be  hindered.  But  she  formed  no 
exception  to  the  general  rule,  that  the  greater  the  knowledge 
and  goodness  that  is  brought  into  contact  with  wrongs  and 
abuses,  the  greater  the  momentary  misapprehension  and  mis- 
liking.  Hence  the  book  that  made  Americans  foam  at  the 
mouth  only  made  the  corresponding  classes  of  Englishmen  shake 
their  heads.  Time  sets  all  right,  —  time  for  a  little  change  in 
individual  hearts,  and  a  great  consequent  change  in  public  cir- 
cumstances, and  the  person  who  feels  the  chill  of  a  public  terror 
is  soon  warmly  visited  again  by  the  approbation  of  those  who 
through  the  same  selfish  impulse  seek  their  share  in  whatever 
good  may  result  from  whatever  risk  has  been  taken.  This  book 
suggested  by  America  did  not  make  its  author  less  popular  in 
England,  but  it  changed  the  basis  of  her  popularity,  the  general 
view  of  her  character,  and  the  course  of  her  after  life.  The  effort 
of  writing  it,  with  the  experience  that  qualified  her  for  the  work, 
set  her  above  and  beyond  the  world,  and  necessitated  the  mould- 
ing and  directing  it,  with  a  single  eye  to  its  benefit.  Hence- 
forth she  instinctively  sought  its  contact  where  it  is  most  plastic, 
—  at  the  point  of  confluence  of  private  with  public  life,  before 
the  materials  have  hardened  into  act  of  parliament.  "  Society," 
technically  so  called,  was  neither  contemned  nor  renounced ;  but 
being  outgrown,  her  relation  to  it  was  changed. 

Let  us  know  what  men  worship,  and  we  may  know  also  what 
they  will  become  ;  and  the  world  could  foresee  in  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau  the  consequences  of  a  worship  exceedingly  unlike  the 
popular  one.  We  have  in  the  "Miscellanies"  (Vol.  I.  p.  190, 
American  edition)  a  vision  of  her  ideal.  Multitudes  of  minds 
felt  that  she  was  herself  the  realization  of  her  own  ideal  and 
they  sought  her  guidance,  and  were  influenced  by  her  life.  The 
thinking  mind  of  that  time  was  perhaps  more  profoundly  exer- 
cised by  her  chapters  on  property  and  on  woman  than  on  the 
rest  of  the  book,  which  had  so  violently  agitated  the  shallower 
currents :  and  while  her  personal  popularity  was  for  a  time  un- 

*  See  Miscellanies. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  329 


thought  of  in  the  conflict  of  principles  the  book  excited,  and  her 
personal  admirers  were  less  conscious  of  her  personal  impress,  in 
the  very  change  their  minds  were  undergoing  from  the  workings 
of  her  great  thoughts,  she  was  writing  thus  in  her  journal,  on 
observing  that  with  all  the  success  of  her  book,  the  manner  of  it 
was  very  different :  "  If  my  book  does  not  succeed,  I  am  not 
so  popular  as  we  thought  I  was ;  that  is  all." 

I  find  at  the  end  of  this  year's  journal  the  following  page, 
which  throws  light  on  the  domestic  economy  of  the  popular 
political  economist :  — 


ACCOUNTS  OF  THE  YEAR  1837. 

RECEIVED. 

&    s.  d. 

Interest  from  Harriet  Martineau  .  .802 
From  Fox,  for  sale  of  series  .  .  21  6  7 
From  London  and  Westminster  Review  .    18   0  0 

Own  funds   224  2  0 

  £271  85.  9d. 

SPENT. 

£     5.  d. 

For  board   150   0  0 

Dress  and  conveniences  .      .       .       .    35   2  1\ 
Postage  and  coach-hire      .       .       .       18   2  10 
Books  and  stationery     .       .       .       .    14   3  2£ 

Travelling  9  15  6 

Given  away   22   3  8 

Sundries  11  13  5 

  £261  Is.  Zd. 

Balance  £10  Is.  6d. 

Many  portions  of  her  journal  of  the  next  year,  1838,  show  the 
tone  and  temper  to  which  the  sharp  changes  of  English  praise 
and  American  blame,  worldly  success  and  unworldly  aspirations, 
had  brought  her  mind.  The  reader  will  not  need  to  have  them 
pointed  out. 

This  diary,  which  is  contained  in  one  of  Letts's  volumes  of 
four  hundred  pages,  is  accompanied  by  lists  of  books  read  in 
each  month,  remarkable  events  of  the  year  in  relation  to  herself, 
and,  like  all  her  years,  with  a  statement  of  receipts  and  expendi- 
tures. 


330 


MEMORIALS. 


Monday,  January  1st,  1838.  —  A  fine  bright  morning  to  begin  the 
year  with.  I  had  read  in  bed  last  night,  to  watch  the  year  in,  and 
thought  of  my  beloved  Follens,  to  whom  I  think  this  hour  of  the  year 
will  be  ever  consecrated.  I  am  making  myself  anxious  already  about 
my  novel.  I  must  learn  to  trust  the  laws  of  suggestion,  having  had 
good  reason  to  know  how  well  they  serve  me.  My  plot  will  grow  as 
I  proceed.  "Wrote  the  rest  of  my  paper  on  the  Catholics  in  America. 
Was  sorry  to  leave  it  for  a  call,  yet  enjoyed  the  call.  Heard  it  said 
"  If  Macready's  enterprise  *  is  not  a  high  Christian  enterprise,  it  is 
something  better."  Bravo !  Heard  of  a  lady's  marriage  with  a  young 
Irishman  of  half  her  age,  and  with  no  practice.  What  follies  women 
of  forty-eight  do ! 

Afternoon.  —  Finished  my  paper  with  great  joy.  Now  going  to 
read  for  the  evening.    0,  what  leisure  I  am  going  to  have,  I  hope  ! 

Tuesday,  2d.  —  Mr.  Roebuck  called  early  and  gave  me  facts  about 
Canada,  which  I  wrote  down  as  soon  as  he  was  gone.  They  are  very 
strong  in  favor  of  Canada.  Finished  the  tables  of  last  year's  diary, 
and  went  out  to  walk.  How  summer-like  did  all  look  !  Count 
Krazinski  called,  and  dear  Miss  Mitchell,  whom  I  had  not  seen  for 
above  six  years.  She  is  unchanged.  Carlyle  called  ;  says  he  has 
peace  of  mind  now  he  has  no  writing  to  do.  Very  kind.  Looks 
finely,  and  it  is  worth  while  watching  his  entrance  into  a  room  full 
of  company.  So  modest,  so  gentlemanly  !  The  Polish  children  dined 
with  us.  I  wrote  notes,  dressed,  coffee,  and  off  to  the  theatre.  A  fine 
row  of  children  in  the  next  box.  Our  children  were  well  pleased, 
drumming  with  their  fingers  to  the  music.  The  pantomime  was  ad- 
mirable, and  I  was  surprised  to  find  how  I  enjoyed  it.  We  all  got 
pretty  well  tired  before  it  was  over,  and  it  was  past  twelve  when  we 
got  home.  Found  a  paper,  sent  me  by  Robert  Sedgwick,  with  my 
letter  to  him  about  "  Home." 

Wednesday,  3c?.  —  I  certainly  have  great  sympathy  with  shy  people. 
Such  odd  fits  of  shyness  come  over  me  now  and  then.  People  can't 
see  it,  I  think,  except  from  my  face.  Mrs.  Booth  called,  Rev.  Mr. 
Hunter,  and  Browning. 

Friday,  5th.  —  The  meeting  held  yesterday  in  favor  of  Canada  was 
very  striking,  and  must  awaken  the  people  and  the  ministers  surely. 
A  letter  from  the  Follens,  very  loving,  but  conveying  news  of  ridicu- 
lous charges  against  me  in  America  ;  among  the  rest,  of  my  being 
insane.  I  don't  mind  pure  calumnies.  A  mixture  of  the  truth  is 
what  infuses  the  sting.    Wrote  to  Dr.  Channing.    Mr.  Porter  called, 

*  For  the  reform  of  the  theatre. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE, — WITHIN.  331 


and  we  went  to  his  house.  Had  a  very  pleasant  day.  Mr.  and  Mrs. 
Kicardo  were  there,  and  I  liked  them  very  much.  Mr.  Urquhart,  late 
ambassador  or  something  to  Turkey.  He  is  one  of  the  great  fearers 
of  Russia.  When  all  were  gone  we  talked  till  eleven.  I  like  such 
visits  as  this.    They  are  the  true  pleasure  of  society. 

Saturday,  8th.  —  Talked  over  low  morals  in  novels.    fully 

agrees  with  me  about  Miss  Edgeworth's.  Read,  in  Blackwood,  article 
on  Mademoiselle  Gautier,  a  devotee,  —  much  like  other  devotees, 
whose  tales  are,  however,  very  instructive. 

Sunday,  7th.  —  Carlyle  sends  me  a  full  list  of  his  writings  for  Mr. 
Loring.  How  much  may  happen  to  American  minds,  from  this  one 
sheet  which  lies  beside  me  !  Heaven's  blessing  on  it !  Read  Life  of 
Scott,  Vol.  VI.  It  is  far  more  interesting  than  the  former  ones  ;  and 
here  his  pride  takes  the  form  of  despising  money,  which  is  far  better 
than  grasping  at  it.  But  this  pride  was  a  great  snare.  While  his 
diary  tells  of  sleepless  nights,  so  many  that  he  fears  becoming  unfitted 
for  work,  he  writes  to  Lady  Davy  that  his  troubles  have  not  broken 
and  will  not  break  his  rest.  It  amuses  me  to  see  how  his  diary  reveals 
a  state  of  mind  and  way  of  working  like  mine.  The  pride,  too,  is  like 
me,  and  the  insouciance  about  things  which  cannot  be  helped. 

Monday,  8th.  —  Lazy,  in  bed  ;  partly  from  Scott's  eulogium  on 
thoughts  before  rising.  They  are  very  ingenious  and  clear  then, 
certainly.  Mended  and  quilted  till  noon,  very  much  enjoying  my 
quiet  over  my  own  fire.  Then  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Macready  called,  very 
full  of  Drury  Lane.  The  Examiner,  I  hear,  has  gone  against  the 
Canadians  altogether,  bidding  them  be  patient,  like  the  Irish.  How 
can  Fonblanque  ?  Read  Scott  till  I  finished.  Very  interesting.  It 
seems  as  if  one  might  trust  to  a  novel  growing  out  as  it  proceeds,  in- 
stead of  having  the  whole  cut  and  dry  before  the  beginning.  Scott 
speaks  of  writing  out  the  plot,  and  carefully  weaving  the  story,  if  it 
should  prove  necessary  to  try  something  new.  How  he  reveres  Miss 
Austen  !  He  never  knew  what  poverty  really  was.  He  always  had 
carriage,  house,  grounds,  pictures,  butler,  &c.  Only  restriction,  never 
privation.  I  have  all  to-day  and  all  to-morrow  disengaged,  which  is 
exceedingly  pleasant.  It  must  be  good  for  me  to  be  idle,  and  I 'm 
sure  it  is  very  pleasant.  I  do  not  find  just  now,  as  formerly,  that  all 
unpleasant  thoughts  come  back  to  plague  my  leisure,  —  thoughts  of 
angry,  backbiting  Americans,  and  of  all  the  wrong  and  awkward 
things  I  have  ever  done. 

Tuesday,  9th.  —  Read  "  Pride  and  Prejudice  "  again  last  night.  I 
think  it  as  clever  as  before.    Cold  night.    Read  the  Follens'  letter 


332 


MEMORIALS. 


and  answered  it,  on  account  of  the  calumnies  against  me.  These 
scarcely  trouble  me  at  all  ;  I  suppose  because  they  are  so  wholly  false. 
I  think  praise  and  blame  at  a  distance  scarcely  matter  at  all.  It  is 
a  good  lesson,  though,  to  see  how  the  same  people  who  so  greatly 
flattered  me  when  there  are  abusing  me  now.  I  bound  and  mended 
two  pair  of  shoes,  and  darned  a-  handkerchief.  Finished  Judges,  in 
Pictorial  Bible,  which  is  a  great  treat  to  me.  Finished  "  Pride  and 
Prejudice."  It  is  wonderfully  clever,  and  Miss  Austen  seems  much 
afraid  of  pathos.  I  long  to  try.  Brushed  my  hair  by  the  fire,  for  it 
is  very  cold,  and  slept  badly  from  cold.  But  how  do  the  poor  live 
through  such  weather  ?  I  cannot  forget  them  in  their  brick-paved 
cellars,  without  fire.  I  know  that  the  human  lot  is  more  equalized 
than  we  are  apt  to  think  ;  but  yet  I  fear  sometimes  lest  my  faith 
should  give  way,  —  such  an  abode  of  various  misery,  much  of  which 
might  be  obviated,  does  the  world  seem. 

Wednesday,  10th. — Cold  !  cold  !  Walked  in  the  Park.  Thick  snow 
drove  me  home.  Put  lace  in  my  satin  gown.  Nobody  came,  it 
snowed  so.  Read  "  Les  precieuses  Ridicules,"  which  did  not  amuse  me 
very  much  ;  though  acted  I  can  fancy  it  capital.  Dressed  and  went 
down  to  tea.  Put  pretty  books  in  the  drawing-room.  Delightful 
party,  —  Milmans,  Lyells,  Beauforts,  Montagues,  Procters,  and  Bab- 
bage.  Osgood  asked  Procter  to  tell  him  which  was  Barry  Cornwall. 
Miss  Beaufort  agrees  with  me  about  Miss  Sedgwick  making  opinion 
too  strong  a  sanction.  No  hope  of  her  coming  here  at  present. 
She  is  active,  but  not  very  strong.  Lent  the  Milmans  Miss  Sedg- 
wick's "  Home."  Several  of  us  had  a  great  bout  of  praising  Mrs. 
Barbauld. 

TJiursday,  llth.  —  "While  we  were  sleeping  some  folks  were  hot  and 
busy  enough.  The  Royal  Exchange  was  burned  down.  There  is  no 
telling  the  extent  of  the  damage.  My  first  thoughts  were  for  the 
Fishers.  I  shall  soon  know  how  it  affects  them.  The  fine  bells 
chimed  their  last  while  the  framework  on  which  they  were  hung  was 
catching  fire.  The  clock  showed  twenty-five  minutes  past  one  when 
the  dial-plate  was  red  hot.  The  stock-brokers'  offices  are  burnt,  with 
their  contents,  —  all  the  books  and  papers  at  Lloyd's.  The  kings  and 
queens  all  tumbled  into  the  court,  —  all  lost.  The  Gresham  com- 
mittee must  rebuild.  Mr.  Lyell*  called.  Told  me  of  absent  geo- 
logical gentleman  who  never  knows  how  the  world  is  going ;  who 
stared  about  him  when  told  of  the  throwing  out  of  the  Reform  Bill  : 
"  What  decision  ? "  "  What  bill  ? "  "  What  reform  ?"    So  he  scarcely 

*  Afterwards  Sir  Charles  Lyell. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  333 


seemed  to  know  this  morning  what  the  Royal  Exchange  was.  Buck- 
land's  Bridgewater  Treatise  sold  off  six  thousand  immediately,  and 
the  second  edition  of  five  thousand  is  far  gone  now.  How  much 
greater  sale  than  novels !  There  is  some  great  mistake  about  the 
public  being  so  fond  of  fiction.  But  Buckland  united  the  religious 
and  scientific  world,  probably.  Read  "  Northanger  Abbey."  Capital : 
found  two  touches  of  pathos. 

Saturday,  13th. — Bright  morning.  After  mending  several  things 
walked  in  the  park.  It  was  a  busy  scene,  with  skating  and  sliding. 
Never  saw  cheeks  so  red  as  some  of  the  bairns'.  My  mother's  manner 
on  hearing  of  an  invitation  to  her  set  me  thinking  on  the  question 
which  occupies  her  a  good  deal,  —  the  quality  of  our  acquaintance. 
She  is  surely  right  about  some  ;  and  why  should  not  I  make  acquaint- 
ance, too,  among  those  of  middle  rank  ?  Surely  I  am  right  in  think- 
ing that  if  I  enlarge  my  acquaintance  at  all,  it  shall  be  among  those 
below  rather  than  those  above  me.  I  want  insight  into  the  middle 
classes,  and  to  communicate  with  the  best  of  them  can  surely  do  one 
nothing  but  good.  If,  as  my  mother  says,  the  high  quit  me  on  that 
account,  let  them.  They  will  not  be  worth  the  keeping.  But  I  don't 
believe  it.  I  must  keep  my  mission  in  view,  and  not  my  worldly 
dignity.  Miss  Mitchell  dined  and  slept  here.  She  and  I  had  a  nice 
talk  over  our  fire  at  night.  She  told  me  how  people  insist  that  I  am 
helped  with  my  books.  A  bad  compliment  enough  to  the  sex.  — 
How  is  it  that  I  do  not  get  into  perfect  peace  about  my  communica- 
tiveness ?  I  ought  either  not  to  communicate  so  much,  or  not  to  fear 
my  mother's  opinions  and  remarks  about  it. 

Sunday,  14th.  —  Kept  up  too  much  talk  about  the  Pictorial  Bible 
and  prayer-book  with  my  mother.  I  should  have  let  her  prejudice 
pass  with  a  simple  protest.  I  often  think  I  ought  to  .  do  this,  yet  it 
would  be  really  paying  less  respect  to  do  so.  How  different,  in  such 
a  case,  to  reconcile  truth,  respect,  and  peace!  Read  Channing's 
"  Texas,"  and  found  it  nobler  than  ever  before.  Was  animated  and 
shamed  to-day  to  think  I  should  have  spent  a  thought  on  what  peo- 
ple are  thinking  of  me,  however  unjustly,  in  Boston,  when  my  book 
and  my  position  bear  the  relation  they  do  to  the  great  subjects  Dr. 
Channing  grows  warm  on.  What  matters  it  what  is  done  to  me,  if 
I  can  give  the  faintest  impulse  to  what  is  right,  true,  and.  permanent  1 
Let  me  place  myself  above  these  things.  Read  aloud  Southey's  arti- 
cle in  the  Quarterly  on  cemeteries  ;  much  learning,  but  little  interest. 
How  little  I  guessed  what  might  come  of  my  selecting  that  particular 
volume  of  the  Quarterly  ! 


334 


MEMORIALS. 


Monday,  15th.  — We  little  know,  indeed,  what  a  day  may  bring  forth ! 
Probably  this  is  the  greatest  day  of  my  year.  While  I  was  reading 
one  article  in  the  twenty-first  volume  of  the  Quarterly,  on  Grecian 
philosophy,  there  being  an  article  in  the  same  number  on  Hayti,  it 
flashed  across  me  that  my  novel  must  be  on  the  Haytian  revolution, 
and  Toussaint  my  hero.  Was  ever  any  subject  more  splendid,  more 
fit  than  this  for  me  and  my  purposes  ?  One  generally  knows  when 
the  right  idea,  the  true  inspiration,  comes,  and  I  have  a  strong  per- 
suasion that  this  will  prove  my  first  great  work  of  fiction.  It  admits 
of  romance,  it  furnishes  me  with  story,  it  will  do  a  world  of  good  to 
the  slave  question,  it  is  heroic  in  its  character,  and  it  leaves  me  Eng- 
lish domestic  life  for  a  change  hereafter.  I  spent  the  morning  busily 
looking  out  materials,  which  abound.  Dined  out,  —  evening  party. 
At  my  mother's  earnest  desire,  told  her  my  Haytian  project.  This 
extreme  cold  puts  one  out  of  all  one's  habits  ;  but  it  is  not  for  us  to 
complain,  but  rather  to  consider  the  poor. 

Tuesday,  16th.  —  Lord  Eldon  dead,  —  obliged  to  leave  his  hon- 
ours and  his  fears  and  his  money !  Poor  soul !  how  will  the  next 
world  look  to  one  so  narrow  ?  And  yet,  when  we  come  to  think  of 
narrowness,  there  is  but  little  difference  as  regards  the  whole  of  truth 
between  the  wisest  and  the  foolishest  of  us.  Went  to  call  on  Miss 
Beaufort.  Then  dear  Erasmus  came,  and  was  delightful.  Wrote  notes 
and  letters,  then  sat  down  to  read  Smedley.  What  a  tale  of  pri- 
vation and  suffering!  total  deafness  first, — then  gradual  incapacity 
of  every  sort,  all  most  meekly  and  strongly  borne.  Here  lay  his 
strength,  —  in  his  piety  and  constitutional  cheerfulness,  for  his  intel- 
lect was  nothing  remarkable.  He  was  a  hack  writer  and  small  poet. 
His  powers  of  style  were  much  impaired  by  his  deafness,  I  think  ;  a 
consequence  which  had  never  occurred  to  me.  But  between  the  open 
and  the  shut  eye,  great  difference. 

Wednesday,  V7th.  —  Met  at  dinner  Mr.  H.  C.  Robinson.  I  was 
silly  at  dinner  in  offering  some  sort  of  answer  to  Mr.  Robinson's  ques- 
tion about  the  Seigneurial  rights  of  the  French  Canadians,  when  I 
knew  next  to  nothing  about  them.  I  dare  say  I  talked  nonsense,  but 
I  declared  I  did  not  understand.  Mr.  Booth  does  not  care  much 
about  the  grievances,  but  thinks  the.  question  whether  Canada  is 
capable  of  self-government  or  not.  If  the  majority  think  they  are, 
let  them  try.  Then  came  the  question,  what  majority  ?  I  say  the 
majority  of  the  electors  who  have  chosen  so  wise  a  set  of  legislators 
as  the  Assembly. 

The  Searles  came  to  tea.    Mr.  Searle  says  he  remembers  Dr.  Chan- 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN. 


335 


ning,  a  young  man,  morose,  low-spirited,  repulsive.  Long  may  lie 
live,  growing  more  genial  every  day. 

Thursday,  \%th.  —  ....  Letter  from  an  unknown  lady  remon- 
strating against  the  preference  I  have  given  to  Christianity  over  nat- 
ural religion  in  my  book.  It  is  a  clever,  frank,  moderate,  and  lady- 
like epistle,  which  I  must  answer.  The  unbelief  must  surely  be  of 
a  reasonable  character  :  read  much  of  "  Emma "  this  evening,  and 
looked  out  for  information  about  Hayti.  I  love  this  leisure,  but  still 
feel  as  if  I  did  not  sit  down  to  think  enough.  Heard  of  another  un- 
wise engagement.  Surely  women  ought  to  love  and  marry  early  ; 
if  they  do  not,  how  many  make  fools  of  themselves  after  forty  !  —  I 
suppose  as  they  grow  older  and  friends  drop  off  and  they  feel  the 
want  of  protection  and  companionship,  and,  above  all,  of  affection. 
With  what  an  air  did  Crompton  pronounce  against  the  Pictorial 
Bible,  not  having  seen  it  !  Do  we  not  all  do  likewise  —  I,  espe- 
cially ?    Called  on  the   s  ;  found  a  most  affectionate  welcome,  — 

such  a  one  as  makes  me  think  of  the  importance  of  human  beings  to 
each  other.  How  were  these  stimulated  and  moved  by  me,  ignorant 
and  almost  utterly  weak  as  I  feel  myself  to  be,  and  as  dependent 
upon  the  wise  whom  I  meet !  But  these  are  meek  and  affectionate, 
not  ignorant  and  weak.  Eead  "  Emma,"  —  most  admirable.  The  little 
complexities  of  the  story  are  beyond  my  comprehension,  and  wonder- 
fully beautiful.  Corrected  proof  of  my  "Letter  to  the  Deaf."  I 
would  not  alter  it,  even  where  the  expression  seems  to  me  poor.  It 
was  written  in  the  full  flow  of  feeling,  and  so  let  it  stand.  May  it 
bring  some  comfort  to  some  who  have  suffered  as  I  have  !  But  where 
is  all  the  suffering  gone  ?  ^ 

Saturday,  20th.  —  The  sun  shone.  Dressed  and  set  off  for  Chelsea. 
Walked  it  within  three  quarters  of  an  hour.  Mrs.  Carlyle  looked  like 
a  lady  abbess  ;  black  velvet  cap  with  lappets,  white  scarf,  and  rosary. 
Very  elegant  creature. 

Sunday,  21st.  —  Dusted  my  study  furniture,  and  brushed  and  rubbed 
for  near  an  hour.  Sarah  is  hard  pressed  in  her  work  this  severe 
weather,  so  I  bestirred  myself  to  make  things  nice.  Then  read  Tous- 
saint  in  the  "Biographie  Universelle,"  making  notes  as  I  went.  Leigh 
Hunt  tells  Carlyle  that  his  troubles  will  cease  at  five-and-forty  ;  that 
men  reconcile  themselves,  and  grow  quiet  at  that  age.  Let  me  not 
wait  for  forty- five,  but  reconcile  myself  daily  and  hourly  to  all  but  my 
own  curable  faults. 

Monday,  22d.  —  The  "  Morning  Chronicle  "  says  Roebuck  will  be 
heard  at  the  bar  of  the  House  to-day,  but  cautions  people  against 


336 


MEMORIALS. 


believing  his  statements.  Shameful ! —  to  prejudge.  I  think  it  likely 
the  matter  will  end  in  all  his  suggestions  being  adopted,  while  he  is 
allowed  none  of  the  credit.  Mr.  Ker  called  and  took  me  to  his  house, 
and  I  had  a  delicious  day  there.  We  talked  over  every  species  of 
novel.  Rogers  observes  that  in  Scott's  the  story  stands  still  during 
the  dialogue,  while  in  Miss  Austen's,  as  in  a  play,  the  story  proceeds 
by  means  of  the  dialogue.  Mr.  Ker  says  Scott's  characters  are  not  true 
to  nature,  —  only  the  vestments  of  nature.  Miss  Austen's,  you  know 
every  one.  Told  me  of  Brougham's  promise  to  Lady  Jersey  to  let  her 
know  just  the  contents  of  the  Reform  Bill.  Had  a  messenger  to 
bring  word  when  Lord  John  Russell  was  on  his  legs,  and  then  sent 
in  a  letter  to  Lady  Jersey,  next  door,  with  an  outline  of  the  bill.  She 
had  a  large  dinner-party,  and  read  it  at  the  head  of  the  table.  Every 
one  believed  it  a  joke,  except  the  Duke  of  Wellington,  who  pro- 
•  nounced,  —  "'T  is  damned  true."  We  sat  over  the  fire,  talking  of  my 
novel,  till  half  past  twelve.   objects  wholly  to  Toussaint.  Vic- 
tor Hugo  has  a  story  of  St.  Domingo.    Mrs.  thinks  such  a  story 

hazardous,  to  begin  with.  Talked  over  Joe  Miller  at  breakfast  with 
much  admiration  and  affection. 

Saturday,  January  28.  —  I  think  the  prison  chapter  will  prove  the 
most  interesting  of  my  book.  I  do  not  think  it  is  waste  of  time  to 
look  over  one's  own  works  thus.  It  is  necessary,  to  see  how  they 
appear. 

February  6.  —  Note  from  Carlyle,  most  hearty,  about  my  book, 
and  advising  me  to  keep  clear  of  theory,  and  cling  to  giving  pictures 
of  facts.  What  a  true  heart  he  has,  with  an  insane  horror  of  moral 
and  political  science  !  I  want  to  find  out  how  near  he  comes  to  wish- 
ing men  to  live  without  any  mutual  agreement  whatever. 

Mr.  Wedgwood  called.  Is  busy  trying  to  get  a  law  to  exempt  scru- 
pulous persons  from  judicial  oaths.  Showed  how,  after  all,  you 
depend  on  a  man's  affirmation  that  he  believes  in  a  God,  &c.  ;  as  Mr. 
W.  says,  like  the  Hindoo  belief  that  the  world  rests  on  an  elephant, 
the  elephant  on  a  tortoise,  and  the  tortoise  on  nothing.  Read  and 
lunched,  and  read  again  and  dressed  till  just  seven,  and  then  off  for  Cap- 
tain Beaufort's.  Met  a  host  of  naval  officers  and  travellers.  Also  C. 
Darwin,  Mr.  F.  Edgeworth,  and  Mr.  Hamilton,  brother-in-law  of  the 
Duke  of  Wellington,  who  had  been  reading  my  book  up  to  dinner- 
time, and  took  a  good  gaze  at  me.  Mr.  Edgeworth's  belief  that  dia- 
ries are  always  written  to  be  read,  and  does  not  like  Scott's.  Surely 
this  is  for  my  own  future  eye  and  not  for  others,  for  my  own  future 
instruction,  and  for  suggestion. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  337 


Sunday,  February  18.  —  Read  beautiful  speeches  at  the  Lovejoy 
meeting  in  Boston,  in  the  "Liberator."  Edmund  Quincy's  is  fine.  His 
father  must  have  been  touched  with  his  hope  of  speedy  departure,  if 
departure  might  aid  cause,  rather  than  living  in  loss  of  freedom. 
What  a  different  aspiration  from  the  ordinary  run  of  young  republi- 
can citizens,  with  the  world  before  them  ?  Mr.  Loring  told  of  Ar- 
nold von  Winkelried,  at  the  battle  of  Sempach,  who  clasped  an  arm- 
ful of  Austrian  lances,  which  transfixed  him.  He  cried,  "  I  will 
make  a  lane  for  you !  —  faithful,  dear  companions !  remember 
my  family."  The  Swiss  rushed  in  over  his  body,  and  conquered  ; 
and  his  death  is  commemorated  to  this  day,  —  nearly  five  hundred 
years. 

Finished  Toussaint  with  a  great  relish.  How  I  have  enjoyed  doing 
this,  and  how  infinitely  do  these  emotions  transcend  all  pleasures  of 
sense  and  all  gratifications  of  vanity  ! 

Wednesday,  April  11.  —  Erasmus  Darwin  and  Browning  called, 
who  is  just  departing  for  Venice  to  get  a  view  of  the  localities  of 
Sordello.    He  is  right. 

Afternoon.  —  I  dozed  for  an  hour,  and  then  went  out  into  the  Park, 
and  saw  the  yellow  sunset,  and  the  troops  of  shouting  children  at  play 
on  the  fresh  grass.  The  policeman  seemed  sorry  to  give  them  notice 
that  the  gates  were  going  to  be  shut.  Home  to  tea.  Gave  orders  for 
framing  Follen  and  Garrison.  Dressed  for  the  Pullers',  and  walked 
there  through  the  Park.  Roebuck  was  there,  —  long  talk  with  him  ; 
the  Gaskells,  Carlyle,  and  Lady  Harriet  Baring,  who  came  to  see  me 

again.    Buller  thinks  her  superior  to   .    He  can  sympathize 

with  all  in  turn.  I  told  him  I  could  with  Voltaire,  Fenelon,  &c, 
seeing  that  the  truth  is  that  all  of  us  are  right  and  all  are  wrong. 
Does  it  follow  that  there  is  no  truth  ?    Surely  not. 

Thursday,  April  12.  —  Finished  my  "  Maid  of  all  Work."  Walked 
in  the  afternoon  to  library  for  the  Edinburgh  review  of  me.  Poor  and 
stupid,  except  a  good  passage  or  two,  —  such  as  a  clever  woman  getting 
at  the  minds  of  foreigners  better  than  men. 

June  26. —  The  Duke  of  Wellington  wrote  repeatedly  to  Croker 
and  Lockhart  to  get  the  article  on  Soult  suppressed.  They  would 
not.  He  said,  "  That  is  the  way  with  these  literary  people.  They 
are  so  pig-headed  they  will  have  their  own  way."  A  pretty  large 
generalization.  When  introduced  to  Soult,  he  said  he  was  happy 
to  meet  him,  and  had  not  seen  him  before  except  through  a  tele- 
scope. 

June  30.  —  Wrote  ten  pages  of  "  Lady's  Maid,"  though  

VOL.  II. 


338 


MEMORIALS. 


and  called  and  sat  some  time.    I  love  them  both.    Then  a 

long  list  of  others.  My  cold  nearly  gone  to-day.  How  much  less  I 
think  of  illness  than  I  used  to  do  !  I  used  to  make  the  most  of  it, 
from  vanity  and  want  of  objects  ;  now  I  make  the  least  of  it,  for  fear 
of  being  hindered  in  my  business.  I  suffer  much  less  for  this.  But 
I  am  not  near  so  happy  as  I  was.  I  want  inner  life.  I  must  take  to 
heart  the  "  Ode  to  Duty,"  and  such  things,  and  do  without  the  sympa- 
thy I  fancy  I  want.  If  I  am  not  happy,  what  matters  it  ?  But  I  am 
happy,  only  less  so  than  I  have  been. 

June  30.  —  Wrote  to  the  antislavery  ladies,  who  have  made  me 
one  of  their  sisterhood.  Read  the  Gospel  of  John  in  Porteusian  Bible. 
Happy  day,  on  the  whole. 

The  idea  of  still  further  serving  the  antislavery  cause  in  Amer- 
ica never  left  her.  It  went  with  her  through  her  Scotch  tour,  and 
is  filtered  through  the  whole  year  amid  fetes  by  the  way  and  moun- 
tain scenes  and  continual  attentions  from  distinguished  persons, 
in  a  way  that  shows  how  it  came  between  her  and  rest. 

"Very  happy,"  she  journalizes  on  August  26,  "in  reading  Amer- 
ican newspapers.  Lovejoy's  speech  a  few  days  before  his  murder  was 
sublime  ;  it  sets  me  above  every  thing,  to  read  of  these  people.  It  is 
the  grandest  affair  now  transacting  on  earth." 

Again,  on  the  30th  of  November  :  — 

"  Sat  down  in  earnest  to  finish  my  article,  which  I  did  with  a  glow- 
ing heart  an  hour  after  midnight.  I  am  glad  I  have  told  this  noble 
story.    O,  may  no  mishap  befall  it ! " 

"  Deerbrook,"  a  fruit  of  1838,  was  republished  in  America 
immediately,  and  is  to  this  day  highly  esteemed,  and  seems 
likely  to  live.  Mrs.  Gaskell  in  an  especial  manner  was  moved 
by  it,  and  thanked  her  for  it  as  a  personal  benefit.  John  Ster- 
ling wrote  thus  of  it  to  Mrs.  Fox  :  — 

"  By  the  way,  do  you  ever  read  a  novel  ?  If  you  ever  mean  to  do 
so  hereafter,  let  it  be  Miss  Martineau's  '  Deerbrook.'  It  is  really  very 
striking,  and  parts  of  it  are  very  true  and  very  beautiful.  It  is  not  so 
true  or  so  thoroughly  clear  and  harmonious  among  delineations  of 
English  middle-class  gentility  as  Miss  Austen's  books,  especially  as 
'Pride  and  Prejudice,'  which  I  thiuk  exquisite." 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  WITHIN.  339 


This  remark  of  Sterling  is  just.  Harriet  Martineau's  writings 
are  true  to  no  class.  Though  so  true  to  humanity  they  overleap 
its  subdivisions,  and,  like  oaks  planted  in  flower-pots,  are  sure 
to  outgrow  their  limitations. 

Long  afterwards,  on  the  appearance  of  Mr.  Macmillan's  edition, 
Sir  Arthur  Helps  writes  to  him  thus  :  — 

Yes,  my  dear  Macmillan,  I  shall  have  much  pleasure  and  much 
honour  in  being  the  medium  of  presenting  to  the  queen  anything 
written  by  Miss  Martineau.  She  is  a  great  writer.  I  have  lately  re- 
read "  Deerbrook  "  with  exceeding  delight.  I  certainly  should  care 
to  have  a  copy  of  Miss  Martineau's  book  for  myself. 

In  great  haste,  yours  always, 

A.  HELPS. 

In  the  journal  of  1839  is  this  entry  :  — 

Wednesday,  June  12,  1839.  —  My  birthday.  This  day  twelve 
months  I  began  "Deerbrook,"  and  I  shall  not  forget  what  I  have 
done  to-day.  Who  would  have  thought  then  that  I  should  spend  my 
next  in  Venice  1  Am  much  better,  and  enjoy  it.  J.  and  I  out  be- 
tween six  and  seven  walking  about  St.  Mark's,  and  over  the  bridge 
below  the  Bridge  of  Sighs,  examining  the  marbles  and  looking  about 
us.  People  do  not  seem  to  be  very  early  here,  and  the  Piazza  was 
quiet.  The  three  red  pillars  are  of  wood,  with  cords  for  raising  the 
ensigns,  of  Cyprus,  Candia,  and  the  Morea.  Remember  the  Lion's 
Mouth  at  the  Ducal  Palace  ;  and  the  two  red  marble  pillars  amid 
the  white  in  the  little  piazza,  whence  criminal  sentences  were  read. 
Beautiful  canal  laving  the  walls  under  the  Bridge  of  Sighs.  Break- 
fast, and  then  off  to  the  Campanile,  which  we  found  mighty  easy  to 
climb,  an  ascending  path  round  the  four  sides.  Spent  above  an  hour 
on  the  top,  most  charmingly.  Heard  the  quarters  strike  four  times 
and  the  chimes  play,  so  melodious  as  to  make  the  noise  tolerable. 
How  the  great  green  bells  swung  !  Looked  down  with  infinite 
pleasure  into  the  shady,  dim  court-yards  of  many  a  noble  house, — 
upon  the  Ducal  Palace,  upon  the  royal  gardens  ;  upon  the  myriads 
of  pigeons  ;  upon  the  bronze  horses  ;  upon  the  domes  of  St.  Mark, 
with  their  melon-branches  for  weather-cocks  ;  upon  the  folk  in  the 
piazza,  —  the  water-carriers,  the  people  walking  in  the  shadow  of 
the  Campanile,  or  sketching  in  the  niches  of  the  church  ;  upon  the 
brilliant  mosaics  in  the  porches  ;  and  upon  the  many  isles.  Saw  the 
Lido,  where  Byron  rode  ;  the  Arsenal ;  traced  the  Grand  Canal,  and 


340 


MEMORIALS. 


the  Campo  di  Bialto.  The  mountains  were  delicious,  afar  off.  The 
city  from  above  looks  vast,  sun-dried,  and  old.  The  old  man  and 
another  live  at  the  top  all  the  year  round,  and  ring  the  quarters  and 
hours  To  the  Ducal  Palace  again.  Sat  on  the  Golden  Stair- 
case while  the  keys  and  permission  were  sent  for.  Remember  the 
well,  round  and  of  bronze,  —  the  birds  came  to  it,  and  the  men  and 

women  to  draw  Stood  on  the  Bridge  of  Sighs.    Did  not  go  to 

the  common  prisons,  but  back  to  those  of  the  Inquisition.  One  floor, 
containing  eight  cells,  belonged  to  the  Council  of  Ten.  Horrible 
dungeons !  .  .  .  .  Saw  the  vestibule  and  council-chamber,  —  nothing 
remarkable.  Council-chamber  empty  of  furniture  ;  marble  floor,  all 
cubes  and  painted  ceiling.  Went  through  many  rooms  in  the  palace, 
—  very  splendid.  Saw  the  Titian,  —  liked  St.  Mark  and  a  boy  on 
guard,  but  not  the  woman  angel.  Stucco  figures  in  ceiling  very 
fine.  Paul  Veronese's  four  pictures  exquisite,  especially  Mercury 
with  the  Graces,  which  J.  fell  in  love  with.  Ceiling  of  Collegio 
very  fine,  —  an  artist  on  a  high  stage  copying  one  compartment  well. 
Have  not  seen  the  senate-chamber  yet.  Home  at  twelve.  What  a 
morning  ! 

She  expressed  as  follows  her  gratification  on  receiving  the  cer- 
tificate of  membership  in  the  Massachusetts  Antislavery  Society, 
in  a  letter  to  Abby  Kelly,*  through  whose  hands  it  came. 

Fludyer  Street,  Westminster,  June  20,  1838. 

My  dear  Madam,  —  On  my  return  from  the  country  I  find  the 
certificate  of  membership  of  the  Massachusetts  Antislavery  Society, 
which  the  members  of  the  Lynn  Society  have  had  the  kindness  to 
forward  to  me.  I  accept  the  valued  gift  with  feelings  of  high  gratifi- 
cation. The  generous  interpretation  which  my  American  sisters  put 
upon  the  small  efforts  of  those  who  have  done  less  than  themselves 
shows  that  the  spirit  of  disinterestedness  is  strong  among  them  ;  and 
my  great  pleasure  in  this  mark  of  kindness  arises,  not  from  a  con- 
sciousness of  merit  in  myself,  but  from  an  appreciation  of  the  gener- 
osity of  my  correspondents.  I  do  not  wish  to  enlarge  on  the  subject 
of  myself  and  my  doings  ;  but  I  must  just  remind  you  that,  in  bearing 
my  testimony  in  print  against  slavery,  I  have  incurred  no  risk  and 
no  discredit.  Here  public  sentiment  is  wholly  with  me  on  this  sub- 
ject.   The  only  sacrifice  I  had  to  make  was  of  the  good  opinion  of 


*  Since  Mrs.  Foster. 


CONSEQUENCES  OF  FOREIGN  LIFE, — WITHIN.  341 


some  of  my  friends  in  America  ;  and  I  cannot  but  trust  that  the  time 
is  not  far  distant  when  they  will  forgive  and  agree  with  me. 

You  and  your  sisters,  my  clear  madam,  have  a  far  harder  battle  to 
wage,  in  which  I  beg  to  assure  you  that  you  have  all  my  sympathy, 
and,  I  believe,  the  sympathy  of  this  whole  nation.  Not  one  of  your 
efforts  is  lost  upon  us.  You  are  strengthening  us  for  the  conflicts  we 
have  to  enter  upon.  We  have  a  population  in  our  manufacturing 
towns  almost  as  oppressed,  and  in  our  secluded  rural  districts  almost 
as  ignorant,  as  your  negroes.  These  must  be  redeemed.  We  have 
also  negroes  in  our  dominions,  who,  though  about  to  be  entirely  sur- 
rendered as  property,  will  yet,  we  fear,  be  long  oppressed  as  citizens, 
if  the  vigilance  which  has  freed  them  be  not  as  active  as  ever.  I 
regard  the  work  of  vindicating  the  civil  standing  of  negroes  as  more 
arduous  and  dangerous  than  freeing  them  from  the  chain  and  the 
whip.  Both  you  and  I  have  a  long  and  hard  task  before  us  there, 
when  the  first  great  step  is,  as  in  our  colonies,  safely  accomplished. 
But  this  is  a  kind  of  labour  which  renews  strength  instead  of  causing 
fatigue  ;  the  reason  of  which  is,  that  a  sure  and  steadfast  hope  is 
before  us.  May  this  hope  sustain  you !  I  think  it  surely  will ;  for 
nothing  was  ever  to  my  mind  more  sure  than  that  there  is  no  delusion 
connected  with  your  objects  ;  that  they  are  sanctioned  by  the  calmest 
reason  and  the  loftiest  religion,  and  that  in  the  highest  condition  of 
wisdom  in  which  you  may  find  yourselves  in  the  better  world  to 
which  you  are  tending,  you  will  never  despise  your  present  action  in 
your  great  cause. 

We  have  heard  with  mingled  feelings  of  the  outrages  at  Philadel- 
phia. Upon  the  whole,  we  hope  for  great  good  from  them  ;  but,  till 
I  hear  more  particulars,  I  shall  not  cease  to  wonder  at  the  extent  and 
intensity  of  the  bigotry  still  existing  in  that  city.  I  should  have 
supposed  that  your  enemies  had  seen  enough,  by  this  time,  of  the 
fruits  of  persecution.  While  earnestly  desiring  that  God  will  advance 
the  cause  in  his  own  best  way,  we  cannot  but  hope  that  no  more 
struggles  of  this  nature,  involving  so  much  guilt,  may  be  in  store  for 
you.  It  is  a  severe  pain  to  witness  so  cruel  a  worship  of  Mammon, 
however  strong  may  be  our  faith  in  the  persecuted.  By  whatever 
means,  however,  the  cause  is  destined  to  advance,  God's  will  be 
done ! 

It  gives  me  heartfelt  pleasure  to  remember  that  I  am  now  one  of  your 
sisterhood,  in  outward  as  well  as  inward  relation.  If  I  should  ever 
be  so  blessed  as  to  be  able  to  assist  you,  you  may  count  upon  me.  At 
least,  you  will  always  have  my  testimony,  my  sympathy,  and  my 


342 


MEMORIALS. 


prayers.  I  fear  there  is  no  prospect  of  visiting  your  country  again. 
I  have  both  domestic  and  public  duties  here  which  I  cannot  decline  ; 
but  my  thoughts  and  hopes  will  be  with  your  people,  though  I  must 
continue  to  live  among  my  own. 

Believe  me,  dear  madam,  with  high  respect  for  the  body  in  whose 
name  you  have  addressed  me, 

Gratefully  and  affectionately  theirs  and  yours, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 


CONSEQUENCES,-TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


"A  good  book  is  the  precious  life-blood  of  a  master-spirit,  embalmed  and 
treasured  up  on  purpose,  to  a  life  beyond  time."  —  Milton. 

Sorrow,  suffering,  fame,  foreign  travel,  danger,  had  always, 
up  to  the  time  of  her  return  from  America,  kept  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau's  health  below  the  degree  she  might  otherwise  have  en- 
joyed. 

Now,  added  to  all  these,  was  the  preparation  and  putting 
through  the  press  of  so  many  important  volumes. 

Though  she  was  not  then  fully  aware  of  the  too  great  exertion, 
she  did  afterwards  make  efforts  for  rest  and  refreshment.  But 
a  tour  among  the  lakes  and  a  journey  with  an  invalid  cousin  to 
Switzerland  were  so  filled  up  with  various  work  and  thoughtful 
planning  for  more  work,  that  she  returned  to  London  in  a  state 
of  health  that,  perforce,  put  a  stop  to  further  exertion  until  she 
should  have  consulted  with  her  brother-in-law,  the  physician 
at  Newcastle.  The  result  of  a  month's  visit  in  his  family, 
and  under  his  care,  was  to  confirm  the  need  of  rest  and  quiet- 
ness, and  she  went  thence  to  the  lodgings  at  Tynemouth,  which 
she  did  not  leave  till  long  years  afterwards. 

It  seems  on  a  mere  glance  at  the  outward  facts  a  very  strange 
life  ;  —  but  it  is  accounted  for.  There  was  for  her  at  this  period, 
as  ever  previously,  the  heaviest  family  grief  and  responsibility, 
mingled  with  real  family  affection  and  care ;  a  life  of  thought 
and  industry  in  the  midst  of  patient  suffering ;  a  life  of  loneli- 
ness, yet  of  much  solace  from  the  friendship  of  many. 

These  six  years  of  enforced  retreat  she  always  called  the  pas- 
sive period  of  her  life.    And  one  desirous  to  follow  this  passive 


344 


MEMORIALS. 


period  in  all  its  suffering  and  solace,  should  fill  in  the  preceding 
Autobiography  from  such  journals  and  letters  as  are  permitted. 

The  literary  works  will  be  found  recorded  in  the  first,  but  the 
work  that  told  upon  the  world  will  be  better  shown  from  the 
two  latter  sources. 

After  the  Swiss  journey  there  related,  the  breaking  down  of 
health,  the  return  to  Fludyer  Street,  Westminster,  and  the  visit 
to  Newcastle,  the  journal  begins  :  — 

December  15,  1839.  —  Strange  but  pleasant  to  begin  again  after 
five  months'  interval.  I  shall  not  have  much  to  put  down  at  pres- 
ent, but  it  may  be  useful  and  pleasant  hereafter  to  see  how  it  was 
with  me  when  thus  confined,  with  a  near  future  wholly  dark  and 
uncertain. 

For  the  better  understanding  of  this  journal,  let  it  be  noted 
that  the  "  Oberlin,"  as  Harriet  Martineau  always  called  it,  is 
the  college  founded  for  the  Western  States  of  America,  when 
it  was  found  that  "Lane  Seminary"  would  not  allow  its  students 
to  be  abolitionists.  Eyes  of  farther  reach  into  futurity  than 
those  of  any  of  the  presidents  of  American  colleges  at  that 
time,  saw  the  pressing  need  of  immediate  effort  to  place  edu- 
cation on  a  better  basis ;  and  we  sent  two  of  our  number  to 
England  to  raise  funds  there  for  the  purpose  of  founding  a 
new  institution,  which  should  afford  instruction  irrespective  of 
colour  and  of  sex.  It  was  to  this  effort  that  she  gave  herself 
till  the  object  was  accomplished  ;  all  the  while  revolving  in  her 
mind  the  practicability  of  coming  to  live  in  America,  to  share 
the  life  of  the  abolitionists.  In  her  journal  at  Tynemouth  is 
the  following  record  :  — 

Am  much  disposed  to  live  for  the  great  enterprise.    I  opened  it 

to-day  to  .    Must  consult.    At  present  it  seems  much  like 

an  inspiration.    God  grant  it,  through  whatever  suffering  

I  wrote  the  "  Dress- Maker  "  during  this  and  the  next  month,  a  little 
at  a  time,  with  slowness  and  uncertainty.  At  the  time  thought  it  hardly 
worth  the  pains,  —  the  doing  it  so  painfully.  But  when  done  glad 
to  have  undertaken.  Great  satisfaction  in  a  finished  thing.  This 
one  much  approved.  Health  much  the  same.  No  suffering  worth 
speaking  of  from  being  laid  by,  which  my  distant  friends  conclude  to 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE.  345 


be  a  very  hard  trial.  My  future  will  be  provided  for  somehow,  and 
the  present  is  full  of  comforts.  Bodily  suffering  not  great  just  now, 
and  kindness  of  friends  most  cheering.  Out  of  doors  once  this  month, 
and  do  not  mean  to  try  again  at  present.  Lord  Durham  asked  me 
over  to  Lambton  to  meet  the  Duke  of  Sussex.  Could  not  go,  of  course. 
Much  enjoyed  some  talk  on  politics  with  Mr.  Hawes  and  Charles 
Buller,  who  came  over  from  Lambton.  Striking  review  of  Carlyle  by 
Sterling  in  the  London  and  Westminster.  Carlyle  writes  to  me  that 
it  is  like  the  Brocken  Spectre,  —  a  very  large  likeness  and  not  very 
correct. 

December  15. — The  Mayor,  Mr.  Carr,  called  and  got  interested 
about  the  Oberlin. 

December  16.  —  Mr.  McAlister  spent  the  evening  to  hear  all  about 
Oberlin  and  the  abolition.    I  hope  a  sermon  may  come  out  of  it. 

January  17.  —  Miss  F.  came  to  bring  me  a  contribution  of  ,£10,  and 
to  tell  me  of  Dr.  Winterbottom's  delight  at  the  "  Martyr  Age."  Madame 
Goethe  is  charmed  with  my  America.  I  rejoice  thereat.  Letter  from 
Lord  Murray  about  the  Oberlin.  The  article  will  be  reprinted,  I 
trust.  Letter  from  Wicksted.  Will  do  what  he  can  for  the  Oberlin. 
Letters  from  Milnes,  Mrs.  Reid,  and  a  lump  besides.  Also  letters 
from  Mr.  Keep,  the  American  delegate.  There  was  a  burst  of  tearful 
joy  at  the  Oberlin,  when  they  received  the  first  instalment  (=£600)  of 
our  contributions.  Mr.  Dawes  called,  —  an  Ohio  man,  good-looking 
and  hearty  :  says  the  corporation  of  London  were  unanimous,  and  pro- 
posed giving  £1,000,  first  and  last,  but  they  were  tampered  with,  he 
suspects,  by  the  American  Minister,  Stevenson,  and  made  to  believe 
that  helping  the  Oberlin  would  be  flying  in  the  face  of  the  American 
government.  When  Dawes  came  in  I  was  practising  quadrilles  for 
the  children's  dance  in  the  evening.  It  is  curious  to  middle-aged 
persons  to  see  little  boys  and  girls  dancing  quadrilles  perfectly  and 
gracefully,  and  out  in  a  country-dance.  The  gallopade  step  in  a 
country-dance  is  a  great  improvement  on  the  old  jigging  step.  Our 
frivolity  in  comparison  with  the  interests  of  the  Oberlin  struck 
me  much,  yet  it  is  right  enough  in  its  way.  Merry  dance  in  the 
evening. 

December  27.  —  Mr.  Dawes  called,  and  gave  charming  view  of  the 
Oberlin.  The  mischief-maker  in  the  London  corporation  has  lost  his 
election  in  consequence,  and  they  hope  for  a  good  vote  from  the  reac- 
tion. The  American  Antislavery  Society  ask  to  reprint  my  article  as 
a  cheap  tract.  I  am  very  glad  of  this.  A  dweller  in  Ohio,  eleven 
miles  from  Oberlin,  took  in  some  seventy  of  the  students  and  boarded 


346 


MEMORIALS. 


them  for  a  year.  Another,  many  miles  off,  took  in  thirty.  In  like 
manner  a  farmer  drove  a  cow  a  long  way  to  present  her  to  them. 
Some  students  are  sons  and  brothers  of  slaveholders,  and  lose  all 
their  resources  in  going  to  Oberlin.  So  much  for  slavery  being 
charming  on  the  spot.  One  of  the  professors  was  offered  $2,000  to 
preside  at  the  proposed  hall  for  free  inquiry  in  Boston,  but,  as  Dawes 
says,  they  might  as  well  have  tried  to  get  one  of  the  great  Western 
oaks  up  by  the  roots.  He  went  back  to  toil  and  poverty.  Bad  head- 
ache. Mr.  Dawes,  with  capital  facts  and  papers.  His  simplicity  is 
very  moving. 

December  30.  —  Set  about  the  Oberlin  business  after  breakfast,  when 
Mr.  Dawes  came  in.  He  melted  us  all  presently.  It  gives  me  great 
pleasure  to  recognize  the  fine  American  qualities  which  I  used  to 
admire  there,  —  the  glorious  faith  and  piety,  together  with  the  shrewd- 
ness and  business-like  character  of  mind,  sublime  when  applied  to 
philanthropic  instead  of  selfish  affairs.    Wrote  some  pages  for  them. 

 came  in.    Thinks  the  Misses  Grimke  go  a  great  deal  too 

far  in  self-denial.  So  people  thought  in  the  days  of  the  early  Chris- 
tians, no  doubt.  came  in.  Very  solemn  about  the  "Times" 

having  taken  up  its  song  with  Captain  Marryatt  against  me  ;  is  earnest 
with  me  to  answer.    Shall  not.    Wrote  a  valentine  for  the  boys. 

December  31.  — Wrote  for  the  Oberlin  as  long  as  duty  would  allow. 
That  subject  warms  one's  whole  heart.  Mr.  Frederic  Hill  called  to 
know  if  I  could  point  out  a  person  fit  to  be  governor  of  the  new 
prison  at  Perth.    (He  is  Inspector  of  Prisons.) 

December  31,  1839.  —  The  year  is  within  an  hour  of  its  close,  —  a 
year  of  little  work,  yet  of  some  value,  though  I  doubt  having 
voluntarily  improved.  I  have  neglected  some  of  my  best  means  and 
encouraged  my  selfishness.  An  invalid  state  will  not  improve  me  in 
this.  How  long  will  it  last  1  Who  of  us  will  depart  this  next  year  ] 
There  is  a  strange  list  at  each  year's  end.  Now  for  joining  heart  with 
the  Follens  over  the  sea.  They  are  thinking  of  me  this  midnight,  I 
know. 

On  the  next  page,  headed  "Miscellaneous  Observations,"  I  find 
this  description  :  — 

Chateau  de  Joux  lies  in  the  Jura,  on  the  French  side.  Toussaint 
must  have  approached  through  the  defile,  winding  round  a  rocky  hill, 
and  disclosing  the  tiny  valley,  —  the  little  basin  of  fertile  fields,  with 
the  clear  stream  winding  through  it,  which  was  the  last  bit  of  green 
earth  he  ever  saw.    He  must  have  walked  or  gone  on  horseback  up 


CONSEQUENCES, — TO  LIFE  PASSIVE.  347 


the  winding  path  to  the  fort.  Dreary  rock,  crested  by  the  fort. 
Grand  rock  opposite,  and  four  roads  meeting  beneath.  Perpendicular 
rock  on  the  back  side,  part  of  which  he  might  see  from  his  window. 
Dark  firs  above,  and  a  snowy  summit  behind  knolls,  with  firs  sprin- 
kled about,  and  glimpses  into  two  valleys  ;  patches  of  enclosure  ;  ditto 
of  pasture  in  a  recess,  with  a  few  cows  and  children.  Cow-bells  ;  — 
boys  ;  —  singing  ;  —  church-bell.  A  bird  or  two.  A  flock  of  goats. 
Small  running  stream  beside  the  road. 

Two  drawbridges  and  portcullis.  Great  well,  court-yard,  long  stair- 
case, on  the  right ;  past  the  wheel,  door  to  the  left :  damp  and  dark 
by  vault  and  passage,  and  then  Toussaintfs  room  on  left  hand.  Is 
vaulted,  low,  with  charcoal  drawings  on  the  ceiling,  about  twenty- 
eight  feet  long  and  thirteen  wide,  window  breast-high,  deep  and 
grated,  with  some  view  of  the  court-yard  and  the  perpendicular  rock 
opposite.  Floor  planked,  very  much  decayed,  and  quite  wet.  Drip- 
ping of  water  heard  all  round,  and  wet  clay  in  the  passages,  and 
flakes  of  ice  from  the  roof  and  walls  lying  about.  Door  by  one  cor- 
ner ;  window  opposite  ;  fireplace  in  middle  of  left  side ;  and  formerly 
(they  say)  a  stove  opposite.  Toussaint  was  found  dead,  lying  by  his 
fire,  —  they  said  on  some  straw  alone ;  but  the  woman  gave  another 
account.  Fire  burning  when  he  was  found.  High  up,  not  under 
ground  (but  not  the  less  damp  for  that.  Dim  light,  but  no  sunshine 
ever). 

Woman's  account  seems  to  me  not  to  be  true.  She  was  clearly 
opposed  to  other  testimony  in  most  of  her  story  ;  but  here  it  is.  She 
never  saw  him  ;  but  her  first  husband  was  in  St.  Domingo,  and  died 
there.  She  says  Toussaint  was  caught  by  being  banqueted  by  Le 
Clerc,  on  board  a  ship  (at  the  farther  end  of  two  hundred  men), 
which  sailed  away  while  he  was  at  table  :  that  his  servant  remained 
with  him  to  the  last.  (The  old  man  in  the  village  says  the  porter 
waited  on  him.)  She  says  the  commandant  Rubeau,  or  Rubaut,  had 
orders  from  government  to  treat  him  well,  supplied  him  with  books, 
and  had  him  daily  to  his  house  because  he  saw  that  "  il  avait  du  cha- 
grin "  :  that  Toussaint  went,  daily  ;  and  the  last  night  excused  him- 
self as  being  unwell.  It  was  proposed  to  have  his  servant  with  him, 
—  he  refused  it,  —  was  left  with  fire,  flambeaux,  book,  and  fauteuil, 
and  was  found  dead  in  the  morning  :  that  physicians  examined  him 
and  declared  it  to  be  rupture  of  a  blood-vessel  in  the  heart.  He  had 
liberty  to  walk  about  within  the  drawbridge,  —  need  be  in  his  room 
only  at  night  ;  was  small,  had  "  du  genie,"  spoke  negro  language  as 
well  as  French,  and  had  a  ceremonious  funeral.    She  showed  us 


348 


MEMORIALS. 


where  he  is  buried.  It  was  in  the  church,  but  alterations  have  lately 
been  made. 

This  story  is  much  what  might  be  expected  to  be  put  forth,  in  the 
case  of  a  murdered  or  neglected  prisoner.  How  came  he  to  be  in 
such  a  vile  dungeon  ?    This  is  irreconcilable  with  the  rest. 

Toussaint  lived  among  "  the  skeletons  of  the  earth,"  —  the  rocks 
(as  J ulia  says) :  contrast  with  the  warm  and  living  scenery  of  the 
tropics.    What  time  of  year  did  he  arrive  1    How  much  snow  1 

Make  him  speculate  on  how  Napoleon  would  like  to  be  fixed  on  a 
rock. 

January  1, 1840.  —  Read  Examiner  and  tried  to  write  for  the  Oberlin, 

but  could  not  write  at  all.  Made  a  cap,  therefore.    C  T  came 

in  to  wish  me  good  wishes.  How  charmingly  she  looked  !  My  grand- 
mother very  ill,  but  likely  to  be  better.  Read  Rahel  (Varnhagen). 
Unsatisfactory.  Went  on  with  the  Oberlin  appeal.  Writing  fatigues 
me  much.  But  what  a  cause  it  is  !  How  it  warms  one  as  one  proceeds ! 
In  Wilberforce  I  meet  with  a  few  facts  about  Toussaint.  Curious, 

when  it  seems  a  dead  subject,  —  one  left  for  me  to  revive.  

to  dinner.  She  became  anxious  to  read  about  the  Oberlin  the  moment 
she  heard  that  Lords  Brougham  and  Morpeth  were  interested  in  it. 
 called.  Odd,  sometimes,  to  see  thoroughly  vulgar  peo- 
ple.   It  enlarges  one's  ideas. 

January  3.  —  Wrote  for  the  Oberlin.  Mr.  Dawes  called,  and  all 
were  charmed  with  him.  He  listened,  deeply  affected,  to  my  addi- 
tions, with  moist  eyes,  as  if  the  story  were  new  to  him  which  I  had 
learned  from  himself.  "  You  have  had  great  assistance,"  was  his 
characteristic  way  of  approving  what  I  have  done. 

Evening.  —  Read  Wilberforce,  and  looked  over  Dr.  Crowther's  book. 
All  envious  of  Sir  William  Ellis.  Says  I  wrote  on  Hanwell  at  their 
dictation  :  whereas  I  had  never  seen  them  but  once,  and  they  knew 
nothing  about  it.  Read  an  account  of  a  case  like  my  own.  While 
every  body  seems  to  conclude  that  I  shall  get  well  perfectly  in  time,  I 
feel  far  from  sure  of  ever  being  well  again,  and  that  this  complaint, 
mild  as  it  is  now,  will  not  be  my  death.  If  so,  it  will  probably  be  a 
few  (very  few)  years  of  increasing  ailment,  ending  with  my  sinking. 
There  is  nothing  agitating  in  this  thought,  —  much  owing  to  my 
insensibility  to  some  immense  realities,  partly  to  long  experience  of 
great  events  and  change,  and  partly  to  habitual  confidence  that  all  is 
ordered  well. 

January  4. — Finished  appeal  for  the  Oberlin.  Felt  raised  and 
joyful,  as  this  subject  always  makes  me.    Quiet  day,  very  happy. 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE.  349 


Charming  letter  from  my  mother,  and  from  Lady  Coltman  telling  me 
of  £  20  more  for  the  Oberlin. 

Read  Mr.  Thorn's  account  of  the  Oxford  theology,  drawn  from 
their  own  writings  :  good.  The  irrevocable  concessions,  —  concessions 
they  have  made  for  the  sake  of  their  plea  of  authority,  which  must  fail, 
so  the  good  will  remain  when  the  fallacy  is  overthrown.  I  feel  a 
strong  sympathy  with  them.  Saving  their  premises,  I  go  with  them. 
Have  been  reading  Wilberforce  :  grows  twaddling  in  his  old  age, 
through  want  of  cultivation  of  mind.  Very  noble,  however,  —  his 
keeping  back  Brougham's  pledge  about  the  queen,  and  silently  suffer- 
ing universal  censure. 

January  5.  —  C  T         and  I  had  a  sweet,  long  talk.  Some 

chance  through  her  of  good  to  the  class  of  unhappy  women.  If  I 
live,  this  too  must  be  my  work.  If  not,  some  one  else  will  do  it, 
I  doubt  not. 

January  13.  —  Mr.  Dawes  came  on  business  about  the  Oberlin 
tract,  which  completely  tired  me,  and  made  a  bad  day  of  it.  Mr. 
Dawes  is  gloriously  business-like. 

The  following  letter  shows  that  the  antislavery  problem  was 
not  the  only  one  she  bore  in  mind. 

TO  MRS.  HENRY  G.  CHAPMAN. 

Tynemouth,  Northumberland,  April  24,  1840. 

Mr  dear  Friend,  —  I  must  send  you  a  word  of  love,  thanks,  and 
blessing.  You  know,  I  dare  say,  that  I  have  been  very  ill  for  nearly 
this  year  past,  and  that  it  is  very  doubtful  when  I  shall  be  better,  or 
whether  ever.  Instead  of  writing  to  you,  I  have  been  writing  for 
the  Oberlin,  —  doing  the  little  I  could,  —  and  not  in  vain.  Messrs. 
Keep  and  Dawes  hope  and  believe  that  the  institution  is  safe.  But 
for  our  national  immoralities,  which  have  brought  on,  as  a  part  of 
their  retribution,  visitations  of  poverty  almost  amounting  to  famine, 
we  should  have  sent  you  more  ample  aid.  If,  however,  the  Oberlin  is 
safe,  we  are  humbly  thankful.  Mr.  Dawes  has  endeared  himself  to 
us,  and  I  thank  you  for  introducing  him  to  me.  I  have  not  yet  seen 
Mr.  Keep,  but  I  hear  that  he  is  much  beloved  

Living  and  dying  I  shall  be  in  spirit  with  you  and  your  cause.  If 
I  can  do  any  thing,  however  little,  for  your  work,  ask  me,  and  while 
I  have  breath  in  my  body,  I  will  work  for  you.  I  am  now  about  a 
book  which  I  hope  may  do  some  good  if  I  am  permitted  to  finish  it. 
The  barest  hope  of  this  would  cheer  my  days  if  they  wanted  cheer- 


350 


MEMORIALS. 


ing,  —  which,  however,  they  do  not.  You  need  feel  no  sorrow  for 
me,  my  dear  friend.  How  often  am  I  full  of  joy  for  you,  and  yet 
I  am  sensible  of  your  trials.  They  are  very  great,  but  they  bear  their 
own  death-warrant,  while  the  strength  you  oppose  to  them  is  im- 
mortal. 

My  kindest  regards  to  Mr.  Chapman.  I  should  like  to  think  that 
Mr.  Garrison  remembered  me  with  regard. 

Farewell,  my  dear  friend.  Many  prayers  rise  for  you  and  yours, 
from  this  land  as  well  as  your  own. 

Ever  your  affectionate 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

How  goes  your  mind  about  a  community  of  goods,  and  yet  an  in- 
violate personal  freedom  ?  .  .  .  .  When  you  see  light,  give  it  me. 

July,  1840,  Harriet  Martineau  writes  to  America  thus  :  — 

TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

Dear  Friend,  —  I  have  seen  Garrison  ;  and  among  all  the  pleas- 
ures of  this  meeting  I  seem  to  have  been  brought  nearer  to  you.  If 
I  were  well,  and  had  health,  and  if  my  mother's  life  were  not  so  fast 
bound  to  mine  as  it  is,  I  think  I  could  not  help  coming  to  live  beside 
you.  Great  ifs,  and  many  of  them.  But  I  dream  of  a  life  devoted  to 
you  and  your  cause,  and  the  very  dream  is  cheering.  I  have  not 
been  out  of  these  two  rooms  for  months,  and  now  I  begin  to  doubt 
whether  I  shall  ever  again  step  across  their  threshold.  I  may  go  on 
just  as  I  am,  for  years,  and  it  may  end  any  day  ;  yet  I  am  not  worse 
than  when  I  last  wrote. 

We  had  a  happy  day,  we  four,  when  Garrison  was  here.  I  am  sure 
he  was  happy.    How  gay  he  is  !    He  left  us  with  a  new  life  in  us. 

Garrison  was  quite  right,  I  think,  to  sit  in  the  gallery  at  Convention. 
I  conclude  you  think  so.  It  has  done  much  for  the  woman  question, 
I  am  persuaded.  You  will  live  to  see  a  great  enlargement  of  our 
scope,  I  trust ;  but,  what  with  the  vices  of  some  women  and  the 
fears  of  others,  it  is  hard  work  for  us  to  assert  our  liberty.  I  will, 
however,  till  I  die,  and  so  will  you  ;  and  so  make  it  easier  for 
some  few  to  follow  us  than  it  was  for  poor  Mary  Wollstonecraft  to 
begin. 

I  must  not  begin  upon  Convention  subjects.  I  am  so  tired  ;  and 
there  would  be  no  end.  You  know  what  I  should  say,  no  doubt. 
The  information  brought  out  will  do  good,  but  the  obvious  deficien- 


CONSEQUENCES, — TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


351 


cies  of  the  members  in  the  very  principles  they  came  to  advocate  will 
surely  do  more. 

Garrison  brings  you  £2  from  me,  which  I  have  earned  by  my 
needle  for  your  society,  being  fond  of  fancy-work,  and  fit  only  for  it, 
in  this  my  invalid  state.  I  feel  in  my  soul  the  honour  of  the  appoint- 
ment of  delegate.  You  know  that  I  could  not  have  discharged  its 
duties,  even  if  the  others  had  been  admitted.  But  there  is  in  me  no 
lack  of  willingness  to  serve  our  cause  in  any  capacity. 

Believe  me  ever  your  faithful  and  affectionate 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Again  she  writes  to  America,  to  the  same  friend :  — 

We  are  fighting  many  battles  here,  —  great  and  important.  "We 
are  doing  away  with  the  punishment  of  death.  Yesterday  morning  I 
told  a  government  man  that  Parliament  and  people  are  forwarder  than 
he  (who  is  a  commissioner  on  the  question)  had  any  idea  of ;  and  last 
night  he  got  his  gradualism  assented  to  in  Parliament,  by  a  majority 
of  only  one  !  All  the  best  men,  almost,  came  out  against  capital 
punishment  altogether. 

Well,  my  dear  friend,  live  long  as  we  may,  there  is  no  prospect  of  a 
want  of  work  for  us.  We  have  a  scope  and  a  call  such  as  few  women 
have.  What  can  there  be  in  the  world's  gift  to  tempt  either  men  or 
women  aside  from  such  a  destiny  ? 

My  kind  regards  to  Mr.  Chapman.  He  is  always  sure  of  my  love 
and  sympathy. 

Ever  your  affectionate 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

In  a  letter  to  Mr.  Empson,  dated  December,  1840,  friendly 
and  familiar,  and  which  he  had  no  idea  would  ever  reach  her 
eyes,  Lord  Jeffrey  writes  thus  of  "  The  Hour  and  the  Man  "  :  — 

"  I  have  read  Harriet's  first  volume,  and  give  in  my  adhesion  to  her 
Black  Prince  with  all  my  heart  and  soul.  The  book  is  really  not  only 
beautiful  and  touching,  but  noble ;  and  I  do  not  recollect  when  I  have 
been  more  charmed,  whether  by  very  sweet  and  eloquent  writing  and 
glowing  description,  or  by  elevated  as  well  as  tender  sentiments.  I  do 
not  at  all  believe  that  the  worthy  people  (or  any  of  them)  ever  spoke 
or  acted  as  she  has  so  gracefully  represented  them,  and  must  confess 
that  in  all  the  striking  scenes  I  entirely  forgot  their  complexion,  and 
drove  the  notion  of  it  from  me  as  often  as  it  occurred.    But  this  does 


352 


MEMORIALS. 


not  at  all  diminish,  but  rather  increases  the  merit  of  her  creations. 
Toussaint  himself,  I  suppose,  really  was  an  extraordinary  person  ; 
though  I  cannot  believe  that  he  actually  was  such  a  combination  of 
Scipio  and  Cato  and  Fenelon  and  Washington  as  she  seems  to  have 
made  him  out.  Is  the  Henri  Christophe  of  her  story  the  royal  cor- 
respondent of  Wilberforce  in  1818  ]  His  letters,  though  amiable,  are 
twaddly  enough.  The  book,  however,  is  calculated  to  make  its  readers 
better,  and  does  great  honour  to  the  heart  as  well  as  the  talent  and 
fancy  of  the  author.  I  would  go  a  long  way  to  kiss  the  hem  of  her 
garment,  or  the  hand  that  delineated  this  glowing  and  lofty  repre- 
sentation of  purity  and  noble  virtue.  And  she  must  not  only  be 
rescued  from  all  debasing  anxieties  about  her  subsistence,  but  placed 
in  a  station  of  affluence  and  honour  ;  though  I  believe  she  truly  cares 
for  none  of  these  things.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  she  suffers  so  much, 
and  may  even  be  verging  to  dissolution." 

Miss  Edgeworth  also  sent  a  fervent  and  enthusiastic  assurance 
of  her  admiration  of  "  The  Hour  and  the  Man."  The  title  of 
the  book  was  chosen  as  the  one  best  calculated  to  conceal  the 
hero's  colour,  as  this  complexional  prejudice  was  running  high 
in  the  United  States,  and  she  hoped  the  work  might  tell  in 
favour  of  her  cause  there.  It  was  republished  there  immediately, 
and  has  since  been  republished  at  different  intervals,  in  different 
forms ;  and  our  most  admired  and  impressive  orator,  Wendell 
Phillips,  seizing  the  subject  for  lecturing-tours  on  behalf  of  the 
cause,  bore  it  through  the  whole  land,  deep  into  the  prejudiced 
hearts  of  the  people. 

The  next  year  Harriet  Martineau  addressed,  from  her  sick- 
room at  Tynemouth,  the  subjoined  letter  to  her  friend  Elizabeth 
Pease  of  Darlington,*  on  the  occasion  of  what  were  at  that  time 
called  by  careless  observers  "  the  divisions  among  the  abolition- 
ists ":  — 

Tynemouth,  Northumberland,  February  27,  1841. 
My  dear  Friend,  —  I  have  read  the  statements  in  "  Right  and 
Wrong  among  the  Abolitionists  of  the  United  States,"  with  respect  to 
the  differences  between  the  two  antislavery  societies  in  America, 
with  a  strong  and  painful  interest.    I  wish  I  could  adequately  ex- 

*  .  Daughter  of  Joseph  Pease  of  Darlington,  and  afterwards  the  wife  of  Dr. 
Nicliol,  the  astronomer. 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


353 


press  my  sense  of  the  duty  of  every  one  interested  in  the  cause  of  the 
negro,  —  of  human  freedom  at  large,  —  to  read  and  deeply  meditate 
this  piece  of  history.  I  am  not  more  firmly  persuaded  of  any  thing, 
than  that  those  who,  on  the  present  occasion,  listen  to  one  side  only, 
or  refuse  to  hear  either,  are  doing  the  deepest  injury  in  their  power  to 
the  antislavery  cause,  and  sowing  the  seeds  of  a  bitter  future  repent- 
ance. 

I  am  aware  how  distasteful  are  the  details  of  a  strife.  I  know  "but 
too  well,  from  my  own  experience,  how  natural  it  is  to  turn  away, 
with  a  faint  and  sickening  heart,  from  the  exposure  of  the  enmities 
of  those  whose  first  friendship  sprang  up  in  the  field  of  benevolent 
labours.  I  fully  understand  the  feelings  of  offended  delicacy  which 
would  close  the  ears  and  seal  the  lips  of  those  who  have  been  fellow- 
workers  with  both  the  parties  now  alienated.  Among  all  these  causes 
of  recoil,  I  see  how  it  is  but  too  probable  that  the  antislavery  parties 
on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  may  be  left  by  many  of  their  British 
brethren  to  "  settle  their  own  affairs,"  to  "  fight  their  own  battles." 
But  if  I  had  a  voice  which  would  penetrate  wherever  I  wished,  I 
would  ask  in  the  depths  of  every  heart  that  feels  for  the  slave 
whether  it  should  be  so ;  whether  such  indifference  and  recoil  may 
not  be  as  criminal  in  us  as  dissension  in  them  ;  whether  in  declin- 
ing to  do  justice  to  the  true  friends  of  the  slave  (on  whichever  side 
they  may  appear  to  be),  we  may  not  be  guilty  of  treachery  as  fatal  as 
compromising  with  his  enemies. 

Those  who  devote  themselves  to  the  redemption  of  an  oppressed 
class  or  race  do,  by  their  act  of  self-devotion,  pledge  themselves  to 
the  discharge  of  the  lowest  and  most  irksome  offices  of  protection,  as 
much  as  to  that  of  the  most  cordial  and  animating.  We  are  bound, 
not  only  to  fight  against  foes  whom  we  never  saw,  and  upon  whom 
our  sympathies  never  rested  ;  not  only  to  work  for  millions  of  poor 
creatures,  so  grateful  for  our  care  that  they  are  ready  to  kiss  the  hem 
of  our  garments,  —  this  kind  of  service,  however  lavish  it  may  re- 
quire us  to  be  of  our  labour,  our  time,  our  money,  is  easy  enough  in 
comparison  with  one  which  is  equally  binding  upon  us  ;  —  it  is  also 
our  duty  to  withdraw  our  sympathy  and  countenance  from  our  fellow- 
labourers  (however  great  their  former  merits  and  our  love),  when 
they  compromise  the  cause.  It  is  our  duty  to  expose  their  guilt  when, 
by  their  act  of  compromise,  they  oppress  and  betray  those  brethren 
whose  nobleness  is  a  rebuke  to  themselves.  This  painful  duty  may 
every  friend  of  the  negro  in  this  country  now  find  himself  called 
upon  to  discharge,  if  he  gives  due  attention  to  the  state  of  anti- 


354 


MEMORIALS. 


slavery  affairs  in  America.  If  be  does  not  give  this  attention,  it 
would  be  better  for  him  that  he  never  named  the  negro  and  his  cause  ; 
for  it  is  surely  better  to  stand  aloof  from  a  philanthropic  enterprise 
than  to  mix  up  injustice  with  it. 

The  first  movers  in  the  antislavery  cause  in  America,  those  who 
have  stood  firm  through  the  fierce  persecutions  of  many  years,  who 
have  maintained  their  broad  platform  of  catholic  principles,  who  have 
guarded  their  original  Constitution  from  innovation  and  circumscrip- 
tion,—  Garrison,  and  his  corps  of  devout,  devoted,  and  catholic  fellow- 
labourers,  with  the  Bible  in  their  heart  of  hearts  and  its  spirit  in  all 
their  ways,  — are  now  in  a  condition  in  which  they  need  our  support. 
They  have  been  oppressed,  betrayed,  pillaged,  and  slandered.  Not 
they,  but  their  foes,  are  the  innovators,  the  bigots,  the  unscrupulous 
proselyters,  the  preachers  of  a  new  doctrine,  modified  to  propitiate 
the  proslavery  spirit  of  the  country  in  which  they  live.  No  one 
will  call  my  words  too  strong,  my  accusations  exaggerated,  who  will 
read  the  evidence  relating  to  the  transfer  of  the  "Emancipator  "  (for  one 
instance),  or,  casting  an  eye  upon  the  statement  of  accounts  of  the 
American  Antislavery  Society,  will  perceive  who  voted  into  their 
own  pockets  the  money  by  which  the  "Emancipator"  might  have 
been  sustained,  under  whose  commission  the  assailants  of  the  Old  Or- 
ganization crossed  the  Atlantic,  and  at  whose  expense  they  travelled 
throughout  our  country,  sowing  calumnies  against  Garrison  and  his 
faithful  companions  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  our  land. 
When  the  friends  of  the  slave  here  are  told  of  treachery,  pillage,  and 
slander,  will  they  hazard  being  a  party  to  the  guilt,  for  want  of  in- 
quiry, even  though  the  London  Antislavery  Committee,  and  their 
organ,  the  "Reporter,"  at  present  appear  to  stand  in  that  predicament  ? 
If  they  would  avoid  such  a  liability,  let  them  read  and  consider  the 
statement  by  which  the  case  is  placed  fully  before  them. 

No  one  is  more  ready  than  I  to  make  allowance  for  lapse  in  the 
friends  of  the  negro  in  America.  I  have  seen  too  much  of  the  suffer- 
ing (not  conceivable  here)  consequent  upon  a  profession  of  anti- 
slavery  principles,  to  wonder  that  there  are  but  few  who  can  endure, 
from  year  to  year,  the  infliction  from  without,  the  probing  of  the  soul 
within,  which  visits  the  apostles  of  freedom  in  a  land  which  main- 
tains slavery  on  its  soil.  From  my  heart  I  pity  those  who,  having 
gone  into  the  enterprise,  find  that  they  have  not  strength  for  it,  and 
that  they  are  draw  by  their  weakness  into  acts  of  injustice  towards 
such  as  are  stronger  than  themselves  ;  for  those  who  are  not  with 
the  thoroughgoing  are  necessarily  against  them.    We  must  regard 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


355 


■with  even  respectful  compassion  the  first  misgivings,  before  they  have 
become  lapse.  But  what  then  must  we  feel,  —  what  ought  we  to  do 
—  for  those  who  have  strength,  for  those  who  can  suffer  to  the  end, 
for  those  who  are,  after  the  pelting  of  a  ten  years'  pitiless  storm,  as 
firm,  as  resolved,  as  full  of  vital  warmth  as  ever,  as  prepared  still 
to  abide  the  tempest,  till  the  deluge  of  universal  conviction  shall 
sweep  away  the  iniquity  of  slavery  from  the  earth  ]  Shall  we  refuse 
to  hear  the  tale  of  their  injuries,  of  their  justification,  because  others 
have  refused,  or  because  the  story  is  painful  ?  May  we  dare  to  call 
ourselves  workers  in  the  antislavery  cause  while  thus  deserting  the 
chief  of  its  apostles  now  living  in  the  world  ? 

All  believe  that  the  truth  will  finally  prevail  ;  and  you  and  I,  dear 
friend,  have  a  firm  faith  that  therefore  the  Old  Organization,  with 
Garrison  at  its  head,  will  prevail,  at  length,  over  the  base  enmity  of 
the  seceders.  But  we  ought  not  to  be  satisfied  with  their  prevailing 
at  length,  till  we  see  whether  they  cannot  be  enabled  to  stand  their 
ground  now.  Not  a  moment  is  to  be  lost.  Not  for  a  moment  should 
their  noble  hearts  be  left  uncheered  ;  not  for  a  moment  should  the 
slaveholder  be  permitted  to  fan  his  embers  of  hope  ;  not  for  a 
moment  should  the  American  slave  be  compelled  to  tremble  at  the 
adversity  of  his  earliest  and  stanchest  friends,  if  we  can,  by  any 
effort,  obtain  a  hearing  for  the  cause.  Let  us  urge  and  rouse  all  who 
are  about  us,  —  not  to  receive  our  mere  assertions,  —  not  to  take  our 
convictions  upon  trust,  —  but  to  read,  search  out,  and  weigh,  the  evi- 
dence, and  judge  for  themselves. 

This  is  all  that  is  needed  ;  for  I  believe  there  is  not  a  friend  of  the 
slave,  in  any  part  of  the  world,  who,  knowing  the  facts,  would  not 
make  haste  to  offer  his  right  hand  to  Garrison  and  his  company,  and 
his  voice  and  purse  to  their  cause. 

I  am  yours  very  truly, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

In  a  brief  review  of  the  year  at  the  end  of  this  volume  of 
journal  is  the  following  :  — 

Two  things  occurred  at  the  beginning  of  December  which  cheered 
me  greatly.  Lady  Byron,  being  pleased  with  my  refusal  of  a  pension, 
placed  £  100  at  my  disposal  for  the  relief  of  cases  of  -  desert  and  dis- 
tress. It  was  done  in  the  most  delicate  way,  and  the  plenitude  of 
my  charity-purse  will  long  be  a  comfort  to  me. 

R .  Monckton  Milnes,  the  poet,  I  had  felt  to  be  on  cordial  terms 
with  me,  though  a  Puseyite  and  a  Tory  M.  P.    I  had  no  idea,  how- 


356 


MEMORIALS. 


ever,  of  what  he  could  do  for  me.  He  heard  of  me  through  mutual 
friends,  sent  me  his  "  one  tract  more,"  and  a  beautiful  letter,  and  those 
most  truthful  lines,  'Christian  Endurance,'"  which  have  since  sup- 
ported me  much  and  often.  They  will  bear  pondering,  and  well 
have  I  pondered  them.  It  was  a  good  deed  of  a  young  man  to  sit 
down  to  speak  to  the  soul  of  one  like  me. 

September  24.  —  Sir  C.  Clarke  came.  I  could  not  but  admire  the 
frankness  with  which  he  told  me  that  my  illness  is  incurable  ;  and  I 
can  never  again  feel  health,  if  his  judgment  be  true. 

It  is  strange  that  this  did  not  move  me  in  the  least,  and  does  not 
now.  I  have  long  disbelieved  that  I  should  ever  be  in  health  again, 
and  I  have  no  wish  that  it  were  otherwise.  How  my  mother  will 
grieve  !  I  never  spoke  to  her  of  the  hope  of  relief,  but  others  have. 
That  was  too  low  a  hope  for  me,  though  I  am  far  from  saying  that  I 
may  not  some  time  sink  for  want  of  it.  At  present  I  fear  only  the 
intellectual  and  moral  consequences  of  a  life  of  confinement.  If 
they  cannot  be  obviated,  I  must  meekly  bear  them  too. 

Mr.  Macready  visited  her  about  this  time,  and  thus  records  in 
his  journal  the  impression  she  left  upon  his  mind  :  — 

"March  28,  1841.  —  Intended  to  post  to  South  Shields  and  cross  the 
ferry  to  Tynemouth,  but  stopped  and  turned  the  postboy,  and  made 
him  go  to  Newcastle,  from  thence  to  take  the  railway.  Was  half 
an  hour  before  the  train  started  ;  lunched  ;  wrote  a  note  for  Miss 
Martineau.  Went  by  railway  to  North  Shields.  Walked  to  Tyne- 
mouth, and  inquiring  at  the  post-office  Miss  Martineau's  address, 
called  on  her,  sending  up  my  note  ;  she  was  very  glad  to  see  me. 
We  talked  over  many  things  and  persons.  She  is  a  heroine,  or,  to 
speak  more  truly,  her  fine  sense  and  her  lofty  principles,  with  the 
sincerest  religion,  give  her  a  fortitude  that  is  noble  to  the  best  height 
of  heroism." 

Writing  in  1842  to  console  her  friend  under  severe  bereave- 
ment, she  says  :  — 

"I  know  that  you  will  endure, — you  are  experienced  in  death. 
What  would  it  be  to  you  in  this  hour,  that  he  had  gained  wealth,  and 
lived  in  the  praises  of  the  vulgar  part  of  society  ?  What  comfort  is 
there  not  now,  in  the  truth  that  he  has  sacrificed  his  wealth  and  his 
repose,  and  put  his  reputation  to  hazard,  from  love  to  the  helpless  ! 
We  are  of  one  mind,  dear  friend,  about  these  things.    You  do  not 


CONSEQUENCES, — TO  LIFE  PASSIVE.  357 


perplex  yourself  with  repining  at  the  loss  of  your  dearest  friends,  and 
I  am  satisfied  to  be  confined  to  two  rooms  for  a  long  time  or  a  short, 
—  and  there  the  matter  ends.  We  can  smile  an  understanding  to 
each  other,  and  proceed  to  our  business.  When  you  hear  me  in- 
quired for,  just  state  the  main  truth,  that  I  am  not  likely  to  die  yet, 
but  can  never  recover  if  the  physicians  are  right.  I  am  so  unfit  now 
for  authorship,  that  I  close  with  the  fourth  volume  of  the  '  Play- 
fellow.' I  thank  you  for  what  you  tell  me  of  the  first  volume,  — 
The  Settlers  at  Home.  It  rejoices  me  always  to  hear  of  children 
being  moved  by  any  thing  I  write.  You  hear  of  the  awful  position 
of  our  public  affairs.    How  are  our  starving  multitudes  to  be  fed  ? " 

Writing  again  a  letter  of  consolation  for  the  loss  of  Henry 
Grafton  Chapman,  who  sent  his  love  to  her  from  his  death-bed, 
she  says,  — 

"How  kind,  how  beautiful  in  him  it  was  to  leave  me  those 
words." 

Dr.  Channing  too,  who  died  at  the  same  date,  spoke  of  her 
frequently  to  his  family  with  much  affectionate  admiration  during 
the  time  previous  to  his  death. 

These  lines,  sent  to  her  on  learning  her  hopeless  condition, 
are  by  Lord  Houghton. 

CHRISTIAN  ENDURANCE. 

Mortal !  that  stand  est  on  a  point  of  time 

With  an  eternity  on  either  hand, 
Thou  hast  one  duty  above  all  sublime  ; 

Where  thou  art  placed,  serenely  there  to  stand. 

To  stand,  undaunted  by  the  threatening  death, 

Or  harder  circumstance  of  living  doom  ; 
Nor  less  untempted  by  the  odorous  breath 

Of  hope,  that  issues  even  from  the  tomb. 

For  hope  will  never  dull  the  present  pain, 
Nor  fear  will  ever  keep  thee  safe  from  fall, 

Unless  thou  hast  in  thee  a  mind,  to  reign 
Over  thyself,  as  God  is  over  all. 


358 


MEMORIALS. 


'T  ia  well  in  deeds  of  good,  though  small,  to  thrive  ; 

'T  is  well  some  part  of  ill,  though  small,  to  cure  ; 
'T  is  well  with  onward,  upward  hope  to  strive  ; 

Yet  better  and  diviner  to  endure. 

What  but  this  virtue's  solitary  power, 

Through  all  the  lusts  and  dreams  of  Greece  and  Rome, 
Bore  the  selected  spirits  of  the  hour 

Safe  to  a  distant  immaterial  home  1 

But  in  that  patience  was  the  seed  of  scorn,  — 
Scorn  of  the  world,  and  brotherhood  of  man  ; 

Not  patience  such  as,  in  the  manger  born, 
Up  to  the  cross  endured  its  earthly  span. 

Thou  must  endure,  yet  loving  all  the  while  ; 

Above,  yet  never  separate  from  thy  kind  : 
Meet  every  frailty  with  a  tender  smile, 

Though  to  no  possible  depth  of  evil  blind. 

This  is  the  riddle  thou  hast  life  to  solve  ; 

And  in  the  task  thou  shalt  not  work  alone  ; 
For  while  the  worlds  about  the  sun  revolve, 

God's  heart  and  mind  are  ever  with  his  own. 

These  are  the  lines  that  Dr.  Channing  so  much  admired,  and 
after  reading  which  he  bade  her  be  glad  that  she  was  the  inciter 
of  such  holy  thoughts  and  generous  sympathies.  His  letters 
were  a  solace  during  her  long  exile  from  active  life,  and  their 
friendship  was  constant  to  his  latest  hour.  Their  opinions  on 
the  doctrine  of  necessity  and  other  philosophical  subjects  were 
unlike.  "  I  am  less  and  less  troubled,"  he  said,  "  about  the- 
ories which  I  disapprove  when  adopted  by  the  good  and  true," 
and  his  affection  for  her  was  undiminished  by  opinions  which 
he  could  not  abide.  "  You  can  hold  them,"  he  said,  "and  hold 
your  moral  judgment  and  sensibilities  too.  You  are  unharmed 
by  what  would  be  death  to  me."  Of  "  Toussaint "  he  said,  "  I 
thank  you  for  1  The  Hour  and  the  Man.*  You  have  given  a  mag- 
nificent picture,  and  I  know  not  where  the  heroic  character  is 
more  grandly  conceived." 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


359 


The  annexed  letter  to  Mrs.  Chapman,  dated  March  29,  1842, 
gives  the  mind  of  Harriet  Martineau  on  the  American  political 
leaders  of  that  time. 

"  One  way  or  another  I  learn  all  the  important  features  of  your  en- 
terprise, and  keep  up  with  the  history  of  your  country.  Just  now, 
the  best  lovers  of  your  country  here  are  covered  with  shame.  Web- 
ster's instructions  to  Everett  about  the  Creole  have  arrived,  and  the 
ludicrousness  of  the  transaction  is  as  remarkable  as  the  shameful- 
ness  

"  For  many  years  your  writers  and  ours  have  exhibited  Webster  as 
your  cheval  de  bataille,  and  have  thrust  him  forward  as  the  great 
American,  so  that  his  disgrace  covers  your  whole  country  in  English 
eyes.  I  am  glad  now  that  I  bore  my  testimony  against  him  in  print 
so  long  ago.  Those  who  believe  in  me  and  my  book  will  want  to 
see  whether  there  is  not  yet  something  better  than  Webster  on  your 
continent.  I  hope  he  will  be  stung  to  the  quick  by  the  papers  on  his 
instructions.  The  Spectator,  such  a  sinner  generally  against  us  abo- 
litionists, is  capital  on  that  head.  But  I  should  wish  him  a  more  sol- 
emn retribution  and  a  more  corrective  one,  than  wounded  vanity  for  the 
tremendous  sin  of  treason  against  reason  ;  of  laying  aside  such  logical 
faculties  as  he  has,  to  put  false  cases,  out  of  the  insincerity  of  his 
heart  

"  I  feel  it  much  to  gain  time  before  our  inevitable  revolution  comes. 
If  it  could  only  be  put  off  to  another  generation,  our  educational  plans 
expanding,  our  aristocratic  institutions  relaxing  meanwhile,  there 
might  be  an  immense  diminution  of  the  guilt  and  misery  which  must 
more  or  less  attend  such  a  bouleversement  as  must  take  place." 

Tynemouth,  March  30.  —  The  majestic  unchanged  posture  of  the 
faithful  is  impressive  and  cheering,  but  what  an  uprooting  of  the 
poison-tree  there  must  be  which  is  ramifying  under  the  walls  of  the 
Supreme  Court,  and  exhaling  its  venom  into  the  eyes  and  brains  of 
the  Judiciary  ! 

On  the  15th  of  September,  1843,  stands  this  entry  in  her 
journal :  — 

"  A  new  imperative  idea  occurred  to  me,  —  Essays  from  a  Sick- 
Room." 

Of  this  book  her  friend  Henry  Crabb  Robinson  said,  that  no 
praise  could  be  too  strong  for  the  integrity  of  the  work,  as  of 
some  earlier  ones ;  that  a  very  few  lines  or  phrases  inserted, 


360 


MEMORIALS. 


with  a  reserved  sense  of  her  own,  a  very  trifling  amount  of  con- 
cession, would  have  gained  her  the  praises  and  the  custom  of  "the 
religious  world,"  so  that  she  would  have  been  comforted  and 
made  much  of,  and  have  made  her  £  30,000,  like  Hannah  More. 
This  grated  upon  her  temper,  and  she  almost  felt  as  if  she  had 
been  praised  for  honour  in  not  reading  an  open  letter  if  left  alone 
with  it,  or  with  a  purse  of  gold  without  stealing.  She  "  shud- 
dered at  the  idea  of  the  religious  world  laying  its  paws  upon 
me." 

"The  new  and  imperative  idea"  came  to  her  on  the  15th. 
The  entry  in  the  journal  on  the  19th  is,  "  Wrote  first  of  the  es- 
says on  1  Becoming  Inured.' " 

So  it  was  ever  in  her  life.  Thought  and  action  were  simulta- 
neous, and  the  sound  followed  the  flash  to  the  beholders. 

"  Life  in  a  Sick-Koom  "  was  republished  in  America,  and  called 
a  blessing  to  humanity  in  all  English-speaking  lands;  and  it 
was  said  that  all  who  read  it  found  their  thoughts  and  their 
hearts  visiting  her  sick-room  with  grateful  love.  Great  numbers 
of  persons  prefer  it  to  any  of  her  works.  Philosophers  are  less 
impressed  by  it. 

Again  the  poet,  and  by  this  time  the  friend,  sends  consolation. 

TO  HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Because  the  few  with  signal  virtue  crowned, 

The  heights  and  pinnacles  of  human  mind, 
Sadder  and  wearier  than  the  rest  are  found, 

Wish  not  thyself  less  wise  nor  less  refined. 
True  that  the  small  delights  that  day  by  day 

Cheer  and  distract  our  being  are  not  theirs  ; 
True  that  when  vowed  to  virtue's  nobler  sway, 

A  loftier  being  brings  severer  cares  : 
Yet  have  they  special  pleasures,  —  even  mirth, 

By  those  undreamt  of  who  have  only  trod 
Life's  valley  smooth  ;  and  if  the  rolling  earth 

To  their  nice  ear  have  many  a  painful  tone, 

They  know  man  does  not  live  by  joy  alone, 
But  by  the  presence  of  the  power  of  God. 

R.  MONCKTON  MILNES. 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


361 


But  at  length  endurance  reached  its  bounds ;  and  after  her 
recovery  she  writes  thus  :  — 

TO  MRS.  HENRY  G.  CHAPMAN. 

Birmingham,  March  15,  1815. 
My  dear  Friend,  —  Once  again  I  write  to  you  from  the  nridst  of 
life,  — from  a  house  full  of  busy,  gay  young  people,  where  there  is  no 
check  upon  occupations,  talk,  or  mirth  for  my  sake.  It  feels  very 
strange,  but  very  delightful.  I  am  glad  you  have  had  some  personal 
knowledge  of  mesmeric  effects.  I  like  that  those  whom  I  love  should 
know  something  of  the  wonderful  influence  whereby  I  have  been  re- 
stored, and  by  which  my  present  duties  are  marked  out.  My  case  has 
made  a  great  sensation ;  and  similar  cases  are  being  told,  and  the  knowers 
are  comparing  notes,  and  consulting  how  best  to  concentrate  and  use 
the  powers  put  into  our  hands  by  our  knowledge.  And  the  sick  and 
their  doctors  write  to  me,  —  a  multitude  of  them ;  and  my  business  is 
thus  put  under  my  hand  very  clearly.  In  addition  to  this,  I  have 
now  to  write  a  tale,  —  a  little  book  for  our  great  League  Bazaar,  — 
being  too  well  and  busy  to  do  the  fancy-work  I  had  intended  to  send. 
It  is  all  I  can  do  "  to  keep  my  stockings  mended."  [An  allusion  to  the 
popular  proslavery  charges  to  American  women  :  "  Go  spin,  you 
jade,  go  spin  !  "  and  "  Better  be  mending  your  stockings ! "]  To 
finish  about  myself,  I  am,  as  far  as  all  kinds  of  evidence  can  show, 
perfectly  well.  I  now  doubt  whether  I  was  ever  well  before.  I  have 
a  very  unusual  degree  of  strength,  shown  not  only  in  my  daily  long 
walks,  but  in  my  going  through  daily  business,  and  much  odious 
persecution  from  the  doctors,  with  entire  ease  and  composure.  It  is, 
however,  a  clear  duty  to  take  care  that  this  good  state  is  confirmed, 
before  entering  on  the  hurry  and  fatigue  of  my  old  life  in  London  ; 
and  I  have  agreed  to  a  charming  plan  suggested  by  some  friends  at  the 
Lakes,  that  I  shall  settle  among  them  for  some  months,  and  lead  an 
open-air  and  holiday  life  (as  far  as  mine  can  be)  for  the  whole  summer 
and  autumn.  The  Arnolds,  Wordsworths,  Gregs,  and  Fletchers  will 
be  my  neighbours  and  companions.  From  the  first  of  June  my  address 
will  be,  "  Ambleside,  Westmoreland."  Till  then,  "  Bobert  Martineau, 
Esq.,  Birmingham."  To  whom  shall  I  give  this  direction  about  the 
"  Standard"?*  I  value  it  highly,  and  I  should  like  still  to  have  it  come 
as  hitherto.    It  was  a  delightful  surprise  to  me  last  week  to  see  what 

*  The  organ  of  the  American  Antislavery  Society,  at  that  time  and  after 
edited  by  Sydney  Howard  Gay,  Edmund  Quincy,  and  James  Russell  Lowell. 
VOL.  II. 


362 


MEMORIALS. 


had  been  done  about  my  table-cover.  No  such  destination  had  ever 
occurred  to  me,  but  I  will  now  own  I  did  feel  a  little  sorry  on  sending 
it  off,  as  the  thought  that  that  which  held  inwrought  so  many  of  my 
deepest  ideas  and  feelings  would  probably  go  into  the  hands  of  some 
entire  stranger,  who  would  be  wholly  unconscious  of  the  real  value 
of  the  work  to  a  friend.  I  say  this  just  to  indicate  to  you  what  must 
have  been  my  gratification  when  I  saw  what  had  been  done.  How 
amusing  it  is,  in  face  of  such  facts,  to  remember  the  contemptuous 
charge  of  ordinary  folk  against  you,  that  you  are  "people  of  one 
idea  ! "    You  seem  to  have  a  good  many  feelings,  at  all  events. 

I  do  long  to  see  what  is  to  happen  next  among  you.  While  your 
well-wishers  here  are  mournful,  and  think  your  condition  low  and  your 
prospects  dark  beyond  repair  (I  mean  those  of  your  country),  I  cannot 
help  recurring  to  my  old  ground  of  hope  and  cheer  for  you, — that  your 
people  (never  beginning  to  do  their  best  till  they  are  at  their  worst) 
do  rise  up  in  moral  might  when  the  danger  is  pressing,  and  discharge 
their  duty  better  than  any  other  people  when  once  they  set  about  it. 
I  cannot  conceive  that  the  North  will  succumb  to  the  South  in  such 
times  as  all  men  see  you  are  now  entering  upon.  I  have  such  faith  in 
your  countrymen  as  to  expect  from  them  that  they  will  surrender 
their  false  pride,  and  give  up  their  idolatry  of  the  existing  form  of  the 
Union,  —  now  become  a  malignant  and  obscene  idol,  —  in  order  to 
apprehend  and  do  homage  to  the  true  spirit  of  which  it  was  once  the 
representative.  If  you  (in  or  out  of  the  "  Standard  ")  can  justify  this 
hope  by  your  testimony,  it  will  make  me  very  happy.  I  have,  myself, 
no  doubt  that  the  whole  matter  is  in  the  hands  of  the  North.  With- 
out calling  the  South  a  bully  or  a  coward,  or  other  hard  names,  I 
suppose  it  is  an  indisputable  fact,  that  the  South  is  actually  power- 
less, if  the  North  do  but  think  so,  and  act  accordingly.  Its  not  acting 
accordingly  is  the  impediment  I  find  on  every  hand,  when  I  try  to 
make  your  case  understood  here  as  well  as  my  small  knowledge 
permits.  Another  difficulty  that  I  meet  with  is  from  your  (the  aboli- 
tionists) being,  as  a  matter  of  course,  mixed  up  with  our  Antislavery 
Society  here,  which  is  now  disgraced  almost  to  the  lowest  point  ; 
your  true  alliance  is  with  our  League,  as  you  all  know  through  George 
Thompson.  And  there  is  now  the  most  absurd  and  shocking  virtual 
alliance  between  the  antislavery  folk  and  the  West  India  interest. 
I  protest,  with  all  my  might,  against  your  being  classed  with  your 
namesakes  here,  showing  the  while  how  different  your  work  is,  even 
if  they  were  in  the  way  of  their  duty.  But  argument  and  explana- 
tion do  little  with  people  who  do  not  know  your  country.    The  only 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


363 


effectual  evidence  wall  be  your  enforcing  a  clear  demand  for  a  reno- 
vated and  purified  Act  of  Union.  But  I  am  always  vexed  with 
myself  when  I  write  in  this  way  to  you,  my  ignorance  may  so  easily 
make  it  all  a  waste  of  your  precious  time  ;  yet,  even  so,  you  may  like 
to  see  where  those  who  love  your  cause  want  enlightening.  We  are 
doing  well  in  our  public  affairs,  —  morally  better,  I  think,  than  ever 
before  within  my  memory.  The  prosperity  is  pleasant,  but  the 
awakened  spirit  of  society  is  good.  The  sugar  question  is  all  wrong, 
but  must  erelong  be  better  treated.  In  other  matters,  fiscal  and 
moral,  I  do  think  we  are  pretty  rapidly  improving.  The  Anti-Corn- 
Law  League  is,  I  do  think,  a  noble  body,  with  a  glorious  function. 

And  now,  my  dear  friend,  for  this  time  farewell.  I  bless  you  for 
all  your  acts  of  love  towards  me.  I  need  not  tell  you  that  my  heart 
is  with  you. 

Yours  affectionately, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

This  brother,  whose  address  she  gives  in  the  foregoing  letter, 
is  he  whom  Harriet  Martineau  always  spoke  of  as  "  my  good 
brother."  He  died  in  1870,  leaving  a  name  so  much  respected 
in  Birmingham  as  to  need  no  eulogy,  whether  as  chief  magistrate 
or  as  a  public  benefactor. 

Besides  the  immense  amount  of  writing  done  at  Tynemouth, 
during  those  years  of  pain  which  she  called  her  passive  period, 
she  used  to  fill  in  the  chinks  of  time  with  fancy-work.  She 
made  pretty  baskets  of  braid  and  wire-ribbon,  which  sold  for  a 
sum  sufficient  to  found  a  library  for  the  Barracks.  She  sent 
them  also  to  the  National  Antislavery  Bazaar  in  Boston,  United 
States.  But  a  really  remarkable  piece  of  work,  both  for  its  great 
beauty  and  the  amount  of  time  bestowed  upon  it,  was  a  table- 
cover,  "  the  four  seasons,"  of  Berlin  wool  wrought  into  fruits 
and  flowers,  which  was  bought  by  subscription  by  her  anti- 
slavery  friends,  and  presented  to  Mrs.  Follen.  Thus  it  was  the 
means  of  raising  one  hundred  dollars  for  the  cause,  and  gave 
those  friends  the  occasion  for  expressing  what  they  felt  of  affec- 
tionate gratitude  for  all  her  works  and  her  labours  and  her 
patience. 

This  residence  at  Tynemouth  during  her  long  severe  illness 
she  always  called  her  "  passive  period,  "  —  but  with  small  show 


364 


MEMORIALS. 


of  reason,  seeing  that  head,  heart,  and  hands  were  so  full  of 
activity.  Much  has  been  told  of  what  she  did,  but  more  must 
remain  untold.  For  example,  in  her  journal  this  note  fre- 
quently occurs:  "Wrote  Grainger  paper,"  "Grainger  came," 
"  Wonderful  man."  From  after  writings  of  hers  it  appears  that 
his  great  public  works  in  Newcastle  bear  witness  to  him.  He 
had  Harriet  Martineau's  best  help  in  carrying  on  his  enter- 
prises. 

With  the  money  placed  at  her  disposition  by  Lady  Byron 
she  caused  a  drain  to  be  laid  the  length  of  Tynemouth  Street, 
and  ordered  a  well  to  be  dug  in  the  garden  of  her  lodgings,  that 
served  the  whole  row  of  houses  and  "  kept  the  maids  from  bad 
company." 

It  was  after  many  years  of  suffering  from  illness  that  Harriet 
Martineau's  mind  was  exercised  a  second  time  by  the  proposal 
of  a  pension.  It  was  then  a  period  of  public  distress,  and  her 
means  of  livelihood  were  failing  with  her  power  to  write.  She 
however  preferred  to  share  their  privations  with  the  people  to 
being  supported  by  ministerial  patronage. 

Her  decision  was  appreciated  by  the  people,  and  they  held  a 
public  meeting  in  London,  Colonel  Perronet  Thompson  in  the 
chair,  by  which  it  was  resolved  unanimously,  — 

1.  That  this  meeting  fully  appreciates  the  moral  and  political 
honesty  which  led  Miss  Martineau  to  refuse  the  pension  offered  by 
the  late  Whig  administration  ;  though  they  think  there  has  rarely 
occurred  an  instance  in  which  the  royal  bounty  would  have  been  so 
well  bestowed. 

2.  That  it  is  the  opinion  of  this  meeting  that  the  answer  of 
Miss  Martineau  involves  a  great  principle,  since  if  the  people  were 
fully  represented,  the  act  of  the  executive  would  be  the  act  of  the 
people. 

3.  That  this  meeting  holds  Miss  Martineau  to  have  pre-eminently 
deserved  well  of  her  country,  and  that  it  respectfully  and  cordially 
recommends  and  urges  upon  the  public  at  large  meetings  like  the 
present,  to  show  to  her,  in  an  unequivocal  form,  public  appreciation 
of  her  conduct  and  character. 

4.  That  a  copy  of  the  foregoing  resolution  be  transmitted  by  the 
chairman  to  Miss  Martineau. 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE 


365 


The  thanks  of  the  meeting  were  then  given  to  the  chairman  for 
his  conduct  in  the  chair,  and  to  the  proprietors  of  the  hall  for  the 
gratuitous  use  thereof,  for  the  purposes  of  the  meeting. 

P.  PERROXET  THOMPSON,  Chairman. 

I  received  a  long  time  since  from  Mrs.  Henry  Turner  of  Not- 
tingham, a  friend  and  relative  of  Harriet  Martineau,  a  letter  con- 
taining an  interesting  narrative  of  the  circumstances  attending 
her  restoration  to  health ;  but  as  it  does  not  differ  from  her  own 
in  a  preceding  volume,  except  in  incidentally  giving  the  names 
of  many  witnesses,  I  need  not  here  repeat  it. 

Xow  came  her  removal  from  Tynemouth  to  the  neighbourhood 
of  Windermere,  where  she  first  saw  Mr.  Atkinson,  a  gentleman 
who  devoted  his  fortune  and  life  to  philosophical  pursuits  and 
studies,  and  who  afterwards  became  her  coadjutor  in  the  publi- 
cation of  the  philosophical  work  called,  for  brevity's  sake,  "  The 
Letters." 

When  she  afterwards  made  an  inquiry  about  him  of  Dr. 
Samuel  Brown,  a  deep  student  of  philosophy,  whose  name  is 
always  associated  with  his  "  Atomic  Theory,"  his  reply  was  as 
follows  :  — 

"  I  think  him  the  noblest  man  I  have  known.  If  his  attainments 
in  positive  knowledge  and  his  culture  in  the  art  of  expression  were 
equal  to  the  nobleness  and  magnitude  of  his  proper  genius,  he  would 
be  the  foremost  man  of  the  age.  His  acquirements  are  not  small,  — 
his  gift  of  speech  is  excellent  and  even  admirable  of  its  kind.  But  a 
soul  of  such  capacity  and  fineness  should  know  as  much  as  Humboldt 
and  Comte,  and  be  able  to  write  itself  out  with  as  much  strength  and 
delicacy  as  Carlyle  and  Tennyson.  But  I  ask  wondrous  things  of 
him." 

This  unexpected  acquaintance  between  Miss  Martineau  and 
Mr.  Atkinson  became  a  firm  and  lasting  friendship.  Being  so 
much  younger  than  herself,  —  brother  at  once  and  son  in  years 
and  in  reverential  and  sincere  devotedness,  he  received  and  gave 
furtherance  in  their  scientific  studies  ;  and  was  induced  by  her 
to  give  the  world  the  benefit  of  those  studies  in  the  work  they 
published  in  concert, — the  "Letters  on  the  Laws  of  Man's 
Nature  and  Development." 


3G6 


MEMORIALS. 


Harriet  Martineaus  works  during  this  "  passive  period  "  were, 
"  Deerbrook,"  "  The  Hour  and  the  Man,"  "  Settlers  at  Home," 
"  Peasant  and  Prince,"  "  Feats  on  the  Fiord,"  "  Crofton  Boys," 
"  Guide  to  Service,"  "  The  Dressmaker,"  "  The  Maid  of  all 
Work,"  "  The  Housemaid,"  "  Life  in  the  Sick-Rooin,"  "  Letters 
on  Mesmerism,"  or  sixteen  volumes  by  English  publication 
estimate. 

This  was  what  Dr.  Walter  Channing  presented  to  the  Ameri- 
can faculty  in  a  medical  publication,  in  warning  against  pam- 
pered idleness,  as  a  bedridden  case. 

The  opinions  of  the  readers  of  "  Deerbrook  "  have  been  as  va- 
rious as  possible ;  one  thinking  it  a  proof  of  the  inferiority  to 
themselves  to  which  great  writers  sometimes  sink,  and  another 
declaring  it  to  be  "  one  of  the  eight  great  novels  of  the  world," 
while  the  reading  world  delights  in  it  up  to  the  present  time. 

As  one  good  deed  or  thought  helps  another,  so  her  home 
deeds  were  strengthened  by  her  foreign  aspirations.  Witness 
the  following  letter  to  an  American  friend  at  this  time. 

EXTRACT  FROM  A  LETTER  FROM  HARRIET  MARTI  NE  AIL 

Our  greatest  achievement,  of  late,  has  been  the  obtaining  of  the 
penny  postage.  I  question  whether  there  be  now  time  left  for  the 
working  of  beneficent  measures  to  save  us  from  violent  revolution  ; 
but  if  there  be,  none  will  work  better  than  this.  It  will  do  more  lor 
the  circulation  of  ideas,  for  the  fostering  of  domestic  affections,  for 
the  humanizing  of  the  mass  generally,  than  any  other  single  measure 
that  our  national  wit  can  devise.  Have  you  read  the  evidence  before 
the  Bankers'  and  Merchants'  Committee  ?  Did  you  see,  for  one 
instance,  the  proof  that  the  morals  of  a  regiment  depend  mainly  on 
the  readiness  of  the  commanding  officer  in  franking  the  soldiers' 
family  letters  ?  We  are  all  putting  up  our  letter-boxes  on  our  hall 
doors  with  great  glee,  anticipating  the  hearing  from  brothers  and 
sisters,  —  a  line  or  two  almost  every  day.  The  slips  in  the  doors  are 
to  save  the  postmen's  time,  —  the  great  point  being  how  many  letters 
may  be  delivered  within  a  given  time,  the  postage  being  paid  in  the 
price  of  the  envelopes  or  paper.  So  all  who  wish  well  to  the  plan 
are  having  slips  in  their  doors.  It  is  proved  that  poor  people  do 
write,  or  get  letters  written,  viherever  a  franking  privilege  exists. 
When  January  comes  round,  do  give  your  sympathy  to  all  the  poor 


CONSEQUENCES,  —  TO  LIFE  PASSIVE. 


367 


pastors'  and  tradesmen's  and  artisans'  families,  who  can  at  last  write 
to  one  another  as  if  they  were  all  M.  Ps.  The  stimulus  to  trade, 
too,  will  be  prodigious.  Rowland  Hill  is  very  quiet  in  the  mjdst 
of  his  triumph  ;  but  he  must  be  very  happy.  He  has  never  been 
known  to  lose  his  temper,  or  be  in  any  way  at  fault,  since  he  first 
revealed  his  scheme. 

In  consequence  of  words  like  these  from  her  in  a  letter  to 
himself,  Mr.  Hill,  the  prime  mover  and  conductor  of  this  great 
achievement,  replied  thus  :  "  An  expression  of  approbation  from 
you  more  than  repays  me  for  whatever  I  have  done." 

It  was  just  after  the  publication  of  "  The  Hour  and  the  Man  " 
that  Garrison  wrote  thus  of  Harriet  Martineau  in  remembrance 
of  all  her  great  devotedness  :  — 

SONNET. 

England  !  I  grant  that  thou  dost  justly  boast 

Of  splendid  geniuses  beyond  compare  ; 

Men  great  and  gallant,  —  women  good  and  fair,  — 
Skilled  in  all  arts,  and  filling  every  post 
Of  learning,  science,  fame,  —  a  mighty  host  I 

Poets  divine,  and  benefactors  rare,  — 

Statesmen,  —  philosophers,  —  and  they  who  dare 
Boldly  to  explore  heaven's  vast  and  boundless  coast. 
To  one  alone  I  dedicate  this  rhyme, 

Whose  virtues  with  a  starry  lustre  glow  ; 

Whose  heart  is  large,  whose  spirit  is  sublime, 
The  friend  of  liberty,  of  wrong  the  foe  : 
Long  be  inscribed  upon  the  roll  of  Time 
The  name,  the  worth,  the  works  of  Harriet  Martineau  ! 


FOREIGN  LIFE, -EASTERN. 


"  I  felt  my  brow  strike  against  the  stairway,  and  in  an  instant  my  feet  were 

on  the  steps  I  perceived  that  each  successive  step,  as  my  foot  left  it, 

broke  away  from  beneath  me  And  thus  did  I  for  a  few  seconds  continue 

to  ascend  Till,  happy  as  a  shipwrecked  mariner  at  the  first  touch  of 

land,  I  found  my  feet  on  firm  ground."  —  Moore. 

Harriet  Martin eau's  health  restored,  and  with  it  her  restora- 
tion to  what  was  always  so  precious  to  her,  —  the  society  of  her 
family  and  friends,  —  her  mesmeric  mission  accomplished,  her 
house  built  and  time  taken  to  confirm  her  cure,  the  way  then 
opened  for  the  best  use  of  her  renovated  powers. 

She  had  lived  the  life  of  her  time,  in  sympathy  with  its  every 
variety  of  human  being,  and  she  was  now,  by  sympathy,  to  enter 
into  the  life  of  all  time ;  passing  successively,  by  means  of  modern 
travel,  through  the  fourfold  life  of  Eastern  antiquity.  The  book 
she  subsequently  wrote,  combining  as  it  does  the  deepest  studies, 
thoughts,  and  feelings  with  the  interests  and  acts  of  daily  life  in 
the  lands  called  "  blest  "  and  "  cursed  "  and  "  holy,"  —  the  lands 
of  the  pyramids  and  of  the  desert,  her  thoughts  meanwhile  sweep- 
ing through  all  time  from  Menes  to  Moses,  and  from  Nazareth  to 
Mecca,  —  fully  merits  the  title  of  "  Eastern  Life,  Present  and 
Past." 

It  harmonizes  what  is  perdurable  in  the  four  faiths  of  Egypt, 
Sinai,  Palestine,  and  Syria  ;  and  shows  how  the  main  ideas  of 
moral  obligation,  strict  retribution,  the  supreme  desire  of  moral 
good,  and  the  everlasting  beauty  of  holiness  are  ever  passing 
through  all  systems  from  age  to  age,  gathering  to  themselves  all 
with  which  they  are  in  agreement,  and  finally  annihilating  all 
besides,  and  crowning  with  blessings  the  whole  human  race. 

As  Harriet  Martineau's  life  was  a  continual  progress,  it  might 


370 


MEMORIALS. 


be  expected  that,  after  such  far-reaching  thoughts  as  she  has 
recorded,  she  should  begin  to  cast  back  a  depreciatory  glance 
upon  what  was  transient  in  her  life  in  America  and  her  life  in  a 
sick-room,  —  as,  for  example,  upon  the  metaphysical  disquisitions 
and  the  traditional  forms,  —  while  seizing  with  an  ever- strength- 
ening grasp  on  what  is  everlasting.  Philosophy  was  superseding 
metaphysics. 

Besides  being  a  standing  benefit  to  Eastern  travellers,  the 
book  keeps  its  place  as  a  way-mark  and  stands  as  a  philosophical 
stepping-stone  in  the  public  mind.  On  its  first  appearance,  thirty 
years  ago,  it  was  warmly  praised,  with  a  reservation.  Now,  its 
reappearance  is  hailed  with  unreserved  satisfaction.  One  of  her 
latest  acts  was  to  write  a  preface  for  the  new  edition.  Of  course 
there  are  never  wanting  those  who  stigmatize  this  work  of  a 
good  heart  seeking  and  appropriating  its  own  through  the  past, 
as  an  unpardonable  deviation  from  the  present ;  but  the  book  is 
generally  felt  to  be  one  of  those  things  which  survive  their  day, 
to  light  the  path  of  those  about  to  enter  upon  a  serious  search  for 
truth.  It  is  a  preparation  of  heart,  and  the  mind  soon  follows 
the  heart's  lead. 

To  know  the  impression  it  made  on  its  first  appearance  on 
minds  qualified  by  literary  cultivation  to  appreciate  it  in  part, 
one  should  turn  back  to  the  "Edinburgh  Review"  of  1848, 
where  one  of  the  representatives  of  literature  spoke  thus  warmly 
of  it,  selecting  for  commendation  the  description  of  the  temples 
of  Philce. 

"  A  work  giving  fresh  interest  to  the  beaten  track  of  Egyptian  travel 
and  researches  was  put  into  our  hands,  —  Miss  Martineau's  '  Eastern 
Life,'  of  which  the  first  volume  and  part  of  the  second  relate  to 
'  Egypt  and  its  Faith.'  Excellent  as  a  book  of  travels,  it  is  equally 
excellent  as  an  adjunct  to  history.  Miss  Martineau  unites  the  ob- 
servant with  the  learned  traveller,  sees  for  herself,  even  after  Eothen  ; 
and  lias  put  spirit  into  the  dry  bones  of  Champollion,  Wilkinson,  and 
Lane.  The  bustle  of  Cairo  and  the  solitude  of  Thebes  are  sketched 
with  equal  power  and  truth  ;  even  the  desert  has  its  gorgeous  hues, 
and  the  silence  of  centuries  becomes  eloquent  in  her  pages.  A  single 
extract  is  all  we  can  afford  at  present.  Were  we  looking  out  for  a 
merely  descriptive  or  a  merely  reflective  passage,  or  for  one  startling 


FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  EASTERN. 


371 


from  its  speculative  boldness,  we  should  be  at  a  loss  where  to  begin 
and  where  to  end.  But  as  we  must  begin  and  end  with  a  single  ex- 
tract, we  have  selected  the  following  observations,  as  not  only  true  in 
themselves,  when  properly  limited  and  understood,  but  of  general 
application  to  all  researches  which  have  for  their  object  the  practical 
moral  and  intellectual  life  of  antiquity.  The  tendency  of  Europe,  at 
the  revival  of  classical  learning,  was  to  idolize  the  past.  We  now 
incline  to  desecrate  and  depose  it.  The  earlier  propensity  was  that 
of  the  bookworm  ;  the  latter  is  that  of  the  sciolist.  Surely  there  is 
a  medium  in  which  scepticism  may  acquiesce  and  faith  repose  ;  in 
which  research  and  reverence  may  be  reconciled,  and  the  present 
illustrate  without  disfiguring  the  past.  Detur  hcec  venia  antiquitati 
ut,  rniscendo  humana  divinis,  primordia  augustiora  faciat" 

In  order  to  possess  at  first  hand  the  vivid  descriptions  and 
penetrative  thoughts  from  which  the  book  on  Eastern  Life 
was  made,  one  must  search  the  voluminous  Eastern  Journal. 
It  is  filled  not  only  with  wayside  adventures  and  interviews 
with  persons  of  all  nations,  but  also  with  citations  from  past 
writers  in  comparison  with  present  conditions,  accompanied  by 
pencil-drawings  illustrating  the  temples  and  architecture,  the 
rocks  and  various  changes  of  scenery  through  which  the  little 
party  passed,  amid  the  bustle  of  Cairo  and  the  solitude  of  Thebes, 
—  and  so  onward.  One  should  travel  in  imagination  in  com- 
pany with  these  closely  written  pages  in  Nile  boats  and  on  cam- 
els' backs  to  the  journey's  end ;  for  it  is  but  here  and  there  a 
glance  that  can  in  this  place  be  afforded,  whether  at  things  or 
thoughts.  But  these  are  not  countries,  as  she  herself  says  of 
Egypt,  to  go  to  for  recreation. 

"  All  is  too  suggestive  and  too  confounding  to  be  met  but  in  the 
spirit  of  study.  One's  powers  of  observation  sink  under  the  perpetual 
exercise  of  thought  ;  and  the  light-hearted  voyager  who  sets  forth 
from  Cairo  eager  for  new  scenes  and  days  of  frolic,  comes  back  an 
antique,  a  citizen  of  the  world  of  six  thousand  years  ago." 

EASTERN  JOURNAL. 

....  I  used  to  be  surprised  to  find  how  much  less  preternatural 
Shakspere  appeared  after  I  became  acquainted  with  some  of  the 
elder  dramatists  ;  and  for  a  long  time  I  have  been  becoming  aware 


372 


MEMORIALS. 


bow  much  Judaism  owes  to  Egyptian  predecession,  and  Christianity 
to  both  ;  and  to  heathen  wisdom  mingled  with  it,  —  not  by  Christian- 
ity, but  by  the  recorders  of  the  Gospel.  And  I  see  much  less  advance 
upon  the  wisdom  of  heathendom  than  I  used  to  suppose  ;  the  chief  won- 
der to  me  now  being  in  the  comprehensiveness  of  mind  which  existed 
in  a  Jew,  and  in  the  popular  purport  of  his  mission  and  instructions. 
And  the  farther  I  go  in  an  Eastern  country  the  more  natural  and 
accountable  seems  the  whole  matter,  —  the  more  easily  supposable  in 
the  ordinary  course  of  human  thought  and  action.  And  to  me  it  is 
much  more  animating  and  encouraging  to  see  that,  in  natural  course, 
and  by  ordinary  operation  of  universal  faculties,  prophets  and  sav- 
iours arise,  and  will  doubtless  continue  to  arise,  than  to  believe  that 
by  a  special  intervention  one  Redeemer  was  once  sent,  whose  influ- 
ence has  certainly,  thus  far,  not  been  adequate  to  so  singular  an 
occasion  and  office.  What  I  already  see  and  learn  of  Oriental  life 
and  modes  of  thought  takes  as  much  from  the  marvellousness  of  the 
Bible  as  it  enhances  the  hopefulness  of  its  purposes  and  of  the  des- 
tiny of  universal  man.  It  does  not  follow  from  this  that  the  best 
prepared  and  exercised  imagination  will  not  on  the  spot  see  the  deep- 
est and  the  most  clearly,  —  even  as  Lord  Byron  could  see  more  of  the 
beauties  of  Lake  Leman  than  a  dolt,  though  he  found  it  impossible 
to  write  poetry  in  the  actual  scene,  and  had  to  wait  till  he  got  within 
four  walls,  as  all  writers  have  to  do  who  write  any  thing  worth 
reading,  unless  they  have  power  of  abstraction  enough  to  enable  them 
to  abolish  their  surroundings.  Surely  the  destiny  of  man  is  secure 
and  clear  enough  under  these  great  conditions,  —  that  he  shall  be  for 
ever  living  in  the  presence  of  and  in  general  allegiance  to  great  ideas 
as  historical  facts,  till  he  can  entertain  them  fitly  for  their  own  sake, 
and  that  by  the  natural  structure  of  the  human  mind  such  great 
ideas  must  for  ever  be  arising  in  the  succession  needed  ;  the  order 
being,  Need,  Appliance,  Superstition,  Philosophy,  Wisdom,  —  a  new 
Need  having  meantime  arisen  to  animate,  a  new  Gain  through  the 
same  process. 

Then  follows  a  rapid  wayside  story  of  interviews  with  Selim 
Pasha ;  and  the  description  that  gives  local  colour  to  her  book  :  — 

Yellow  beaches,  shady  palms,  rugged  Libyan  Hills,  glowing  red 
and  orange  sunsets  with  green  and  lilac  shed  between  upon  the 
waters,  the  young  moon  meanwhile  so  bright  behind  the  branches  of 
trees  that  any  one  would  have  noted  it,  notwithstanding  the  surround- 
ing brightness,  as  a  hazy  heavenly  body.    Moored  to  an  island  for 


FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  EASTERN. 


373 


the  night.  The  country  fertile  and  much  tilled  ;  the  people  in  good 
condition.  Many  water-draughts.  The  men  work  only  two  hours  at 
a  time.  A  voice  along  the  banks  proclaims  the  resting-time.  They 
are  mostly  small  proprietors.  Much  tobacco  and  millet.  Mr.  Yates 
gathered  what  seems  to  be  cotton.  The  yellow  flower  beautiful. 
Castor-oil  plant  beautiful  too.  I  suppose  the  dogs  of  the  peasantry 
are  really  formidable,  from  the  warnings  given  to  me  of  them.  But 
I  never  remember  to  be  afraid  of  them.  The  excitement  about  Thebes 
now  began.  We  were  looking  towards  the  Libyan  Hills  which  con- 
tained the  tombs  of  the  kings.  We  got  into  a  wind  which  carried 
us  nimbly  on  towards  the  great  point  of  our  voyage.  To  the  east 
spread  a  wide,  level  country,  backed  by  peaked  mountains,  quite 
unlike  the  massive  Arabian  rocks  with  which  we  had  become  so 
familiar. 

Alee  pointed  out  some  of  the  heavy  Karnac  ruins  behind  the  wood 
on  the  eastern  bank.  Very  large  and  massive  they  looked.  But  the 
chief  interest,  as  yet,  was  on  the  other  shore.  There  we  saw  through 
glasses,  and  pretty  clearly  with  the  naked  eye,  traces  every  where 
of  mighty  works,  which  seem  to  show  that,  if  one  could  blow  away 
the  sand,  a  whole  realm  of  architectural  grandeur  would  appear. 
Long  rows  of  square  apertures  indicated  the  vast  burying-places. 
Straggling  remains  of  buildings  wandered  down  the  declivities  of 
sand.  And  then  the  Memnonium  appeared,  and  I  could  see  its  pil- 
lars of  colossal  statues  ;  and  next  we  saw  —  and  never  shall  I  lose 
the  impression  —  The  Two  I  —  the  Memnon  and  his  brother,  —  sitting 
alone  and  serene,  the  most  majestic  pair  ever,  perhaps,  conceived  of 
by  the  imagination  of  art.  No  description  of  this  scene  can  ever 
avail ;  it  cannot  convey  the  vastness  of  the  surroundings,  the  expanses 
of  sand,  the  rear-guard  of  mountains,  the  spread  and  flow  of  the  river, 
the  sparse  character  of  the  remains  and  the  extent  which  they  claim 
for  themselves.  The  lines  of  the  scenery  seem  to  enhance  the  vast- 
ness ;  the  almost  uniformity  of  land-colouring,  of  the  natural  and 
artificial  features,  with  the  vivid  green  of  the  intermediate  shores, 
where  Arabs  and  camels  and  buffaloes  were  busy  (the  modern  world 
obtruding  itself  before  the  ancient),  the  blue  or  gray  river,  reach  be- 
hind reach  where  divided  by  green  promontories,  —  the  softness  of  all 
this  is  not  to  be  conveyed  to  a  European  conception.  I  like  the  old 
name  for  this  part  of  Thebes,  — "  The  Libyan  Suburb."  I  first 
stepped  ashore  at  Luxor.  Alee  had  to  buy  a  sheep  and  some  bread  ; 
so  we  took  a  guide  who  could  speak  English,  and  set  off  for  the  ruins. 
First  were  conspicuous  the  fourteen  pillars  which  front  the  river  in 


374 


MEMORIALS. 


a  double  row.  But  we  went  first  to  the  great  entrance  of  the  temple. 
No  preconception  can  be  formed  of  these  places.  It  was  not  the 
vastness  of  the  buildings  which  strikes  one  here,  but  their  being 
dimly  covered  with  sculptures,  so  old,  so  spirited,  so  multitudinous  ! 
The  stones  are  in  many  places  parting,  for  the  cement  is  gone,  and 
the  figures  of  men  and  horses  extend  over  the  cracks,  as  full  of  life 
as  if  painted.  But  the  guardian  colossi  !  What  mighty  creatures  they 
are  !  The  massive  shoulders,  and  bend  of  the  arm,  and  serene  air 
of  fixity,  how  they  make  one  long  to  see  the  whole  !  A  third  helmet 
is  visible,  and  a  fourth  among  the  Arab  huts  elsewhere,  —  those  mis- 
erable round  patches  which  destroy  all  unity  of  impression  about  this 
awful  building.  I  was  much  struck  with  the  nearly  buried  columns, 
with  the  melon  or  lotus  (or  what  ?)  shaped  capitals,  which  are  hardly 
seen  from  the  river.  What  vast  stones  rest  on  them  !  One  of  these 
architrave  stones  of  the  other  range  (the  fourteen)  has  fallen  upon  the 
rims  of  the  cup  composing  the  capital  without  breaking  it.  Yet  the 
stone  is  not  granite.  These  last  capitals  were  all  painted,  and  the 
blossoms,  buds,  and  leaves  which  adorned  the  flower-like  capitals 
were  very  distinct. 

The  one  sensation,  after  all,  was  the  sight  of  the  Memnon  pair  on 
the  Gournon  side.  To  conceive  of  the  avenue  of  sphinxes  from  the 
main  entrance  here  at  Karnac,  and  then  to  look  from  another  face 
over  the  river  to  these  sitting  statues,  and  think  of  them  as  the  out- 
posts of  the  great  temple  there,  —  what  a  chain  of  magnificence  was 
this  !  Certainly  no  work  of  human  hands  ever  before  impressed  me 
with  any  sense  of  the  sublime  like  these  statues.  There  is  an  air  of 
human  vigilance  about  them,  amidst  their  desert  and  the  vastness  of 
the  scene,  which  is  truly  awe-striking.  And  one  wonders  that  works 
so  primitive  should  reach  the  sense  of  the  soul  more  effectually  than 
those  which  are  the  result  of  centuries  of  experience  and  experiment. 
These  and  many  wondrous  detached  portions  of  the  temple,  dispersed 
among  Arab  ovens,  stables,  and  dwellings,  were  all  we  now  saw.  The 
rest,  on  our  return. 

The  people  looked  well,  intelligent,  and  sleek,  for  the  most  part. 
They  crowded  around  us  

The  rank  held  by  the  women  in  old  Egypt  is  a  most  striking  con- 
sideration. Are  there  any  other  instances  ?  The  Germans  were  dis- 
tinguished for  this,  but  in  quite  a  different  way.  There  seems  to 
have  been  a  real  equality  among  the  old  Egyptians  which  indicates  a 
degree  of  enlightenment  which  may  make  their  lofty  mythology  not 
a  single  marvel. 


FOREIGN  LIFE,  —  EASTERN. 


375 


Then  Philce  in  descriptive  fulness,  with  ground-plan  and  all 
its  special  temples,  courts,  corridors,  and  avenues,  omitting  only 
the  lateral  chambers ;  "  but  this,'1  she  says,  "  is  from  memory 
only ;  and  quite  untrustworthy." 

Doubtless  since  she  asserts  it,  so  it  is  j  but  her  memory,  as  a 
general  thing,  was  wellnigh  unexampled.  Those  who  knew  her 
best  say  she  outrivalled  Macaulay.  "  She  never  forgot  any 
thing."  She  goes  on,  with  an  expression  of  satisfaction  at  what 
she  has  done  :  — 

"  The  satisfaction  of  the  clearing  up  of  my  mind  about  the  contents 
of  Philce  is  greater  than  I  could  have  supposed  ;  and  it  has  left 
imagery,  and  old  processions  by  water  to  the  sacred  isle,  such  as  I 
could  not  have  had  by  any  meaner  experience  than  that  of  this  day." 

Here  she  met  Mr.  Findlay  and  Prince  Czartoryski,  between 
whom  and  herself  there  was  the  bond  of  deep  interest  in 
Poland. 

Evening.  —  Settled  myself  ;  saw  the  Creykes,  relations  of  Wilber- 
force,  and  received  Count  Zamoyski.  I  omitted  to  mention  an  inscrip- 
tion in  French,  in  the  side  of  the  large  propylon,  relating  the  arrival 
here  of  the  republican  army  under  Dessaix  in  1799  ;  and  over  it  is  a 
line  printed,  —  "  La  page  de  l'histoire  ne  doit  pas  etre  delie." 

For  a  delightful  chapter  of  Eastern  life  one  has  only  to  turn 
to  the  preceding  volume.  Sufficient  in  addition  to  say,  that  after 
Harriet  Martineau's  return,  her  "  dear  aunt  Margaret  Eankin " 
did  not  wait  in  vain  for  the  story  of  wonders  which  she  had 
bespoken;  —  "from  your  own  lips,"  "with  bottles  of  water 
from  the  Jordan  and  from  the  Nile ;  for  I  cannot  expect  you 
to  purloin  a  step  of  four  feet  long  from  the  great  Pyramid." 

This  book  was  the  occasion  of  some  comical  experiences.  A 
lady  whom  she  had  mentioned  with  reproof,  though  not  by 
name,  for  having  purloined  specimens  of  Egyptian  antiquity 
from  some  cave  or  temple,  accused  her  in  the  "  Times"  of  false 
witness,  the  lady  having  never  been  at  the  place  mentioned. 
Miss  Martin eau  promptly  replied  that,  having  become  aware  of 
that  fact,  she  had  already  ordered  a  correction  to  be  made  in  the 
next  edition.    For  the  rest,  as  the  spoliation  remained  a  fact, 


376 


MEMORIALS. 


no  correction  was  needed.  The  lady  responded  at  much  length, 
awaiting  a  reply.  Miss  Martineau  repeated  her  assurance  of 
a  correction  as  to  the  locality,  reaffirming  the  fact.  The  lady 
threatened  a  libel  suit,  and  there  the  matter  ended. 

A  second  experience  was  no  laughing  matter,  for  it  concerned 
the  feelings  of  a  young  churchman,  who  feared  to  lose  the 
approbation  of  his  bishop  if  he  should  become  involved  in  her 
account  of  "  a  young  clergyman  of  the  church  of  England  carry- 
ing candles  in  a  procession  "  during  some  ceremony  at  Jerusalem. 
In  this  instance  she  was  fortunately  able  to  obviate  all  mischief ; 
but  unforeseen  risks,  it  seems,  beset  the  path  of  Eastern  as  well 
as  Western  travellers.  In  compensation,  however,  she  had  often 
been  able  to  do  individual  good  by  the  way.  "You  have 
probably  heard,"  says  Mr.  Edward  W.  Lane,  the  author  and 
Oriental  scholar  whom  she  met  at  Cairo,  "of  the  patronage 
accorded  me  by  our  government.  It  is  most  highly  gratify- 
ing to  me ;  and  for  it  I  feel  that  my  thanks  are  due  to  you  as 
well  as  to  others." 

She  entered  her  newly  built  house,  that  was  to  be  for  years 
the  home  of  health  and  happy  industry,  of  study  and  of  strenu- 
ously active  benevolence,  of  which  we  have  her  own  description, 
on  the  7th  of  April,  1846. 

The  mental  field  that  had  as  she  thought  been  lying  fallow 
during  the  passive  period  at  Tynemouth  now  showed  the  germs 
it  had  been  unconsciously  cherishing ;  and,  while  scattering  into 
the  field  of  the  world  such  seed-growths  as  "  Eastern  Life,  Past 
and  Present,"  and  "  The  Letters  on  the  Laws  of  Man's  Nature 
and  Development,"  she  was  busy  with  her  great  works,  "  The 
History  of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace,"  "  Comte  "  (Philosophie  Posi- 
tive), and  constant  leading  articles  for  the  "  Daily  Xews." 


HOME. 


"  Hands  full  of  hearty  labours  :  paius  that  pay 
And  prize  themselves,  —  do  much  that  more  they  may. 
No  cruel  guard  of  diligent  cares,  that  keep 
Crowned  woe  awake,  as  things  too  wise  for  sleep  : 
But  reverent  discipline,  religious  fear, 
And  soft  obedience  find  sweet  biding  here. 
Silence  and  sacred  rest,  peace  and  pure  joys,  — 
Kind  loves  keep  house,  lie  close,  and  make  no  noise ; 
And  room  enough  for  monarchs,  while  none  swells 
Beyond  the  limits  of  contentful  cells. 
The  self-remembering  soul  sweetly  recovers 
Her  kindred  with  the  stars  :  not  basely  hovers 
Below,  — but  meditates  the  immortal  way, 
Home  to  the  source  of  light,  and  intellectual  day." 

Crashaw. 

How  many  travellers  from  all  lands  have  visited  this  dwelling 
among  the  Westmoreland  mountains,  as  a  shrine !  Yet  varied  and 
beautiful  in  its  grandeur  as  the  surrounding  region  is,  one  was 
always  too  much  absorbed  in  listening  to  the  genius  of  the  place 
to  be  able  to  observe  the  scene  without  or  the  surroundings 
within.  For  the  first,  I  need  only  indicate  her  "  Guide  "  to  the 
land  she  loved  so  well,  and  her  papers  in  "  Sartain's  Philadelphia 
Magazine,"  where  are  to  be  found  incomparably  accurate  and 
beautiful  pictures  of  the  Lake  country.  But  she  has  not  men- 
tioned "  The  Knoll,"  restrained  by  that  same  sentiment  that 
made  her  refuse  to  gratify  the  friends  who  entreated  her  to  allow 
her  initials  to  be  drilled  into  the  stone  above  her  door :  "  I 
think  such  things  savour  of  vanity."  On  entering  it,  guests 
were  merely  aware  of  being  in  a  dwelling  of  the  utmost  con- 
venience and  comfort ;  in  a  home  pervaded  with  the  subtle 
influence  of  well-ordered  and  elegant  hospitality.    And  although 


378 


MEMORIALS. 


one  could  not  then,  at  first,  have  told  the  cause,  it  is  made  clear 
by  that  passage  of  her  Autobiography  which  tells  of  the  purchase 
of  the  land  and  the  building  of  the  house,  why  the  whole  seemed 
so  worthy  of  her :  she  had  fashioned  it  after  her  own  likeness. 
And  one  desiring  to  gratify  many  feels  bound  of  course  to  note 
the  particulars  by  which  the  general  effect  is  produced,  as  ob- 
served in  the  leisure  of  an  after  day.  The  house  is  perfectly 
planned  for  all  her  purposes,  being  roomy  and  convenient.  It  is 
built  of  the  dark  gray  Westmoreland  stone,  in  the  fashion  of  the 
houses  in  Elizabeth's  time,  with  large  bay- windows,  gables,  and 
clustering  chimneys,  and  overgrown  to  the  very  eaves  with  ivy, 
jasmine,  the  snowberry  plant,  passion-flowers,  and  climbing 
roses,  which  make  a  harbourage  for  the  birds.  Scores  of  them 
fly  out  of  it  at  sunset,  if  you  do  but  open  the  door,  returning 
instantly  to  their  perch  among  the  leaves ;  so  safe  and  quiet  are 
their  lives  here.  The  house  is  built  on  a  little  knoll,  —  and 
hence  its  name,  —  in  the  valley  of  the  Eotha,  nearest  to  the 
village  of  Ambleside,  a  mile  beyond  Lake  Windermere. 

On  approaching  from  the  village,  no  part  of  the  building  can 
be  seen  from  the  road;  and  you  pass  in  between  massive  lozenge- 
built  gate-posts  by  a  drive  well  planted  with  larches,  beeches, 
holly,  and  a  thicket  of  hawthorn,  laurel,  and  laurustinus, — 
incredulous  and  uncertain  where  it  may  be.  But  following  the 
gravelled  sweep,  a  few  steps  bring  you  suddenly  upon  the  terrace 
before  the  house,  which  fronts  upon  the  valley;  and  thence  you 
look  down  upon  the  parterres  bright  with  a  thousand  flowers 
between.  The  greater  part  of  the  little  domain  —  "  our  farm  of 
two  acres  "  —  is  flanked  to  right  and  left  by  an  oak-copse,  and 
enclosed  by  a  cross-pole  fence  of  larch-wood  entangled  with  rose- 
bushes, —  a  luxury  to  see.  Almost  concealed  by  the  copse,  at 
the  foot  of  the  steps  to  the  left,  below  the  terrace,  is  the  farm- 
servants'  cottage  and  the  cow-house  ;  while  the  little  root-house, 
farther  down,  by  the  lower  gate,  with  its  young  pine-tree  and 
pollard  willow,  makes  a  pretty  accident  in  the  sketch. 

Standing  before  the  charming  woodbine-covered  porch,  on 
3rour  left,  in  the  middle  distance,  lies  the  village  of  Ambleside, 
at  the  foot  of  Wansfell.    Farther  on,  beyond  the  church-spire, 


HOME. 


379 


in  the  valley,  rise  the  more  distant  Furness  Fells,  and  through 
the  near  wide-branching  oak-tree  of  a  thousand  years,  which 
helps  to  draw  the  boundary  of  the  property,  you  catch  a  gleam 
of  Windermere.  Thence  the  eye  climbs  the  steep,  well-wooded 
end  of  Loughrigg ;  and,  following  the  high  horizon  line  in  front, 
notes  the  charming  variety  of  heath  and  shrubbery,  and  green 
fields  and  forest-trees,  along  its  side  as  far  as  Wordsworth's  house 
in  the  Rydal  pass,  through  which  in  early  spring  a  gush  of  wintry 
sunshine  comes  down  towards  evening,  flooding  it  with  beauty  and 
splendour.  All  along  on  Loughrigg  side  are  the  sheep  and  cattle 
pastures ;  and  it  is  a  pretty  sight  to  see  these  white  and  dark 
moving  spots,  that  seem  placed  there  merely  for  beauty,  while 
they  constitute  so  important  a  part  of  the  wealth  of  the  country. 
On  a  mild,  breezy  day  there  rises  a  most  soothing  sound  of  the 
wind  on  its  way  through  the  clumps  of  trees  in  the  valley,  min- 
gled with  the  rushing  of  the  mountain  streams.  The  continual 
strengthening  or  fading  of  the  hills  as  the  mists  grew  denser  or 
were  swept  away,  and  all  the  changes  of  their  colour  from  dawn 
to  sunset,  none  but  herself  could  describe. 

The  low  stone-wall  around  the  terrace  is  marked  by  a  hedge 
of  eglantine  ;  and  I  know  not  whether  its  flowers  in  summer  or 
its  hips  in  winter  make  the  prettiest  effect.  The  large  bay-win- 
dows, still  more  embayed  without  in  ivy,  subjected  the  proprietor 
to  a  tax  of  five  guineas  a  year  at  the  time  they  were  planned. 
But  Harriet  Martineau  knew  she  had  not  laboured  in  vain  for 
the  abolition  of  the  window-tax,  and  she  built  in  the  secure 
determination  that  her  successors,  at  least,  should  enjoy  the 
mountain  landscape  and  the  play  of  clouds,  the  sunlight  and 
the  air,  which  she  had  so  zealously  laboured  to  make  the  heritage 
of  every  cottager.  Her  faith  was  justified.  The  window-tax 
was  long  since  commuted  for  a  very  moderate  house-tax. 

On  the  right  of  the  terrace,  a  flight  of  some  thirty  or  forty 
stone  steps  takes  you  easily  down  to  the  orchard-slope  below, 
where  stands  the  costly  sun-dial,  of  light  gray  granite,  the  gift 
of  her  friend,  Miss  Sturch  of  London.  It  is  fashioned  like  a 
Gothic  font,  affording  seats  on  its  octagonal  base ;  and  catches 
the  eye  like  a  gleaming  speck  from  the  opposite  side  of  the 


380 


MEMORIALS. 


valley,  whence  you  see  The  Knoll  relieved  against  Fairfield,  and 
instantly  distinguished  by  its  dial  from  the  other  dwellings. 
And  surely  the  apostrophe  to  intellectual  illumination,  her  own 
device,  inscribed  upon  the  base,  —  "Light!  come  visit  me!"  —  has 
not  been  made  by  her  in  vain. 

On  the  same  level  is  the  stone-pine  planted  by  Wordsworth  ; 
and  before  you  reach  the  swarded  field,  from  which  you  are 
separated  by  the  iron  fence,  is  a  little  nook  or  grotto  quarried 
into  the  knoll  itself,  and  furnished  with  comfortable  rustic  seats, — 
the  gift  of  her  sister ;  and  having  taken  sanctuary  there  you  may 
feel  safe  though  all  Westmoreland  were  in  pursuit  of  you,  and 
listen  undisturbed  to  the  cawing  of  the  distant  rooks. 

In  view  from  the  terrace  of  this  "  well-neighboured  house,"  as 
Emerson  in  those  old  times  called  it,  curls  the  smoke  of  Fox 
How,  the  residence  of  Dr.  Arnold's  family ;  and  farther  on  lived 
Mr.  Quillinan,  the  son-in-law  of  Wordsworth.  Thus  there  were 
strong  human  interests  and  a  strong  local  glory  around  the  Rocky 
Knoll  when  she  made  it  her  own,  for  Wordsworth  and  many 
another  well-known  name  still  dwelt  there. 

But  not  only  was  Harriet  Martineau's  house  well-neighboured  : 
by  the  most  important  principle  of  decoration  it  was  well-fur- 
nished too  ;  for  of  every  thing  within  it  one  might  affirin  that, 
for  the  best  possible  reasons  that  thing  should  be  there  and  no 
other,  —  almost  every  picture,  object,  and  piece  of  furniture  uniting 
elegant  convenience  and  adornment  with  some  family  remem- 
brance or  token  of  friendship.  The  drawing-room  was  especially 
enriched  by  them.  There  was  placed  the  collection  of  lighter 
and  contemporary  literature,  mostly  the  homage  of  the  authors. 
The  beautiful  carpet,  of  the  time  I  am  telling  of,  was  the  gift  of 
her  friend  Jacob  Bright,  who  procured  the  dimensions  and  had 
it  placed  in  her  absence,  to  give  her  a  pleasant  surprise.  The 
whole  furniture  of  the  room  illustrated  the  points  of  Harriet 
Martineau's  character  by  bringing  to  the  thoughts  of  beholders  the 
persons,  so  numerous  and  so  various,  who,  separately  and  stran- 
gers to  each  other,  had  this  one  experience  in  common,  —  that 
they  were  each  drawn  into  sympathy  by  one  of  the  many  sides 
of  her  powerful  nature.    At  the  entrance,  on  the  right,  stands 


HOME. 


381 


the  marble-mounted  sideboard,  sent  by  her  friend  H.  Crabb 
Eobinson,  the  eminent  English  and  German  student,  the  phi- 
losopher of  the  Unitarians,  the  admired  and  cherished  friend 
of  so  many  distinguished  persons  of  the  last  century,  that  he 
modestly  said  of  himself,  "  Some  men  are  famous  on  their  own 
account :  I  am  famous  for  my  friends."  The  little  silver  alma- 
nac was  a  present  from  her  friend  Mr.  Darwin.  The  stone 
jardiniere  was  given  by  the  proprietors  of  a  neighboring  slate- 
quarry,  on  the  occasion  of  her  visit  to  them  described  in  her 
little  volume  of  Letters  on  Ireland.  Eichmond's  fine  crayon- 
drawing  of  Harriet  Martineau,  of  nearly  life-size,  the  engraving 
from  which  adorns  so  many  dwellings,  placed  nearly  opposite  the 
door  of  entrance,  was  a  homage  from  himself.  "What  touching 
stories  ought  to  be  told  of  so  many  another  useful  and  orna- 
mental object,  all  brought  together  from  different  nations  and 
kindred  and  tongues  and  people  ;  but  a  few  more  must  suffice  as 
illustrating  parts  of  her  own  experience.  On  the  sideboard 
stands  her  brother  Eobert's  gift,  —  the  household  lamp  that 
lighted  her  evenings.  On  a  little  table  is  an  ebony  papeterie, 
the  gift  of  Florence  Nightingale.  The  gold  inkstand  on  another 
was  the  expression  of  her  friend  Lord  Durham's  grateful  appre- 
ciation of  the  restraining  power  she  exercised  over  a  riotous 
population.  The  tea-caddy  was  bought  of  a  poor  and  suffering 
neighbour  at  its  full  price  the  day  before  a  sale  at  which  the 
rest  of  the  furniture  was  sacrificed.  The  pretty  French  clock,  on 
the  centre  bookcase  (which  covered  one  side  of  the  room,  filled 
with  works  principally  of  belles-lettres  given  by  the  authors  of 
the  day),  marks  the  sense  her  family  entertained  of  her  generosity 
in  influencing  her  mother  to  omit  all  mention  of  Harriet  in  her 
will.  The  Prie-Dieu  of  Berlin  tapestry-work,  begun  by  herself 
at  Tynemouth,  was  finished  and  presented  to  her  by  her  nieces, 
her  brother  Eobert's  daughters.  The  statuettes,  Aristides  and 
Niobe,  were  placed  there  by  her  sister  and  her  aunt ;  and  the 
square,  Egyptian-modelled  oaken  pedestals  were  a  part  of  her 
furniture  at  Tynemouth.  The  engraving  of  Scheffer's  "  Christus 
Consolator,"  which  she  enjoyed  and  understood  so  thoroughly, 
was  the  consolation  of  her  sick-room  at  Tynemouth,  through  the 


382 


MEMORIALS. 


kind  thouglitf illness  of  Miss  Adelaide  Kemble.*  Between  the 
©Ugraved  portraits  of  her  friends,  Lord  and  Lady  Durham,  hung 
a  pastel  of  one  of  the  Norwegian  Fiords  (described  in  "  The  Play- 
fellow "),  sent  her  by  Lady  Byron ;  and  above  it,  Eastlake's  gift 
of  his  "Byron's  Dream."  The  full-length  engraving  of  Mrs. 
Fry  was  there,  presented  by  Richmond,  whose  work  it  is.  The 
engraving  after  Raphael  was  a  token  of  regard  from  Mrs.  Carlyle. 
In  her  own  room  hung  Miss  Stephen's  gift,  —  a  water-colour  by 
herself,  —  "  Woodland."  The  other  souvenirs  in  the  drawing- 
room  are  "Mrs.  Calmady's  Children,"  from  her  friend  Evans, 
the  artist ;  Goethe's  "  Mignon,"  from  her  friend  Mr.  Knight.  The 
"  Pet  Antelopes "  is  from  Mrs.  Mackintosh ;  the  portrait  of 
Admiral  Beaufort,  a  present  from  the  Beaufort  family.  "  Corwen 
Inn,"  a  charming  oil-painting  by  Baker,  was  presented  by  Mr. 
Vincent  Thompson ;  an  engraving  of  Sir  William  Napier  is  from 
Lord  Aberdere,  his  son-in-law;  "Christ  and  the  Tribute-Money," 
from  Mrs.  Jameson ;  "A  Heathery  Moor  in  Yorkshire "  is  by 
sister  artists,  the  Misses  Gittings ;  the  Prie-Dieu  is  from  her 
early  friend  and  sister-in-law,  Mrs.  Robert  Martineau.  The  solid 
reading-desk  is  from  Mrs.  Richard  Martineau ;  the  work-box, 
from  her  dear  and  early  friend,  Mrs.  Ker. 

The  flowers  and  plants  with  which  the  room  was  always  filled 
were  also  offerings  from  far  and  near. 

The  large  photograph  of  Colonel  Shaw,  first  white  colonel  of 
the  first  black  regiment  raised  during  the  civil  war  in  America, 
was  sent  to  Harriet  Martineau  by  his  mother,  Mrs.  Francis 
George  Shaw  of  Staten  Island,  N.  Y.  It  was  placed  conspicu- 
ously ;  "  and  it  always  melts  my  heart,"  she  said,  "  to  look  at 
it,  and  think  of  that  great  deed  that  proved  two  races  worthy 
of  each  other,  and  helped  to  save  your  land  for  both !  " 

Across  the  hall,  to  the  left  as  one  enters  the  house,  is  the 
study,  two  sides  of  which  accommodate  the  more  voluminous 
and  useful  of  her  books ;  probably  the  best  woman's  library  ex- 
tant,—  certainly  the  best  I  have  ever  seen,  consisting  of  between 
two  and  three  thousand  volumes.  They  are  books  of  art,  biogra- 
raphy,  education,  general  literature,  geography,  voyages  and 

*  Mrs.  Sartoris. 


HOME. 


383 


travels,  history,  morals  and  politics,  political  economy,  the- 
ology, and  works  of  reference.  This  last  department  was  pecul- 
iarly well  chosen.  There  were  all  sorts  of  annuaries  :  and  first 
the  annual  register,  of  a  hundred  volumes ;  American  ditto  and 
American  Almanac,  a  present  from  Judge  Story;  the  vari- 
ous American  constitutions  of  nation  and  States  ;  reports  of  the 
poor-law  commissions,  annuaries  of  astronomical  observatories, 
Almanack  de  Got  ha,  annual  reports  of  the  antislavery  societies, 
Gorton's  Biographical  Dictionary,  Biographie  Universelle  in 
eighty-three  volumes,  census  returns  of  the  British  Empire,  all  the 
concordances  and  dictionaries,  —  Bayle's,  J ohnson's,  Lempriere's, 
—  dictionaries  of  all  the  classic  and  modern  European  languages. 
Then  there  were  encyclopaedias  of  agriculture  and  essays  on  all 
subjects ;  books  of  jurisprudence  and  prison  discipline ;  school- 
inspectors'  and  sanitary  books,  and  all  possible  hand-books ; 
with  Hone's  popular  works,  and  all  the  useful  works  of  reference 
on  Ireland.  The  Memoires  of  the  French  Institute  were  a 
present  from  Ampere.  Then  there  were  the  reports  of  all  sorts 
of  commissioners,  —  on  education,  mining,  criminal  law,  poor  law, 
idiocy,  and  pauperism  ;  juvenile  books ;  and  catalogues  of  pub- 
lic libraries.  The  purchase  of  these  valuable  works,  necessary 
for  a  political  writer  who  would  fain  make  known  what  the 
world  has  been,  the. better  to  make  it  what  it  ought  to  be,  was  a 
great  but  satisfactory  item  of  her  occasional  expenditure.  There 
were  all  manner  of  books  on  woman's  duties  and  rights.  Knight's 
weekly  volumes  which  she  had  planned  with  the  Countess  of 
Elgin,  Biographical  History  of  Philosophy.  Hardly  an  eminent 
name  of  her  time  that  is  not  affixed  to  some  presentation  copy. 
A  guest  deeply  interested  in  education  took  pains,  with  her  con- 
sent, to  obtain  a  catalogue  in  order  to  be  enabled  to  aid  social- 
science  efforts  in  the  formation  of  town  libraries. 

On  the  walls  hung  two  views  of  Lambton  Castle,  from  the 
Countess  of  Elgin.  In  each  of  the  twelve  panels  of  red  pine  round 
the  bay  window  was  a  cartoon  of  Eaphael  in  wood-engraving, 
from  her  friend  Mr.  Ker.  "  I  '11  tell  you  how  to  treat  this  red 
pine  for  doors  and  wainscoting,"  she  said  to  one  who  was  ad- 
miring it :  "  varnish  when  new,  —  leave  it  two  years,  —  then 


384 


MEMORIALS. 


another  coat,  and  you  have  it  as  you  see."  The  colour  of  the 
carpet  and  curtains,  the  hangings  being  then  in  red  velvet  with 
a  touch  of  gold,  were  in  harmony  with  the  tint  of  the  wood- 
work. 

Imagine,  —  between  globes  and  little  stands  for  precious  ob- 
jects, with  here  and  there  casts  of  Clytie  and  the  Huntress 
Diana,  —  the  bay-window,  filled  with  geraniums,  and  the  library- 
table  with  her  chaise-longue  behind  it,  and  you  have  a  general 
idea  of  this  room,  which  seemed  less  a  library  than  an  oratory, 
consecrated  as  it  was  by  a  devotedness  to  the  world's  welfare  so 
instinctive  as  to  have  become  unconscious ;  but  visitors  were 
always  conscious  of  it,  and  stepped  softly  and  spoke  low,  as  if 
the  place  were  holy. 

"  Voila  ses  saints  I "  said  one  of  them,  standing  before  the 
chimney,  where  was  placed  a  bust  of  Mr.  Atkinson  and  over  it 
the  bas-relief  of  a  friend  which  Harriet  Martineau  had  procured 
to  be  executed  by  Foley.  On  each  side  were  the  engravings  of 
Dr.  Follen  and  Mr.  Garrison.  Over  these  was  the  proof  before 
the  letter  of  the  engraving  of  himself  sent  her  by  Mr.  Ma- 
cready. 

Here  stood  the  library- table,  and  I  must  confess  to  have  shared 
the  general  feeling  in  no  ordinary  degree  as  the  drawers  of  this 
table  were  opened  for  me  :  the  records  of  a  lifetime  —  and  such  a 
lifetime  !  —  placed  in  my  hands  and  at  my  discretion. 

There,  sitting  in  the  seat  which  illness  had  obliged  her  to  quit, 
I  begin  with  the  drawer  at  the  right  hand.  There  are  three  on 
each  side.  These  are  the  labels  on  each  great  package  of  pa- 
pers :  — 

1.  Accounts  and  correspondence  with  booksellers. 

2.  Letters  of  pecuniary  business. 

3.  Letters  of  moral  business. 

4.  Letters  from  strangers  or  otherwise  curious. 

5.  Letters  from  deceased  persons. 

6.  Letters  to  be  returned  unopened. 

7.  Correspondence  with  reviews  and  newspapers. 

8.  Letters  of  literary  business. 

9.  Letters  of  family  business. 

10.  Letters  of  Testimony  and  American  Intercourses. 


HOME. 


385 


No.  1 1  was  two  cardboards  tied  together  with  tape,  inscribed 
"  Unpaid  Bills."  But  there  were  no  papers  between  them,  and, 
as  I  learned,  there  never  had  been. 

Beneath  the  table  was  a  stack  of  tin  boxes  containing  years  of 
journals,  diaries,  jotting  note-books,  sketch-books,  and  accounts. 
"  Take  away  with  you  every  thing  you  want  when  you  go  !  " 
And  that  dear  friend  of  mine  who  *  was  unto  her  as  a  daughter," 
her  niece,  Maria  Martineau,  aided  me  in  the  selection. 

In  every  other  part  of  the  house  tokens  of  love  and  reverence 
and  family  affection  were  as  abundant.  Of  the  more  general 
"Testimonial,"  that  the  preceding  Autobiography  tells  of,  £120 
were  expended  by  the  subscribers  in  a  tea  and  dinner  service, 
the  principal  piece  of  which  was  inscribed  thus  :  — 

Jftetnortal 

OF  A. 

H.  M. 

I  find  allusion  in  her  journal  to  the  first  use  of  it,  on  the 
happy  day  when  the  Ladies  Lambton  came  to  Tynemouth,  and 
"  it  was  a  testimonial  fete." 

Harriet  Martineau's  life  in  this  little  paradise  was  manifold. 
As  mistress  of  a  family  and  as  a  domestic  economist,  one  may 
know  some  of  the  particulars  by  referring  to  her  little  book, 
"  Our  Farm  of  Two  Acres,"  which  is  so  constantly  in  circula- 
tion, and  reprinted  in  America,  "in  the  conviction,"  say  the 
publishers,  "  that  the  local  character  of  the  experiences  will  not 
affect  their  value  to  American  readers."  This  agricultural  ex- 
periment of  hers  was  so  successful  as  to  attract  a  great  deal  of 
notice,  and  influenced  some  proceedings  in  the  neighbourhood. 
A  heavy  package  of  letters  under  my  hand  proves  the  burden 
of  correspondence  that  the  accidental  publication  of  her  letters 
on  cow-keeping  in  the  "  Times  "  occasioned  her.  Her  papers  in 
"  Sartain's  Magazine"  (Philadelphia)  show  her  passionate  enjoy- 
ment of  the  glorious  nature  by  which  she  was  surrounded.  It 
made  her  strong  and  happy  in  her  influential  political  work,  to 

VOL.  II. 


386 


MEMORIALS. 


the  eventual  extent  of  which  more  than  sixteen  hundred  leading 
articles  in  the  "London  Daily  News"  bear  witness.  The  subjects 
of  them  are  as  various  as  the  interests  of  the  world,  of  which  she 
watched  the  fluctuations  with  the  same  calmness  of  deep  emo- 
tion that  shone  in  her  eyes  while  enjoying  the  cloud-shadows 
chasing  each  other  across  the  valley. 

We  know  how  she  looked  in  childhood  and  youth.  There 
was  a  remarkable  change  in  her  appearance  in  mature  age. 
Every  one  noticed  it.  "  How  handsome  she  looks ! "  "  One 
of  the  handsomest  old  ladies  I  have  ever  seen  !  "  "  Does  nt  she 
look  like  a  sovereign  princess  ! "  and  such  like  notes  of  admira- 
tion were  continually  heard ;  and,  indeed,  as  she  sat  in  thought 
at  her  daily  hour  of  rest,  with  her  Berlin  embroidery  by  her 
side,  and  her  beautiful  hands  ("hands  that  the  rod  of  empire 
might  have  swayed ! " )  folded  across  the  newspaper  on  her 
knee,  her  whole  presence  instinct  with  high  thinking  and  good- 
will, her  whole  expression  so  full  of  restful  activity,  it  would 
have  been  difficult  to  find  so  impressive  yet  fascinating  a  pres- 
ence. When  comes  such  another !  Happily  a  trace  —  neces- 
sarily a  faint  one  —  yet  remains  in  Holl's  excellent  engraving 
of  Richmond's  admirable  portrait. 

One  great  secret  of  this  new  beauty  was  the  joy  of  mental 
progress.  She  had  ceased  to  make  her  God  in  human  image ; 
and,  following  the  path  that  stretched  before  her  from  childhood, 
had  thought  and  felt  her  way  to  a  more  satisfactory  worship. 

Her  celebrity  had  always  been  a  tax  in  many  ways,  and  the 
difficult  problem  was  how  to  bear  it  aright. 

It  was  about  this  time  that  she  was  so  overwhelmed  with  the 
ever-increasing  amount  of  correspondence  drawn  to  her  by  a 
general  sense  of  boundless  sympathy  conveyed  in  all  her  writ- 
ings, that  she  found  it  impossible  to  answer  its  demands. 

Her  own  generation,  with  its  questionings  and  plans,  she 
still  had  time  for ;  but  the  young  pressed  so  thickly  around  her 
that  it  seemed  as  if  they  could  neither  do  well  nor  ill ;  do  good 
or  repent  of  evil ;  marry,  choose  a  path  in  life,  or  die,  without 
looking  to  her.  Sister  of  charity  and  spiritual  counsellor  as 
by  nature  she  was,  she  now  found  herself  under  the  absolute 


HOME. 


387 


necessity  of  letting  it  be  generally  known  that  her  whole  life 
would  be  insufficient  to  meet  this  continual  call.  "  They  all  so 
evidently  think  I  am  of  their  own  age !  I  must  try  to  show 
them  their  mistake,  and  be  to  them  even  as  I  am.  Wasn't 
there  Mrs.  Hannah  More  and  Mrs.  Edge-worth?  I  see  there 
were  reasons  for  it :  I  will  be  Mrs.  Harriet  Martineau,  which 
will,  besides,  obviate  mistakes  in  the  delivery  of  letters,  there 
are  so  many  Misses  Martineau  ! "  This  arrangement  so  soon 
occasioned  a  sensible  relief,  that  she  had  reason  to  congratulate 
herself  on  having  so  easily  diminished  the  inconvenience  with- 
out wounding  the  sympathies  of  the  elders  :  many  old  friends 
soon  fell  in  with  her  wishes,  and  numbers  of  them  wrote  prom- 
issory notes,  as  it  were,  beginning  their  letters,  "  Dear  Mistress 
Harriet ; "  but  the  public  at  large  were  true  to  their  first  love, 
and,  unaware  how  many  were  the  misses  of  the  same  name, 
would  never  acknowledge  her  but  as  Miss  Martineau. 

It  was  at  The  Knoll,  at  about  this  period,  that,  in  the  midst 
of  many  lighter  books,  her  most  laborious  works  were  written. 
One  was  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace,  all  after  the  first  book  ;  and  it 
was  that  unexampled  thing,  a  history  on  moral  principles  of  the 
time  not  yet  passed  away. 

Mrs.  Martineau  entered  The  Knoll  in  1846,  on  the  7th  of 
April ;  and  it  was  while  preparing  to  do  so,  on  the  25th  of  March, 
that  her  friend  Macready 

"  Saw  a  brown-faced  looking  woman  watching  for  the  coach ;  thought 
I  knew  the  face  ;  looked  out  of  window ;  it  was  Miss  Martineau.  She 
came  to  the  inn  where  we  stopped  ;  a  few  words  passed  ;  she  told  me 
to  get  my  dinner  at  the  inn,  as  she  had  but  one  room,  and  then  come 
to  her.  I  got  a  very  bad  dinner  and  set  out  to  her  old  lodgings,  to 
which  the  servant  had  misdirected  me  ;  met  her  on  my  return  in 
search  of  me,  and  walked  with  her  to  her  newly  built  or  building 
house,  —  a  most  commodious,  beautifully  situated,  and  desirable  resi- 
dence in  all  respects.  I  could  not  but  look  with  wonder  at  the  brown 
hue  of  health  upon  her  face,  and  see  her  firm  and  almost  manly  strides 
as  she  walked  along  with  me  to  Fox  How,  Dr.  Arnold's  place,  from 
which  the  family  are  at  present  abroad.  We  walked  on  to  Rydal 
Mount,  to  call  on  Wordsworth,  who  was  ill  in  bed,  and  had  had 
leeches  this  morning.    I  left  my  regards,  &c,  took  a  walk  along  his 


388 


MEMORIALS. 


terraces,  and,  returning  to  my  inn,  soon  after  rejoined  Miss  Martineau 
at  Mrs.  Davy's,  with  whom  and  Mr.  Greg  I  took  tea  and  passed  a 
very  agreeable  evening.  I  had  received  a  pamphlet  and  long  letter 
from  Professor  Gregory  on  the  subject  of  mesmerism,  on  which  we 
had  talked  a  little  at  Major  Thorn's,  on  Saturday  last ;  it  is  a  trans- 
lation of  Reichenbach,  and,  with  some  curious  facts  mentioned  by 
Miss  Martineau,  certainly  made  me  pause  in  my  utter  rejection  of 
this  hitherto  inscrutable  and  mysterious  power,  if  power  it  really  be." 

Of  his  next  day's  visit  to  The  Knoll :  — 

"  I  do  enjoy  the  air,  the  hills  and  streams,  that  are  keeping  up  their 
gentle  noise  all  around  me  ;  the  morning  was  one  of  the  best  of  early 
spring's.  I  planted  two  oaks  for  Harriet  Martineau,  which,  with  her 
small  spade,  cost  me  some  strain  of  the  back.  The  more  I  see  of  her 
pretty  house  the  more  I  am  pleased  with  it ;  it  has  not,  that  I  per- 
ceive, one  point  of  objection,  with  an  infinite  number  of  recommend- 
able  qualities.  We  walked  to  the  chapel  over  the  Brathay,  took  a 
lovely  view  of  "Windermere,  and  walked  home,  talking  hard  all  the 
way.  I  read  to  her  Willie's  account  of  the  shipwreck  ;  it  was  to  me 
a  very  pleasant  morning. 

"  I  spoke  to  her  of  my  wish  that  Nina  *  should  hereafter  spend  some 
time  with  her,  which  she  appeared  to  concur  in  very  heartily." 

While  Hawthorne  was  in  England  he  saw  Mrs.  Martineau, 
and  recorded  his  impression  of  her  in  his  note-book  :  — 

" ....  I  saw  Miss  Martineau  a  few  weeks  since.  She  is  a  large, 
robust,  elderly  woman,  and  plainly  dressed  ;  but  withal  she  has  so 
kind,  cheerful,  and  intelligent  a  face,  that  she  is  pleasanter  to  look  at 
than  most  beauties.  Her  hair  is  of  a  decided  gray,  and  she  does  not 
shrink  from  calling  herself  old.  She  is  the  most  continual  talker  I 
ever  heard  ;  it  is  really  like  the  babbling  of  a  brook,  and  very  lively 
and  sensible  too  ;  and  all  the  while  she  talks  she  moves  the  bowl  of  her 
ear-trumpet  from  one  auditor  to  another;  so  that  it  becomes  quite  an 
organ  of  intelligence  and  sympathy  between  her  and  yourself.  The 
ear-trumpet  seems  a  sensible  part  of  her,  like  the  antennae  of  some 
insects.  If  you  have  any  little  remark  to  make,  you  drop  it  in  ;  and 
she  helps  you  to  make  remarks  by  this  delicate  little  appeal  of  the 
trumpet,  as  she  slightly  directs  it  towards  you,  and  if  you  have  nothing 
to  say,  the  appeal  is  not  strong  enough  to  embarrass  you.    All  her 

*  His  daughter. 


HOME. 


389 


•  talk  was  about  herself  and  her  affairs  ;  but  it  did  not  seem  like  ego- 
tism, because  it  was  so  cheerful  and  free  from  morbidness.  And  this 
woman  is  said  to  be  atheistical !  I  will  not  think  so,  were  it  only  for 
her  sake.  What !  only  a  few  weeds  to  spring  out  of  her  mortality, 
instead  of  her  intellect  and  sympathies  flowering  and  fruiting  for 
ever  ! " 

Dr.  Samuel  Brown,  the  philosopher  and  friend  of  such  ex- 
tremely opposed  theological  opinions,  with  whom  she  so  often 
held  the  high  argument  that  high-minded  disputants  alone  can, 
wrote  as  follows  at  this  period  :  — 

"  .  .  .  .  And  my  '  beautiful  enemy 9  in  theory,  my  noble  friend  in 
life  (Harriet  Martineau),  is  condemned  to  death  !  The  physicians 
pronounce  her  incurable.  She  writes  us  a  long  letter,  a  sort  of  last 
farewell ;  but,  sooth  to  say,  it  is  like  the  abdication  of  a  queen,  this 
dying  !  Without  the  faith  of  a  Christian  (or  even  that  of  a  Mahom- 
etan in  God),  and  with  a  philosophical  scheme  most  defective,  this 
great  woman  seems  to  me  endowed  with  certain  of  the  most  eminent 
religious  virtues, —  fortitude,  self-possession,  resignation,  the  having 
no  will  of  her  own,  and  perfect  trust  in  the  optimism  that  is  at  the 
centre  of  things,  to  say  nothing  of  her  many  fine  moral  qualities. 
And  what  a  life  of  virtuous  industry  !  '  Well  done,  good  and  faithful 
servant !  Enter  thou  into  the  joy  of  thy  (misknown  but  secret)  Lord.'  " 

Perhaps  the  following  letter  of  a  later  date,  from  a  visitor  at 
The  ,  Knoll,  while  Harriet  Martineau's  life  seemed  to  hang  each 
day  in  the  balance,  may  serve  better  than  any  narrative  to  show 
what  effect  she  produced  on  the  minds  of  her  inmates. 

The  Knoll,  Ambleside,  1855. 
My  dear  Friend,  —  Here  I  am  at  H.  M.'s  ;  and  I  must  needs  say, 
that  an  hour  in  death  may  be  worth  a  year  of  life.  Not  that  she  is  in 
articulo  mortis  as  yet,  but  she  may  die  at  any  moment,  in  one  of  these 
fainting  or  sinking  fits,  which  are  so  distressing  to  see.  Let  the  pulse 
stop  a  second  or  two  longer,  and  all  would  be  over,  — just  as  the  last 
drop  sinks  the  ship.  She  is  now  engaged  in  writing  her  life,  —  her 
inner  life  that  is,  —  and  the  changes  her  mind  has  undergone,  and  the 
reasons  of  them.  Don't  mention  this,  for  I  do  not  wish  to  have  any 
thing  go  out  of  this  house  which  she  has  not  seen.  Not  that  she  would 
have  any  objection  ;  she  has  vexed  and  perplexed  the  world,  during 
her  fifty  years,  to  the  greatest  extent,  by  her  unexampled  sincerity  ; 


390 


MEMORIALS. 


but  /  do  not  choose  to  supply  matter  for  possible  misrepresentation 
of  any  thing  I  say.  I  never  saw  such  transparency  in  all  my  experi- 
ence. The  French  are,  as  a  nation,  far  beyond  the  most  open  English 
in  this  respect.  But  she  is  like  a  diamond,  —  hard  and  solid,  bright 
and  sparkling,  and  you  see  through  and  through  it,  and  the  stronger 
the  light  the  brighter  it  shines.  But  then  she  is  like  water,  too,  — 
soft,  yielding,  purifying,  and  gentle  or  overwhelming,  as  the  case 

may  be.    She  talks  of  your  friend  ,  to  give  the  outside  of  her 

life.  It  needs  no  great  literary  ability  to  do  it.  Any  body  would 
have  capacity  enough  to  hold  up  so  precious  a  stone  to  the  light,  and 
shift  it  about  a  little,  although  no  lapidary  or  jeweller.    To  know  its 

value  would  be  the  great  qualification,  and  that,  I  think,  

does. 

The  Knoll,  Amblesiue,  1S55. 
....  I  am  still  here  ;  and  here  is  death  at  the  door  ;  but  Harriet 
Martineau  is  the  happiest  person  in  her  enjoyment  of  life  and  her 
anticipation  of  its  immediate  close,  that  I  ever  saw.  I  see  what  it  is 
to  have  lived,  —  not  under  the  exhausted  receiver  of  ladyhood  or 
mere  womanhood,  —  but  the  life  of  a  human  being.  Yet  her  sensibil- 
ities, risible  or  pathetic,  are  like  those  of  early  youth.  Her  laugh 
is  like  that  of  a  child,  and  in  her  sleep  she  seems  like  one,  when  not 
disturbed  by  the  heart-difficulty.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  the 
beauty  of  the  place  here.  The  larches  are  not  yet  in  bud,  yet  it  is 
lovely  past  expression.  I  will  tell  you,  as  I  think  of  them,  the  things 
likely  to  interest  yofl,  but  do  not  mention  them  to  friends  less  wise 
than  yourself.  There  are  people  who  should  never  hear  a  really 
interesting  thing  ;  for  they  have  not  retention  enough  to  keep  it  to 
themselves,  nor  sense  enough  to  transmit  it  unchanged.    I  mean, 

too,  the  unfriendly,  such  as  A  ,  who  hates  Harriet  Martineau 

fiercely  on  account  of  moral  oppugnancy,  or  B  ,  who  hates  her 

gently  because  of  theological  differences.  You  would  be  astonished 
to  know  how  all  England  and  France  are  agitated  by  what  I  will 
call  the  death-bed  question.  —  Her  death-bed  seems  to  have  set 
them  all  on  the  qui  vive.  The  anonymous  letters,  that  pour  in, 
apropos  or  mal-apropos  of  the  Harriet  Martineau  letters  are  curious 
indeed.  Original  verses  on  pink  paper,  entitled  the  "  Folly  of  Athe- 
ism ; 8  copies  of  the  New  Testament  ;  manuscript  collections  of  texts 
about  immortality,  and  the  like.  The  letters  from  "  Christian  friends" 
are  yet  more  curious.  The  kindest  of  them  account  for  her  peace  of 
mind  by  the  supposition  that  God  is  especially  sustaining  her  and 
supporting  her,  although  she  does  not  know  it.  "  In  short,"  she  says, 
"they  can  easily  account  for  my  being  comfortable  and  happy  in 


HOME. 


391 


mind,  by  supposing  me  the  special  favourite  of  their  God,  whom  I 
reject."  She  will  use  the  word  "religion"  in  the  bad  sense.  I  argue 
for  it, — but  no.  Then  her  "  views  "  !  I  have  been  travelling  in  Eng- 
land in  the  heat  of  the  Crimean  war,  and  I  protest  to  you  that  her 
"  views  "  seem  much  more  in  the  minds  of  all  the  people  I  have  met 

than  the  siege  of  Sevastopol  

I  am  so  struck  with  her  absolute,  candid,  real  love  of  truth.  She 
seems  utterly  destitute  of  prejudice.  Then  she  is  so  womanly,  in  the 
good  sense  of  the  word,  and  in  some  senses  so  sensitive.  She  some- 
times suffers  much  from  little  things  I  could  not  possibly  suffer  from 
at  all.  For  instance,  a  story  in  the  newspapers  that  she  "  hoed  her 
own  cabbages,"  and  the  story  of  the  old  peasant  at  Ambleside,  who 
said,  "  I  should  ha'  liked  one  like  she  for  my  good  woman  ;  for  she 
would  ha'  ploughed."  This  would  be  called  feminine  delicacy,  I 
suppose,  but  it  really  is  human  sensitiveness  :  I  could  hardly  con- 
ceive of  such  things  as  annoying  to  such  a  one  as  she,  till  I  learned 
from  her  that  they  were  distressing  to  persons  that  she  loved  and 
respected.  How  weak  is  the  mind  of  a  certain  part  of  England  !  I 
could  see,  by  this  little  incident,  how  her  "views"  must  strike  such 
persons,  —  persons  who,  like  one  of  her  neighbours,  expressed  the 
sentiment  that  "  people  owed  it  to  their  friends  not  to  change  their 
opinions." 

In  the  course  of  conversation  one  evening  at  The  Knoll,  Mrs. 
Martineau  told  us  of  a  letter  she  had  received  in  1851  from  Mr. 
E.  J.  Furnival.  He  said  that  in  the  judgment  of  William  John- 
son of  King's  College,  Cambridge,  the  development  theory  and 
the  doctrine  of  the  non-existence  of  personality  like  man's  per- 
sonality, in  God,  are  capitally  answered  by  Tennyson,  in  his 
"In  Memoriam,"  —  the  first  by  Strophe  CXIX.,  the  second 
by  CXXIII.  He  did  not  like  "The  Letters."  Some  one  re- 
marked that  he  did,  however,  like  "Deerbrook,"  and  told  all 
his  friends  that  he  had  made  thirty  men  read  it.  "  He  wanted 
to  know,"  she  continued,  "  whether  I  knew  Austin's  '  Jurispru- 
dence,' and  his  distinction  between  the  laws  proper,  of  the 
moral  world,  and  the  laws  improper,  of  the  outward  or  nat- 
ural world,  —  natural  laws.  He  could  not  brook  the  accusation 
against  Bacon  (as  of  Moses,  in  '  Eastern  Life '),  he  said,  of  being 
what  he  should  call  a  blackguard,  —  saying  false  things,  when 
he  knew  the  truth." 


392 


MEMORIALS. 


She  gave  us  an  abstract  of  her  reply ;  but  as  I  find  it  in  the 
Athenaeum,  and  as  there  is  in  it  no  confidential  communication, 
I  subjoin  it  (in  preference  to  my  own  recollections),  as  it  gives 
so  many  of  her  "  views  "  in  reply  to  objections  to  them. 

The  Knoll,  Ambleside,  October  5,  1851. 

Dear  Mr.  ,  —  Your  packet  and  I  arrived  here  almost  together. 

I  must  beg  of  you  to  thank  Mr.  very  heartily  for  me  for  the 

wonderful  pleasure  he  has  sent  me  in  this  little  volume.  Like 
most  other  people  (whom  I  have  met  with,  at  least),  I  shrank  from  a 
whole  volume  of  published  griefs  ;  and  the  more,  because  I  knew 
Arthur  Hallam ;  and,  like  every  body  that  has  read  it,  I  forego  my 
objection  (which  I  still  think  natural)  during  the  reading.  I  began 
to  cut  and  read  last  night ;  and  I  stopped  at  last,  by  a  virtuous  effort, 
from  the  feeling  that  I  ought  not  to  be  able  to  take  in  so  much  at 
once,  —  that  I  ought  to  spread  it  out,  —  though,  happily,  I  have  the 
volume  to  refer  to  at  all  times.  I  cannot  honestly  say  that  I  had  any 
thing  like  so  much  pleasure  from  "  The  Princess."  There  are  bits  of 
wisdom  and  of  beauty,  —  many  ;  but  the  impression  of  the  whole  is 
more  than  odd ;  —  it  is  very  disagreeable,  —  to  my  feeling.  It  does 
not  follow  that  I  am  not  glad  to  know  it ;  still  less,  that  I  am  not  as 
much  obliged  to  you  for  making  me  read  it  as  if  I  had  liked  it  ever 
so  much. 

And  now  I  am  wondering  how  Mr.  J.  and  you  can  see  any 
"  answer  "  in  those  two  poems  of  Tennyson's  to  anything  Mr.  Atkin- 
son and  I  have  said.  Who  has  ever  said  that  men  are  only  brain  ? 
Does  any  one  say  that  an  orange-grove  is  only  carbon,  silica,  &c.  ;  or 
the  nightingale  only  a  chemical  and  mechanical  compound,  —  passing 
over  the  product  or  result,  —  making  no  mention  of  the  fragrance 
and  the  music  ?  If  any  one  did  say  so,  and  could  establish  it,  would 
he  not  be  elevating  the  chemical  and  mechanical  elements  and  forces, 
and  not  lowering  the  blossom  and  the  bird  1  There  they  are !  — 
beyond  his  power  to  disparage.  And  so  "we  are  what  we  are, — 
however  we  came  to  be,"  as  I  said  in  that  book.  u  Science  "  is  very 
far  from  pretending  to  say  that  men  are  "magnetic  mockeries,"  or 
any  sort  of  mockeries ;  but  the  most  real  of  all  things  that  men 
can  have  cognizance  of,  and  therefore  proper  subjects  of  science. 
Science  goes  to  show  us  that  there  is  far  more  in  man  than  Tennyson 
or  any  one  else  has  ever  dreamed  of ;  and  the  one  very  thing  that 
science  most  strenuously  and  constantly  insists  on  is  that  we  do 
not  and  cannot  know  any  thing  whatever  of  essence,  but  only  of 


HOME. 


393 


attributes  or  qualities,  —  say  phenomena.  —  As  for  the  other  poem, 
we  should  scarcely  object  to  any  part  of  it,  and  eagerly  agree  with 
most  of  it.  You  know  we  think  it  nonsense  —  a  mere  jingle  of 
words — to  profess  to  disbelieve  in  a  First  Cause.  It  is  an  inseparable, 
an  essential  part  of  human  thought  and  feeling  to  suppose  a  First 
Cause.  (See  our  book,  pp.  240,  342.)  It  is  only  when  men  presume 
to  say  what  are  the  attributes  or  qualities,  —  making  it  out  a  mag- 
nified human  being  (which  Xenophanes  so  well  saw  our  tendency  to 
do),  that  we  decline  to  abet  such  hardihood,  and  to  attach  our  awe 
and  reverence  to  an  idol.  —  As  for  our  making  Bacon  a  "  blackguard '' 
(your  word,  you  know),  the  question  is  one  of  fact,  —  always  remem- 
bering that  the  avowal  of  convictions  on  speculative  subjects  is  not 
the  same  virtue  in  all  times.  I  do  not  admit  the  "  blackguardism  " 
of  Moses,  for  instance,  but  rather  regard  his  avowal  of  so  much  as  he 
did  declare  as  worthy  of  reverent  admiration.  Bacon  was  awfully 
faulty  in  that  matter  ;  but,  as  you  well  know,  far  more  criminal  in 
others  ;  a  thorough  "  blackguard "  as  Chancellor,  if  timid  and  cun- 
ning as  a  philosopher.  But  you  can  satisfy  yourself  about  this, 
which  is  better  than  taking  any  body's  word  for  it.  Study  him  well, 
ascertaining  his  bearings,  and  not  forgetting  to  look  into  the  dates 
of  his  various  writings,  and  see  how  the  matter  is  ;  and  don't  blame 
us  for  Bacon's  weaknesses,  nor  yet  judge  him  by  the  circumstances 
of  your  and  my  station  and  time.  (For  that  matter,  however,  do  you 
know  no  very  good  people  who  sanction  what  they  believe  to  be 
untrue,  for  other  folks'  good  yet  more  than  their  own  peace  and 
quiet?)  As  for  your  question  about  the  grounds  of  our  aspiration 
after  self-sacrifice,  &c,  our  ground  is  much  the  same  as  yours,  I 
should  think.  If  you  were  asked  why  you  obey  the  will  of  God,  you 
would  say  that  it  is  because  your  nature  impels  you  so  to  do  ; 
because  you  feel  it  to  be  best ;  because  you  long,  and  yearn,  and  love 
so  to  do.  So  we,  —  if  asked  why  we  prefer  health  to  sickness,  peace 
to  turmoil  of  mind,  benevolence  to  self-indulgence,  —  reply  simply 
that  we  do.  Our  moral,  like  our  physical  faculties,  indicate  health 
and  happiness  as  our  natural  action  ;  and,  as  we  incline  to  temper- 
ance as  the  rule  of  health,  we  naturally  aspire  to  a  life  of  self-sacri- 
fice, or,  say  rather,  of  active  good-will,  because  it  is  inexpressibly 
desirable  in  our  eyes.  This  is  one  ground.  But  I  think  it  is  a 
higher,  and  therefore  more  natural,  state  (when  simply  living,  and 
not  arguing)  not  to  think  about  the  matter  expressly  at  all,  but  simply 
to  give  way  to  our  love  of  our  neighbour,  and  act  from  it,  without 
reviewing  any  "grounds."   As  for  the  reviewers,  they  have  been 


394 


MEMORIALS. 


more  fraudulent  (in  misquotations  and  the  like)  than  I  had  sup- 
posed possible  ;  but  that  is  their  affair,  and  not  ours.  As  for  their 
wrath,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  most  of  them  are  divines, 
doctors,  or  somehow  concerned  in  metaphysics  ;  and  that  we  have 
attacked  the  very  staple  of  their  thoughts  and  lives.  Thus,  great 
allowance  is  to  be  made  for  them,  and  they  really  cannot  do  us 
justice.  We  do  not  see  that  any  one  of  them  has  touched  any  one 
point  of  our  book  ;  and  they  answer  one  another  so  effectually  as  to 
save  us  the  trouble  of  doing  it.  We  have  brought  a  great  deal  of 
censure  on  ourselves  through  the  form  of  our  book,  —  its  mere  episto- 
lary form,  and  its  stopping  short  in  the  middle.  Some  day  we  shall 
probably  give  out  our  views  in  a  more  complete  and  orderly  way. 
Meantime  we  have  the  pleasure  of  some  hearty  sympathy  ;  and, 
where  we  are  most  abused,  it  is  a  true  satisfaction  to  sympathize  the 
more  with  our  enemies  the  less  they  are  able  to  do  so  with  us. 
There  is  nothing  but  the  sheer  dishonesty  (of  which  I  am  sorry  to 

say  there  is  a  terrible  deal)  that  afflicts  us  at  all  

Our  field  prospers.  Every  lot  is  sold  ;  and  all  were  paid  for  in 
one  day,  —  to  the  last  shilling.  The  money  is  in  the  bank  ;  and  I 
am  thinking  how  to  get  up  baths  and  a  reading-room  with  it.  The 
roofs  are  on  the  two  cottages  now  nearly  finished  ;  and  very  nice 
houses  they  are.   I  find  my  ground  will  admit  of  two,  and  I  have  been 

asking  whether  I  may  not  venture  on  a  second  

I  have  lost  (you  kindly  inquire,  you  know)  some  of  my  potatoes  this 
year,  and  nearly  all  my  turnips,  —  from  the  absence  of  frost  last 
winter.  All  else  is  nourishing,  and  beautiful  beyond  description. 
I  come  home,  with  work  for  two  years  on  my  hands,  —  in  full  health, 
—  after  a  capital  holiday  with  my  family,  and  with  not  a  care  in  the 
world. 

Now  I  think  I  have  answered  all  your  questions.  And  what  a 
quantity  I  have  given  you  to  read  ! 

Believe  me  truly  your  obliged 

H.  MARTINEAU. 
0  yes,  —  I  have  Austin's  "  Jurisprudence  "  on  my  shelves. 

But  whatever  she  did,  though  in  the  most  simple  and  private 
manner,  was  sure  to  attract  public  attention  in  an  inexplicable 
way,  both  from  her  village  neighbours,  the  labourers  and  me- 
chanics, and  her  country  neighbours,  the  nobles  and  gentry. 
The  former  sought  her  as  a  source  of  instruction,  help,  and 


HOME. 


395 


information,  and  "the  noble  lords  in  the  chair"  gave  her 
health  as  such  at  public  entertainments. 

Nothing  is  more  interesting  to  housewives  than  to  know  how 
their  contemporaries  live ;  and  nothing  was  more  interesting  to 
the  great  writer  on  political  economy  than  the  details  of  domestic 
economy  the  world  over.  The  world  will  repay  to  her  the  com- 
pliment. Below  are  subjoined  the  accounts  of  one  year  at  The 
Knoll. 

RECEIVED. 


£    s.  d. 

Dividends  and  interest      .       .       .    382  10  5 

Earned.    "D.  N."       .       .       .       280   7  0 

Periodicals                                         66    0  0 

Old  works  30  17  9 

Old  papers,  &c  10  9 

Farm                                               42   0  3 

  £802  165.  2d. 


SPENT. 

£     5.  d. 

House  and  selves      ....    230   5  3 
Highest  sums,  beyond  wages. 
Meat  .       .      .       .   22   2  7 
Wine  and  beer      .       12    4  9 
Fuel  .      .      .      .  13   8  6 
Postage,  &c.  .       .       11    2  2 

Gave  away   261    4  8£ 

Farm   108   6  7 

  £599  165.  6|<*. 

Balance  £202  19s.  l\d. 


SERVICE. 

.  Such  was  The  Knoll,  Harriet  Martineau's  house,  and  such 
was  its  mistress  :  no  less  admirable  was  her  household. 

All  interests  there  were  harmonized  and  welded  into  one ;  for 
she  could  not  help  treating  her  servants  as  if  they  were  her 
children,  and  their  deferential  duty  was  truly  filial.  They  gen- 
erally came  to  her  young  and  lived  with  her  long ;  and  friends 
visiting  her  at  intervals  never  failed  to  notice,  from  time  to 
time,  their  improvement  in  manners,  general  appearance,  and 


396 


MEMORIALS. 


intelligence.  There  were  who  made  light  of  her  knowledge 
of  the  "higher  classes,"  because  in  one  of  the  "Illustrations" 
a  certain  Lady  F.  is  described  as  treating  her  servants  with 
affection.  But  she  always  thought  it  a  libel  on  every  class  to 
assume  that  they  have  not  all  one  human  heart,  and  she  wrote 
this  tale  as  an  example,  and  painted  this  portrait  as  a  vindi- 
cation of  the  higher  class  from  the  aspersion  of  being  without 
exception  indifferent  to  the  humbler.  Yet  she  recommended 
to  all  the  dress  and  expenditure  suited  to  their  means  and  con- 
dition. We  have  already  seen  that  she  understood  so  thor- 
oughly the  theory  of  domestic  service,  that  persons  who  saw 
her  name  for  the  first  time  on  the  little  title-page  of  "  The  Maid 
of  All  Work  "  supposed  she  must  herself  be  a  servant.  Looking 
over  these  little  guides  to  domestic  details  in  after  years,  how 
many  have  been  reminded  of  the  words  of  Scripture  :  "  Whoso 
is  greatest  among  you  let  him  be  your  servant."  Neither  the 
education  nor  the  household  training  of  her  servants  was  neg- 
lected, and  their  devotedness  was  the  natural  fruit  of  her  loving 
care. 

I  was  authorized  by  the  writers  to  print  the  subjoined  cor- 
respondence, seeing  I  so  much  desired  it,  as  more  illustrative 
than  any  statement  of  mine  :  — 

MRS.  MARTHA  ANDREWS  TO  MISS  MARTINEAU. 

My  dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  I  write  a  line  to  say  that  I  hope 
dear  Mrs.  Martineau  is  better  this  week.  I  have  thought  much  of 
her  to-day  as  I  was  looking  over  a  memorandum  I  have  of  our  first 
meeting.  I  think  it  will  not  be  uninteresting  to  her,  just  as  I  put 
it  down  at  the  time. 

"September  24,  1847.  —  I  met  with  the  kindest  reception  from  Miss 
Martineau,  who  was  now  become  my  mistress. 

u  We  travelled  together  to  Birmingham,  and  I  shall  never  forget  the 
delight  I  felt  in  her  company  ;  and  the  day  was  glorious.  I  enjoyed 
the  journey  exceedingly,  the  country  was  so  beautiful  ;  and  we  passed 
so  many  country  churches,  and  here  and  there  a  hill  in  the  distance. 
We  were  met  at  the  station  by  Miss  M.'s  brother.  We  stayed  a  fort- 
night at  Edgbaston,  and  I  was  so  happy  ! " 

I  hope  I  am  not  intruding  by  referring  to  the  past,  but  I  had  in- 


HOME. 


397 


deed  forgotten  it  till  to-day,  when  I  dropped  upon  it,  and  I  just  copy 
it  down,  as  I  then  wrote  it,  after  getting  to  Ambleside. 

With  kind  love  and  duty  to  Mrs.  Martineau,  I  beg  you  to  accept 
the  same  from 

Your  humble  and  affectionate  servant, 

MARTHA. 

It  was  to  this  servant,  whom  she  always  mentioned  as  "  my 
dear  Martha,"  that  her  mistress  wrote  the  following  letter  while 
in  near  prospect  of  death. 

Ambleside,  March  31. 

Dear  Martha,  —  I  have  been  anxious  for  some  time  to  send  you 
a  line  under  my  own  hand,  and  now  I  do  it,  partly  to  thank  you  for 
your  very  interesting  and  gratifying  letter  to  me,  and  partly  to  ask 
your  acceptance  of  a  little  gift  from  me  which  I  hope  to  send  by  the 
next  post  (as  I  cannot  put  in  the  packet  on  a  Sunday).  It  is  a  brooch 
containing  a  bit  of  my  hair.  We  cut  off  my  long  hair  lately,  and 
I  knew  you  would  like  to  have  a  piece,  so  I  had  it  set  in  a  brooch  ; 
and  I  send  it  now,  not  at  all  knowing  how  long  I  may  be  able  to 
hold  converse  with  you  in  any  way. 

You  are  fully  aware  of  my  state,  I  believe,  —  that  I  may  live  for 
even  many  months  ;  but  that  it  is  more  probable  that  I  shall  go  off 

suddenly  in  one  of  the  sinking  fits  which  occur  every  few  days  

But  we  all  think  the  sudden  and  easier  ending  the  more  probable. 
One  does  not  think  of  having  any  personal  wishes  in  matters  so 
serious  and  solemn  ;  but  when  I  consider  my  dear  nieces  (Maria 
especially  as  head  nurse),  and  the  sacrifices  they  are  making  for  me, 
and  the  anxiety  to  so  many  friends  of  my  being  in  so  precarious  a 
state,  and,  I  may  add,  my  own  former  experience  of  long  illness,  I 
certainly  feel  that  the  end,  whenever  it  comes,  will  be  a  welcome 
release. 

I  have  no  great  suffering,  though  of  course  I  never  feel  well,  and 
often  very  ill,  —  with  the  strange  ailments  which  attend  a  disordered 
circulation  and  an  irregular  action  of  the  heart.  But  there  is  nothing 
which  prevents  our  being  as  cheerful  a  little  household  as  you  could 
easily  find.  We  have  no  concealments,  and  we  do  not  wish  any 
thing  in  our  lot  to  be  otherwise  than  as  it  is.  We  employ  ourselves, 
and  enjoy  the  beauty  of  the  valley  ;  and  one  friend  or  relation  comes 
after  another.  Sister  Higginson  came  first ;  then  Mr.  Atkinson  for 
a  month  ;  then  my  brother  Kobert,  who  left  us  to-day  ;  and  next, 
my  sister,  his  wife,  will  come  in  Susan's  place.  My  sister  Rachel  I 
saw  in  London.    Elizabeth  and  Caroline  are  as  kind  and  good  as  can 


398 


MEMORIALS. 


be,  and  so  is  your  brother.*  I  have  taken  care  that  my  good  ser- 
vants shall  be  protected  and  assisted  after  my  death,  as  I  have  told 
him.  I  am  so  happy  to  think,  dear  Martha,  that  you  look  back 
on  your  abode  here  as  a  not  unprofitable  time,  —  morally.  It  is  a 
great  pleasure  to  believe  that,  at  that  important  period  of  your  life, 
you  were  able  to  derive  benefit  from  your  position,  and  I  thank  you 
for  giving  me  the  pleasure  of  telling  me  so.  Of  my  affection  for  you, 
you  need  no  fresh  assurance.  If  this  should  be  the  last  time  of  my 
writing  to  you,  accept  from  me,  with  confidence,  the  assurance  of 
the  love  of 

Your  affectionate  friend, 

H.  MARTINEAU. 
My  kind  regards  and  wishes  to  your  good  husband. 

TO  MRS.  MARTINEAU. 

My  dear  Madam,  —  It  is  with  a  great  deal  of  feeling  that  I  at- 
tempt these  few  lines,  as  it  possibly  may  be  the  last  time.  Still  I 
think  that  if  you  are  able  to  be  calm  and  cheerful  in  the  near  pros- 
pect of  death,  surely  I  ought  not  to  be  unhappy  or  selfish  ;  and  I 
wish  again  to  express  my  thanks  to  you  for  the  many  lessons  I  have 
learnt  from  you.  I  only  wish  I  was  able  to  carry  them  out  more 
efficiently.  All  the  instruction  I  received  from  you  comes  fresh  into 
my  mind.  One  great  principle  was  love  and  forbearance  with  others, 
not  to  be  so  rash  in  judging  others,  —  suspicious,  &c,  which  I  remem- 
ber I  was,  very  strongly,  when  I  first  came  to  live  with  you.  Then 
the  lessons  on  calmness  and  patience  under  trouble,  —  the  desire  for 
honesty  in  every  sense  of  the  word.  These  things  I  have  endeavoured 
to  work  upon,  and  now  I  try  to  use  the  same  influence  on  the  minds 
of  those  under  my  power.  But  your  influence,  of  course,  was  greater 
than  I  can  expect  to  have,  because  I  felt  that  strong  love  for  you 
which  not  many  servants  have  or  can  have,  because  they  and  their 
employers  are  differently  situated.  I  have  often  thought  of  the  great 
dangers  we  were  exposed  to,  had  it  not  been  for  your  love  and  kind- 
ness to  us. 

Then  to  act  conscientiously  to  our  own  hurt.  I  earnestly  wish 
this  noble  principle  was  more  taught.  What  a  different  state  of 
society  there  would  be  ! 

I  hope  you  will  forgive  my  troubling  you.  Please  to  accept  my 
warmest  love.    I  hope  you  may  yet  be  spared  for  some  time  to  the 

*  Mrs.  Martineau's  farm-servant. 


HOME. 


399 


world  and  those  that  love  you.  I  can  say  with  truth  that  the  kind 
attentions  I  have  received  have  not  increased  my  pride  or  my  ambi- 
tion. I  feel  thankful  and  humble.  This  lesson  also  I  have  learnt 
from  you. 

With  many  thanks  for  all  the  past,  I  remain,  my  dear  madam, 

Yours  affectionately, 

MARTHA. 

The  guests  at  The  Knoll  were  often  impressed  by  the  devoted- 
ness  they  witnessed  of  both  mistress  and  maids.  One  of  these, 
a  visitor  from  America,  who  had,  as  the  friend  of  the  mistress, 
received  much  attention  from  the  maid,  wrote  to  her  afterwards, 
with  a  gift  distinctively  American,  —  a  gold  eagle. 

Twenty  years  of  such  service  justifies  such  a  reply.  The 
handwriting  is  that  of  a  person  of  cultivation ;  and  guests  were 
always  prompt  to  say,  in  view  of  this  devotedness, 

"  How  well  in  thee  appears 
The  constant  service  of  the  antique  world." 

May  15,  1873. 

Dear  Madam,  —  I  really  do  not  feel  equal  to  express  my  gratitude 
for  your  beautiful  letter.  The  contents  surprised  me  very  much. 
Please  accept  hearty  thanks  for  your  handsome  present,  and  for 
what  you  so  touchingly  allude  to  in  my  long  service  at  The  Knoll. 
I  hope  to  spend  it  in  "  remembrance  of  you." 

I  feel  sure  it  will  be  a  comfort  to  you  to  know  that  our  prospects 
are  getting  brighter.  I  need  scarcely  add  it  has  been  a  most  trying 
time  since  Miss  Jane  M.  left  us.  Her  illness  has  been  a  terrible 
sorrow  to  my  mistress,  but  I  am  happy  to  say  she  now  begins  to  take 
comfort  and  courage  again.  The  last  three  months  there  is  much 
more  ease  and  quiet.  I  had  the  pleasure  of  going  over  to  Leamington 
to  see  Miss  Jane  the  week  before  last,  and  found  she  was  really  get- 
ting on,  and  she  assured  me  she  felt  conscious  of  returning  strength, 
and  the  great  object  of  her  life  is  to  come  back  to  us.  She  longs  to 
be  by  her  aunt's  side  again  :  there  is  such  a  strong  union  of  affection 
between  them,  that  I  trust  they  will  be  united  again. 

My  mistress  is  in  real  delight  about  the  steady  improvement,  and 
is  quite  content  to  wait.  Of  course  we  do  our  very  best  for  her,  and 
she  often  tells  me  we  are  very  kind  to  her,  and  there  is  hardly  any 
thing  she  does  not  praise  in  those  around  her. 

I  sometimes  feel  I  should  ill  deserve  many  blessings  if  I  indulged 
in  any  regret,  and  daily  I  preserve  a  tranquillity  which  I  earnestly 


400 


MEMORIALS. 


hope  may  not  be  construed  into  indifference.  I  regard  my  mistress 
with  as  much  reverence  as  I  do  affection,  and  look  upon  it  as  a  bright 
privilege  to  do  all  I  can  for  her  in  my  humble  way ;  indeed,  it  is  a 

pleasure  to  me ! 

I  often  wish  you  could  see  her,  she  is  such  a  handsome  old  lady. 
The  cap  you  sent  her  makes  her  look  almost  divine.  I 'm  quite  sure 
she  is  much  better  since  taking  the  phosphate  you  sent.  We  go  on  so 
regularly  and  comfortably !  but  at  the  same  time  there  is  little  strength 
to  struggle  with  difficulties. 

With  renewed  thanks  for  your  kindness,  and  wishing  you  health 
and  happiness, 

I  remain,  gratefully  and  respectfully, 

CAROLINE. 


HOSPITALITY. 

It  was  not  her  fame  only,  but  also  her  delight  in  the  exercise 
of  hospitality,  that  drew  around  her  so  many  guests.  She  was 
most  anxious  to  receive  the  friends  of  her  American  life.  The 
Hutchinson  family — the  sweet  singers  of  our  American  Israel — 
sung  to  her  upon  her  own  lawn  at  The  Knoll  the  songs  of  her 
other  beloved  land.  Either  to  Tynemouth  or  The  Knoll  came 
almost  all  the  early  abolitionists.  To  her  came  Sumner  in  his 
youth,  and  received  from  her  an  introduction  to  her  numerous 
London  friends ;  and  so  many  others  came  that  it  were  in  vain 
to  try  to  name  them  all.  "  She  is  so  —  well,  fascinating  !  "  they 
all  said  ;  "  there  is  no  other  word  for  her." 

There  are  some  inconveniences,  however,  attending  a  great 
fame,  a  reputation  for  hospitality,  and  a  general  benevolence. 
As,  for  example,  when  her  maid  saw  carriages  descending,  the 
occupants  standing  up  with  their  heads  stretched  forward  in 
search  of  The  Knoll,  she  could  not  help  being  impressed  with  an 
idea  that  they  must  needs  be  admitted.  "  Caroline  is  so  soft- 
hearted ! "  said  her  mistress  to  an  old  friend,  an  inmate  for 
the  time  being ;  "  visitors  tell  her  they  cannot  go  away  with- 
out seeing  me,  when  I  am  too  much  engaged  or  too  ill  perhaps 
to  receive  them."  "  But  what  can  I  do,  ma'am  1 "  interrupts  Caro- 
line.   "  What  can  I  do  when  they  tell  me  they  worship  you, 


HOME. 


401 


ma'am  !  and  that  they  were  brought  up  upon  your  works !  — 
they  have  come  from  ever  so  far  and  from  every  where  to  see 
you  !  "  And  Caroline  could  seldom  help  fairly  yielding  up  the 
castle. 

Mrs.  Parkinson,  the  old  woman  who  lived  in  the  cottage  near 
the  gate,  used  to  say,  "  If  I  had  a  penny  for  every  time  they 
stop  the  coachman  to  ask  where  Miss  Martineau  lives,  I  should 
be  a  rich  woman." 

Hither  it  was  that  statesmen  came  across  the  country  for  an 
interchange  of  thought  with  her ;  here  it  was  that  she  wrote  the 
Autobiography ;  and  some  few  of  them,  who  were  trusted  and 
valued  friends,  were  privileged  to  read  it.  One  of  these  was  the 
Earl  of  Carlisle,  who  read  it  with  the  feelings  he  thus  expresses, 
for  "  such  an  infidel  "  as  herself :  — 

London,  December  12,  1855. 

My  dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  It  is  difficult  to  read  your  account 
of  yourself  with  a  serenity  like  your  own.  I  most  earnestly  trust 
that  the  decline  may  be  gentle  and  painless. 

I  should  wish  you  to  be  entirely  guided  by  your  own  judgment 
and  inclination  in  inserting  or  omitting  any  thing  about  myself,  only 
be  assured  I  could  never  have  the  baseness  or  the  blindness  to  shrink 
from  such  companionship. 

I  should  have  much  liked  to  see  you  again,  and  to  visit  you  in  your 
gabled  and  terraced  abode,  but  this  must  not  be  for  the  present,  at 
least,  as  I  am  just  setting  out  again  for  my  island. 

May  that  spirit  of  love  and  justice  to  which  I  believe  you  have 
always  wished  to  be  faithfid  be  evermore  with  you. 

Yours  very  sincerely, 

CARLISLE. 

Notwithstanding  her  suffering  condition  during  the  twenty 
years  preceding  her  death,  and  the  amount  of  literary  and  other 
work  she  did,  I  suppose  no  one  ever  welcomed  so  many  visitors 
of  all  classes,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest.  The  heart-failure 
under  which  she  laboured  made  it  sometimes  impossible  to  admit 
those  she  most  wished  to  see ;  and  to  one  of  them  she  expressed 
her  regret  as  she  felt  it,  strongly  :  — 

"  I  would  willingly  die  for  the  pleasure  of  seeing  you  ;  but  if  it 
should  kill  me,  it  would  make  you  unhappy  for  life." 


402 


MEMORIALS. 


Charlotte  Bronte,  for  whom  Mrs.  Martineau  cherished  a  deep 
affection,  was  previous  to  this  time  a  guest  at  The  Knoll.  She 
gives  her  sister  Emily  an  account  of  that  visit,  —  the  second 
event  in  their  earlier  acquaintance.    She  says  :  — 

"  I  am  at  Miss  Martineau's  for  a  week.  Her  house  is  very  plea-ant 
both  within  and  without  ;  arranged  at  all  points  with  admirable 
neatness  and  comfort.  Her  visitors  enjoy  the  most  perfect  liberty  ; 
what  she  claims  for  herself  she  allows  them.  I  rise  at  my  own 
hour,  breakfast  alone  I  pass  the  morning  in  the  drawing- 
room,  she  in  her  study.  At  two  o'clock  we  meet,  talk  and  walk 
till  five, — her  dinner-hour,  —  spend  the  evening  together,  when  she 
converses  fluently  and  abundantly,  and  with  the  most  complete  frank- 
ness. I  go  to  my  own  room  soon  after  ten,  and  she  sits  up  writing 
letters.  She  appears  exhaustless  in  strength  and  spirits,  and  indefati- 
gable in  the  faculty  of  labour  :  she  is  a  great  and  good  woman  ;  of 
course  not  without  peculiarities,  but  I  have  seen  none  as  yet  that  an- 
noy me.  She  is  both  hard  and  warm  hearted,  abrupt  and  affectionate. 
I  believe  she  is  not  at  all  conscious  of  her  own  absolutism.  When 
I  tell  her  of  it,  she  denies  the  charge  warmly  ;  then  I  laugh  at  her.  I 
believe  she  almost  rules  Ambleside.    Some  of  the  gentry  dislike 

her,  but  the  lower  orders  have  a  great  regard  for  her  I  have 

truly  enjoyed  my  visit  here  Miss  Martineau  I  relish  inexpres- 
sibly  

"  She  is  certainly  a  woman  of  wonderful  endowments,  both  intellec- 
tual and  physical  ;  and  though  I  share  few  of  her  opinions,  and  regard 
her  as  fallible  on  certain  points  of  judgment,  I  must  still  award  her 
my  sincerest  esteem.  The  manner  in  which  she  combines  the  highest 
mental  culture  with  the  nicest  discharge  of  feminine  duties  filled  me 
with  admiration  ;  while  her  affectionate  kindness  earned  my  grati- 
tude I  think  her  good  and  noble  qualities  far  outweigh  her 

defects.  It  is  my  habit  to  consider  the  individual  apart  from  his  (or 
her)  reputation  ;  practice  independent  of  theory  ;  natural  disposition 
isolated  from  acquired  opinion.  Harriet  Martineau's  person,  practice, 
and  character  inspire  me  with  the  truest  affection  and  respect/' 

After  another  visit  at  The  Knoll  she  writes  thus  :  — 

"  Of  mv  kind  hostess  herself  I  cannot  speak  in  terms  too  high. 
Without  being  able  to  share  all  her  opinions,  — philosophical,  political, 
or  religious.  —  without  adopting  her  theories,  I  yet  find  a  worth  and 
greatness  in  herself,  and  a  consistency  and  benevolence  and  persever- 


HOME. 


403 


ance  in  her  practice,  such  as  win  the  sincerest  esteem  and  affection. 
She  is  not  a  person  to  be  judged  by  her  writings  alone,  but  rather  by 
her  own  deeds  and  life,  than  which  nothing  can  be  more  exemplary  or 
nobler.  She  seems  to  me  to  be  the  benefactress  of  Ambleside,  yet 
takes  do  sort  of  credit  to  herself  for  her  active  and  indefatigable  phi- 
lanthropy. The  government  of  her  household  is  admirably  adminis- 
tered ;  all  she  does  is  well  done,  from  the  writing  of  a  history  down 
to  the  quietest  feminine  occupation.  No  sort  of  carelessness  or  neg- 
lect is  allowed  under  her  rule,  and  yet  she  is  not  over-strict,  or  too 
rigidly  exacting  ;  her  servants  and  her  poor  neighbours  love  as  well 
as  respect  her. 

"  I  need  not,  however,  fall  into  the  error  of  talking  too  much  about 
her,  merely  because  my  mind  is  just  now  deeply  impressed  with  what 
I  have  seen  of  her  intellectual  power  and  moral  worth." 

There  Charlotte  Bronte  saw  Mr.  Atkinson,  who  had  been  de- 
scribed to  her  as  a  combination  of  the  Greek  sage  of  antiquity 
with,  the  modern  European  man  of  science. 

"  But,"  she  says,  "he  serenely  denies  us  our  hope  in  immortality, 
and  quietly  blots  from  man's  future,  heaven  and  the  life  to  come. 
That  is  why  a  savour  of  bitterness  seasoned  my  feeling  towards 
him." 

No  wonder  that,  with  such  a  predisposition,  she  should  herself 
have  been  disturbed  and  distressed  by  the  publication  of  "  The 
Letters." 

They  had  talked  of  Comte,  on  whose  lectures  Mrs.  Martineau 
was  then  engaged ;  she  had  admired  the  laborious  devotedness 
which  could  compel  into  an  English  existence  a  work  so  utterly 
opposite  in  character  to  the  impressive  fictions  that  occupied  her 
own  mind,  but  she  was  too  strongly  bound  to  the  past  to  be 
willing  to  cast  a  thought  beyond  its  vague  shadows  on  futurity. 
She  accepted,  as  it  was  natural  for  a  clergyman's  daughter  to  do, 
the  clerical  declarations  that  philosophy  was  atheism  ;  and  so  she 
told  her  friend.  Harriet  Martineau's  affection  was  in  no  way 
impaired  by  this.  She  thanks  her  friend  warmly  for  the  frank- 
ness of  the  letter,  saying,  — 

"  It  charmed  me,  and  I  thank  you  for  it.  Only  one  remark.  I 
have  no  objection  to  words,  when,  as  you  do,  people  understand 


404 


MEMORIALS. 


things  ;  but  I  am  not  an  atheist  according  to  the  settled  meaning  of 
the  term.  An  atheist  is  'one  who  rests  in  second  causes,'  who  sup- 
poses things  that  he  knows  to  be  made  or  occasioned  by  other  things 
that  he  knows.  This  seems  to  me  complete  nonsense  ;  and  this 
Bacon  condemns  as  the  stupidity  of  atheism.  I  cannot  conceive  the 
absence  of  a  First  Cause  ;  but  then  I  contend  that  it  is  not  a  person, 
i.  e.  that  it  is  to  the  last  degree  improbable,  and  that  there  is  no  evi- 
dence of  its  being  so.  Now,  though  the  superficial,  ignorant,  and 
prejudiced  will  not  see  this  distinction,  you  will ;  and  it  will  be  clear 
to  you  what  scope  is  left  for  awe  and  reverence  under  my  faith." 

This  extract  is  from  a  very  long  letter,  full  of  news  and  pleas- 
ant thoughts,  ending  thus  :  — 

"  My  lecture  was  upon  Wickliffe  ;    was  in  raptures  with  it. 

Now  I  must  go  to  my  proofs,  my  dear.  How  I  like  to  think  that  I 
have  you,  be  you  any  where  from  atheist  to  Latter-day  Saint ;  I  don't 
care,  as  long  as  you  love  me,  without  regard  to  the  results  of  the  un- 
derstanding." 

More  correspondence  there  was,  and  it  was  not  on  this 
ground  that  Charlotte  Bronte  felt  for  a  time  repelled  from  her 
friend.  She  had  earnestly  adjured  Harriet  Martineau  to  give  her 
a  full  and  frank  opinion  of  her  novel,  "  Yilette ;  "  and,  how- 
ever affectionately  and  thoughtfully  given,  it  was  only  the  more 
painful  to  the  receiver,  seeing  that  it  confirmed  the  current  and 
more  roughly  expressed  opinion  of  the  world.  Greater  experience 
than  Miss  Bronte  possessed  would  come  to  her,  doubtless  Har- 
riot Martineau  thought,  in  season  to  correct  the  fault  in  question. 

It  is  painful  to  remember  that  Charlotte  Bronte  did  not  live 
to  profit  by  the  just  criticism  she  had  so  ardently  evoked.  More 
knowledge  of  some  kinds  would  in  all  probability  have  shown 
her  its  justice.  But  death  prevented  the  two  friends  from  again 
meeting. 

The  affectionate  fear  of  the  younger  that  the  publication  of 
"  The  Letters  "  might  deprive  H.  Martineau  of  valued  friends 
proved  entirely  unfounded. 

Perhaps  the  best  way  of  correcting  certain  mistakes  that  are 
noticeable  in  periodicals,  even  to  this  day,  is  to  insert  this  letter 
from  Harriet  Martineau  to  the  editor  of  "  Men  of  the  Time." 


HOME. 


405 


Ambleside,  March  22,  1856. 
Sir,  —  Mr.  Murray  is  always  glad  to  receive  information  of  mis- 
takes in  his  hand-books  ;  and  I  presume  you  wish  to  be  made  aware 
of  all  such  serious  errors  in  your  "  Men  of  the  Time "  as  may  dis- 
credit a  work  upon  so  excellent  a  plan.  The  mistakes  of  fact  in  the 
notice  of  myself  are  so  numerous,  and  I  must  say  so  inexcusable,  con- 
sidering the  means  of  information  that  exist  in  print,  that  you  ought 
to  be  informed  of  them  on  authority,  in  order  to  their  rectification. 
If  allowed  to  remain,  such  mistakes  discredit  the  whole  work,  as  is 
the  case  already  with  my  family  and  friends,  who  ask  how  they  can 
trust  any  part  of  the  book,  when  any  one  memoir  is  so  unnecessarily 
full  of  errors. 

1.  My  forefathers  were  not  manufacturers,  but  surgeons.  It  was 
that  profession  which  descended  from  generation  to  generation. 

2.  There  was  no  silk  manufacturer  in  Norwich  till  after  my  father's 
death,  and  the  removal  of  the  family  from  the  city.  My  father  (the 
first  manufacturer  of  the  family)  was  a  bombazine  and  camlet  manu- 
facturer. 

3.  This  is  the  most  important  mistake  of  all,  because  it  deprives 
my  parents  of  honour  due  to  them.  My  education  was  not  of  the 
"  limited  character "  imputed.  On  the  contrary,  my  parents  gave 
their  children,  girls  as  well  as  boys,  an  education  of  a  very  high  order, 
including  sound  classical  instruction  and  training.  What  the  family 
have  done  is  sufficient  evidence  that  their  education  was  not  of  "  a 
limited  character." 

4.  It  was  in  1834  that  I  went  to  America. 

5.  "  Deerbrook "  has  been  more  popular  than  almost  any  of  my 
works,  and  has  gained  a  higher  reputation  than  any  other.  It  has 
gone  through  two  large  editions  (a  rare  thing  for  a  novel)  and  I  have 
disposed  of  it  for  a  third. 

6.  Lord  Grey  never  offered  me  a  pension.  The  one  which  was  at 
first  proposed  was  not  £  150,  but  £  300. 

7.  It  was  at  the  end  of  1842,  and  not  1853,  that  my  medical  man 
declared  me  incurably  ill. 

8.  Rev.  James  Martineau  was  not  of  the  party  to  the  East,  or  ever 
in  the  East  at  all.  The  names  of  the  party  are  given  in  my  "  Eastern 
Life." 

9.  Mr.  Atkinson  is  not  a  "  Mesmerist,"  but  a  philosophical  student, 
and  a  gentleman  of  independent  fortune.  The  standing  of  the 
"  Letters  on  Man's  Nature  and  Development "  is,  in  point  of  fact,  as 
different  as  possible  from  that  groundlessly  asserted  in  the  memoir. 


406 


MEMORIALS. 


10.  My  version  of  Comte  does  not  close  the  list  of  my  labours. 

11.  One  of  the  best  received  and  most  important  of  my  books  is 
not  mentioned,  —  "  Household  Education." 

12.  Nobody  has  witnessed  "  flashes  of  wit  *  from  me.  The  giving 
me  credit  for  wit  shows  that  the  writer  is  wholly  unacquainted  with 
me  

Now,  what  will  you  do  ?  Of  course,  you  will  not  allow  proved 
errors  to  continue  to  circulate  uncontradicted.  Will  you  cancel  these 
notices,  or  print  this  letter,  or  what  will  you  do  1 

You  are  probably  aware  that  I  am  mortally  ill.  I  have  written  and 
got  printed  an  Autobiography,  which  will  be  published  immediately 
after  my  death.  But  this  does  not  affect  the  case,  as  your  notice  will 
then  be  withdrawn.  It  is  the  interval  between  this  time  and  that, 
that  you  have  to  provide  for  :  and  I  hope  to  hear,  before  I  decide  on 
a  public  contradiction,  what  course  you  propose  to  take. 

Yours  obediently, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

It  is  hardly  necessary  to  add  that  the  editor  of  "  Men  of  the 
Time  "  was  much  obliged  by  the  corrections,  and  profited  by 
them  immediately. 

When  I  consented  to  Harriet  Martineau's  desire  that  I  should 
make  such  additions  as  I  judged  proper  to  her  Autobiography, 
I  entreated  her  to  allow  me  the  publication  of  such  letters  as  I 
might  select  from  her  correspondence  with  myself.  The  follow- 
ing is  her  reply,  with  this  preliminary  note  :  — 

"  For  publication  if  you  wish  it." 

Ambleside,  June  11,  1855. 
My  dear  Friend,  —  You  desire  my  permission  to  publish,  after 
my  death,  certain  letters  of  mine  to  yourself.  Mr.  Atkinson  desires 
permission  to  give  you  some  of  my  letters  to  him  for  publication.  I 
give  you  my  sanction  with  entire  willingness,  and  I  hope  you  will 
employ  it  as  freely  as  you  like  in  regard  to  these  two  sets  of  let- 
ters. 

Such  use  of  them  is  perfectly  consistent  with  the  principle  on 
which  I  have  forbidden,  in  my  will,  the  unauthorized  publication 
of  my  private  correspondence.  That  interdict  is  grounded  on  the 
objection  that  all  freedom  and  security  in  epistolary  correspondence 
are  destroyed  by  the  liability  that  unreserved  communication  may 
hereafter  become  public.    No  such  danger  is  incurred  when  writer 


HOME. 


407 


and  receiver  agree  to  make  known  what  they  have  said  to  each  other. 
There  would  be  no  fireside  confidence  if  tete-d-tete  conversation  were 
liable  to  get  abroad,  through  some  third  person  thinking  what  he  had 
overheard  might  be  useful.  But  if  the  two  talkers  agree  to  say  else- 
where what  they  have  said  to  each  other,  there  can  be  no  possible 
objection  to  their  doing  so. 

You  have,  therefore,  my  full  permission  to  make  any  use  you  please 
of  any  thing  I  have  written  to  you  ;  and  Mr.  Atkinson  has  the  same, 
as  I  am  going  to  tell  him. 

Yours  affectionately, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 


PHILOSOPHY. 


"  Christianity,  I  conceive,  is  to  be  re-established  by  clear  development  of  its 
original  essential  truths.  No  religion  can  now  prevail  which  is  not  plainly  seen 
to  minister  to  our  noblest  sentiments  and  powers,  and  unless  Christianity  fulfils 
this  condition  I  cannot  wish  it  success."  —  Channing. 

"  There  is  no  condition  in  life,  no  degree  of  talent,  no  form  of  principle, 
which  affords  protection  against  an  accusation  [as  of  Atheism]  that  levels 
conditions,  confounds  characters,  renders  men's  virtues  their  sins,  and  rates 
them  as  dangerous  in  proportion  as  they  have  influence,  though  attained  in  the 
noblest  manner  and  used  for  the  best  purposes."  —  Walter  Scott. 

"  But  the  commandment  of  knowledge  is  yet  higher  than  the  commandment 
over  the  will :  for  it  is  a  commandment  over  the  reason,  belief,  and  understand- 
ing of  man,  which  is  the  highest  part  of  the  mind,  and  giveth  law  to  the  will 
itself.  For  there  is  no  power  on  earth  which  setteth  up  a  throne  or  chair  of 
state  in  the  spirits  and  soxils  of  men,  and  in  their  cogitations,  imaginations, 
opinions,  and  beliefs,  but  knowledge  and  learning."  —  Bacon. 

Harriet  Martixeau,  by  independent  thought,  study,  and 
travel  having  arrived  at  an  ascent  whence  a  wider  view  of  ex- 
istence became  visible  to  her ;  and  Mr.  Atkinson,  after  long 
study  and  induction,  having  attained,  by  a  new  application  of 
an  old  method,  the  knowledge  for  which  she  was  labouring,  it 
followed,  after  her  cure  by  the  means  he  recommended  to  the 
lady  whose  mesmeric  patient  she  had  been,  that  he  became  a 
personal  acquaintance,  a  coadjutor  in  philosophical  pursuits,  and 
ultimately  a  most  valued  friend.  He  was  not  "a  mesmerist," 
but  a  philosophical  student  of  all  natural  phenomena ;  and,  being 
a  gentleman  of  independent  fortune,  was  at  liberty  to  devote  him- 
self entirely  to  the  examination  of  facts  and  the  search  for  truth. 

It  was  he  who,  Margaret  Fuller  thought,  possessed  "a  fine 
instinctive  nature  : "  — 

VOL.  II. 


410 


MEMORIALS. 


"  A  man  of  about  thirty  ;  in  the  fulness  of  his  powers  ;  tall  and 
finely  formed,  with  a  head  for  Leonardo  to  paint  ;  mild  and  com- 
posed, but  thoughtful  and  sagacious  ;  he  does  not  think,  but  perceives 
and  acts.    He  is  intimate  with  artists,  having  studied  architecture 

himself,  as  a  profession  Sometimes  stationary  and  acting  in 

the  affairs  of  other  men,  sometimes  wandering  about  the  world  and 
learning,  —  he  seems  bound  by  no  tie,  and  yet  looks  as  if  he  had  rela- 
tions in  every  place." 

It  ought,  however,  to  be  noted,  that  Mr.  Atkinson,  though 
so  rapid  in  thought,  was  pre-eminently  a  thinker;  possessing 
that  faculty  of  clear,  methodical  explanation  of  the  essence,  the 
nature,  and  the  qualities  of  things,  that  Plato  rates  so  highly. 

The  results  of  research  on  the  part  of  Harriet  Martineau  and 
himself,  as  given  in  "The  Letters"  they  conjointly  published, 
were  popularly  called  "  views  ; "  but  having  had  warning  suffi- 
cient that  common  fame  is  as  deceitful  as  the  human  heart,  and 
sometimes  as  desperately  wicked,  I  determined  not  to  rely  upon 
it ;  and  I  frankly  asked  Mr.  Atkinson  what  were  his  "  views." 
Hers  I  had  already  learned :  and  it  seemed  but  fair  to  ask  the 
question  of  himself,  and  thus  avoid  the  mistake  of  asking  one 
person  to  make  a  confession  of  faith  for  another.  "  The  Let- 
ters "  told  what  views  were  held  in  common  ;  but  each  being 
independent  in  mind,  it  seemed  needful  and  desirable  to  one 
deeply  interested  in  the  premises  to  learn  what  each  thought  at 
first  hand. 

This  was  Mr.  Atkinson's  reply  both  to  my  inquiries  respect- 
ing our  dear  friend's  now  failing  health,  and  touching  his  philo- 
sophical views  :  - — 

MR.  ATKINSON  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

May  29,  1856. 

My  dear  Mrs.  Chapman,  —  Thanks  for  your  kind  note.  I  like  to 
see  what  you  say  of  our  dear  friend  ;  and  she  is  a  dear  friend,  and  I  do 
not  know  what  we  shall  do  without  her.  It  seems  almost  unnatural 
that  such  a  fine  nature  and  clear  perception  should  be  dying  away 
like  a  flower,  astonishing  us  with  its  great  beauty  for  an  hour,  and 
then  gone  for  ever. 

But  to  question  the  ways  of  nature  according  to  the  demands  of  the 


PHILOSOPHY. 


411 


human  heart  is  the  province  of  the  poet,  not  the  duty  of  the  philoso- 
pher. The  philosopher  must  leave  the  little  nook  of  his  own  nature, 
and  study  and  learn  obedience  to  the  divine  law  discovered  on  a 
wider  view.  It  is  this  peeping  out  from  under  the  cover  of  self  that 
has  given  to  our  friend  Harriet  Martineau  this  wide  range  of  view 
and  this  superiority,  in  a  corrected  sense  of  the  end  and  order  of 
nature.  She  is  not  an  investigator,  a  discoverer  in  science,  but  she 
is,  strictly  speaking,  a  philosopher,  as  a  lover  of  truth  in  a  highly 
practical  sense,  for  the  sake  of  mankind.  She  is  not  an  original 
philosophic  genius,  but  her  artistic  power  and  ability  to  learn  is 
extraordinary  :  and  more  extraordinary  still  is  the  power  of  seizing 
on  salient  points,  and  reproducing  in  a  clear  form  what  has  been 
imperfectly  stated  by  others. 

But  it  is  not  my  purpose  now  to  go  into  the  statement  of  what  I 
think  of  her  intellect  and  character  and  the  scope  of  her  powers. 
This  is  not  what  you  have  asked  me.  You  may  be  sure  that  I  quite 
assent  to  your  proposition  that,  had  our  friend  possessed  a  less  pure 
and  elevated  nature,  she  would  have  been  better  understood,  and 
more  certainly  received  the  praise  of  the  multitude  ;  more  especially 
in  relation  to  that  brave  exercise  of  her  free  nature  in  expressing 
opinions  which  she  conscientiously  believed  for  the  ultimate  good 
of  mankind.  That  the  views  promulgated  should  be  mistaken  and 
maligned  (as  you  notice)  is  of  small  consequence.  It  could  not,  in 
the  nature  of  things,  have  been  otherwise.  All  improved  and  true 
views,  and  almost  all  discoveries,  have  been  at  first  opposed  and 
maligned  ;  so  that  Bacon  very  properly  says,  "  There  is  no  worse 
augury  in  intellectual  matters  than  that  derived  from  unanimity," 
with  the  exception  of  divinity  and  politics  where  suffrages  are  allowed 
to  decide.  For  nothing  pleases  the  multitude  unless  it  strike  the  im- 
agination or  bind  down  the  understanding  with  the  shackles  of  vulgar 
notions.  Hence  we  may  well  transfer  Phocion's  remark  from  morals 
to  the  intellect,  "  that  men  should  immediately  examine  what  error 
or  fault  they  have  committed  when  the  multitude  concurs  with  and 
applauds  them."  Again,  says  Bacon,  u  to  speak  plainly,  no  correct 
judgment  can  be  formed,  either  of  our  method  or  its  discoveries,  by 
those  anticipations  which  are  now  in  common  use  ;  for  it  is  not  to  be 
required  of  us  to  submit  ourselves  to  the  judgment  of  the  very  method 
we  ourselves  arraign."  Hence  there  is  nothing  for  it  but  to  submit  to 
the  misinterpretation  and  disapproval  of  the  old  world  we  are  leaving 
behind  us. 

I  hope  it  is  no  presumption  to  say  this.    I  merely  speak  after  the 


412 


MEMORIALS. 


manner  and  spirit  of  Lord  Bacon,  as  one  who  has  endeavoured  to 
carry  forward  his  principles.  But  as  to  those  who  speak  or  think  or 
write  in  a  harsh  and  presumptuous  spirit  of  my  views,  I  would  remind 
them  that  "  they  who  live  in  glass  houses  should  not  throw  stones for 
they  may  be  sure  they  will  find  it  difficult  to  make  good  their  own 
ground,  either  from  a  moral  or  an  intellectual  point  of  view. 

If  you  ask  what  I  am,  I  should  say,  a  rationalist ;  that  I  take  my 
view  from  the  point  of  reason.  Or  I  may  say  I  am  a  naturalist ;  as 
opposed  to  the  non-natural  or  supernaturalists  ;  that  man  is  a  reasoning 
being,  and  that  his  progress  in  power  and  excellence  depends  on  his 
acquired  knowledge  of  nature  ;  —  of  nature  in  general,  but  of  human 
nature  in  particular.  I  see  and  feel  that  logic  or  reason  implies  the 
fixity  of  principles  ;  and  hence  we  speak  of  eternal  truths,  and  of 
universal  laws ;  and  until  we  perceive  the  absolute  necessity  of  things 
being  just  what  they  are,  and  the  impossibility  of  their  being  different 
in  law  and  principle,  we  have  a  sense  undeveloped  and  are  neither 
philosophers  nor,  strictly  speaking,  natural  beings.  "Neither  is  it 
possible  "  (says  Bacon)  "  for  any  power  to  loosen  or  burst  the  chain  of 
causes,  nor  is  nature  to  be  overcome,  except  by  submission."  Because 
the  power  of  man  over  nature,  and  over  his  own  nature,  rests  in  his 
knowledge  of  causes  ;  and  the  province  of  the  philosopher  is  to  trace 
all  effects  to  their  causes  in  nature,  to  their  material  causes  and  con- 
ditions, in  order  to  the  discovery  of  the  laws  concerned.  And  there 
is  no  possibility  of  an  exception  to  causation.  Hence  the  notion  of  an 
interfering  providence,  acting  by  results  and  by  a  free-will,  is  sheer 
nonsense  ;  the  shallow  and  dangerous  dreaming  of  unenlightened  and 
unphilosophic  minds.  But  the  study  of  human  nature  must  be  pur- 
sued as  a  pure  science  :  for  the  human  mind  in  general,  like  the 
separate  senses,  is  subject  to  error,  the  correction  of  which  imperfec- 
tion cannot  arise  out  of  meditation,  but  must  be  sought  by  experiment 
in  deep  investigation  into  causes,  and  by  the  analogies  of  knowledge. 
We  require  a  new  mode  of  investigation,  another  range  of  facts  ;  for 
the  attempt  to  understand  human  nature  by  reasoning  and  by  simple 
abstract  reflection,  without  a  scientific  procedure  by  experiment  and 
observation  by  which  to  trace  effects  to  their  causes,  is  absurd.  We 
may  as  well  try  to  live  by  the  study  of  the  multiplication-table, 
leaving  out  all  respect  of  the  loaves  and  fishes. 

Bacon  finely  admonishes:  "But  if  any  individual  desire,  and  is 
anxious  not  merely  to  adhere  to  and  make  use  of  present  discoveries, 
but  to  penetrate  still  further,  and  not  to  overcome  his  adversaries  by 
disputes,  but  nature  by  labour  ;  not,  in  short,  to  give  elegant  and 


PHILOSOPHY. 


413 


specious  opinions,  but  to  know  to  a  certainty  and  demonstration,  let 
him,  as  a  true  son  of  science,  join  with  us  ;  that  when  he  has  left  the 
antechambers  of  Nature  trodden  by  the  multitude,  an  entrance  may 
at  last  be  discovered  to  her  inner  apartments."  But  then,  granting 
all  this,  our  good  friends  or  enemies  of  the  old  world  may  say,  "  What 
becomes  of  those  sentiments  of  our  nature  that  have  been  exercised  in 
religion  ? "  I  reply,  that  those  sentiments  that  have  been  misdirected 
by  error,  and  crushed  by  folly  and  degrading  and  hideous  notions  ; 
which  have  been  little  better  than  a  jingle  of  words,  will  spring  up 
again  unimpeded,  —  a  new  growth  of  beautiful  flowers  in  our  path  ; 
for  our  philosophy  is  — 

"  Not  harsh  and  crabbed  as  dull  fools  suppose, 
But  musical  as  is  Apollo's  lute." 

But  in  speaking  of  the  philosophical  method  and  of  the  develop- 
ment of  the  sentiments,  you  must  consider  that  I  speak  of  myself 
alone,  and  do  not  answer  for  our  friend's  agreeing  with  me  implicitly. 
For  in  using  common  terms,  such  as  religion  or  spirit,  she  thinks  I 
shall  be  misunderstood. 

In  Froude's  article*  you  will  find  a  reference  to  Appendix  0  (of 
"  The  Letters  "),  which  I  wrote  purposing  to  soften  any  ill  impression 
and  prevent  misinterpretation.  But  our  friend  thinks  the  terms  were 
misinterpreted  by  Froude  ;  or,  as  she  expresses  herself  to-day,  in  a 
note  in  reply  to  what  I  told  her  I  should  write  to  you,  that  "  they 
will  be  supposing  the  old  bottles  to  hold  the  old  wine."  "  To  be  sure, 
if  they  read  you  as  a  whole,  paying  due  attention  to  every  part,  they 
could  not  make  the  mistake  ;  but  then  people  are  so  run  away  with 
by  sounds  and  associations  !  "  This  is  quite  true,  but  we  cannot  in- 
vent new  terms  for  the  sentiments  ;  and  by  dropping  such  terms  as 
religion,  spirituality,  and  the  like,  we  shall  be  equally  misinterpreted, 
in  another  way,  and  be  called  dull,  cold,  unimpassioned  atheists,  dry 
reasoning  materialists,  and  indeed  be  found  wanting  in  the  faculties 
and  feelings  more  or  less  common  to  the  human  race.  But  with  this 
caution  people  must  be  indolent  indeed  if  they  misunderstand  me. 
True  philosophy,  in  an  emotional  sense,  may  be  termed  an  affection 
of  the  mind,  obedient  to  the  highest  reason  ;  but  this  can  hardly  be 
entertained  by  those  who,  as  Plutarch  says,  "  retain  the  foolish  and 
frightful  opinions  they  received  in  infancy."  And  when  I  speak  of 
the  old  world,  it  must  be  understood  that  the  old  world  is,  in 
reality,  the  young  world.  My  opinion  is,  then,  that  philosophy 
rightly  felt  as  well  as  understood  is  deeply  reverential,  and  a  pro- 

*  In  Fraser's  Magazine. 


414 


MEMORIALS. 


foundly  pure  religion,  and  the  only  high  and  elevating  religion  ; 
the  only  religion  completely  discarding  idol-worship  and  selfish 
principles  ;  the  only  religion  that  distinctly  excludes  pride,  in  the 
humbling  sense  of  our  being  wholly  dependent  on  causes,  which,  in 
their  effects,  appear  as  a  uniform,  perpetual,  and  universal  miracle, 
in  the  wondrous  working  of  an  incomprehensible  something  we  term 
power,  or  fundamental  nature,  or  the  nature  of  nature,  as  Bacon  calls 
it ;  or  the  first  cause,  more  commonly  termed  (or  can  be  termed)  mirac- 
ulous :  —  this  idea  of  power,  meanwhile,  in  contradistinction  to  our 
sensational  experience,  recognizing  the  course  of  effects  ;  which  sen- 
sational appearances  (effects)  again,  from  their  order  and  beauty, 
rivet  attention  and  claim  a  tribute  from  the  feelings.  The  contem- 
plation, referring  to  the  cause  or  power,  is  wonder,  or  knowledge 
broken  off.  The  contemplation  of  the  effect  is  admiration  and  ex- 
quisite enjoyment.  But  these  sentiments  with  which  I  am  so 
solemnly  impressed  are  not  to  be  explained  in  a  few  lines  ;  may 
easily,  as  our  friend  fears,  be  mistaken  ;  and  are  hardly  to  be  compre- 
hended by  those  under  the  dreary  slavery  of  old  superstitions,  where 
power  is  personified  and  evil  is  personified,  just  as  Beauty,  Time, 
Strength,  and  Fleetness  were  personified  in  the  heathen  mythology. 
People  still  rest  among  the  same  or  similar  delusions,  the  "  spirit "  of 
power  being  shaded  off  into  three  distinctions,  opposed  by  the  Devil, 
who  really  seems  to  have  had  it  pretty  much  his  own  way  ;  and  in 
the  last  day  is  to  get  the  lion's  share  of  the  poor  human  race,  for 
eternal  damnation.  Now  I  really  don't  think  our  view  of  things, 
which  excludes  this  fearful  demon,  and  damnation,  can  be  so  very 
offensive.  But  if  I  am  to  be  damned  here  and  hereafter  for  discredit- 
ing the  Devil,  I  cannot  help  it. 

Yet  if  we  would  seek  that  spirit  of  excellence,  of  wisdom,  and  of 
power,  that  eternal  reason  or  mind  in  nature,  or  the  inspired  word 
that  is  spoken  from  the  depths  of  human  nature,  it  must  be,  as  it 
were,  by  an  invocation  of  the  enlightened  conscience  ;  by  an  appeal 
to  the  untrammelled  understanding  ;  by  a  deep  and  devoted  love  of 
all  that  is  virtuous  and  most  noble  ;  by  a  reverential  love  of  beauty 
and  excellence  in  every  form  ;  and  by  a  strict  fidelity  to  truth  and 
honour  :  for  truth  must  be  considered  what  Plato  terms  it,  "  the 
body  of  God  ;  and  light,  as  his  shadow."  The  religion  of  philosophy 
should  pervade  our  whole  being,  and  prevail  throughout  our  whole 
life,  and  under  all  circumstances  :  should  be  seen  in  the  artist  de- 
voutly conscientious  towards  that  nature  which  he  so  loves  ;  in  the 
statesman's  disinterested  labour  for  the  good  of  mankind  ;  in  the  mer- 


PHILOSOPHY. 


415 


chant's  undeviating  honest  course  ;  nay,  in  fact,  must  be  seen  in  a 
growth  towards  true  magnanimity,  and  in  the  abnegation  of  self,  and 
in  the  respectful  feeling  of  every  man  towards  his  fellow-man. 

The  great  privilege  of  the  freethinker  being  in  the  pursuit  of 
knowledge  as  of  an  enterprise,  and,  freed  from  error,  to  learn  wisdom 
in  a  deeper  devotion  to  truth,  and  for  its  own  sake  as  well  as  for  the 
good  x>i  mankind,  depend  upon  it  we  shall  not  by  any  power  in 
reason,  or,  as  it  were,  jugglery  of  the  intellect,  rob  human  nature  of 
its  devotional  feeling  and  hero-worship.  We  must  love,  though,  alas  ! 
that  love  may  be  often  blind  and  misplaced.  We  shall  retain  self- 
respect,  though  we  cease  to  have  pride.  We  shall  retain  the  desire  of 
approbation,  though  freed  from  the  slavery  of  vanity.  So  also  of  the 
devotional  feelings  :  they  will  retain  a  sphere  of  action  and  acquire  a 
more  healthy  vigour,  when  no  longer  perverted  and  misdirected  by 
the  belief  in  the  silly  fables  of  the  ancients.  Be  sure  the  devotional 
feelings  will  not  wither  away  and  perish  when  we  awake  from  the 
long  dream,  and  have  cast  down  the  idols  that  have  so  long  disgraced 
the  altar,  and  trampled  hell  under  our  feet,  and  extinguished  its 
"  eternal  fires,"  putting  to  flight  all  the  lies  and  blasphemies  conse- 
quent upon  those  erroneous  opinions  established  by  the  blind  igno- 
rance of  the  infant  world. 

Some  mean  by  philosophy  the  being  raised  above,  or  the  becoming 
indifferent  to,  the  accidents  of  life  ;  or  the  being,  as  it  were,  a  law  unto 
yourself.  Thus  we  speak  of  a  person  bearing  a  matter  philosophi- 
cally ;  we  never  say  a  person  bears  a  misfortune  religiously,  because 
few  of  the  old  religions  teach  fortitude,  but  chiefly  compensation  and 
the  low  principle  of  reward  and  punishment  for  "poor  miserable  sin- 
ners." But  supposing  I  call  the  fortitude  of  philosophy  the  religion, 
and  the  compensation  doctrine  a  worldly  and  vain  philosophy  :  —  shall 
I  be  misunderstood  ?  And  when  I  say  that  philosophy  by  knowledge 
is  erecting  a  strong  mansion,  while  the  old  religions  are  but  propping 
up  a  tottering  house  that  was  built  on  a  shifting  sand-heap,  let  it  not 
for  an  instant  be  supposed  that  philosophy  ends  in  the  reasoning  our- 
selves out  of  ancient  beliefs  ;  for  a  clearance  from  such  beliefs  is  sim- 
ply opening  the  way,  and  making  it  possible  for  us  to  pursue  philoso- 
phy, somewhat  as  the  musician  runs  down  the  keys  to  make  silence 
ere  he  begins  his  song.  And  let  none  pride  themselves  in  the  good- 
ness of  their  natures,  though  there  be  some  that  truly  seem,  by  the 
beauty  of  this  form,  to  be  a  law  unto  themselves  ;  but  let  even  these 
remember  that  the  best  minds  are  most  capable  of  being  improved, 
and  that  those  who  have  pronounced  on  the  value  of  philosophy 


410 


MKMOElALS. 


have  been  the  giants  of  the  world,  some  of  tie  i:  :.iest  and  the  lest 
of  mankind.  The  pril-  :'  - 1".  posing  we  can  discern  good  from  evil 
without  knowledge  was  the  ignorant  pride  fabled  in  the  fall  of  Adam. 

<  t:-^:. iiei.  the  "beauty  and  the  value  of  knowledge,  tic  neit 
«  i-.-i  i  >.  wi..:  kill  ::  kn :w  le-dje  >  we  are  L-hiefly  in  want  o£  and 
how  this  is  to  be  acquired  :  and  for  a  reply  to  this  I  relet  you  to  my 
publishel  letters  to  Harriet  Martin eau  ;  for  the  critics  :i  those  betters 


■agon 


method  alone,  is  it  possible  lor  us  to  an.am  a  .Knowledge  ol  numan  na- 
ture, and  of  those  din' erci.es.  similitudes,  and  orders  which  are  the 
elements  of  a  true  science  ;  but  which  anained,  we  shall  then  define 
.  1  -.  jl  .  y  the  meaning  of  ~  the  flesh  warring  against  the  spirit,"  and  of  that 
:i;t  ::a:i  i  si»eaking,  as  it  were,  out  of  the  depth  of  our  nature  ;  and 
by  the  study  of  abnormal  conditions,  and  by  a  new  view  and  experi- 
menting learn  the  true  laws  of  our  being,  and  thence  attain  practical 
roles  :'z  our  rui  dance  :  calmly  considering  the  facts,  yet  patiently 
waiting  upon  further  discoveries  ;  earnest  and  attentive  as  a  little  child 
beginning  to  learn,  and  hopeful  as  a  child  with  the  world  of  knowl- 


wiser  than 
I  have  b 
certainly  I 

the  ]  •:•  -e- 

t.  :onsidei 


it,  J 
v-  -  v 


PHILOSOPHY. 


417 


cism,  choose  to  investigate.  And  if  I  am  not  orthodox  in  science  any 
more  than  in  religion,  I  cannot  help  it  ;  and  I  remember  what  has 
been  said  about  this  :  "  Orthodoxy  is  my  doxy,  and  heterodoxy  is 
any  body  else's  doxy/'  I  have  no  doubt  but  Franklin  was  thought 
credulous,  in  believing  that  he  brought  down  electricity  from  the 
passing  cloud  to  ring  the  little  bell  by  his  side.  And,  it  may  be,  he 
was  thought  sceptical  in  not  afterwards  believing  thunder  to  be  the 
voice  of  God.  TVe  must  submit  to  the  conditions  of  men's  minds  and 
the  judgment  of  our  times.  But  the  philosopher  need  no  longer 
waste  his  time  in  contending  with  error  and  folly,  but  devote  himself 
entirely  to  the  study  of  nature,  and  to  the  tracing  of  effects  to  their 
natural  causes  in  order  to  discover  their  laws  of  action,  in  which  is 
hidden  power.  Formerly  men  put  lance  in  rest  to  uphold  the  vir- 
tue of  their  wives  or  the  beauty  of  their  mistresses  ;  and  engaged  in 
what  were  strangely  termed  holy  wars,  in  defence  of  their  religion  ; 
and  philosophers  were  not  wholly  free  from  this  contentious  spirit  ; 
simply  because  they  were  not  yet  free  from  the  errors  of  the  divine 
and  the  metaphysician,  and  brought  down  upon  their  knees  to  the 
study  of  nature  out  of  the  little  world  of  their  own  thoughts,  as  nature 
ought  to  be  studied  and  in  the  only  way  in  which  it  can  be  under- 
stood and  rightly  interpreted ;  and  to  the  study  of  human  nature  in 
particular  as  a  pure  science.  And  if  philosophy  was  such  a  glorious 
pursuit,  as  understood  and  practised  by  those  noble  minds  in  olden 
times  (before  the  forced  paralysis  of  the  understanding  by  theology 
and  its  professors)  by  those  first  natural  rulers  of  the  race  who  shone 
out  like  stars  in  the  night  and  early  dawn  of  the  world's  history,  what 
may  not  philosophy  become  when  wholly  purified  of  a  debasing  and 
obstructive  theology,  with  all  the  follies  and  dissolving-views  and 
phantasmagoria  of  metaphysics  (as  metaphysics  has  been  as  yet  con- 
sidered) ;  and  when  all  truth  shall  be  felt  to  be  divine,  and  philosophy 
to  be  divinity  itself,  that  is,  to  be  the  science  of  divine  things,  —  a 
science  exhibiting  the  nature  and  laws  of  man's  constitution,  and  the 
sure  and  only  means  of  attaining  to  a  higher  state  of  existence,  each 
accor ling  to  his  talent  and  inherent  capacity :  and  if  all  do  not  be- 
come equally  great,  at  least  the  rule  for  all  will  be  the  highest  ;  and 
from  the  moral  and  intellectual  assent  to  this  there  will  be  no  excep- 
tion among  cultivated  and  sane  minds.  Only  think  what  glorious 
old  Socrates  would  be,  were  he  now  one  among  us,  —  learning  his 
misleading  error  about  the  clairvoyance  of  the  oracles,  which  he  could 
not  then  suppose  was  any  thing  else  but  the  word  of  a  god,  nor  think 
that  voice  within  was  his  own  nature  prompting  him.    How  could 


418 


MEMORIALS. 


he  then  judge  but  after  the  popular  belief,  and  conclude  it  to  be  an 
attendant  demon  ?  For  the  great  difficulty  in  the  progress  of  mind 
and  the  science  of  the  mind  is,  that  the  error  and  impediment  pre- 
venting clear  seeing  can  only  be  cleared  away  by  the  very  light  which 
is  obscured  by  the  error.  Hence  the  course  of  the  mind's  progress, 
until  fairly  cleared  of  all  superstition,  could  not  but  be  devious  and 
slow,  —  falling  upon  truth  step  by  step  and  from  age  to  age,  as  it 
were  by  accident. 

0,  it  will  be  a  strange  sight  to  watch  the  last  spasms  of  dying 
superstition,  —  the  superstition  of  the  scientific  !  And  the  High 
Church  will  go  ahead  of  the  freethinkers,  as  the  tories  often  go  ahead 
of  the  "liberals"  in  politics.  We  have  Cardinal  Wiseman  in  his 
lectures  now  taking  phrenology  under  his  protection,  preaching  the 
all-importance  of  philosophy  ;  but  it  won't  do.  New  wine  may  not 
be  put  into  old  bottles  ;  and  it  is  vain  to  expect  any  great  progress  in 
the  science  by  the  superinducing  or  ingrafting  new  matters  upon  the 
old.  An  installation  must  be  made  from  the  very  foundation,  if  we 
do  not  wish  to  revolve  in  a  circle  ;  but  theologians  will  be  driven 
to  desperate  efforts  to  reconcile  new  truth  with  their  ancient  belief ; 
and  they  will  pretend  to  be  the  very  first  to  welcome  the  very 
matters  they  have  been  so  violently  opposing.  Yes  —  we  may  well 
smile  to  observe  the  shifts  that  are  made  to  appear  consistent  and  to 
consider  how  it  must  all  end,  just  by  letting  the  responsibility  slip 
away,  —  leaving  the  priest  of  dogma  and  of  form  and  ceremonies, 
a  reformed  man,  —  the  deep-feeling  and  devoted  priest  of  all  holy 
and  virtuous  natures  ;  in  a  word,  a  true  philosopher,  sagacious  and 
full  of  wisdom,  —  that  empress  of  knowledge.  He  will  have  left  the 
shifting  sand-heap  for  the  solid  rock  ;  belief  for  knowledge  ;  and  in 
a  position  demonstrably  true,  as  founded  on  the  clear  logical  condi- 
tion of  the  mind,  and  in  the  pursuit  of  truth,  finding  universal 
evidence  of  that  logical  position  ;  and,  as  the  end  of  all,  displaying 
the  true  and  natural  bent,  meaning,  and  realization  of  all  man's 
fondest  hopes  and  highest  aspirations. 

It  is  now  time  to  stop  and  apologize  for  the  bad  writing.  If  I 
have  not  rightly  understood  your  question,  pray  ask  me  any  thing 
further  you  may  wish  me  to  explain. 

I  fear  this  our  dear  friend  is  something  worse,  but  you  will  have 
an  account  from  herself  by  the  post  which  brings  you  this. 

Believe  me,  with  great  regard,  very  sincerely  yours, 

HENRY  G.  ATKINSON. 

P.  S.  I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  Appendix  0,  in 
"The  Letters." 


PHILOSOPHY. 


419 


The  following  letter  from  Mr.  Atkinson  finds  its  best  place 
here,  though  twenty  years  intervene.  Not  in  vain  is  the  appeal 
to  Time,  — 

1 '  Sole  philosopher, 
For  all  besides  are  sophists." 

Boulogne-sur-Mer,  August  23,  1876. 
Dear  Mrs.  Chapman, — The  enclosed  document  will  show  you 
that  Professor  Tyndall's  views,  as  given  in  his  famous  Belfast  Ad- 
dress, as  president  of  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of 
Science,  are  precisely  what  was  condemned  in  "  The  Letters  "  twenty- 
five  years  before. 

Again,  the  one  method,  as  applicable  to  all  questions,  physical  and 
metaphysical,  exemplified  in  "  The  Letters,"  is  now  set  forth  by  Dr. 
Maudsley,  in  his  opening  chapter  on  Method,  in  his  great  work  on 
Man  ;  and  by  Mr.  George  Henry  Lewes,  in  his  "  Problems  of  Life 
and  Mind;"*  whilst  the  deep  truth  of  unconscious  cerebration  or 
atomatic  mind,  as  fundamental  to  the  conscious  accompaniments,  has 
since  been  explained  by  Sir  William  Hamilton  and  Dr.  Carpenter,  as 
discoveries  of  their  own,  though  clearly  referred  to  in  "The  Letters." 

Then,  again,  all  the  wonders  of  mesmerism  are  being  discussed  in  all 
the  many  newly  founded  psychological  societies  ;  whilst  the  late  Mr. 
Jackson,  in  his  opening  address  as  President  of  the  Glasgow  Psycho- 
logical Society,  referred  to  my  discovery  of  phreno-mesmerism  as  a 
matter  of  the  deepest  importance  to  psychology  and  the  investigation 
of  man's  nature  ;  and  even  Professor  Huxley  has  at  length  expressed 
his  interest  in  mesmerism,  which  he  says  he  heard  so  much  of  in  his 
youth. 

And  our  friend  lived  to  know  all  this.  And  what  a  true  prophet 
was  her  sympathizing  friend  Professor  Gregory  !  And  all  this,  I 
think,  ought  to  be  referred  to  in  your  own  Memoir,  as  most  certainly 
our  friend  would  have  been  sure  to  do,  and  desired  that  you  should  do. 

Yours  very  truly, 

H.  G.  ATKINSON. 

This  was  Professor  Gregory  of  Edinburgh  (long  since  dead), 
who  wrote  to  Harriet  Martineau  as  follows,  on  the  publication 
of  "  The  Letters  : "  — 

"Although  you  and  I  may  not  live  to  see  it,  yet  you  may  feel 
satisfied  that,  whether  all  your  conclusions  be  subsequently  estab- 

*  That  there  is  but  one  method  for  all  subjects. 


420 


MEMORIALS. 


lished  or  not,  no  work  has  ever  yet  borne  your  name  fit  to  be  com- 
pared with  '  The  Letters  •  in  its  ultimate  effect  for  good  on  the  human 
race.  We  require  to  be  roused  from  the  lethargy  of  our  priest-ridden 
mental  slumber  ;  and  a  more  effectual  rousing  than  that  given  by 
1  The  Letters '  it  is  not  easy  to  imagine." 

In  his  letters  to  me  Mr.  Atkinson  frequently  expresses  much  in- 
difference to  any  fame  accruing  from  this  priority  of  discovery : — 

"  What  we  do  not  discover  somebody  else  will ;  and  when  progress 
is  made  the  main  point  is  secured." 

It  was  during  this  period  that  Harriet  Martineau  became  in- 
terested in  the  philosophy  of  Anguste  Comte,  the  great  genius 
to  whom  so  many  have  been  indebted  who  have  not,  like  her, 
acknowledged  their  obligations.  She  has  told  how  she  became 
associated  with  his  "  Philosophie  Positive,"  the  great  work  of 
his  devoted,  uncompromising,  severe  life  of  poverty  and  toil. 

His  hopes  of  ultimate  success  in  thinking  out  his  system  and 
presenting  it  to  the  world  were  at  the  highest,  and  his  worldly 
fortunes,  broken  and  blighted  by  the  treatment  to  which  the 
theological  cast  of  Charles  X.'s  reign  must  needs  subject  one 
whose  vocation  it  was  to  prove  that  the  reign  of  theology  was 
over,  were  at  the  lowest,  when  Harriet  Martineau  became  ac- 
quainted with  his  name  and  works. 

In  consequence  of  the  interest  she  expressed  to  me  in  his  career, 
I  inquired  among  my  gay  entourage  in  Paris  who  and  what  was 
Comte.  "  A  poor  worthless  lecturer  to  about  five  hundred  of 
the  raggedest  vagabonds  in  France,"  was  the  frequent  reply. 
The  flower  of  the  iZcole  Polytechnique,  whose  professor  he  had 
been  till  removed  for  his  opinions,  did  not,  however,  agree  in 
this  judgment,  and  they  taxed  themselves  at  that  crisis  for  his 
pecuniary  support.  Every  where  in  English-speaking  lands  his 
philosophy  was  labouring  under  popular  misunderstanding,  though 
so  clear  to  students  and  the  scientific  world,  whether  accepted  or 
rejected. 

The  misunderstanding  among  those  who  only  knew  it  by  name 
was  in  part  owing  to  the  different  shades  of  meaning  attached  to 
the  word  "positive,"  which  in  popular  English  we  make  the 


PHILOSOPHY. 


421 


equivalent  of  "dogmatical"  or  "unreasonably  peremptory;" 
while  in  French  it  would  be  denned  as  what  can  be  rigorously 
demonstrated  from  and  sustained  by  facts.  M.  Comte  used  the 
term  with  regard  to  philosophy  because  it  was  the  one  that  de- 
scribed the  method  hitherto  used  in  the  investigation  of  the 
special  sciences  which  his  system  includes.  When  the  perse- 
cution that  makes  even  wise  men  mad  had  told  upon  a  delicate 
frame,  he  was,  in  consequence  of  a  brain  fever,  placed  for  many 
months  of  the  year  1826  -  7,  in  a  maison  de  sante  ;  but  he  com- 
pletely recovered  his  health,  and  went  on  with  his  deep  and  high 
thinking  till  he  had  produced  the  works  which  have  not  only 
immortalized  his  own  name,  but  have  opened  the  way  for  other 
men  to  positions  which  they  adorn  in  the  world  of  thought. 
This  is  not  the  place  to  say  more  of  him  than  belongs  to  the 
point  where  the  circle  of  his  thought  touched  that  of  Harriet 
Martineau.  She  was  drawn  to  the  study  of  his  works  by  the 
philosophical  integrity  which  refused  the  slightest  concession  of 
his  principles  to  the  tyranny  of  his  times,  though  under  pressure 
from  loss  of  place  and  means.  "  What  is  a  great  life  ] "  is  a 
question  to  which  she  must  needs  reply,  with  Alfred  de  Vigny, 
"A  thought  of  youth  realized  in  mature  age."  And  when  any 
man  on  earth  was  seen  struggling  in  adverse  circumstances  to 
realize  the  thoughts  he  deemed  sacred,  he  was  sure  to  be  followed 
by  Harriet  Martineau's  help  and  blessing. 

She  has  told  how  it  came  about  that  she  was  led  to  introduce 
M.  Comte  to  the  English-speaking  world,  but  she  has  not  told 
how  he  was  impressed  by  the  way  in  which  she  had  interpreted 
his  grand  original  work,  the  "  Philosophic  Positive."  But  one 
learns  from  his  own  letters  how  highly  he  estimated  the  upright- 
ness, the  exactitude,  and  the  sagacity  shown  in  the  long  and 
difficult  labour  of  translating  and  condensing  a  work  which  she 
considered  as  one  of  the  chief  honours  of  the  age. 

He  is  "  grateful  for  the  noble  Preface,"  in  which  she  says  that 
one  reason  for  her  undertaking  the  work  is,  "  that  most  or  all  of 
the  English  writers  who  have  added  substantially  to  our  knowl- 
edge for  many  years  past  are  under  obligations  to  this  work, 
which  they  would  have  thankfully  acknowledged  but  for  fear 


422 


MEMORIALS. 


of  offending  the  prejudices  of  the  society  in  which  they  live ; " 
and  therefore,  "  though  his  fame  is  safe,  it  does  not  seem  to  me 
right  to  assist  in  delaying  the  recognition  of  it  till  the  author 
of  so  noble  a  service  is  beyond  the  reach  of  our  gratitude  and 
honour :  and  it  is,  besides,  demoralizing  to  ourselves  to  accept 
and  use  such  a  boon  as  he  has  given  us  in  a  silence  which  is,  in 
fact,  ingratitude.  His  honours  we  cannot  share  :  they  are  his 
own,  and  incommunicable.  His  trials  we  may  share,  and  by  shar- 
ing, lighten ;  and  he  has  the  strongest  claim  upon  us  for  sympathy 
and  fellowship  in  any  popular  disrepute  which,  in  this  case,  as  in 
all  cases  of  signal  social  service,  attends  upon  a  first  movement." 

A  stronger  reason  for  her  undertaking  was,  that  M.  Comte's 
work  in  its  original  form  does  no  justice  to  its  importance,  even 
in  France,  much  less  in  England  ;  and  she  gave  in  two  volumes 
what  filled  six  volumes  in  the  original  lectures,  with  redundancies 
and  repetitions.  He  thanks  her  for  these  judicious  omissions, 
especially  those  which  the  advance  of  astronomical  science  made 
imperative.  He  sees  that  her  work  makes  the  "  Philosophic  Posi- 
tive "  known  in  a  degree  that  he  could  never  in  his  lifetime  have 
hoped.  And  when  it  became  a  question  of  popularizing  his 
principles  in  France,  he  gave  the  preference  to  her  work  over 
his  own  ;  and  long  years  after  his  death,  M.  Avezac-Lavigne,  one 
of  his  friends,  wrote  to  her  for  permission  to  translate  her  work 
into  French.    The  letter  is  here  subjoined. 

LETTER  FROM  M.  AVEZAC-LAVIGNE  TO  H.  MARTI NEAU. 

Bordeaux,  le  23  Mai,  1871. 
Mademoiselle,  —  Vous  n'ignorez  pas,  sans  doute.  que  M.  Comte 
a  place,  parmi  les  livres  devant  former  la  bibliotheque  d'un  positiviste, 
votre  traduction  de  son  systeme  de  philosophic,  a  Pexclusion  des  six 
volumes  qu'il  avait  composes.  Cette  substitution  d'un  livre  en 
langue  etrangere  a  son  livre  francais  a  du  etre  amende  par  des  motifs 
puissants  bien  honorables  pour  vous.  Mais,  quoique  parfaitement 
justified,  la  preference  de  M.  Comte  ne  pouvait  pas  avoir  le  resultat 
qu'il  s'en  etait  promis  ;  car,  en  realite,  votre  traduction,  malgre  son 
eminente  valeur,  ne  devait  trouver  en  France  qu'un  nombre  tres 
restreint  de  lecteurs,  et  les  personnes  qui  desiraient  connaitre  la  phi- 
losophic positive  continuaient  a  avoir  recours  aux  six  volumes  de  M. 


PHILOSOPHY. 


423 


Comte.  Or,  la  longueur  de  cet  ouvrage,  son  prix  eleve,  et  sa  rarete, 
avant  l'edition  qu'en  a  donnee  Germer  Bailliere,  etaient  des  obstacles 
a  son  expansion  ;  en  sorte  que,  ni  votre  excellente  traduction,  ni 
l'ouvrage  fran^ais  ne  devaient  populariser  la  philosophie  positive. 
En  presence  de  cette  difhculte,  je  formai  le  projet  de  traduire  vos 
deux  volumes,  et  c'est  la  premiere  livraison  de  mon  travail  que  j'aurai 
1'bonneur  de  vous  soumettre  prochainement,  afin  que,  si  ce  specimen 
vous  agree  vous  vouliez  bien  ni'autoriser  a  publier  le  reste. 

Mademoiselle,  si  j'ai  pris  la  liberte  de  livrer  a  Timpression  le  pre- 
mier fascicule,  de  100  pages  environ,  sans  vous  en  donner  avis,  c'est 
que  j'ai  pense  qu'il  vous  paraitrait  necessaire  de  pouvoir  apprecier,  du 
moins  d'apres  quelques  pages,  mon  humble  travail,  dont,  soit  dit  en 
passant,  je  n'espere  retirer  ni  honneur  ni  profits.  Dans  la  malheu- 
reuse  phase  que  traverse  la  France,  les  esprits  sont  naturellement 
detournes  des  etudes  abstraites,  et  cependant  j'ai  la  conviction  que  si 
le  livre  de  M.  Comte  avait  ete  plus  repandu,  beaucoup  de  malheurs 
auraient  ete  epargnes  a  mon  pauvre  pays.  C'est  le  motif  que  m'a  fait 
perseverer  dans  l'entreprise  que  j'avais  commencee  avant  la  guerre, 
malgre  les  graves  preoccupations  qui  m'agitaient,  et  j'espere  que  cette 
consideration  contribuera  a  vous  faire  accueillir  favorablement  la 
demande  que  j'ai  l'honneur  de  vous  adresser. 

Je  suis  avec  respect,  Mademoiselle,  votre  tres  humble  et  devoue 
serviteur, 

C.  AVEZAC-LAVIGXE. 

With  a  refreshing  unconsciousness  of  her  own  superiority  in 
scientific  comprehension  and  expression,  Mrs.  Martineau  caused 
this  reply  to  be  made  :  — 

M.  Avezac-Lavigne. 

Sir,  —  Your  letter  was  forwarded  to  Mr3.  H.  Martineau  by  Messrs. 
Triibner  &  Co.,  which  she  begs  jne  to  acknowledge  with  her  kind 
regards.  I  trust  you  will  accept  her  reply  through  me,  as  she  is  un- 
able to  carry  on  all  her  correspondence  with  her  own  hand,  and  I  am 
anxious  to  save  her  what  fatigue  of  writing  I  can.  My  aunt  begs  me 
to  say  that  she  feels  much  interest  in  the  subject  of  your  letter,  and 
hopes  that  you  may  be  able  to  carry  out  the  project  you  propose. 
On  account  of  a  long  and  suffering  illness,  from  heart  complaint, 
she  has  for  many  years  lived  a  most  secluded  and  quiet  life.  She 
has  long  given  up  public  writing,  and  now  with  increasing  weakness 
and  old  age  she  is  obliged  to  withdraw  from  business  of  all  kinds. 
I  am  therefore  sorry  to  tell  you  that  it  is  quite  out  of  the  question 


424 


MEMORIALS. 


for  her  to  grant  your  request,  or  to  enter  into  the  details  of  your 
work. 

My  aunt  "begs  me  to  say  that  she  did  not  insert  any  thing  new  in 
her  version  of  M.  Comte's  Lectures.  This  being  the  case,  she  asks 
whether  it  would  not  be  a  more  simple  plan  for  you  also,  instead  of 
translating  her  two  volumes  into  French,  merely  to  compress  the  origi- 
nal i  It  appears  to  her  to  be  the  most  effectual,  as  well  as  the  easiest 
method  to  present  the  substance  of  M.  Comte's  own  words  instead  of 
through  a  double  translation. 

"With  best  wishes  believe  me 

Yours  truly, 

J.  S.  M. 

On  first  receiving  her  work,  M.  Comte  had  -written  at  great 
length  expressing  to  Harriet  Martineau  his  gratitude  and  admi- 
ration, affirming  that  in  sharing  his  labours  she  had  become  a 
sharer  of  his  fame. 

So  too  said  M.  Littre,  his  biographer,  who,  as  a  profound 
student  of  philosophy,  and  in  every  sense  a  savant,  besides 
being  an  eminent  physician,  was  in  all  respects  qualified  to  make 
him  known  to  the  world  as  he  really  was  in  individual  life. 
While  appreciating  his  greatness  and  his  wonderful  powers  of 
thought  till  age  and  disease  overtook  him,  he  does  not  shrink 
from  such  a  detailed  account  of  the  latest  phase  of  his  life  as 
justifies  the  inference  that  it  was  through  physical  failure  that 
he  fell  back  at  last,  —  not  into  theology  indeed,  as  the  word  is 
understood  by  the  world  at  large,  but  into  a  theological  method, 
which  his  real  self  would  have  condemned,  and  which,  of  itself, 
absolved  his  disciples,  of  whom  M.  Littre  had  been  one,  from 
elaborate  care  to  show  that  they  no  longer  agreed  with  him  in 
his  wanderings  and  retrogressions. 

Harriet  Martineau  heard  from  a  distance  of  his  decline,  and 
however  pained  by  the  evidence  of  failure  in  a  brain  that  had 
been  in  middle  life  so  strong,  had  ever  the  consolation  of  having 
done  him  justice  and  given  him  aid  at  a  time  when  he  could 
appreciate  both.  As  the  verdict  of  a  qualified  Englishman,  it 
may  be  well  to  note  that,  after  examining  her  presentation  of 
Comte,  Mr.  Grote  wrote  to  her  thus  :  — 

"  I  tell  you  of  this  piece  of  work  of  yours,  not  only  that  it  is  ex- 
tremely well  done,  but  that  it  could  not  be  better  done." 


PHILOSOPHY. 


425 


Dr.  Nichol,  the  astronomer,  qualified  by  his  life  of  science  to 
form  a  judgment  on  such  a  work  as  this  compression  without 
loss  (amounting,  in  fact,  to  a  gain)  of  the  "  Philosophie  Posi- 
tive," gave  the  subjoined  expression  of  his  opinion  :  — 

My  dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  Most  admirable  !  It  quite  sur- 
passes my  expectation.    Your  success  is  complete. 

Yours  ever  truly, 

J.  P.  NICHOL. 


THE  LIFE  SOKBOW. 


"  It  is  not  wonderful,  therefore,  if  the  bonds  of  antiquity,  authority,  and  una- 
nimity have  so  enchained  the  power  of  man,  that  he  is  unable  (as  if  bewitched) 
to  become  familiar  with  things  themselves."  —  Bacon,  Nov.  Org.,  Aph.  84. 

"  It  does  not  become  the  spirit  which  characterizes  the  present  age  distrust- 
fully to  reject  every  generalization  of  views,  and  every  attempt  to  examine  into 
the  nature  of  things  by  the  process  of  reason  and  induction."  —  Humboldt, 
Introduction  to  Cosmos. 

"  Atrocitata  mansuetudo  est  remedium."  —  Ph^drus. 

One  consequence  of  Harriet  Martineau's  publication  of  "  The 
Laws  of  Man's  Nature  and  Development "  was  to  bring  most 
painfully  before  the  public  eye  the  great  sorrow  of  her  whole 
life,  hitherto  so  well  concealed  from  all  but  those  who  were  com- 
pelled by  proximity  to  know  it,  that  I  never  before  suspected  its 
existence,  intimate  as  the  relation  of  our  minds  had  been. 

Now  I  learned,  in  common  with  the  rest  of  the  beholders,  how 
heavy  and  how  steadily  borne,  for  the  sake  of  all  it  concerned, 
this  long-standing  burden  of  private  suffering  had  been,  which 
Mr.  James  Martineau  now  brought  before  the  world. 

When  in  June,  1851,  I  visited  London  during  the  great  Ex- 
hibition, I  found  in  that  circle  of  society  most  nearly  in  con- 
nection with  Unitarianism  a  little  buzzing  commotion  over  "The 
Letters."  It  surprised  me,  both  as  coming  from  a  class  pledged 
by  principle  and  taught  by  persecution  to  respect  the  rights 
of  opinion,  and  because  accompanied  in  so  many  instances  by 
assurances  that  the  speaker  had  not  read  the  book,  yet  knew  it 
to  be  so  very  bad  a  one  as  to  make  it  a  subject  of  the  deepest 
regret  that  such  a  one  should  ever  have  been  written.  Not 
having  myself  seen  it,  I  could  only  say  in  reply,  that,  at  least 


428 


MEMORIALS. 


until  after  reading,  the  character  of  the  writer  ought  to  be  a 
sufficient  voucher  for  a  book.  I  was  assured  substantially  by 
various  persons  in  their  various  ways  that  so  it  would  have  been 
of  course  in  an  ordinary  case  ;  but  this  was  a  book  which  per- 
sons did  not  like  to  read,  lest  it  should  undermine  their  faith ; 
besides  being  too  foolish  to  waste  time  upon.  It  was  blank 
atheism,  and  it  removed  all  the  barriers  to  vice  and  immorality 
by  denying  moral  obligation.  Moreover,  it  garbled  and  falsified 
Bacon,  in  order  to  bring  the  support  of  his  great  name  to  what 
he  never  dreamed  of.  It  was  Miss  Martineau's  act,  inasmuch  as 
done  by  and  under  her  sanction,  for  she  had  prefaced  and  pre- 
sented the  whole  to  the  public  ;  and  what  was  not  her  own  she 
had  procured  to  be  written  by  a  very  ignorant  man,  who  had  im- 
posed upon  her  by  mesmeric  influence,  —  if  there  were  such  a 
thing,  which  they  did  not  believe. 

This  mixture  of  falsehood  and  nonsense  bearing  to  an  un- 
prejudiced mind  its  own  refutation,  it  was  not  necessary  for  me 
to  have  read  the  book  to  be  able,  in  talking  with  those  equally 
ignorant,  to  deny  every  thing  and  call  for  the  proof. 

"0,  it  was  in  vain  to  deny  it ;  it  was  only  too  true.  Her  own 
brother,  the  Rev.  James  Martineau,  had  published  an  article  in 
which  he  affirmed  all  this  ;  and  what  her  own  brother  felt  thus 
obliged  to  declare  to  the  world  must  be  true." 

I  hastened  to  procure  both  the  book  and  her  brother's  review 
of  it  ("  Prospective  Review,"  No.  XXVI.  Art.  IV.,  "  Mesmeric 
Atheism").  Ignorance,  with  a  mingling  of  worldly  and  super- 
stitious terror,  is  capable  of  any  degree  of  misrepresentation  ;  and 
I  thought  it  quite  possible  that  both  book  and  review  might 
have  been  misunderstood  among  those  who  were  thus  trusting 
to  hearsay  against  their  own  better  knowledge  of  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau. I  carefully  read  both,  and  found  nothing  in  the  book  to 
justify  what  report  had  given  me  as  the  substance  of  it.  But 
the  review  had  presented  Miss  Martineau  and  her  associate  to 
the  world  as  atheists  and  reckless  of  moral  obligation ;  and  at 
a  time  when  members  of  the  medical  faculty  were  labouring 
to  brand  mesmerism  as  immorality,  the  article  was  entitled 
"Mesmeric  Atheism."    The  review  did  present  Mr.  Atkinson, 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


429 


Miss  Martiueau's  friend  and  co-worker  in  the  cause  of  philosophy 
and  progress,  as  both  knavish  and  foolish,  both  vain  and  igno- 
rant. Miss  Martineau  and  Mr.  Atkinson  had,  in  fine,  "  piled  up 
a  set  of  loose  and  shapeless  assertions,  serving  to  mark,  but  not 
to  protect,  the  territory  they  open  for  all  the  black  sheep  of  un- 
belief."   Further  on,  the  review  proceeds  thus  :  — 

"  But  enough  of  this  hierophant  of  the  new  atheism.  With  grief 
we  must  say  that  we  remember  nothing  in  literary  history  more 
melancholy  than  that  Harriet  Martineau  should  be  prostrated  at  the 
feet  of  such  a  master,  should  lay  down  at  his  bidding  her  early  faith 
in  moral  obligation,  in  the  living  God,  in  the  immortal  sanctities  ; 
should  glory  in  the  infection  of  his  blind  arrogance  and  scorn,  mis- 
taking them  for  wisdom  and  pity,  and  meekly  undertake  to  teach 
him  grammar  in  return.  Surely  this  inversion  of  the  natural  order 
of  nobleness  cannot  last.  If  this  be  a  specimen  of  mesmeric  victories, 
such  a  conquest  is  more  damaging  than  a  thousand  defeats." 

After  this  I  came  to  know  that  Mr.  Atkinson  was  a  gentleman 
and  a  scholar,  and  a  remarkably  able,  high-minded,  and  true- 
hearted  man,  esteemed  by  all  who  knew  him,  and  spoken  of  with 
high  respect  as  a  devoted  student  of  science,  and  also  for  his 
reverential  tone  of  mind,  by  other  reviews  adverse  to  his  opin- 
ions ;  and  I  learned,  moreover,  what  all  who  saw  for  themselves 
already  knew  of  Miss  Martineau,  that,  so  far  from  denying,  he 
affirmed  man's  moral  obligation  and  the  existence  of  a  funda- 
mental cause,  eternal  and  immutable,  —  the  last  as  incompre- 
hensible to  human  nature,  the  first  as  the  great  business  of  life 
to  ascertain  and  fulfil. 

But  so  little  do  people  understand  themselves  and  their  own 
creeds,  that  many  who  had  plumed  themselves  upon  their  superi- 
ority to  image-worshippers  were  as  startled  on  reading  this  book 
as  Tacitus  tells  us  those  Eomans  were  at  the  siege  of  Jerusalem, 
who,  bursting  into  the  Holy  of  Holies,  found  the  fane  empty. 

For  "  The  Letters,"  I  found  the  book  to  be  an  inquiry  or 
search  after  the  best  way  of  studying  the  faculties  of  man,  in 
order  to  obtain  a  right  understanding  of  his  nature,  place,  business, 
and  pleasure  in  the  universe  ;  and  consequently  not  always  within 
the  comprehension  of  minds  not  previously  familiar  with  the 


430 


MEMORIALS. 


authors'  range  of  studies.  For  the  review,  I  saw  that  it  some- 
times shared  the  general  ignorance,  and  sometimes  took  advan- 
tage of  it,  to  destroy  the  reputation  of  the  authors  of  "The  Letters." 
But  it  was  the  review  that  had  garbled  and  misquoted  Bacon,  in 
a  vain  endeavour  to  fix  on  them  the  charge  of  having  done  so  : 
and  it  exposed  itself  to  some  keen  remarks,  by  scoffing  at  Bacon's 
first  aphorism,  unwittingly  attributing  it  to  Mr.  Atkinson,  while 
in  the  sequel  misquoting  Mr.  Atkinson,  to  make  him  seem  to  the 
unread  to  be  ignorantly  censuring  Bacon.  "  The  Letters  "  had 
but  represented  Bacon  as  he  really  showed  himself  to  be,  —  not 
latterly  a  theist ;  and  being  stronger  in  intellect  than  in  moral 
principle,  willing  to  advance  his  opinions  at  the  expense  of  his 
sincerity,  in  times  when  persecution  made  men  more  prudent 
than  true.  The  argument  of  "  The  Letters  "  is  that  what  Bacon 
said  about  Christianity  was  poetical,  and  by  way  of  accommo- 
dation, as  seen,  for  example,  in  his  "  Christian  Paradoxes."  It 
would  seem  that  Bacon's  views  were  like  those  of  every  other 
thinker,  —  changing  with  time,  and  therefore  very  much  a  matter 
of  dates. 

I  was  astonished  to  find  a  Unitarian,  whom  the  Catholic  and 
Anglican  churches  consider  no  Christian,  so  wrathful  against 
the  "  infidelity "  of  this  book.  The  authors  were  faithful  to 
themselves  :  were  the  Unitarians  more  ?  .  .  .  . 

"  Could  this  reviewer  possibly  be  a  brother  of  Harriet  Marti- 
neau  1 "  I  asked  n^self,  and  I  felt  confident  it  must  be  a  mistake 
to  think  so.  The  curious  public  in  its  talkative  carelessness  is 
capable  of  almost  any  confusion  of  ideas,  and  surely,  I  thought, 
there  must  be  a  misunderstanding  here.  I  carried  my  doubts 
to  herself  to  be  resolved,  and  asked  her  plainly,  "  Who  is  the 
author  of  that  review  1 " 

"It  is  my  brother  James  ;  and  you  must  not  believe  it,  for  it 
is  not  so." 

Xo  possibility  of  believing  it  for  any  one  who  would  read  and 
compare ;  no  risk  of  it  for  any  one  who  knew  her.  I  was  too 
much  afflicted  to  seek  further  conversation  with  herself  at  that 
time  on  a  subject  so  distressing.  The  circumstances  must  needs 
compel  so  much  denial,  explanation,  and  self-defence,  that  I 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


431 


could  not  bear  to  add  to  such  a  pain  even  by  expressions  of 
sympathy.  I  saw  instantly  the  estrangement  that  Mr.  James 
Martineau's  course  would  make  a  duty  to  her  cause,  to  the  coad- 
jutor whom  she  had  associated  with  herself  in  its  promotion,  and 
to  herself  as  the  vowed  servant  of  truth.  Private  insult  to  her- 
self she  might  choose  to  overlook,  but  a  threefold  fidelity  for- 
bade her  any  further  choice.  If  there  be  any  thing  established 
by  the  experience  of  mankind,  it  is  this  :  while  forgiving  an  ene- 
my and  doing  him  good,  never  to  let  him  travel  the  world  with 
your  sanction  affixed  to  his  evil  offices.  It  is  the  dictate  alike  of 
good  sense,  good  feeling,  and  self-defence.  No  one  proclaiming 
unpopular  truth  at  every  risk  but  is  compelled  by  self-respect 
and  self-preservation  to  take  this  course,  —  of  letting  the  word 
"  brother "  on  no  enemy's  lips  beat  down  this  only  effectual 
guard  against  the  dagger-stroke  aimed  under  the  fifth  rib. 

So  near  and  dear  a  friend  as  Harriet  Martineau  was  to  me,  it 
became  my  duty  to  inquire  carefully  into  this  case  ;  and  every 
body  talked  freely.  This  excuse  was  occasionally  offered  for  the 
reviewer,  —  that  it  was  his  duty  as  a  Christian  minister,  and  his 
duty  to  his  God,  to  clear  himself  and  Unitarianism  of  the  burden 
of  imputed  heresy.  He  had  not  been  able,  it  was  said,  to  pre- 
vail on  Mr.  Thorn  and  Mr.  J.  J.  Tayler,*  his  co-editors,  to  do  it 
for  him,  and  so  he  was  obliged  to  forget  that  he  was  a  man  and 
a  brother,  to  discharge  what  seemed  to  him  a  higher  duty. 

But,  as  it  would  have  been  so  much  simpler,  so  much  easier, 
so  much  more  effectual  a  way,  to  have  disclaimed  all  responsibil- 
ity for  "  The  Letters  "  by  a  note  in  the  review  to  the  effect  that 
he  had  neither  sanctioned  the  opinions  nor  approved  of  the  pub- 
lication, that  part  of  the  public  which  in  such  a  case  is  amused 
with  looking  on  drew  the  conclusion,  from  this  otherwise  in- 
comprehensible course  on  the  part  of  an  advocate  of  free  thought, 
that  masculine  terror,  fraternal  jealousy  of  superiority,  with  a 
sectarian  and  provincial  impulse  to  pull  down  and  crush  a  world- 
wide celebrity,  had  moved  to  this  public  outrage. 

Happily  for  the  authors  of  "  The  Letters,"  British  literary  usage 

*  These  gentlemen  declared  he  had  never  tried ;  they  were  aghast  at  the 
appearance  of  the  article. 


432 


MEMORIALS. 


required  no  reply.  Men  did  not  construe  silence  as  consent  to 
the  imputations  of  reviewers. 

But  in  private  it  was  not  so.  Miss  Martineau  was  continually 
obliged  to  encounter  these  misrepresentations  :  sometimes  in  re- 
ply to  direct  inquiries  of  her  friends ;  sometimes  to  counteract 
the  actual  mischief  which  the  review  had  stimulated  and  set  at 
work,  and  which  threatened  to  put  in  peril  her  pecuniary  affairs 
by  exciting  a  panic  among  the  publishers. 

Of  this  sort  of  painful  duty  thus  devolved  upon  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau by  her  brother's  course,  it  then  seemed  as  if  there  could 
be  no  end  but  the  ending  of  life. 

It  was  pitiable  to  behold  the  distress  this  whole  affair  occa- 
sioned the  short-sighted  and  the  feeble,  who  wished  to  maintain 
undisturbed  relations  with  both  parties,  without  in  the  slightest 
degree  appreciating  Miss  Martineau's  moral  obligation  to  protect 
her  cause  and  her  associate  from  injury,  —  especially  not  to  de- 
sert her  associate  ;  precluded  by  her  relationship  from  defending 
himself  against  these  calumnies. 

As  to  the  general  desertion  of  friends  on  occasion  of  this  pub- 
lication, which  Charlotte  Bronte  supposes,*  it  was  not  a  fact,  nor 
was  Harriet  Martineau  one  to  grieve,  if  it  had  been  so,  over  the 
sundering  of  false  relations.  It  was  the  regard  of  those  she  really 
loved  and  honoured  that  she  valued,  and  I  am  not  aware  of  a 
single  instance  in  which  it  was  not  ultimately  increased  by  this 
renewed  example  of  her  fidelity  to  what  she  had  ever  esteemed 
the  strongest  moral  obligation,  —  "  the  obligation  of  inquirers 
after  truth  to  communicate  what  they  obtain." 

Her  friends  outside  of  Unitarianism  were  not  wrathful  or  dis- 
tressed. I  had  the  opportunity  to  see  numbers  of  the  represent- 
ative men  and  women  of  the  great  world  in  London  meeting  her 
with  undiminished  cordiality  when  she  came  thither  immediately 
afterwards,  and  her  presence  there  speedily  dispersed  the  mo- 
mentary panic  in  which  I  had  seen  some  of  the  Unitarian- 
trained,  minister-worshipping  minds. 

Few  are  qualified  by  previous  philosophical,  anatomical,  and 
phreno-mesmeric  studies,  any  more  than  by  love  of  truth  and 

*  See  Mrs.  Gaskell's  Life  of  Charlotte  Bronte. 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


433 


faith  in  it,  to  pronounce  on  such  a  book  as  "  The  Letters."  Num- 
bers who  had  been  troubled  by  its  publication  soon  began  to 
suspect  as  much.  Some  were  fain  to  let  the  subject-matter  drop, 
for  fear  of  finding  out  things  in  contradiction  to  established 
usages.  Some  had  not  even  understood  what  they  were  talking 
about  when  the  conversation  fell  on  the  merits  of  the  method 
recommended  in  the  book.  They  had  found  it  "  sadly  imme- 
thodical ; "  while  other  some  pronounced  this  old  method  of 
question  and  answer  not  a  successful  one  except  in  school-books. 
The  advantage  of  scientific  investigation  and  careful  study  and 
reasoning  over  taking  for  granted  or  taking  on  authority,  was  never 
the  idea  suggested  to  such  by  the  word  "  method,"  to  which  deeper 
thinkers  sometimes  begged  their  attention  as  the  main  thing  in 
this  book.  It  gave  more  offence  for  alleged  want  of  reverence 
among  minds  of  exclusively  Unitarian  training  than  among  those 
of  more  liberal  culture  and  biblical  enrichment.  Mr.  Martineau, 
for  example,  seemed  shocked  as  at  blasphemy,  that  his  sister 
should  have  given  the  words  "supreme  lawless  will"  as  a 
definition  of  the  Christian  God ;  while  at  that  very  time  Chris- 
tian Britain  was  employed  upon  its  tenth  million  of  Jonathan 
Edwards's  sermon,  "  Sinners  in  the  Hands  of  an  Angry  God," 
in  which  "  God's  mere  pleasure,"  "  his  arbitrary  will  restrained 
by  no  obligation,"  is,  as  by  all  Calvinistic  doctrinal  teachers, 
insisted  upon  in  every  form  of  expression. 

This  is  not  the  place  for  an  analysis  of  "  The  Letters "  or  a 
refutation  of  the  review.  "  The  Letters  "  are  republished  ;  but 
there  is  no  call  for  abuse  and  calumny  against  their  authors. 

To  an  intelligent  and  unprejudiced  observer  one  of  the  most 
painful  things  at  that  time,  as  at  all  times,  is  to  see  persons 
mourning  over  what  they  should  most  exult  in,  —  the  confession 
and  worship  of  what  one  believes  to  be  the  truth  ;  blaming  what 
they  should  most  admire,  —  the  consistent,  upright  course  of  a 
righteous  heart  in  the  consequent  emergency.  Although  herself 
keenly  alive  to  such  griefs  as  these,  whether  springing  from 
wickedness  or  weakness,  Harriet  Martineau  was  one  in  whom 
they  wearied  themselves  down.  Sustained  by  her  alacrity  of 
mind  and  her  devotedness  of  heart,  she  outlived  this,  and  kin- 

VOL.  II. 


434 


MEMORIALS. 


dred  blows.  Public  outrage  is  absolution  ;  and  the  cruelty  of 
compelling  her  in  this  way  to  choose  between  science  and  secta- 
rism,  progress  and  pause,  the  scientific  associate  who  was  also 
a  friend  and  the  brother  who  was  no  friend,  wrought  deliverance 
from  a  life  sorrow  :  her  broken  idol  was  removed  from  her  path. 

Although  this  is  no  place  for  analysis  of  "  Letters  "  or  review, 
yet  one  undertaking  to  throw  light  upon  the  life  of  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau  cannot  with  truth  or  justice  or  common  sense  ignore  the 
act  by  which  "her  own  brother"  placed  himself  in  the  same 
category  with  the  defamers  of  old  times  whom  she  must  never 
again  meet. 

So  many  mingled  motives  springing  from  the  troubling  of  the 
affections,  family  pride,  forgiveness,  pain,  and  magnanimity,  must 
needs  arise  in  the  heart  of  one  so  tried,  that  I  am  not  surprised 
to  find,  in  her  Autobiography,  so  few  words  given  to  this  great 
calamity  of  her  life.  But  what  in  her  is  magnanimity  in  me 
would  be  unfaithfulness. 

I  ought  not  to  close  this  passage  without  stating  that,  as  I 
would  never  be  guilty  of  the  absurdity  of  showing  a  life  over- 
shadowed, and  no  object  visible  between  it  and  the  sun,  so, 
when  she  asked  of  me  this  final  service,  I  only  consented  at 
length  (and  in  a  sense  reluctantly)  on  the  understanding  that  I 
should  nothing  conceal  or  extenuate  which,  either  for  joy  or  sor- 
row, told  strongly  upon  her  life.  Her  reply,  given  thoughtfully, 
slowly,  and  at  intervals,  was,  "  When  you  speak  of  my  brother 
James,  be  as  gentle  as  you  can." 

The  mass  of  communications  that  the  publication  of  the  "  II. 
M.  Letters,"  as  they  were  called,  brought  upon  her  from  self- 
styled  friends  and  real  friends  after  the  misrepresentations  of 
the  "  Prospective  Review/'  became  at  length  utterly  unman- 
ageable, and  she  decided  to  address  them  all  under  one  cover ; 
for  although  the  degrees  of  their  friendship,  the  variety  of  their 
feelings,  and  the  tone  of  their  correspondence  were  so  very 
different,  yet  in  one  thing  almost  all  agreed,  —  regret  that  she 
had  left  the  spot  on  which  they  had  stood  together ;  and  the 
following  is  the  letter  which  I  received  from  her,  with  a  request 
to  send  a  copy  to  each  of  them,  —  knowing  as  she  did  in  ad- 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


435 


vance,  what  actually  proved  to  be  the  fact,  —  that  those  to 
whose  case  it  did  not  apply  would  make  no  personal  applica- 
tion of  it. 

Ambleside,  May  10,  1856. 

My  dear  Friexd,  —  It  appears  to  me  that  you  can  help  me  in  a 
small  embarrassment  that  I  should  like  to  get  rid  of*,  if  I  can  do  it 
without  causing  more  trouble  than  the  matter  is  worth.  I  call  the 
embarrassment  of  slight  consequence,  because  a  short  time  must  put 
an  end  to  it ;  but  the  interest  involved  is  not  a  trifle.  You  know 
how  much  I  value  the  confidence  and  affection  of  my  more  intimate 
American  friends  ;  and  you  will  not  need  to  be  assured  by  me  that 
the  recent  letters  I  have  had  from  several  of  them  express  the  kind- 
liest respect  and  regard,  as  well  as  interest  in  my  departing  condition. 
Yet  these  letters  manifest  so  extraordinary  a  notion  of  my  state  of 
mind,  and  are  so  very  wide  of  the  mark  as  to  our  relation  to  each 
other  (theirs  and  mine),  that  I  feel  as  if  it  were  wrong  to  let  the 
mistakes  pass  in  silence,  while  yet  I  have  not  strength  to  reply  to 
each  correspondent.  Some  believe  that  they  have  touched  so  lightly 
on  what  is  evidently  uppermost  in  their  minds  that  they  spare  me  all 
need  to  reply,  and  they  would  really  regret  having  obliged  me  to 
answer  ;  while  the  character  of  the  light  touch  they  do  give  is  exactly 
what  makes  me  feel  some  sort  of  reply  a  duty.  It  is  true  they  will 
erelong  see  in  my  Autobiography  (which  I  leave  for  posthumous 
publication)  what  my  philosophy  really  is  ;  but  it  would  be  hardly 
right  to  wait  if,  by  writing  one  letter,  I  can  enable  them  to  under- 
stand me  better  while  I  am  still  among  you. 

In  all  the  letters  I  refer  to  it  is  clear  that  the  supreme  association 
with  me  at  present  is,  not  my  past  life,  present  illness,  or  approach- 
ing death,  but  my  "views"  on  theological  subjects.  Again,  all 
the  correspondents  I  am  speaking  of  carefully  and  distinctly  assure 
me  that  they  do  not  hold  my  "views."  Most  of  them  call  me  "scep- 
tical" (even  the  phrase  "the  slough  of  scepticism"  occurs  in  one 
letter),  and  others  write  of  "unbelief,"  "darkness,"  "doubt,"  &c. 
All  this  shows  so  entire  an  unacquaintance  with  even  the  first 
principles  and  main  characteristics  of  positive  philosophy  as  sur- 
prises me  a  good  deal,  after  the  progress  which  I  have  hoped  and 
supposed  it  was  making  in  your  country.  By  positive  philosophy 
I  mean  not  any  particular  scheme  propounded  by  any  one  author, 
but  the  philosophy  of  fact,  as  arising  from  the  earliest  true  science, 
and  rehabilitated  by  Bacon's  exposition  of  its  principles.  There 
must  be  thinking  and  educated  men  in  all  your  cities  who  could 


436 


MEMORIALS. 


tell  my  friends  that  positive  philosophy  is  at  the  opposite  pole  to 
scepticism,  that  it  issues  in  the  most  affirmative  (not  dogmatical) 
faith  in  the  world,  and  excludes  unbelief  as  absolutely  as  mathemati- 
cal principles  do  ;  that  there  is  no  "  darkness "  in  it,  but  all  clear 
light,  up  to  the  well-defined  line  which  separates  knowledge  from 
ignorance  ;  that  positive  philosophy  is,  in  short,  the  brightest,  clearest, 
strongest,  and  only  irrefragable  state  of  conviction  that  the  human 
mind  has  ever  attained. 

You  see,  my  difficulty  in  speaking  at  all  about  this  is  that  what 
I  say  of  my  philosophy  will,  almost  inevitably,  look  like  conceit  and 
boasting  about  myself.  I  really  must  say  that  such  an  appearance 
should  be  laid  to  the  charge  of  those  who,  while  meaning  to  be  affec- 
tionate and  even  respectful,  write  to  me  as  to  one  somehow  fallen  or 
gone  astray,  or  in  some  way  in  an  inferior  condition  of  faith  to  theirs. 
This  conception  is  not  true,  —  it  is  in  fact  the  reverse  of  the  truth  ; 
but  you  see  how  impossible  it  is  to  declare  this  without  offending  the 
feelings  of  persons  who  consider  it  a  merit,  rather  than  a  weakness,  to 
rest  satisfied  in  ignorance  of  the  basis  of  the  notions  or  "  views  "  they 
hold.  If  fidelity  to  the  truth  on  which  I  take  my  stand  must  bring 
on  me  the  charge  of  presumption,  so  be  it !  I  cannot  help  it,  and 
must  bear  it  as  the  lesser  evil  of  two. 

You,  and  others  of  my  friends,  and  I  myself  may  well  be  tired  of 
hearing  questions  or  opinions  about  my  "views."  "Views"  is  not 
the  word  for  disciples  of  positive  philosophy,  but  for  those  who  are 
still  within  the  dogmatic  circle  or  the  metaphysical  wilderness. 
They  may  speak  of  the  "views"  of  persons  who  see  through  the  eyes 
of  authority,  like  the  dogmatic  part  of  the  theological  world,  or  of 
those  who  make  their  own  "consciousness"  their  point  of  view,  and 
who  therefore  differ  mutually  as  their  consciousness  differs.  Among 
these  —  the  metaphysical  "believers"  or  speculators  —  the  views  are 
as  various  as  would  be  those  of  the  earth  by  the  same  number  of 
persons,  each  in  a  balloon  of  his  own,  all  wafted  by  different  currents 
at  different  elevations,  with  no  other  mutual  connection  than  trav- 
elling in  the  same  atmosphere.  The  disciples  of  positive  philosophy 
have  no  more  variation  of  views  than  students  of  mathematics  have 
in  regard  to  the  mathematical  field,  already  explored.  The  truth 
compels  unanimous  conviction  in  both  cases.  If  difference  of  "views" 
arises,  it  is  during  the  first  attempts  to  conquer  some  fresh  territory, 
which,  when  annexed,  will,  like  all  that  has  gone  before,  become 
unquestionable  and  leave  no  room  for  diversity  of  "views."  If, 
instead  of  the  "  views."  people  asked  about  my  'point  of  view,  that 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


437 


would  be  sensible  and  practical.  The  point  of  view  is  indeed  the 
grand  difference  between  the  dogmatists,  the  metaphysical  specula- 
tors, and  the  positive  philosophers.  The  first  take  their  stand  on 
tradition,  and  the  second  on  their  own  consciousness.  Their  point 
of  view  is  in  their  own  interior,  from  whence  it  is  manifestly  im- 
possible, not  only  to  understand  the  universe,  but  to  see  the  true 
aspect  of  any  thing  whatever  in  it.  We,  seeing  the  total  failure  in  the 
pursuit  of  truth  consequent  on  this  choice  of  a  standpoint,  try  to  get 
out  of  the  charmed  circle  of  illusion,  and  to  plant  our  foot  in  the 
centre  of  the  universe,  as  nearly  as  we  can  manage  it,  and,  at  all 
events,  outside  of  ourselves.  Copernicus  has  been  the  great  bene- 
factor of  his  race,  in  this  matter  ;  and  by  showing  that  our  globe 
is  not  the  centre  of  the  universe,  nor  man  its  aim  and  object,  he 
overthrew  theology  and  metaphysics  without  knowing  it.  However, 
this  would  lead  me  too  far.  I  must  keep  to  my  own  correspondents 
and  their  "  views." 

The  first  great  function  of  Baconian  philosophy  is  to  separate 
indisputably  the  knowable  from  the  unknowable  ;  and  the  next  is, 
to  advance  the  pursuit  of  the  knowable.  It  is  obvious  that  the 
process  of  ascertainment  first,  and  constant  verification  of  knowledge 
afterwards,  is  destructive  of  "scepticism."  Scepticism  is  doubt ;  and 
the  positive  philosopher  is  in  a  position  of  direct  antagonism  to  it. 
He  may  hold,  and  must  hold,  his  decision  in  suspense,  in  the  inter- 
val between  the  first  conception  and  the  verification  of  new  truth  ; 
but  "  scepticism  "  about  old  propositions  which  he  has  duly  attended 
to  is  impossible  to  him.  In  the  same  way  there  is  no  wandering 
in  "darkness"  for  the  positive  philosopher.  He  walks  in  light  as 
far  as  he  goes.  It  is,  to  be  sure,  but  a  short  way  up  to  the  blank 
wall  of  human  ignorance  ;  but  we  can  separate,  on  our  own  side 
of  that  blank  wall,  what  is  actually  known  from  what  is  becoming 
revealed  ;  and  both  from  what  we  never  can  know.  I  need  not  add 
that  the  wall  itself  is  destined  to  be  forced,  and  the  limits  of  igno- 
rance to  be  set  perpetually  farther  back,  while  we  can  never  be  any 
nearer  to  knowing  what  our  faculties  are  unable  by  their  constitution 
to  apprehend.  While  the  disciples  of  dogma  are  living  in  a  magic 
cavern,  painted  with  wonderful  shows,  and  the  metaphysical  phi- 
losophers are  wandering  in  an  enchanted  wood,  all  tangle  and  bewil- 
derment, the  positive  philosophers  have  emerged  upon  the  broad, 
airy,  sunny  common  of  nature,  with  firm  ground  underfoot  and 
unfathomable  light  overhead.  So  much  for  the  "  darkness,"  "  doubt," 
falling  away,  "  scepticism,"  &c. 


438 


MEMORIALS. 


Among  the  unknowable  things,  the  first  we  recognize  is  the  nature 
or  attributes  of  the  First  Cause  ;  and  this  is  why  we  are  called 
atheists.  We  .'ire  atheists  in  the  sense  in  which  all  reformers  in 
essential  matters  have  always  been  called  atheists.  Like  the  apostles, 
and  the  Lutheran  reformers,  and  many  more,  the  positive  philoso- 
phers are  called  atheists,  and  for  the  same  reason, — because  they 
are  disbelievers  in  the  popular  theology.  For  the  same  reason  they 
are  insolently  compassionated  and  insultingly  grieved  over.  The 
"  interest "  or  corporation  of  the  great  Diana  of  the  Ephesians  pitied 
as  well  as  vituperated  the  reformers,  no  doubt ;  pitied  them  for  what 
they  lost,  they  themselves  being  disqualified  for  estimating  the  gain. 
At  the  Reformation  the  Catholics  sincerely,  however  insolently, 
pitied  the  Protestants  for  their  loss  of  the  old  resources  and  consola- 
tions, the  procurableness  of  indulgences,  the  comfort  of  absolution, 
the  resource  of  the  intercession  of  saints,  and  the  protection  of  the 
Virgin.  In  the  same  way  now  Christians,  who  have  no  more  au- 
thority from  Scripture  or  reason  for  their  personal  fancies  or  general 
dogmas  about  a  future  life  and  an  adaptation  of  the  universe  to  the 
moral  government  of  our  world  according  to  human  notions  than  the 
Catholics  for  their  special  comforts,  insolently  pity  us  for  what  they 
consider  loss,  without  asking  themselves  whether  they  are  qualified 
to  estimate  our  gain.  The  case  is  one  of  constant  repetition,  world 
without  end.  If  disbelieving  in  the  popular  theology,  therefore,  is 
atheism,  then  we  are  atheists,  but  not  in  the  philosophical  and  only 
permanent  sense  of  the  term  u  disbelief  in  a  First  Cause."  To  us  the 
only  wonder  is  that  men  are  so  long  in  perceiving  that  they  must  be 
wrong  in  "realizing"  (as  you  would  say  in  America)  the  First  Cause, 
more  or  less,  in  any  mode  or  direction  whatever.  The  form  or 
constitution  of  the  human  mind  requires  the  supposition  of  a  First 
Cause.  To  go  further  than  the  supposition  is  to  give  an  extension 
to  Fetishism  which  the  nineteenth  century  might  be  ashamed  of, 
in  its  grown  and  educated  men.  Infant  man  —  the  race  and  the 
individual  —  instinctively  (therefore  constantly  and  necessarily)  trans- 
fers his  own  consciousness  or  experience  to  every  thing  his  senses 
encounter.  Enlightenment  constantly  restricts  this  application  till 
the  individual  or  the  race,  which  at  first  concluded  that  every  thing 
in  the  universe  had  a  life  and  a  will  of  its  own,  arrives  at  the  ad- 
vanced stage  of  believing  in  one  Supreme  Being  made  up  of  human 
attributes  in  a  highly  magnified  form.  As  Xenophanes  described 
men  making  gods  in  their  own  image  in  his  day,  so  we  see  men 
doing  it  still,  for  the  same  reason  that  Xenophanes  gives,  and  whereby, 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


439 


"  if  oxen  and  lions  had  hands  like  our  own,  and  fingers,  then  would 
horses,  like  unto  horses,  and  oxen  to  oxen,  paint  and  fashion  their 
god-forms."  In  this  way  has  the  God  of  monotheists  been  in  a 
barbaric  age  a  "  Lord  of  Hosts  "  and  a  "  God  of  Israel ; "  and  is  now, 
after  a  succession  of  phases,  the  Father  of  mankind,  with  the  affec- 
tions, powers,  and  intellect  of  man  vastly  magnified.  He  designs  ; 
he  foresees  and  plans  ;  he  creates  and  preserves  ;  he  loves,  pardons, 
gives  laws  and  admits  exceptions,  —  is,  in  short,  altogether  human 
in  mind  and  ways.  The  positive  point  of  view  —  that  external  to 
man  —  shows  that  this  conception  cannot  possibly  be  true  in  any 
degree,  no  portion  of  the  universe  having,  more  or  less,  the  charac- 
teristics of  the  Cause  of  the  whole.  Throughout  the  universe,  again, 
nothing  caused  bears  any  resemblance  to  its  cause,  or  can  bear 
such  resemblance,  because  the  functions  of  the  two  are  wholly 
different.  What  is  knowable  about  a  First  Cause  is  simply  this,  — 
as  any  disciple  of  positive  philosophy  is  fully  aware,  —  that  our 
mental  constitution  compels  us  to  suppose  a  First  Cause,  and  that 
that  First  Cause  cannot  be  the  God  of  theology. 

I  need  not  say  how  puerile,  barbaric,  and  irreverent  appear  to  us 
the  "views"  of  Christian  Fetishism  in  their  whole  extent,  com- 
prising that  conception  of  a  future  life  which  is  fetish  in  being  a 
transference  of  our  present  experience  to  other  conditions.  It  is  not 
"  another  life "  that  people  desire  and  expect,  but  the  same  life  in 
another  place.  Once  regarded  from  the  higher  (exterior)  point  of 
view,  the  folly  and  practical  mischief  of  this  superstition  become 
evident  to  a  degree  which  it  would  startle  some  of  my  friends  exceed- 
ingly to  become  aware  of.  The  belief  was  no  doubt  of  use  in  its 
proper  day,  like  every  general  belief,  but  its  proper  date  is  past ;  that 
which  was  a  substantial  faith  (as  when  the  early  Christians  looked 
for  the  Millennium)  is  now  (whenever  it  goes  beyond  a  limited 
dogma)  a  personal  fancy,  a  bastard  conception  of  unchastened  imagi- 
nation, and  a  sentimental  egotism.  The  state  of  anticipation  which 
religious  people  try  to  establish  in  themselves  appears  to  us  in  its 
true  colours,  as  a  selfish  egotism,  like  that  of  children  who  would 
have  the  universe  ruled  to  gratify  their  fancies  and  desires.  I  need 
spend  no  words  in  showing  that  the  conceptions  of  no  two  people  in 
Protestant  Christendom,  as  to  a  future  life,  can  be  made  compatible, 
if  thoroughly  examined.  Christians  find  it  difficult  (and  most  diffi- 
cult in  the  most  anxious  moments)  to  make  out  what  view  of  a  future 
life  can  be  right.  Positive  philosophy  shows  that  there  is  no  evi- 
dence that  any  are  right,  while  there  is  strong  presumptive  evidence 


440 


MEMORIALS. 


that  all  are  wrong.  As  for  the  effect  on  our  minds  of  this  kind  of 
recognition,  I  can  no  more  hope  to  convey  to  theological  believers 
any  sense  of  our  privileges  of  emancipation,  than  the  Lutheran  re- 
formers could  show  their  Romish  friends  why  they  were  happier  than 
when  they  believed  in  the  absolution  of  their  sins,  the  protection 
of  the  Virgin,  and  the  intercession  of  saints.  Whatever  freedom  my 
more  liberal  Christian  friends  have  gained,  that  we  possess  in  greater 
measure.  Whatever  sin  and  sorrow  they  see  in  the  superstitions  they 
have  left  behind,  that  we  are  in  a  yet  greater  measure  thankful  to 
have  been  delivered  from.  As  for  the  sense  of  general  health,  intel- 
lectual and  moral,  the  full  and  joyous  liberty  under  the  everlasting 
laws  of  nature,  and  the  disappearance  of  incongruity,  perplexity,  and 
moral  disturbance  such  as  every  theory  of  the  government  of  the  uni- 
verse must  cause  to  thoughtful  minds,  we  can  only  enjoy  these  bless- 
ings in  sympathy  with  our  fellow-disciples.  It  is  only  by  attaining 
them  that  the  blessing  of  them  can  be  understood.  What  Christians 
may  know  by  observation,  if  they  will,  is  that  we  who  have  gone 
through  their  experience  (whereas  they  have  not  had  ours)  are 
healthier  in  mind,  higher  in  views  and  conduct,  and  happier  in  life 
and  the  prospect  of  death,  than  we  were  before.  Our  old  friends 
may  wonder  at  it  ;  but  that  is  their  affair.  We  know  our  own  feel- 
ings ;  and  the  wonder  to  us  is  that  inexperienced  persons  should 
pronounce  upon  them. 

Perhaps  my  correspondents  may  now  see  how  unnecessary  is  their 
careful  and  express  declaration  to  me  that  they  do  not  share  my 
views.  How  should  they,  when  they  have  not  even  attempted  the 
requisite  study  ?  An  astronomer  calculating  an  eclipse  needs  no 
assurance  from  those  who  take  the  stars  to  be  spangles,  that  they  do 
not  share  his  views.  After  having  gone  through  the  prior  stages  of 
dogmatic  and  metaphysical  belief,  it  was  through  years  of  thought 
and  study,  under  able  guidance,  that  I  attained  my  present  stand- 
point ;  and  to  me,  who  know  what  the  requisite  labour  is,  and  how 
gradual  is  the  evolution  of  the  way,  my  friends  who  have  never  pur- 
sued it  at  all  think  it  necessary  to  explain  that  they  do  not  stand  by 
my  side  !  I  speak  thus  confidently  about  their  not  having  pursued 
truth  in  this  direction,  because  they  entirely  mistake  my  position  and 
state  of  mind.  If  they  understood  either,  they  would  feel  and  express 
something  very  unlike  the  innocent  compassion  and  the  well-meant 
insolence  of  their  recent  letters.  It  is  impossible,  and  of  course  no 
matter  of  desire,  that  every  body  should  engage  in  the  pursuit  of 
truth,  which  is  the  most  laborious  as  it  is  the  highest  of  human  occu- 


THE  LIFE  SORROW. 


441 


pations  ;  but  those  who  decline  the  toil  should  be  at  least  capable  of 
respect  towards  those  who  achieve  it.  The  whole  matter  will  be 
easier  to  a  future  generation,  who  will  have  less  to  unlearn  than  we 
have.  If  it  should  be  thought  an  objection  to  the  faith  which  I  hold 
that  it  takes  long  to  attain,  the  obvious  reply  is  that  fresh  truth  is 
always  hard  of  attainment,  because  of  the  requisite  amount  of  un- 
learning ;  but  that  the  hard  acquisition  of  one  generation  becomes 
the  easy  inheritance  of  another.  Thus,  our  Protestant  world  suffers 
nothing  now  from  dogmas  which  it  cost  the  early  reformers  much 
agony  to  expose  ;  and  thus,  again,  every  child  will  hold  convictions  a 
century  hence  which  it  costs  the  wisest  men  of  our  time  much  toil 
and  pains  to  attain.  I  say  this,  which  cannot  in  a  general  way  be 
new  to  any  body,  simply  to  guard  against  its  being  supposed  that  a 
life  of  scientific  pursuit  is  always  necessary  to  the  attainment  of 
truth.  The  chief  part  of  the  business  is  only  temporary,  —  the  un- 
learning of  error,  the  discrimination  of  the  knowable  from  the 
unknowable. 

The  deepest  chasm,  however,  which  yawns  between  my  correspond- 
ents and  me  is  an  unbelief  on  their  part  which,  while  it  lasts,  ren- 
ders impossible  all  mutual  sympathy  on  the  most  important  subjects 
of  human  thought  and  feeling.  They  are  wholly  indifferent  to  phi- 
losophy as  vital  truth.  Eeality  is  nothing  to  the  superstitious,  in 
comparison  with  the  safety  of  their  own  dogmas  and  persuasions. 
Science  is  to  them  a  mere  word  in  its  highest  relation  of  all,  —  as 
the  basis  of  all  true  belief.  They  approve  of  science  and  philosophy 
as  mental  exercise  and  an  innocent  pursuit ;  and,  in  a  utilitarian 
sense,  as  conducive  to  human  welfare  in  material  conditions.  But 
they  do  not  recognize  in  it  the  special  and  crowning  duty  and  boon 
of  man's  life,  —  the  source  of  all  truth  and  the  highway  to  all  wis- 
dom. They  do  not  see  in  science  the  test  of  all  other  things,  includ- 
ing beliefs,  theological  and  other ;  and  till  they  do  recognize  this, 
they  will  not  see  how  philosophy  —  which  is  wisdom  derived  from 
science  —  is  good  enough  to  fulfil  our  most  ardent  desires,  and  holy 
enough  to  occupy  our  loftiest  aspirations.  The  levity  and  presump- 
tion with  which  theological  and  metaphysical  believers  and  specula- 
tors treat  the  holiest  and  loftiest  aim  and  pursuit  open  to  us,  is  so 
painful  to  my  feelings  of  reverence,  and  discloses  so  broad  a  severance 
between  us,  that  I  hope  for  nothing  more  from  this  letter,  or  from 
any  intercourse  now  possible  on  these  topics,  than  to  awaken  some 
sense  in  my  old  friends  that  there  may  be  more  than  they  see  in  the 
great  study  of  my  life,  and  in  its  results,  and  possibly  to  fix  the 


442 


MEMORIALS. 


attention  of  one  or  another  on  the  difference  between  an  indulgence 
in  the  use  of  time-hallowed  words  and  images  and  the  bona  fide  pur- 
suit of  everlasting  truth.  Perhaps  I  may  at  least  have  checked  the 
unconscious  presumption  with  which  those  who  rest  upon  tradition, 
or  amuse  themselves  with  speculation,  are  apt  to  treat  labourers  who 
deal  with  a  toil  which  they  have  declined. 

I  hope,  and  in  my  own  mind  I  feel  sure,  that  there  is  nothing  in 
what  I  have  said  incompatible  with  real  and  warm  affection  for  my 
old  friends,  or  with  gratitude  for  the  kindliness  and  efforts  at  respect 
with  which  they  have  written  to  me.  I  am  as  sensible  of  their  inter- 
est and  their  fidelity  (as  far  as  their  knowledge  goes)  as  if  our  theo- 
logical agreement  was  the  same  as  of  old,  and  they  will  feel,  I  am 
sure,  that  I  could  not  appear,  by  silence,  to  acquiesce  in  the  position 
they  assign  me,  without  betraying  at  once  our  mutual  confidence  and 
the  philosophy  which  is  the  reverse  of  what  they  suppose.  I  believe 
they  will  not  be  offended.  If  they  are,  I  cannot  take  the  blame  to 
myself.  If  they  are  not,  how  much  better  is  frank  explanation  than 
concealment  or  silence  ! 

I  am,  dear  friend,  yours  ever, 

HARRIET  MARTI  NE  AIL 


WORE. 


"  He  that  to  such  a  height  hath  built  his  mind, 

And  reared  the  dwelling  of  his  thoughts  so  strong 
As  neither  fear  nor  hope  can  shake  the  frame 

Of  his  resolvdd  powers,  nor  all  the  wind 
Of  vanity  or  malice  pierce,  to  wrong 

His  settled  peace,  or  to  disturb  the  same,  — 
"What  a  fair  seat  hath  he  !  —  from  whence  he  may 
The  boundless  wastes  and  wilds  of  man  survey." 

Daniel. 

"  And  deeds  of  week-day  holiness 
Fall  from  her,  noiseless  as  the  snow ; 
Nor  hath  she  ever  chanced  to  know 
That  aught  were  easier  than  to  bless." 

James  Russell  Lowell. 

The  work  of  the  years  passed  in  her  own  home  is  so  various 
as  to  be  with  difficulty  classified.  There  is  room  but  for  the 
merest  mention  of  the  building-plans  for  cottages.  The  "  Har- 
riet Martineau  Cottages,"  at  Ambleside,  stand  as  a  monument 
of  the  movement  she  initiated  for  the  creation  of  comfortable, 
economical  homes  and  the  lowering  of  rents. 

The  years  of  winter  lectures,  meanwhile,  were  building  up 
men's  minds.  The  people  highly  appreciated  them,  and  could 
never  say  enough  of  the  benefit  and  the  pleasure  these  lectures 
gave  them.  They  were  so  carefully  prepared,  so  effectively 
delivered,  and  so  widely  attended  by  those  for  whom  they  were 
gratuitously  given,  that  they  make  a  subject  of  conversation  and 
grateful  remembrance  to  this  day  in  the  region  round  about. 

Then  the  Berlin-wool  work,  which  sometimes  excited  a  smile 
in  those  who  "wondered  how  the  great  authoress  could  bear  such 
a  frivolous  occupation."    It  was  not  merely  for  rest  and  amuse- 


444 


MEMORIALS. 


inent  that  these  groups  of  flowers  and  fruit  and  forest  leaves 
were  wrought,  though  that  alone  were  motive  enough  ;  but  each 
of  them  was  a  gift  of  solid  pecuniary  value  to  some  greater 
work. 

"  Result  of  raffle  for  Miss  Martineau's  needlework,  —  fifty  sub- 
scribers at.£l  each  =  <£50:  amount  to  be  added  to  the  fund 
for  the  relief  of  the  distress  in  the  manufacturing  districts."  And 
by  a  glance  at  the  list  it  would  appear  that  the  names  most 
illustrious  in  the  worlds  of  rank  and  philanthropy  were  rival- 
ling each  other  for  its  possession. 

Many  of  these  works  were  executed  for  the  benefit  of  the  anti- 
slavery  cause  in  the  United  States.  One  in  particular  ("  The 
Four  Seasons  ")  was  presented  by  a  subscription  of  five  dollars 
each  from  the  best-known  of  the  American  antislavery  associates 
to  a  well-known  friend  of  hers,  and  was  thus  the  means  of  raising 
one  hundred  dollars  for  the  cause.  "  So  many  of  my  thoughts 
and  feelings,"  she  said,  "  are  wrought  into  that  table-cover,  that  I 
dreaded  lest  it  should  pass  into  unknown  hands.  But  now  — 
How  much  pleasure  this  has  given  me !  Thank  every  one  of  the 
'  chivalry  '  for  me  !  " 

Some  fatiguing  agricultural  labours  became  a  matter  of  neces- 
sity in  consequence  of  her  improvements  at  the  Knoll.  Having 
written  an  account  of  them  to  a  friend,  the  letter  by  some 
unknown  means  was  published  in  the  "  Times,"  and  brought 
down  upon  her  an  avalanche  of  letters  of  inquiries  about  small 
farming  and  cow-keeping ;  and  as  many  of  them  were  from  the 
heads  of  public  institutions  for  the  improvement  of  cultivation  and 
the  care  of  the  poor,  and  in  the  interests  of  the  poorer  and  suffer- 
ing classes,  she  could  not  refuse  to  reply.  These  letters  came  to 
her  from  all  the  country  round  ;  and  "  Not  for  me,  but  for  the 
poorer  than  I  am,  I  hope,  dear  lady,  to  induce  you  to  be  at  this 
trouble,"  was  sure  to  act  upon  her  like  a  spell. 

The  following  is  a  specimen  of  the  sort  of  reply  she  gave,  and 
the  result  of  the  whole  matter,  ultimately,  was  the  republication, 
with  additions,  of  her  "  Letter  on  Cow-keeping  "  and  "  Our  Farm 
of  Two  Acres."  "  I  am  not  sorry  it  was  published,"  she  said, 
"but  I  had  nothing  to  do  with  it." 


WORK. 


445 


"  Mrs.  Martineau's  experience  is,  that  nothing  yields  so  small  a 
return  to  industry  here  as  the  land.  As  the  art  of  tillage  advances, 
industry  has  less  and  less  chance  against  capital  and  land  in  masses, 
while  skilled  labour  commands  better  wages.  In  that  part  of  the 
country  where  she  lives  small  land-tillage  leads  directly  to  poverty 
in  proportion  as  skilled  agriculture  answers  more  and  more.  To  till 
waste  lands  some  capital  is  necessary,  and  the  cases  are  very  rare  in 
which  subsistence  can  be  obtained  at  all  comparable  with  that  which 
can  be  had  through  wages  in  almost  any  occupation  ;  and  labourers 
who  can  till  the  soil  in  any  way  have  a  much  better  chance  under 
employment  by  the  farmer  than  at  their  own  risk.  Such  is,  in  a 
general  way,  Mrs.  Martineau's  view,  and  she  believes  that  of  most 
people  who  observe  the  rapid  advance  made  in  agriculture.'' 

She  was  always  anxious  to  correct  any  mistakes  which  the  suc- 
cess of  her  own  experiments  might  cause.  "  For  my  success,"  she 
said,  "  is  the  sum  of  many  elements,  including  home  comfort  and 
accommodation,  and  the  maintenance  of  two  persons  —  my  farm- 
servant  and  his  wife  —  whom  otherwise  I  should  not  employ." 

Under  this  head  of  work  at  The  Knoll  comes  the  "  History 
of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace,"  which  was  projected  in  1846  by 
Mr.  Charles  Knight,  the  publisher.  Having  found  it  too  much 
for  him  at  that  time  to  undertake,  he  applied  to  another,  whose 
method  showed  that  he  would  spin  it  out  too  long.  It  lay 
nearly  two  years  in  abeyance,  and  this  circumstance  was  most 
injurious  to  its  success.  But  Mr.  Knight  was  pledged  to  a  list 
of  subscribers  to  whom  it  must  be  issued  in  numbers,  and  he 
became  very  uneasy  at  the  delay.  At  length  it  occurred  to 
him  to  lay  the  subject  before  his  friend  Harriet  Martineau, 
and  to  entreat  her  as  the  greatest  possible  favour  to  consider 
whether  or  no  she  would  undertake  it.  She  did  so,  —  this  was 
about  the  time  of  the  Chartist  outbreak  in  1848,  the  Tenth 
of  April  time,  —  on  condition  of  being  herself  responsible  for  the 
whole  history,  after  the  first  book  \  and,  as  she  says  in  the 
preface  to  the  history,  "solely  responsible." 

The  most  careless  observer  can  hardly  fail  to  see  what  diffi- 
culties lie  in  the  way  of  a  writer  of  contemporaneous  history. 
There  are  a  thousand  risks  in  taking  time  as  it  flies.  It  is  some- 
times a  blindfold  walk  amid  hot  ploughshares,  sometimes  like 


44G 


MEMORIALS. 


the  conducting  of  as  hot  a  conflict.  "Whoever  undertakes  it 
must  charge  over  the  fallen,  alive  or  dead,  and  as  often  be  ac- 
cused of  misapprehension,  both  by  the  vanquished  and  the 
victorious.  He  must  expect  the  blame,  most  likely  the  ill  offices, 
of  all  who  stand  condemned  as  their  deeds  are  placed  in  line. 
AVho  among  authors  is  brave  enough  to  risk  what  may  befall 
while  standing  under  fire  to  identify  the  columns  amid  the  battle- 
smoke,  and  drawing  them  up  in  successive  masses  or  files  for 
public  review  1  So  it  must  needs  be  for  the  writer  who  takes 
the  responsibility  "  solely,"  and  yet  such  a  writer  was  the  one 
the  publisher  must  have ;  for  who  will  read  the  flat,  unprofitable 
tale  of  the  moral  craven  ?  Then  the  terror  of  inaccuracy,  and 
the  vague  dread  of  the  unknown,  which  may  cause  unexpected 
explosion,  to  the  author's  detriment  and  pain,  are  alone  enough  to 
stay  his  undertaking.  "  But  who,"  —  as  Harriet  Martineau  used 
to  say  on  so  many  occasions,  —  "  who  could  ever  stir  a  finger,  if 
only  on  condition  of  being  guaranteed  against  oversights,  mis- 
information, mistakes,  ignorance,  loss,  and  danger?"  And  she 
courageously  undertook  the  unprecedented  task  of  casting  ethics 
into  the  stream  of  contemporaneous  time.  The  work  is  written 
throughout  with  reference  to  the  principles  of  right,  with  no 
yielding  of  judgment  to  the  plea  of  political  necessity,  and  is  yet 
most  candid  in  all  its  statements  of  these  necessities,  as  no  par- 
tisan could  have  been ;  thus  merging  the  piquancy  which  is 
always  at  the  command  of  the  pamphleteer  in  the  judicial  integ- 
rity which  is  the  grand  characteristic  of  the  historian.  Hampered 
as  such  a  work  must  be  by  its  linear,  chronological  necessities,  it 
is  most  remarkable  for  its  interest  as  a  narration  under  its  inevit- 
able disadvantages.  The  historian  of  any  former  age  can  give 
effect  to  his  work  by  front  lights  and  side  lights,  which  the  con- 
temporary historian  does  not  possess,  the  light  of  its  coming 
time  being  wholly  wanting.  These  helps  to  the  success  of  a 
Thierry  with  the  Norman  Conquest,  of  a  Miguet  with  personal 
delineations,  or  of  a  Motley  with  the  Dutch  Republic  must  of 
necessity  be  wanting  to  a  picture  of  the  present  times.  These 
grounds  of  critical  judgment  seem  to  have  been  overlooked  by 
some  who  considered  this  history  as  wanting  in  success.  But 


WORK. 


447 


all  praised  its  rare  exactitude,  and  its  great  value  as  a  most  lucid 
and  able  arrangement  of  all  classes  of  facts,  and  numerous  edi- 
tions up  to  the  present  time  prove  the  public  to  be  in  the  right. 
As  far  as  the  field  of  vision  permitted,  it  dealt  with  the  present  as 
truthfully  and  dispassionately  as  if  it  were  the  past,  —  a  mode  of 
procedure  not  at  the  time  to  be  popularly  appreciated,  but  which 
makes  the  work  sure  of  its  place  in  the  public  heart  of  the  future, 
and  in  the  treasury  of  facts  and  guiding  lines  for  its  historians. 
But  all  the  author's  care  in  guarding  her  sole  responsibility 
proved  in  one  instance  insufficient  to  contend  with  the  terrors 
of  the  publisher  lest  his  pecuniary  interests  should  suffer.  This 
is  the  story  as  I  noted  it  at  the  time  from  the  author's  conversa- 
tion, which  was  not  a  private  one. 

"  When  a  certain  number  was  to  appear,  it  being  actually  printed, 
Mr.  Knight  came,  in  a  great  flurry  of  spirits.  He  told  me  he  had 
just  had  a  letter  from  a  Whig  official  touching  this  period,  and  he 
felt  in  consequence  great  uneasiness  and  anxiety.  But  I  will  give 
you,  I  said,  the  proofs  of  the  truth  and  correctness  of  what  I  have 
asserted  ;  and  I  ran  over  the  evidence.  '  Yes/  he  said,  1  no  doubt  of 
its  truth  and  correctness,  —  I  am  satisfied  of  that,  but  its  publication 
might  ruin  me.  Government  might  take  from  me  the  printing '  (of 
the  poor-law  matter,  &c,  worth  £800  per  annum  to  him);  and  he 
went  on  in  a  despairing,  frightened  way  to  complain  of  the  position  in 
which  it  might  put  him.  Long  after,  he  told  me  he  had  taken  the 
responsibility  of  ordering  that  page  to  be  cancelled.  I  then  told  him 
he  should  never  more  publish  for  me.  Had  he  submitted  the  matter 
to  me,  I  would  have  consented  to  all  reasonable  change,  but  he  did 
not.  And  it  was  '  my  sole  responsibility '  he  took,  without  my 
knowing  it !  His  frequent  changes  of  mind  as  to  time  of  publication 
were  veTy  detrimental  to  the  success  of  the  History.  In  such  a  mode  of 
publication  delay  is  eminently  dangerous.  I  wrote  it  in  twelve  months, 
and  he  paid  me  £1,000,  which  he  thought  moderate,  for  both  parts. 
For  the  last  part,  beginning  with  the  century  to  the  Battle  of  Water- 
loo, he  paid  £200.  This  last  payment  was  made  after  the  1  Letters 
on  Man's  Nature  and  Development '  were  published.  Soon  after  this, 
Robert  Chambers  came  to  take  tea  with  me,  and  told  me  that  Mr. 
Knight,  being  pressed  for  money,  had  sold  the  whole,  and  the  pur- 
chasing house  was  delighted  with  the  acquisition.  But  before  the 
season  was  over  Mr.  Knight  bought  back  £800  worth  of  the  property. 


448 


MEMORIALS. 


"  Robert  Chambers  after  this  entered  into  a  treaty  with  me,  —  for  he 
had  bought  the  whole  History  of  Mr.  Knight,  —  to  complete  it  up  to 
the  present  time,  which  my  illness  prevented  my  doing.  But  I  ought 
to  tell  you  of  Mr.  Knight's  most  handsomely  proposing  to  me  to  buy 
back  the  first  book,  that  I  might  have  the  satisfaction  of  the  beginning 
as  well  as  the  completion  of  the  work." 

She  afterwards  wrote  an  entirely  new  book  for  the  Ameri- 
can publishers,  who  were  induced  by  a  sense  of  its  need,  and 
by  a  manifest  demand  indicating  the  same  in  the  public  mind, 
to  republish  it  in  Boston,  in  the  heat  of  the  slaveholding  rebel- 
lion. It  was  felt  by  the  most  observant  of  those  Americans 
who  read  it  at  the  time  to  be  a  lit  medicine  for  the  hour ; 
and  the  author  was  entreated  by  the  American  publishers  to 
furnish  them  with  a  preface  of  warning  against  the  policies  that 
have  ruined  nations  in  old  times,  and  that  should  be  accord- 
ingly avoided  by  the  statesmen  of  to-day.  She  immediately 
consented,  and  not  only  wrote  the  preface,  but  the  new  part, 
continuing  the  work  to  the  Eussian  wTar  in  1854.  That  edition 
is  entirely  exhausted. 

The  publishers  preface  the  American  edition  thus  :  — 

"  The  reproduction  of  this  work  may  be  regarded  as  peculiarly 
opportune  at  the  crisis  through  which  this  nation  is  now  passing. 
Our  people  are  studying  anew  the  great  problems  which  have  been 
agitating  England  for  more  than  half  a  century.  The  questions  con- 
nected with  an  extension  of  the  suffrage,  the  emancipation  of  the 
blacks,  a  paper  currency,  the  removal  of  restrictions  on  trade,  the 
increase  of  taxation  and  the  national  debt,  have  to-day  their  direct 
analogies  for  the  consideration  of  the  citizens  of  the  United  States. 

To  a  certain  extent  the  solution  may  be  found  in  these  volumes  

The  personal  opinions  of  the  distinguished  author  are  forcibly  stated, 
but  the  expression  of  them  is  characterized  by  an  admirable  fair- 
ness." 

The  same  year  —  1846  —  that  the  History  of  the  Peace  was 
projected  the  "  Daily  News  "  was  started,  under  the  management 
of  Mr.  Charles  Dickens,  Mr.  Forster  being  the  chief  editor.  The 
arrangements  were  of  a  very  costly  character,  and  the  success  of 
the  paper  was  by  no  means  commensurate  to  its  expenditure. 


WORK. 


449 


Mr.  Dickens  retired  in  a  few  weeks,  and  Mr.  Forster  threw  up 
the  editorship  ;  and  the  proprietors,  under  the  advice  of  Mr. 
Dilke,  determined  to  try  the  experiment  of  a  cheap  paper,  and 
to  establish  a  daily  paper  at  a  reduced  price.  But  after  a  trial  of 
two  years  the  cheap  paper  was  abandoned  as  unsuccessful,  as  the 
circulation,  at  one  time  20,000  per  day,  had  fallen  off  to  scarcely 
a  quarter  of  that  amount.  Since  the  first  of  the  year  1849  the 
paper  continued  (till  the  very  recent  change  to  a  penny)  at  the 
ordinary  price  of  daily  London  newspapers,  that  of  five  pence  with 
a  stamp.  The  politics  of  the  paper  have  since  been  uniformly  lib- 
eral, and  in  favour  of  free  trade.  Its  devotion  to  the  latter  object 
caused  it  to  be  spoken  of  as  the  Cobden  organ.  But  it  was  always 
independent,  and  it  never  followed  the  peace  view  nor  the  pro- 
slavery  tendencies  of  that  party,  and  has  in  those  respects  been 
its  energetic  opponent. 

In  view  of  Harriet  Martineau's  numerous  leading  articles,  at 
the  rate  at  times  of  six  per  week,  her  valued  friend,  Mr.  Hunt, 
said  at  that  period  :  — 

"  Our  contributors  never  wrote  more  than  four  articles  a  week  at 
most.  It  is  all  that  the  best  of  them  could  fairly  do.  And  political 
writers  commonly  deteriorate.  The  first  article  is  excellent,  and  we 
think  we  have  found  a  treasure.  The  second  is  less  striking,  but  we 
are  not  surprised  that  so  high  a  standard  cannot  in  every  instance  be 
maintained.  At  the  third  we  say,  ( Have  we  not  read  something  like 
this  very  lately  ? '  The  next  is  so  manifest  a  falling  off  that  we  desire 
no  more." 

There  was  no  such  feeling  or  failure  in  the  political  career  of 
Harriet  Martineau.  "Do  you  know,"  said  Mr.  Hunt  to  one 
of  her  family,  "  that  your  sister  is  a  great  political  writer  1 "  He 
told,  too,  how  these  writings  moulded  public  opinion  through 
Parliament.  "  They  are  read  in  the  clubs ;  they  precede  the 
debates  and  modify  the  '  Times.'  The  1  Daily  News '  leads." 
And  well  it  might  and  must  lead  ;  "for  these,"  said  a  friend  to 
Mr.  Hunt,  "  are  not  only  newspaper  articles,  but  poems."  And 
so  they  were,  —  the  full  sweet  harmonies  to  which 

"  The  powers  militant  that  stood  for  Heaven 
Moved  on." 


450 


MEMORIALS. 


The  subjects  of  these  articles  cover  the  whole  field  of  national 
and  political  action,  philanthropic  effort,  and  agricultural  statistics. 
In  the  department  of  agriculture  no  one  had  done  so  much,  ex- 
cept Sir  John  Walsham.  Irish,  Jewish,  and  American  subjects, 
Indian  and  educational  reform,  antislavery,  geographical,  and  his- 
torical articles,  economical  and  West  Indian  interests,  reviews 
and  miscellaneous  writings,  made  up  her  sixteen  hundred  strong. 

It  was  fortunate  for  all  whom  political  knowledge  and  integrity 
might  concern,  that,  on  the  death  of  Mr.  Hunt,  his  successor 
should  have  been  such  a  man  as  William  Weir. 

He  had  been  early  trained  by  classical  studies  at  home,  and 
by  the  study  and  use  of  the  European  Continental  languages 
abroad ;  and  foreign  travel  and  a  University  course  in  Germany 
had  completed  his  preparation  for  life.  It  was  currently  said  of 
him  that  he  was  master  of  the  library  of  Europe.  A  man  of 
great  natural  abilities,  a  barrister  by  profession,  and  a  fluent  and 
eloquent  speaker,  his  career  was  arrested  by  a  deafness  which 
increased  with  years,  and  he  became  a  journalist.  He  brought 
to  the  editorship  of  the  "  Daily  News  "  long  training  in  other 
journals,  and  an  extraordinary  array  of  qualifications  for  the 
post.  Law,  history,  geographical  research,  literature, — he  was  at 
home  in  them  all ;  and  nothing  in  his  experience  had  worn  away 
the  native  vigour  of  his  mind  or  warped  the  rectitude  of  his 
principles.  It  was  his  unalterable  determination  to  hold  the 
"  Daily  News  "  in  its  independent  political  position,  and  to  make 
it  the  guardian  of  popular  rights,  needed  reforms,  and  social 
improvement ;  and  his  cosmopolitan  tendencies  disposing  him  to 
believe  that  the  field  was  the  world,  he  was  greatly  gratified 
to  find  in  Harriet  Martineau  the  same  purposes  and  accomplish- 
ments as  his  own.  "  When  I  returned  from  the  Continent,"  he 
used  to  say,  "her  writings  took  me  between  wind  and  water,  and 
went  a  long  way  towards  determining  the  direction  and  character 
of  my  mind  for  life."  It  was  probably  the  same  with  his  col- 
leagues in  the  office ;  for  it  was  by  having  more  or  less  formed 
the  minds  of  her  whole  generation,  that  she  was  enabled  so 
greatly  to  influence  her  times. 

When .  it  fell,  in  regular  succession,  to  Mr.  Weir  to  reorganize 


WORK. 


451 


the  office,  he  at  once  recognized  the  supreme  value  of  her  col- 
laboration, and  wrote  to  her  as  follows  :  — 

My  dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  You  are  no  Miss  Martineau,  but 
a  benevolent,  indefatigable  fairy,  who  knows  instinctively  what  is 
wanted,  and  how  it  should  be  done.  There  is  something  supernatural 
in  the  patness  of  many  of  your  articles  (that  on  the  queen,  for  exam- 
ple) to  my  views  and  wishes. 

Seriously,  I  do  not  know  how  I  should  have  wrestled  through  this 
last  week  without  you.  As  we  say  north  of  the  Tweed,  "  I  owe  you 
a  day  in  hairst." 

Ever  gratefully  yours, 

WILLIAM  WEIR. 

What  most  commended  Mr.  Weir  to  Mrs.  Martineau  (she  had 
now  for  good  reasons  taken  the  style  that  had  been  in  use  in  the 
last  century  for  maiden  ladies  no  less  than  married  ones)  was 
his  readiness  to  encounter  the  opprobrium  that  always  attends 
those  who  intermeddle  for  good  with  public  affairs.  She  found 
him  always  valiant  for  the  truth. 

In  another  letter,  written  during  a  suspension  of  her  articles, 
he  says :  — 

My  dear  Mistress  Harriet,  —  I  should  have  answered  your  note, 
but  I  have  been  severely  indisposed,  and  at  the  same  time  more 
severely  tasked  than  usual.  I  have  had  to  go  more  into  public  com- 
pany than  usual,  and  have  had  to  take  my  daughter  to  school. 

You  cannot  doubt  that  your  aid  will  always  be  acceptable.  In 
political  principles  we  are  probably  as  nearly  at  one  as  two  distinct 
existences  can  be.  The  only  modification  I  am  likely  ever  to  suggest 
in  any  communication  with  which  you  favour  me,  would  be  when 
the  accident  of  position  enables  me  to  know  some  recent  fact  that 
renders  a  different  strategy  advisable,  or  disproves  some  inference. 

I  have  said  before,  and  say  again,  your  loss  has  been  to  me  irrepa- 
rable. I  have  never  before  met  —  I  do  not  hope  again  to  meet  —  one 
eo  earnest  to  promote  progress,  so  practical  in  the  means  by  which  to 
arrive  at  it.  My  aim  in  life  is  to  be  able  to  say,  when  it  is  closing, 
"  I  too  have  done  somewhat,  though  little,  to  benefit  my  kind  ; "  and 
there  are  so  few  who  do  not  regard  this  as  quixotism  or  hypocrisy, 
that  I  shrink  even  from  confessing  it. 

The  "  sold  to  the  Ministry "  story  must  be  an  American  echo  of 
what  was  once  said  here.    I  cannot  conceive  how  any  person  who  has 


432 


MEMORIALS. 


read  the  "  Daily  News  "  can  imagine  such  a  thing.  We  are  opposed 
to  them  on  all  broad,  general  principles  ;  we  neither  spare  men  nor 
measures.  There  is  only  one  way  to  get  rid  of  such  reports,  —  to  live 
them  down. 

My  great  object  just  now  is,  to  stir  up  the  more  or  less  instructed 
class  to  self-exertion  ;  to  assert  its  right  to  participation  in  adminis- 
trative office,  and  to  that  end  to  be  more  careful  in  its  selection  of  the 
men  to  be  sent  to  Parliament.  I  believe  we  are  on  the  eve  of  a  great 
social  revolution,  and  that  cool-headed  and  earnest  men  are  the  only 
thing  that  can  carry  us  safely  through  it.  But  where  are  they  to  be 
found  ?  .  .  .  . 

Ever  gratefully  yours, 

WILLIAM  WEIR. 

Mrs.  Martineau's  objects  being  identical  with  those  of  Mr.  Weir, 
their  correspondence  was  one  of  mutual  consultation  as  to  means 
and  measures.  At  the  moment  when  the  affairs  of  India  became 
of  paramount  importance  to  Great  Britain,  she  felt  the  necessity 
to  the  general  public  of  more  information  and  a  wider  diffusion 
of  it ;  and  she  wrote  to  inquire  of  the  "  Master  of  the  Library 
of  Europe,"  whether  any  book  calculated  to  convey  the  requisite 
knowledge  was  in  existence. 

Mr.  Weir  immediately  replied  :  — 

Dear  Mistress  Harriet,  —  There  is  no  such  book,  and  it  is  much 
wanted. 

There  are  only  two  people  in  England  who  could  do  it.  One  would 
do  it  admirably,  —  yourself ;  the  other  very  indifferently,  —  myself. 
When  I  came  to  the  bottom  of  your  third  page,  I  cried,  "  That  is  just 
what  crossed  my  mind  when  you  first  spoke  of  the  ignorance  of  the 
public  regarding  India."  I  wish  you  would  try  it.  I  will  strain 
heaven  and  earth  to  get  in  two  chapters  (so  call  them)  a  week. 

Much  will  depend  on  selecting  the  starting-point,  —  not  too  far  back. 
As  for  a  ballad  or  an  epic,  some  epoch  comparatively  recent  ought  to  be 
selected  ;  and  as  opportunity  offers,  the  growth  of  the  army,  admin- 
istrative system,  judicial  system,  etc.,  observed  ab  initio,  so  as  to 
render  intelligible  their  actual  characters. 

Perhaps  the  present  mutiny,  —  apparently  confined  as  yet  to  the 
army,  —  the  relation  of  the  army  to  the  presidency,  the  relations  of 
the  three  presidencies  to  each  other,  and  so  forth.  I  throw  these 
things  out  hurriedly  ;  for  I  have  no  doubt  you  have  already  a  plan 
of  your  own  sketched  out,  and  this  may  help  to  fill  it  up. 


WOKK. 


453 


You  must  have  much  matter,  and  many  intelligent  friends  who  will 
aid.    I  will  give  what  I  can,  and  search  for  more. 

Would  it  not  be  best  to  commence  it  from  the  beginning  by 
"  H.  M."  ?    I  will  write  again  to-morrow. 

I  wish  you  were  at  work.  w<  wjm 

Mr.  Walker,  known  as  "  the  friend  of  the  United  States," 
succeeding  at  the  death  of  Mr.  Weir,  it  is  needless  to  say  that, 
under  such  management,  the  circulation  of  the  "  Daily  News  " 
continually  increased. 

It  was  vastly  more  influential  than  the  "  Times "  with  the 
great  middle  class  in  England,  from  the  time  that  Harriet  Marti- 
neau's  spirit  was  moving  in  the  wheels ;  and  it  is  the  great  middle 
class  that  ministers  and  cabinets  watch  with  most  interest  for 
the  guidance  of  their  course. 

Besides  what  other  authorship  she  might  have  on  hand, 
whether  light  or  weighty,  Harriet  Martineau  wrote  for  this 
paper  above  sixteen  hundred  leading  articles,  at  the  rate  some- 
times, for  months  in  succession,  of  six  in  a  week, — all  so  valuable 
that  it  was  once  proposed  to  her  to  have  twelve  volumes  of  them 
republished.  This  idea  she  did  not  much  favour.  "  Three 
volumes  would  be  enough,"  she  said,  "  as  so  many  of  them  are 
merely  temporary." 

Through  the  kind  offices  of  her  friend  Mr.  Eobinson,  the 
managing  editor  of  the  "  Daily  News,"  the  experiment  was  tried 
long  after  with  a  volume  of  her  biographical  articles.  She  was 
too  ill  to  attend  to  the  publication  herself,  and  in  the  midst  of 
his  own  engrossing  duties  he  assumed  the  whole  labour  of  put- 
ting this  work  through  the  press,  —  a  testimony  of  devoted  friend- 
ship for  the  author. 

The  volume  on  British  India,  of  which  she  felt  the  public 
need,  published  in  1851,  is  "beautiful  exceedingly."  In  1855 
appeared  her  "  Guide  to  the  English  Lakes,"  in  another  way  no 
less  beautiful.  In  1859  the  book,  "England  and  her  Soldiers," 
for  the  promotion  of  army  reform,  was  written  in  aid  of  Flor- 
ence Nightingale's  objects.  In  1861  came  the  volume  entitled 
"  Health,  Husbandry,  and  Handicraft,"  and  also  a  volume  con- 
taining a  collection  of  her  contributions  to  "  Once  a  Week,"  the 


454 


MEMORIALS. 


periodical  for  which  she  wrote  after  she  felt  obliged,  by  the 
refusal  of  "  Household  Words  "  to  publish  any  article  reflecting 
credit  on  the  Catholics,  to  sever  her  connection  with  Mr.  Dick- 
ens. In  1869  the  "Biographical  Sketches"  reappeared,  with 
the  same  admiration  as  at  first,  and  the  same  reserves  on  the 
part  of  those  who  use  some  few  words  in  a  narrower  sense  than 
herself.  One  of  these  was  the  word  "  heart ; "  and  one  of  her 
very  latest  utterances  to  a  friend  who  inquired  what  she  meant 
by  saying  that  Lord  Macaulay  was  not  a  man  of  heart,  illustrates 
this  difference.  "  I  do  not  mean,"  she  said,  "  that  he  did  not 
love  his  family,  or  that  he  was  not,  in  a  small  way,  benevolent. 
But  if  he  had  been  a  man  of  heart,  could  he  have  gone  through 
the  world,  without  taking  it  in,  with  all  its  grand  interests,  its 
sufferings,  and  its  destinies  1  He  did  not  live  on  the  high  level 
of  the  heart.  But  he  was  a  most  charming  litterateur,  and  as 
such  admired  and  rewarded." 

It  may  be  remarked  of  her  appreciations  of  character  in  general, 
that  they  suggest  this  conclusion,  —  that  disinterestedness  un- 
fetters the  judgment.  Let  almost  any  one  try  the  experiment  of 
uttering  his  exact  opinion  as  if  in  the  palace  of  truth  :  it  will  be 
found  to  differ  materially  from  his  utterances  in  other  palaces. 
But  it  was  not  so  with  her. 

Her  correspondence  shows  how  every  originator  or  promoter  of 
a  benevolent  plan  looked  to  her  for  co-operation. 

Mr.  Rathbone  of  Liverpool,  knowing  how  busy  she  always  was 
for  the  natives  of  Westmoreland,  her  proceedings  there  "  sending 
a  sunbeam  into  his  room  "  (as  he  writes  to  her),  sent  her  a  plan 
for  the  introduction  of  penny  banks  among  the  people  ;  and 
he  tells  her  at  the  same  time  how  much  he  has  been  struck  by 
her  plan  for  better  organization  of  life  for  single  ladies,  and  of 
the  economies  of  life  in  general,  that  all  the  toiling  millions  may 
have  leisure  to  be  good  ;  and  all  these  thoughts  make  him  sign 
himself  "  respectfully  and  affectionately  "  hers. 

Her  very  numerous  articles  in  leading  periodicals  were  all 
written  with  some  strong  purpose  of  service  to  mankind,  and 
her  biographical  articles  were  written  on  the  principles  of  fidelity 
and  openness,  as  the  only  security  for  a  similar  result  from  them. 


WORK. 


455 


Her  method  seems  to  have  secured  general  approval,  for  almost 
every  newspaper  in  England  hailed  them  with  admiration,  and 
there  was  actually  a  renewal  of  the  enthusiasm  attendant  on  her 
early  fame.  Her  object  in  writing  them  was  to  be  true  to  what 
she  had  known  and  observed  of  the  life  she  was  dealing  with. 
Nothing  to  extenuate  and  nothing  to  overcharge  was  her  way. 
To  copy  the  portrait  her  subject  had  himself  painted  was  her 
endeavour ;  and  in  observing  the  manners  that  indicate  the 
mind,  she  used  to  say  the  alert  eyes  of  the  partially  deaf,  so 
constant  in  their  watchfulness,  learn  many  things  unknown  to 
others.  Harriet  Martineau  was  for  long  periods  of  her  life  in 
correspondence  with  her  friend  —  I  believe,  too,  her  distant 
relative  —  Mr.  Henry  Reeve,  so  well  known  and  highly  esteemed 
as  editor  of  the  "Edinburgh  Review,"  in  which  many  of  her 
most  valuable  articles  from  time  to  time  appeared.  The  "  West- 
minster EevieAv,"  the  foundation  of  which  she  had  prophesied  in 
the  days  of  her  early  fame,  was  always  at  her  command;  and 
when  it  fell  into  financial  difficulties,  she  took  a  mortgage  of  it 
as  property,  great  as  was  the  ultimate  risk  of  ever  being  indemni- 
fied. "But  I  owe  that  amount  of  loss,"  she  said,  "if  it  be  one, 
to  the  review  that  has  so  often  been  my  organ  of  communication 
with  the  world." 

These  review  articles  and  pamphlets  were  no  "  paper  capital," 
no  "  charming  twaddle ; "  but  all  of  heartfelt  value  and  depth, 
written  because  her  intellect  and  experience  told  her  the  world 
needed  them,  whether  in  great  national  interests  or  in  defence  of 
individual  rights.  A  narrative  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  every 
one  of  them  would  be  a  light  cast  upon  her  life.  Those  written 
in  behalf  of  desert  or  in  deprecation  of  neglect  or  wrong  were 
always  full  of  power.  As  when,  for  example,  she  studied  so  many 
volumes  in  order  to  be  qualified  to  take  up  the  cause  of  the 
Rajah  Brooke,  —  that  Sir  James  Brooke  who  devoted  his  life 
and  fortune  to  the  service  of  the  natives  of  the  Eastern  Archi- 
pelago, and  was  made  a  prince  by  them  because  he  had  fostered 
their  industry,  stimulated  their  commerce,  counselled  their  foreign 
policy,  protected  them  from  piracy,  and  ruled  them  in  their  own 
native  customs  and  ideas,  using  these  meanwhile  as  a  basis  for 


456 


MEMORIALS. 


reforms,  and  resisting  all  efforts  of  the  Dutch,  English,  French, 
or  Belgians  to  settle  in  the  country  in  great  bodies,  or  to  make 
of  it  a  European  colony.  A  man  so  high-minded  and  devoted, 
a  man  of  such  practical  genius  and  utter  disinterestedness,  a 
born  ruler,  was  sure  to  be  maligned  and  calumniated.  And 
it  was  while  he  was  striving  under  this  load  of  calumny  to  ob- 
tain such  recognition  by  his  native  country  as  might  best  enable 
him  to  serve  his  adopted  one,  that  Harriet  Martineau  consulted 
with  his  counsel,  Mr.  Templer,  studied  his  case,  received  himself 
at  her  home,  and  wrote  that  able  article  in  the  "  Westminster 
Review,"  which,  showing  her  thorough  understanding  and  strong 
grasp  of  the  whole  matter,  made  him  desire  her  action  as  a  legis- 
lator for  the  Eastern  Archipelago.  But  her  various  other  duties 
precluded  such  an  effort. 

The  rest  and  peace  of  home  after  Eastern  life  gave  opportu- 
nity for  Western  exertion  ;  and  remembering  the  dust  flung  in 
her  own  eyes  by  slaveholders  about  the  "  intermeddling  "  of  the 
North,  and  finding  the  same  process  constantly  in  use  to  blind 
the  eyes  of  England  at  large,  she  threw  before  the  country,  in 
the  "Daily  News,"  a  history  of  the  American  compromises.  There 
was  an  immediate  demand  for  it  in  book  form,  as  there  had 
before  been  nothing  to  which  the  people  could  refer,  and  the 
ignorance  of  the  people  was  profound.  It  made  a  great  noise, 
not  only  in  England,  where  the  work  was  speedily  and  loudly 
applauded,  but  on  the  Continent.  Four  days  after  its  appearance 
in  London  the  "  Milan  Official  Gazette  "  was  earnest  in  its  recom- 
mendations. It  had  a  great  circulation,  gentlemen  in  various 
parts  of  the  kingdom  ordering  copies  by  the  hundred  for  distri- 
bution. 

Mrs.  Martineau  wrote  another  much-needed  work  touching 
the  important  theme  of  the  true  functions  of  government.  Its 
title  was  "  The  Factory  Controversy  :  a  Warning  against  Med- 
dling Legislation."  She  had  written  it  with  difficulty,  on  ac- 
count of  the  head  and  heart  attacks,  at  this  time  very  severe, 
as  a  gift  to  the  editor  of  the  "  Westminster  Eeview,"  then  in 
pecuniary  difficulty  j  for  she  always  felt  it  a  duty  to  sustain  it,  as 
a  medium  for  the  free  expression  of  opinion  of  which  she  had  so 


WORK. 


457 


frequently  found  the  usefulness.  The  editor  accepted  the  article, 
but  when  he  saw  the  manuscript  he  started  back.  He  approved 
of  her  doctrine,  but  dreaded  the  personalities  it  contained.  Its 
object  was  to  show  that  Mr.  Dickens,  in  "  Household  Words," 
and  Mr.  Leonard  Horner  as  factory  inspector,  were  in  the  wrong 
in  demanding  of  government  what  governments  have  no  business 
to  undertake.  She  did  not  know,  when  she  determined  to  take 
the  working  of  the  factory  acts  as  a  most  complete  illustration  of 
the  vice  of  the  principle  of  meddling  legislation,  that  an  associa- 
tion of  factory  occupiers  was  in  existence.  But  learning  it  from 
Mr.  Horner's  report,  she  obtained  all  the  evidence  on  both  sides, 
and  wrote  her  article. 

"  My  article  won't  do,"  is  the  only  entry  in  her  skeleton 
journal  on  the  day  that  she  received  back  her  manuscript  from 
the  editor  of  the  "  Westminster  Eeview." 

She  then  placed  it  at  the  disposal  of  the  Factory  Occupiers' 
Association,  with  a  letter  of  which  the  following  is  an  extract :  — ■ 

I,  for  my  part,  cannot  modify  what  I  have  said  [of  Mr.  Dickens, 
Mr.  Horner,  and  others].  These  gentlemen  have  publicly  assumed  a 
ground  which  in  the  opinion  of  sound  statesmen  cannot  be  main- 
tained ;  and  I  believe  my  article  proves  that  they  have  supported 
their  position  by  inaccurate  statements,  and  in  a  temper  and  by  lan- 
guage which  convey  their  own  condemnation. 

In  a  matter  of  literary  judgment  or  taste,  one  may  soften  one's 
tone  of  criticism  and  opposition  to  the  gentlest  breath  of  dissent  ;  but 
in  a  matter  of  political  morality  so  vital  as  this,  there  must  be  no 
compromise  and  no  mistake.  Mr.  Horner  and  Mr.  Dickens,  as  inspec- 
tor and  editor,  have  taken  up  a  ground  which  they  do  not  pretend  to 
establish  on  any  principle  ;  and  they  hold  it  in  an  objectionable  tem- 
per and  by  indefensible  means.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  necessary 
to  meet  them  unflinchingly,  and  expose,  with  all  possible  plainness, 
the  mischief  they  are  doing.  They  cannot  complain,  with  any  appear- 
ance of  reason,  of  any  plainness  of  speech.  I  have  judged  them  by 
their  own  published  statements  ;  and  the  language  of  Mr.  Horner's 
Reports  and  of  Mr.  Dickens's  periodical  leaves  them  no  ground  of 
remonstrance  on  the  score  of  courtesy.  I  like  courtesy  as  well  as  any 
body  can  do  ;  but  when  vicious  legislation  and  social  oppression  are 
upheld  by  men  in  high  places,  the  vindication  of  principle  and  the 
exposure  of  mischief  must  come  before  considerations  of  private  feel- 

VOL.  LL 


458 


MEMORIALS. 


ing.  These  gentlemen  have  offered  a  challenge  to  society,  —  and  cer- 
tainly in  no  spirit  or  tone  of  courtesy  ;  and  they  will  not,  if  they 
claim  to  be  rational  men,  object  to  a  fair  encounter  of  their  chal- 
lenge. 

On  these  grounds  I  declined  to  modify  my  article,  preferring  to 
publish  it  unaltered  through  some  other  channel.  As  the  best  means 
of  meeting  the  mischief  it  denounces,  I  offer  it  to  your  association, 
to  be  published  as  a  pamphlet,  or  in  any  way  which  in  the  judgment 
of  your  committee  may  insure  the  widest  circulation  for  it.  In  my 
present  state  of  health  it  has  been  something  of  an  effort  to  write  this 
article,  and  if  I  had  consulted  my  own  ease,  I  should  have  let  the 
matter  alone  altogether  ;  but  the  struggle  for  the  establishment  of  a 
good  or  bad  law  in  this  vital  case  is  so  important,  and  the  existence 
of  your  association  seems  to  me  a  social  fact  of  such  extraordinary  sig- 
nificance, that  I  could  not  have  been  easy  to  let  the  occasion  pass 
without  an  effort  on  my  part,  for  no  better  reason  than  its  occasioning 
me  fatigue  and  many  painful  emotions  

I  suppose  and  hope  you  will  print  this  paper  just  as  it  stands,  in 
the  form  of  an  article  intended  for  a  quarterly  review.  It  will  insure 
the  reader  against  lapsing  into  a  supposition  that  the  writer  is  the 
agent  or  advocate  of  your  committee,  or  in  some  way  or  other  less 
independent  and  impartial  than  I  really  am. 

Believe  me,  dear  sir,  truly  yours, 

HAREIET  MARTINEAU. 

The  result  was  the  amendment  of  the  objectionable  law ;  and 
in  commuuicating  to  Mrs.  Martineau  this  welcome  news,  the 
committee  of  the  Factory  Occupiers'  Association  informed  her 
that  they  had  repeated  evidences  of  the  valuable  service  she  had 
rendered,  especially  in  quarters  where  disinterested  statements 
were  most  needed.  When  they  met  for  the  first  time  after  the 
passage  of  the  amended  bill,  they  all  felt  and  expressed  the  obli- 
gation under  which  they  lay  to  her,  and  it  was  suggested  that 
this  feeling  ought  to  have  expression  in  some  substantial  form. 
They  considered  her  probable  feelings  in  the  matter, —  her  known 
feeling  against  being  paid  for  doing  good ;  and  they  appointed 
three  of  their  number  to  ask  her  wishes  as  to  the  appropriation  or 
expenditure  of  one  hundred  guineas  which  was  placed  for  that 
purpose  in  their  hands. 

The  chairman  of  the  committee  continues  :  — 


WORK. 


459 


I  am  desired  by  my  colleagues,  Mr.  Turner  and  Mr.  Ash  worth,  to 
make  this  intimation  to  you,  and  to  assure  you  of  the  great  satisfac- 
tion it  gives  them  personally  to  be  the  medium  of  paying  this  small 
tribute  to  your  estimable  character  and  attainments.  They  further 
desire  me  to  assure  you  of  the  perfectly  unanimous  request  of  the 
committee  that  you  will  allow  them,  through  this  medium,  to  place 
upon  permanent  record  their  appreciation  of  the  service  you  have  ren- 
dered to  the  cause  of  good  government  ;  and  I  can  only  add  on  behalf 
of  the  sub-committee  that  they  will  be  exceedingly  happy  to  execute 
your  wishes  in  the  appropriation  of  the  amount  in  such  form  as  you 
may  most  desire. 

I  am,  dear  Mrs.  Martineau, 

Yours  most  faithfully, 

HENRY  WH1TWORTH. 

Jlrs.  Martineau  caused  the  sum  to  be  invested  for  others. 

This  work  was  done  in  1855  ;  and  in  consequence  of  the  way 
in  which  it  was  done,  numberless  wrongs  were  presented  to 
her  for  redress.  Among  those,  she  selected  such  as  she  could 
best  treat  of,  from  present  circumstances  and  past  knowledge. 
"  Corporate  Tradition  and  National  Rights,"  considered  in  con- 
nection with  local  dues  on  shipping,  she  examined  in  conjunction 
with  the  Liverpool  Association  for  the  right  Appropriation  of 
Town  Dues,  in  1857. 

One  of  the  pieces  of  work  at  The  Knoll  (after  the  book  on 
u  British  Rule,"  which  followed  the  mutiny)  was  the  planning  of 
"  Suggestions  for  a  Future  Government  of  India."  Persons  who 
knew  most  about  India,  able  men  who  had  been  trained  in  the 
theory  and  practice  of  Indian  government  from  their  youth  up, 
declared  they  had  never  seen  a  work,  not  written  by  one  of  their 
own  number,  which  gave  so  clear  an  impression  of  every  thing 
essential  to  a  wise  solution  of  the  great  question  then  agitating 
the  public  mind.  Many,  indeed,  who  had  spent  their  lives  in 
India,  and  thought  themselves  especially  qualified  to  treat  of  it, 
were  pronounced,  by  the  really  qualified,  to  be,  in  comparison 
with  one  whom  they  called  "this  sagacious  and  thoughtful 
writer,"  but  as  sounding  brass  and  a  tinkling  cymbal. 

"  These,"  men  said,  "  are  the  genuine,  honest  utterances  of  a 
clear,  sound  understanding;  an  understanding  neither  obscured 


4G0 


MEMORIALS. 


nor  enfeebled  by  party  prejudice  or  personal  selfishness."  And 
they  wondered  how  any  reasonable  being  could  dissent  from  the 
propositions  thus  laid  down  in  Harriet  Martineau's  incisive 
words :  — 

"  The  time  has  arrived  which  will  soon  determine  whether  we 
shall  lose  India  very  soon,  or  keep  it  as  a  more  valuable  portion  of 
the  British  Empire  than  it  has  ever  been  yet.  Events  have  hastened 
the  hour  when  we  must  take  a  new  departure  in  our  administration 
of  our  great  dependency. 

"  If  we  take  time  to  collect,  and  reason  from,  all  procurable  knowl- 
edge on  the  subject  of  India,  we  may  make  arrangements  for  which 
the  whole  world  will  be  the  better.  If  we  hastily  decide  that  India 
shall  be  a  crown  colony,  ruled  directly  and  entirely  from  England, 
according  to  existing  British  notions  and  habits  of  colonial  govern- 
ment, we  shall  lose  India  speedily,  disgracefully,  and  so  disastrously 
that  the  event  will  be  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  calamities  in  the 
history  of  nations.  If  it  is  true  that  this  is  the  alternative  before  us, 
every  man's  duty  is  plain,  —  to  exert  himself  to  avert  a  hasty  decision, 
first,  and  to  procure  a  wise  one  afterwards." 

She  goes  on  to  deprecate  the  government  of  the  great  Eastern 
Empire,  not  for  India  itself,  but  for  a  parliamentary  majority ; 
and  dreads  the  total  departure,  dreamed  of  by  some,  from  all  the 
principles  and  rules  of  action  which  had  up  to  that  time  enabled 
England  to  maintain  her  Anglo-Indian  government,  at  the  very 
moment  when  for  the  first  time  the  nation  is  called  upon  to  de- 
cide on  a  method  of  dealing  with  that  territory  without  aid  from 
precedent  or  analogy.    She  continues  :  — 

"  Even  if  we  made  no  change  at  all  in  the  apparatus  of  government, 
it  would  be  a  new  departure,  because  it  would  be  a  choice,  —  a  delib- 
erate adoption  of  a  scheme  of  rule  ;  and  to  such  a  choice  there  is  no 
parallel  in  our  history,  nor  perhaps  in  any  other.  Our  great  privilege 
as  a  nation  is,  that  our  British  institutions  have  grown  up,  naturally 
and  inevitably,  from  our  character  and  our  circumstances  together. 
No  man,  or  body  of  men,  ever  invented,  or  even  foresaw,  our  consti- 
tution as  we  are  living  under  it  now  

"  Already  the  nation  prefers  the  company's  generals  to  the  queen's  ; 
and  as  other  departments  of  service  are  laid  open  to  view,  the  superi- 
ority will  every  where  appear  on  the  same  side.   Important  as  this  is, 


WORK. 


461 


there  is  a  consideration  (before  touched  upon)  which  is  more  vital 
still  :  that  India  has  long  been,  and  now  is,  governed  on  behalf  of  the 
Indians  ;  whereas,  from  the  hour  when  so-called  parliamentary  gov- 
ernment should  be  instituted,  that  aim  could  never  more  be  steadily- 
maintained  and  fulfilled.  No  practical  citizen  will  assert  that  it 
could  ;  for  the  steady  maintenance  of  such  an  aim  can  be  looked  for 
only  from  a  special  association  (under  whatever  name)  of  men  of  spe- 
cial and  rare  knowledge,  qualified  for  their  task  by  a  lifetime  of  such 
experience  as  no  man  can  pick  up  in  Parliament,  or  attain  any  where 
in  a  hurry.  When  we  cease  to  rule  India  for  the  Indians,  we  lose 
India  ;  and  to  vest  the  service  of  India  in  the  Horse  Guards  and  our 
civil  departments,  is  to  hand  over  India  and  the  Indians  to  parties 
whose  distinctive  characteristic  it  is  to  regard  all  public  service  as  a 
patrimony  of  their  own." 

But  in  this  whole  regnant  work  of  suggestion  there  is  perhaps 
nothing  more  true  than  the  following  :  — 

"  Through  whole  centuries  of  irregular  changes  and  frequent  per- 
turbations, which  Englishmen  could  control  and  overrule  at  home, 
but  which  made  terrible  sport  of  the  interests  of  our  colonies,  the 
government  of  India  has  been  stable,  consistent,  as  immutable  in  the 
eyes  of  its  Indian  subjects  as  a  god  ruling  from  a  steadfast  throne. 
In  so  peculiar  a  case  this  has  been  an  inestimable  blessing.  Its  corpo- 
rate character,  and  successions  of  various  men,  have  redeemed  its  rule 
from  the  curse  of  despotisms,  —  the  power  of  self-will  ;  while  its  inde- 
pendence of  the  politics  of  the  day  has  protected  its  dominion  from 
the  manifold  mischiefs  of  party  changes,  —  mischiefs  which  we  admit 
to  be  evils  at  home,  though  we  prefer  them  to  the  evils  of  any  other 
system.  To  Hindostan  the  non-political  character  of  the  company 
has  been  absolutely  a  vital  matter.  Our  rule  there  could  not  have 
been  maintained  if  the  authorities  at  the  India  House  had  been 
changed  as  often  as  the  Ministry,  and  at  the  same  time  with  the  ins 
and  outs  of  the  President  of  the  Board  in  Cannon  Row.  But  the  ben- 
efit has  also  been  great  to  ourselves  at  home,  though  we  may  only  now 
be  beginning  to  understand  the  greatness  of  it.  While 'subject  to  a 
constant  sense  of  nightmare  under  our  painful  efforts  to  get  the  na- 
tional business  done  by  groups  of  officials  who  always  and  necessarily 
begin  in  an  incompetent  condition,  and  usually  go  out  of  office  or 
change  their  function  as  soon  as  they  become  equal  to  their  work,  so 
that  the  conduct  of  public  business  is  a  perpetual  irritation  to  middle- 
class  people  who,  in  their  private  affairs,  are  accustomed  to  efficient 


462 


MEMORIALS. 


performance,  it  has  been  a  real  blessing  to  have  one  public  body  in 
the  midst  of  us  which  did  work  effectively,  as  far  as  it  undertook  to 
work  at  all.  No  doubt,  it  was  often  jealous  in  its  temper  and  restric- 
tive in  its  policy,  and  repressive  and  vexatious  towards  adventurous 
men  ;  but  whatever  it  undertook  to  do  was  done  in  an  orderly, 
prompt,  liberal  manner,  and  with  a  continuous  force  which  would 
have  been  impossible  if  it  had  been  implicated  with  the  Ministers  of 
the  day.  Before  we  abolish  such  an  institution  as  this  we  are  bound 
to  take  care  that  the  government  of  India  is  secured,  as  carefully  as 
hitherto,  from  being  affected  by  party  changes  ;  but  so  far  from  such 
a  precaution  being  a  feature  of  the  Ministerial  proposal,  the  plan 
actually  is  to  bring  India  within  that  very  sphere  of  fluctuations  to 
exclusion  from  which  she  owes  her  existence  as  a  dependency  of 
England.  Englishmen  may  now  show  that  they  value  a  blessing  be- 
fore they  lose  it." 

The  superiority  of  the  officials  of  the  East  India  Company  over 
any  others  possible  was  strongly  set  forth  :  — ■ 

"  On  this  head  the  public  are  provided  with  a  notion  and  a  wish. 
They  see  that  wherever  the  officials  of  the  imperial  government  and 
those  of  the  company  come  into  comparison,  the  superiority  of  the 
latter  is  conspicuous  and  unquestionable.  The  company's  military 
officers,  or  queen's  officers,  well  practised  in  Indian  warfare  under  the 
company's  arrangements,  have  achieved,  wherever  tried,  successes  as 
brilliant  as  the  failures  of  the  other  class  have  been  intolerable.  The 
people  of  England  have  less  opportunity  of  knowing  how  far  a  simi- 
lar contrast  prevails  in  the  civil  service  ;  but  it  is  at  least  as  striking 
to  all  who  have  penetrated  into  the  business  offices  of  the  two  govern- 
ments. It  is  generally  understood  that  nothing,  in  the  way  of  trans- 
action of  business,  exists  that  can  compare  with  the  achievements  in 
Leadenhall  Street,  and  in  most  of  the  offices  in  India,  which  are  held 
duly  responsible  to  the  central  authority  ;  whereas  we  are  in  the 
habit  of  hearing  a  good  deal  of  the  opposite  weakness,  and  feeling 
something  of  the  misfortune  of  it,  in  our  home  administration.  The 
natural  inference  is  that  in  the  highest  office,  as  in  both  classes  of 
subordinate  functions,  a  nominee  of  the  company  would  answer  bet- 
ter than  one  appointed  by  the  imperial  government.  All  eyes  turn 
at  this  moment  to  Sir  John  Lawrence  as  the  right  man.  Whether  he 
be  so  or  not,  the  general  desire  should  operate  as  a  popular  nomina- 
tion, to  check  an  unpopular  one.  If  it  were  duly  attended  to,  neither 
royalty,  administration,  nor  aristocracy  would  venture  to  propose  any 


WORK. 


463 


ordinary  home-bred  Englishman  as  the  ruler  of  a  hundred  millions  of 
men,  while  there  are  Anglo-Indians  in  existence  who  are  familiar 
with  the  country  and  the  people,  and  have  proved  that  they  can  ad- 
minister the  one  and  rule  the  other." 

Such  truths  as  these  were  eagerly  studied  by  all  honestly  in 
search  of  truth ;  and  some  of  the  wisest  men  in  the  nation  said, 
"  Take  this  book  of  suggestions  to  heart,  earnestly  and  inefface- 
ably." 

It  was  written  because  the  writer  believed  that  Lord  Palmer- 
ston,  then  in  power,  would  follow  up  with  rash  precipitancy  the 
wellnigh  fatal  apathy  and  procrastination  of  the  past,  and  it 
would  be  doing  the  nation  a  service  to  rouse  it  to  active  and  pro- 
found consideration  and  caution  in  so  unprecedented  a  case.  She 
had  been  earnestly  entreated  to  write  this  book,  and  she  con- 
sented, "because  the  leisure,  quiet,  and  impartial  position  of  the 
sick-room  seem  to  render  the  request  reasonable." 

"  Endowed  Schools  in  Ireland  "  was  demanded  by  a  parlia- 
mentary need,  and  was  reprinted  from  the  "  Daily  News  "  in 
1859;  and  as  "Life  in  the  Sick-Room"  at  Tynemouth  was  a 
blessing  to  individuals  in  numberless  sick-rooms,  so  these  four 
works  —  a  blessing  to  nations  and  cities  in  their  corporate  ca- 
pacity —  might  properly  be  lettered,  in  contradistinction,  "  Life 
in  a  Sick-Eoom  ; "  for  it  is  doubtful  if  there  could  be  another  of 
such  a  character. 

These  grave  political  labours  were  occasionally  enlivened  by 
narratives  of  previous  experiences,  which  she  had  written  out  at 
the  time  of  their  occurrence,  under  the  following  title  :  — 

TWO  TRUE  STORIES  ABOUT  CLAIRVOYANCE. 

FIRST  STORY. 

Early  in  1849  I  stayed  a  few  days  at  Mr.  S.  Dukinfield  Darbi- 
shire's,  at  Manchester.  One  night,  after  a  party,  Mrs.  Darbishire  told 
me  that  she  had  to  go,  the  next  morning,  to  Bolton,  and  she  hoped 
I  would  go  with  her.  She  had  a  question  to  ask  of  the  girl  Emma, 
whose  strange  powers  as  a  somnambule  had  just  become  known 
through  an  accident.    Mrs.  D.'s  question  related  to  some  missing 


464 


MEMORIALS. 


property  (not,  I  think,  her  own,  but  a  friend's).  Emma's  information 
had  recently  led  to  the  discovery  of  some  mislaid  bank-notes,  and  the 
saving  of  the  character  of  a  clerk  ;  and  this  induced  Mrs.  D.'s  experi- 
ment. I  shall  say  nothing  about  that  business,  however,  but  shall 
relate  only  incidents  within  my  own  experience  and  observation.  At 
first  I  refused  to  go,  being  unwilling  to  coimtenance  the  practice  of 
exposing  invalids  (as  somnambules  very  commonly  are)  to  be  mes- 
merized for  money,  and  urged  beyond  the  natural  exercise  of  the 
faculty,  whatever  it  be.  At  bedtime,  however,  Mrs.  D.  said,  "  I 
think,  if  you  consider  that  your  going  will  make  no  difference  to  the 
girl,  that  it  will  be  merely  two  ladies  being  in  the  room  instead  of 
one,  you  will  see  that  you  may  as  well  use  the  opportunity."  I  was 
very  willing,  of  course  ;  and  I  went. 

It  was  a  bitter  cold  winter's  morning ;  and  when  we  left  the  station 
at  Bolton  Mrs.  D.  said  she  hoped  we  might  meet  brother  Charles 
presently,  and  not  have  to  wait  long  in  the  street.  She  had  sent  him 
a  request  to  meet  her  at  Mr.  Haddock's  (where  Emma  lived),  but  it 
had  now  occurred  to  her  that  we  had  better  meet  him  in  the  street, 
that  she  might  caution  him  against  mentioning  either  of  our  names 
in  Mr.  Haddock's  house.  We  did  meet  him,  a  few  yards  beyond  Mr. 
Haddock's  shop  ;  he  was  introduced  to  me,  and  we  agreed  to  mention 
no  name  during  the  interview.  Mr.  Charles  Darbishire  (I  believe  a 
bachelor)  lived  eight  miles  from  Bolton,  and  I  think  he  and  I  had 
met  once  before  ;  but  we  were  quite  strangers  to  each  other.  Of  me 
and  my  ways  he  knew  nothing  but  that  I  lived  at  Ambleside,  and 
that  I  had  been  much  interested  in  the  facts  of  mesmerism.  For 
his  part,  what  he  knew  of  Emma  was  the  recovery  of  the  bank- 
notes, by  her  information,  he  being  one  of  the  witnesses  of  the 
transaction. 

We  entered  the  shop,  —  an  apothecary's  shop.  Emma  was  the 
maid-of-all-work  to  Mr.  Haddock.  As  we  were  not  expected,  we  had 
to  wait  in  the  shop  while  the  fire  was  lighted  in  the  sitting-room,  and 
while,  doubtless,  Emma  dressed.  I  will  say  nothing  of  Mrs.  Darbi- 
shire's  business,  but  merely  remark  that  she  and  I  were  the  only  per- 
sons present,  after  Mr.  C.  Darbishire  went  away,  except  that  Mr. 
Haddock  went  out  and  came  in,  two  or  three  times,  as  business  called 
him.  He  had  nothing  to  do  with  Emma  while  she  was  under  my 
hands. 

She  was  a  vulgar  girl,  anything  but  handsome,  and  extremely  igno- 
rant. It  does  not.  matter  to  my  story  ;  but  it  is  the  fact,  that  she 
could  not  read.    What  I  saw  disposed  me  to  try  what  I  could  make 


WORK. 


465 


of  her  when  Mrs.  D.'s  business  was  done.  I  mesmerized  her,  and  soon 
saw  she  was  fast.  She  exclaimed  at  once  that  "  the  lady  had  warmed 
her." 

After  a  good  deal  of  very  striking  disclosure  on  her  part,  it  suddenly 
struck  me  that  I  might  try  her  power  of  seeing  about  places  and  per- 
sons. So  I  took  a  handful  —  a  large  handful  —  of  letters  from  my 
pocket,  Mrs.  D.  asking  me  what  I  was  doing.  I  told  her  she  would 
soon  see  :  and  so  she  did  ;  and  so  did  Mr.  C.  D.,  who  returned  in  the 
middle  of  my  experiment. 

I  was  aware  that  the  girl  could  not  read  :  but  to  make  all  sure,  I 
chose  a  letter  which  was  not  in  an  envelope,  and  was  altogether  blank 
outside.  There  was  not  a  scratch  of  ink  on  it,  and  it  was  close  folded. 
I  asked  Emma  who  that  letter  was  from.  She  clapped  it  on  her  head, 
close  folded,  and  said  a  gentleman  wrote  it  who  was  then  walking  up 
and  down  his  parlour,  with  a  silk  handkerchief  in  his  hand.  Her 
account  of  his  appearance,  ways,  and  habit  of  mind  was  as  accurate  as 
possible. 

"  Who  is  it  ? "  asked  Mrs.  D.    "  Who  is  she  talking  about  1 " 

"  I  will  tell  you  all  about  it  by  and  by,"  I  said  ;  "  surely  not  now." 

Emma  described  the  room  ;  but  I  need  not,  unless  I  mention  one 
particular.  It  was  a  London  dining-room,  one  of  hundreds  which 
any  one  might  venture  on  describing.  One  article,  however,  Emma 
mentioned  as  "  a  long-down  picture,"  hanging  in  fact  where  she  said 
it  did.  The  gentleman  was  Mr.  Atkinson,  in  his  own  dining-room  ; 
and  the  "  long-down  picture "  was  a  part  plan,  part  bird's-eye  view 
of  Rome,  two  or  three  times  longer  than  it  was  broad. 

"  Now,"  said  I,  "  go  into  the  next  room,  and  tell  me  what  you  see 
there." 

"  The  next  room  ?  "  said  she.  "  There  is  a  room,  but  I  can't  get  into 
it  ;  there  is  no  door."  And,  moving  in  a  troubled  way,  "  How  can  I 
get  into  it  when  there  is  no  door  ?  " 

"  I  suppose  somebody  gets  into  it  to  clean  it,"  said  I. 

"  0,  yes  ;  they  go  in  by  the  halL" 

"  Well  !  do  you  go  in  by  the  hall." 

"  Yes,  I  can  do  that.  Ah  !  this  is  a  smaller  room.  There  are  some 
cut  stones  stuck  up,  —  one,  two,  three." 

"  Cut  stones  !  "  said  Mrs.  Darbishire  ;  and  I  begged  her  to  wait. 

"  And  there  are  some  book-shelves,  —  not  many  books  :  there  are 
boxes.  Some  are  gray,  some  are  green  ;  and  they  have  large  white 
marks  upon  them,  —  letters,  I  think.  They  are  in  rows,  a  lot  of 
them,  one  on  top  of  another  between  the  shelves." 


406 


MEMORIALS. 


"  Any  books  ?  * 

"  Yes,  some  ;  only  one  shelf  of  them." 
"  Any  thing  else  ?  " 

She  writhed  in  her  chair,  and  shuddered,  and  spoke  unwillingly 
and  hesitatingly. 

"  Ye— s  ;  there  are  some  things  on  the  top  shelf.  I  don't  like 
them,"  shuddering  much. 

"  Tell  me  about  them." 

"  Well,  there  are  six  on  'em  ;  and  one  is  very  well ;  but  the  oth- 
ers —  "    And  she  shuddered. 
"  Go  on." 

"  Well,  there  is  one  below  in  the  shop,  —  one  of  the  sort." 

This  was  true  :  I  had  seen  it  when  we  entered. 

Mrs.  D.  could  wait  no  longer.  "  What  is  she  talking  about  ? "  she 
exclaimed.  "  She  talks  of  '  things '  and  1  things  '  ;  —  what  ttyngs  are 
they  ] " 

I  said  to  Emma,  "  You  talk  of  1  things.'  What  sort  of  things  are 
they  ? " 

"  Well,  I  can't  tell  you  what  they  are." 
"  Are  they  apples  and  oranges,  or  what  ? " 

"  O  no,  no  !  nothing  of  that  sort,  I  should  say,"  —  and  she  shud- 
dered out  her  words,  and  spoke  doubtfully,  — "  they  are  a  sort  of 
heads.  But  one  goes  this  way,"  —  putting  up  her  hands,  and  de- 
scribing a  wide  arch  from  side  to  side  of  her  head,  — "  and  one 
goes  that  way,"  describing  a  great  arch  from  the  nape  of  her  neck 
to  the  root  of  her  nose.  This  was  enough  ;  and  I  relieved  her  from 
her  painful  state  of  disgust  by  turning  to  other  objects. 

This  may  end  my  first  story  ;  for  I  could  have  nothing  more  re- 
markable to  tell.  As  soon  as  we  were  out  of  the  house  I  explained 
it  all  to  my  companions. 

The  second  room  was  the  place  of  deposit  of  some  curious  property 
of  Mr.  Atkinson's  deceased  father,  as  well  as  some  odd  things  of  his 
own.  The  old  Lord  Elgin  gave  Mr.  Atkinson,  Sr.,  some  of  the  most 
fragmentary  of  the  Elgin  marbles  ;  and  these  "  cut  stones  "  were  on 
pedestals  in  various  parts  of  the  room. 

Mr.  Atkinson,  Sr.,  was  an  architect  of  eminence,  and  the  plans,  &c, 
of  the  mansions  and  grounds  of  many  noblemen  and  gentlemen  were 
kept  by  him,  as  deeds  are  by  lawyers,  in  tin  boxes,  —  in  this  case 
gray  and  green,  with  the  names  of  the  owners  and  estates  painted 
outside  in  large  white  letters,  —  the  boxes  being  shelved  as  described. 

Above  them  was  a  shelf  of  books  ;  and  above  them,  on  the  top  shelf, 


WORK. 


467 


six  "  things  "  which,  as  it  happened,  I  had  forgotten,  till  the  girl's 
horrors  brought  them  back  to  mind. 

They  were  six  casts  of  heads, — one,  as  she  said  nothing  remark- 
able, or  "  very  well."  The  other  five  were  casts  of  the  heads  of  a 
family  of  idiots  in.  Norfolk,  hideous  beyond  expression  ;  and  two 
of  them  enormous,  as  Emma  described,  —  one  in  length,  the  other  in 
breadth. 

Of  course  I  told  Mr.  C.  Darbishire  that  I  should  be  ready  to  bear 
witness  to  the  reality  of  Emmas  powers,  at  that  date,  —  so  far  at  least 
as  (what  is  called)  "thought-reading"  is  concerned,  —  in  case  of  her 
meeting  with  the  too  common  treatment,  —  the  insult  and  imputation 
of  imposture  which  are  the  weapons  of  the  prejudiced,  the  ignorant, 
and  people  who  are  too  indolent  to  ascertain  facts  for  themselves.  I  im- 
plored him,  however,  to  do  all  he  could  to  prevent  the  girl  being  over- 
worked or  over-urged  ;  and  thus  to  save  her  from  the  danger  of  rilling 
up  her  failing  power  by  material  from  the  imagination,  and  at  last 
resorting  to  tricks,  deceiving  herself  and  others,  rather  than  give  up. 

SECOND  STORY. 

After  I  got  home  it  struck  me  that  it  might  be  well  to  ascertain 
Emma's  faculty  in  regard  to  myself ;  to  try  in  some  way,  which 
should  be  indisputable  if  it  succeeded,  her  power  of  clairvoyance  in 
the  case  of  a  person  with  whom  mesmeric  relations  had  been  estab- 
lished. I  therefore  wrote  to  Mr.  Charles  Darbishire,  who  was  fre- 
quently seeing  her,  to  explain  my  notion.  I  told  no  person  whatever 
of  my  writing  to  him  ;  and  he,  living  alone,  told  no  person  whatever 
of  my  letter.  Between  us  we  managed  so  that  communication  with 
Emma  —  if  anybody  had  known  of  the  project  —  was  impossible  in 
point  of  time.  There  was  no  telegraph  within  reach  from  hence  at 
that  time,  if  there  had  been  any  body  able  to  use  it.  I  wrote  on  a 
Thursday,  saying  that  for  a  week  from  the  hour  when  he  would 
receive  my  letter  he  had  my  leave  to  learn  from  Emma  what  I  was 
doing  at  any  time  between  9  a.m.  and  9  p.m. 

The  immediate  method  was  put  into  my  head  by  Mr.  C.  D. 
having  said,  once  before,  that  he  was  tempted  to  put  a  note  of 
mine  on  her  head,  to  see  what  she  would  say  ;  but  that  he  con- 
sidered that  it  would  be  hardly  right  to  do  this  without  my  leave. 
He  had  therefore  never  referred  at  all  to  me  and  my  visit,  and  did 
not  know  how  far  the  girl  was  conscious  of  it.  Mr.  C.  D.  received 
my  letter  the  next  morning  —  Friday  —  at  his  home,  eight  miles  from 


468 


MEMORIALS. 


Bolton.  Very  considerately  remembering  that  it  must  be  somewhat 
genant  to  me  to  be  under  possible  inspection  all  day,  and  seeing  the 
advantage  of  wasting  no  time,  he  determined  to  send  me  his  report 
by  the  same  day's  post.  In  the  afternoon  he  made  his  call  at  Mr. 
Haddock's,  found  Emma  quite  ill  with  a  bad  cold,  and  expected 
nothing  from  her  while  so  "  stuffed  "  and  stupid  and  headachy  ;  but, 
as  mesmerizing  would  do  her  good,  he  tried  what  she  could  do,  giving 
no  hint  of  any  particular  reason.  He  was  so  satisfied  that  she  was  con- 
fused, and  talking  at  random,  that  he  presently  broke  off  ;  and  much 
surprised  he  was  to  find  her  accounts  of  things  all  right. 

As  I  have  said,  he  knew  nothing  more  about  my  position  here  than 
that  I  lived  at  Ambleside.  My  house  was  just  built  ;  and  whether 
I  lived  in  lodgings,  or  how  or  where,  he  was  entirely  ignorant.  Such 
was  the  fact  ;  though  it  would  have  made  no  difference  in  the  essen- 
tial points  of  the  story  if  he  had  known  my  house  as  well  as  his 
own. 

He  put  on  Emma's  head  a  folded  paper,  —  blank  except  a  few- 
words  which  told  nothing  and  were  not  signed,  and  were  written 
merely  to  establish  the  necessary  relation.  I  had  also  breathed  on  the 
paper,  lor  the  same  reason.  Outside  it  was  blank  ;  and  it  was  never 
unfolded.  As  soon  as  she  put  it  on  her  head  she  said  she  could  see 
"  the  lady  that  warmed  her."  The  lady  was  sitting  at  a  round  table 
before  the  fire,  and  opposite  the  fire  was  a  large  window,  and  there 
was  on  another  side  another  window,  that  opened  down  to  the 
ground.  The  sofa,  chairs,  and  window-curtains  were  light-coloured, 
&c,  &c,  —  all  correct.  The  only  remarkable  points  of  the  description 
were  two  :  the  sideboard  having  a  white  marble  top  ;  and  the  book- 
case, which  she  called  "  a  right-up "  bookcase.  It  was  a  straight, 
tall,  narrow  bookcase,  made  to  fit  in  between  two  windows  in  our 
house  in  London,  and  looking  exceedingly  ugly  in  any  other  posi- 
tion. 

"  The  lady  "  was  fumbling  in  her  work-box  at  the  table,  — turning 
things  over.  All  this  seemed  so  commonplace,  and  yet  so  unlikely 
(according  to  Mr.  C.  D's.  notions)  that  the  business  stopped  here  ;  and 
lie  wrote  an  account  of  it  after  he  got  home,  intending  to  call  (unex- 
pectedly) pretty  early  the  next  day,  to  see  if  the  girl  was  in  better 
condition.  He  would  carry  his  letter  in  his  pocket,  and  finish  and 
post  it  in  Bolton,  whatever  was  the  result. 

The  girl  was  right  in  every  particular.  The  time  was  near  five  of 
a  February  afternoon.  I  had  come  into  the  drawing-room  from  my 
work  in  the  study,  and  was  sitting  in  the  dusk  before  dinner.    I  had 


WORK. 


469 


sent  my  maid  out  to  buy  a  piece  of  canvas  for  a  new  enterprise  of 
woolwork  ;  and  I  was  looking  out  my  needles  and  other  needful 
things,  ready  to  begin. 

This  was  Friday  afternoon,  my  proposal  having  been  posted  on  the 
Thursday  evening.  On  Saturday  Mr.  C.  Darbishire  paid  his  visit 
some  hours  earlier,  —  from  half  past  eleven  to  just  one.  He  found 
Emma  not  much  better,  and  had  no  expectations  whatever  from  the 
interview. 

"  The  lady  that  warmed  her  "  was  in  another  room  to-day  ;  a  long 
room,  with  a  large  bay-window  at  one  end  and  the  fireplace  at  the 
other.  The  furniture  was  black  horse-hair,  all  but  the  sofa,  which 
was  light-coloured.  (All  true.)  But  the  girl's  interest  was  about  the 
books.  Such  a  quantity  of  books  she  had  never  seen  before  ;  what 
■were  they  for?  She  began  talking  to  "the  lady,"  asking  why  she 
had  so  many  books,  and  whether  she  could  ever  read  the  half  of 
them.  At  last  she  came  to  what  "  the  lady  "  was  doing.  She  had 
a  cloth  in  her  hand,  and  she  was  wiping  and  doing  among  some 
of  the  books.  This  upset  the  girl's  credit  with  Mr.  C.  D.,  to  whom 
it  seemed  more  likely  to  be  a  servant-girl's  dream  than  my  occupa- 
tion. 

"  Now  she  has  got  a  book,"  Emma  declared,  —  "a  big,  square,  brown 
book,  and  she  is  going  to  read  it  on  the  sofa.  Now  she  is  read- 
ing it." 

Presently  she  declared  this  "  tiresome."  She  should  not  "  wait 
long  "  if  the  lady  did  not  leave  off ;  and  what  a  time  this  reading  had 
gone  on  !  At  last  she  exclaimed,  "  Well,  I  shall  not  wait  any  longer, 
if  you  won't  leave  off."  Then,  with  a  laugh,  "  Ah  !  but  you 'd 
better  leave  off.  You  are  not  thinking  about  your  book.  You 
have  got  some  dust  on  your  hands,  and  you  are  thinking  you  will  go 
up  stairs  and  wash  them  !  Well,  go  I  You 'd  better  go  ! "  Pres- 
ently, "  Ah  !  now  she 's  really  going." 

She  described  my  going  up  stairs,  and  my  standing  before  the  glass, 
"  smoothing  her  hair,"  said  Emma  ;  "  and  there  is  a  lady  coming  in. 
No,  she  has  gone  out  again  softly.  I  don't  know  that  she  is  a  lady 
exactly  ;  but  she  is  a  nice-looking  young  person.  And  the  lady  never 
found  out  she  came  in." 

Here  they  stopped,  Mr.  C.  D.  as  hopeless  as  the  day  before,  it 
seemed  all  so  improbable,  and  the  girl  was  really  so  oppressed  with 
her  cold  !  He  left  her  at  1  P.  m.,  went  to  a  counting-house  to  finish 
his  letter,  posted  it  himself,  and  went  home  to  dinner.  I  received  the 
letter  the  next  morning,  —  Sunday,  just  after  breakfast. 


470 


MEMORIALS. 


The  facts  were  these.  I  had  arranged  my  books  the  day  before 
(Friday),  and  being  tired,  had  left  one  shelf  untouched.  At  eleven  on 
Saturday,  and  on  to  about  half  past,  I  had  a  duster  in  my  hand,  and 
was  dusting  and  placing  the  books.  Having  finished,  I  took  up  one 
of  them,  —  a  volume  of  Memoires  of  the  French  Institute,  sent  me 
just  before  by  M.  Ampere,  for  the  sake  of  a  paper  on  the  Memnon  at 
Thebes  (apropos  to  something  in  my  "  Eastern  Life,"  lately  published). 
The  volume  was  rather  large,  square,  and  with  a  yellowish-brown 
back.  I  read  for  a  considerable  time  ;  but  at  length  observed  that 
my  hands  were  dirty,  —  wanted  to  finish  the  paper,  —  hesitated,  but 
presently  went  up  to  my  room  and  washed  my  hands. 

So  far  I  could  testify.  When  I  had  finished  the  letter  I  rang  for 
my  maid.  I  asked  her,  "  Do  you  remember  whether  at  any  time  yes- 
terday you  came  into  my  bedroom  while  I  was  there  1 " 

After  considering  a  moment,  she  answered,  surprised,  "  Why,  yes, 
ma'am,  I  did.  I  was  going  to  fill  the  water-jugs  ;  and  when  I  went 
in  you  were  before  the  glass  ;  so  I  went  out  softly,  thinking  you  did 
not  see  me." 

"  What  time  was  that  ? " 

After  considering  again,  she  said,  "  It  must  have  been  about  a  quar- 
ter to  one  ;  for  I  had  just  finished  up  stairs  before  I  brought  in  your 
lunch  at  one." 

.  This  is  my  second  story.  Many  have  heard  it  ;  and  no  one,  as  far 
as  I  know,  has  ever  treated  it  with  levity  or  incivility.  There  is 
nothing  new  or  exceptional  in  the  facts.  Every  one  who  has  paid  any 
adequate  attention  to  the  subject  is  aware  that  such  instances  of  clair- 
voyance are  very  common  ;  but  it  does  not  often  happen  that  allega- 
tions of  fraud  or  fancy  are  so  completely  excluded  as  in  this  case. 
There  may  be  people  who,  rather  than  believe  facts  that  they  have 
stiffened  their  minds  against,  would  charge  Mr.  C.  Darbishire  and  me 
with  having  fabricated  the  whole  narrative  ;  but,  short  of  this,  there 
seems  to  be  no  escape  from  an  admission  that  there  are  facts  in  human 
nature  which  require  a  good  deal  of  humble  and  candid  study  before 
we  can  honestly  claim  to  know  the  extent  and  character  of  human 
powers. 

Prince  Albert  might  wrell  wonder,  as  he  said  he  did,  what  men  of 
science  and  physicians  in  England  could  mean  by  neglecting  such  a 
department  of  study  as  this.  And  nobody  ought  to  be  surprised  when, 
as  a  natural  consequence  of  such  neglect,  such  a  hell-feast  as  the  witch- 
hanging  in  Salem  takes  place,  or  a  madness  takes  possession  of  a  multi- 


WORK. 


471 


tude  of  (professedly)  educated  people  in  the  nineteenth  century  about 
a  supposed  commerce  with  the  spirits  of  the  dead.  When  due  observa- 
tion is  directed  upon  such  phenomena  as  those  of  mesmerism,  mankind 
will  take  a  great  new  step  onwards  ;  and  meantime  the  candid  have 
the  advantage  over  the  ignorant  and  scoffing,  that  they  are  in  pos- 
session of  a  very  interesting  and  important  knowledge  of  which  the 
others  deprive  themselves,  not  knowing  what  they  lose. 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

Among  the  more  voluminous  works  of  the  ten  years  succeeding 
her  entrance  at  The  Knoll  appeared  her  little  book,  "  House- 
hold Education,"  —  the  oracle  of  so  many  homes ;  and  the 
papers  afterwards  collated  by  the  suggestion  of  the  proprietors, 
under  the  title  of  "  Health,  Husbandry,  and  Handicraft,"  which 
she  calls  "  the  results  of  a  long  experience  and  observation  of  the 
homely  realities  of  life." 

It  was  at  the  early  part  of  this  period  of  what  seemed  impend- 
ing dissolution  that  Matthew  Arnold,  the  poet  and  the  student 
of  public  educational  institutions,  wrote  the  following  lines  after 
passing  an  evening  with  Harriet  Martineau  and  Charlotte 
Bronte  :  — 

HAWORTH  CHURCHYARD. 

Where,  under  Loughrigg,  the  stream 
Of  Rotha  sparkles,  the  fields 
Are  green,  and  the  house  of  one 
Friendly  and  gentle,  now  dead, 
Wordsworth's  son-in-law,  friend,  — 
Four  years  since,  on  a  marked 
Evening,  a  meeting  I  saw. 

Two  friends  met  there, —  two  famed, 
Gifted  women.    The  one, 
Brilliant  with  recent  renown, 
Young,  unpractised,  had  told 
With  a  master's  accent  her  feigned 
History  of  passionate  life  ; 
The  other,  maturer  in  fame, 
Earning  she,  too,  her  praise 
First  in  fiction,  had  since 


472 


MEMORIALS. 


Widened  her  sweep,  and  surveyed 
History,  politics,  mind. 

They  met,  held  converse  :  they  wrote 
In  a  book  which  of  glorious  souls 
Held  memorial  ;  bard, 
Warrior,  statesman,  had  left 
Their  names,  —  chief  treasure  of  all, 
Scott  had  consigned  there  his  last 
Breathings  of  song  with  a  pen 
Tottering,  a  death-stricken  hand. 

I  beheld  ;  the  obscure 
Saw  the  famous.    Alas  ! 
Years  in  number,  it  seemed, 
Lay  before  both,  and  a  fame 
Heightened,  and  multiplied  power. 
Behold  !  the  elder,  to-day, 
Lies  expecting  from  Death, 
In  mortal  weakness,  a  last 
Summons  :  the  younger  is  dead. 

First  to  the  living  we  pay 
Mournful  homage  ;  the  Muse 
Gains  not  an  earth-deafened  ear. 

Hail  to  the  steadfast  soul 
Which,  unflinching  and  keen 
Wrought  to  erase  from  its  depth 
Mist  and  illusion  and  fear  ! 
Hail  to  the  spirit  which  dared 
Trust  its  own  thoughts  before  yet 
Echoed  her  back  by  the  crowd  ! 
Hail  to  the  courage  which  gave 
Voice  to  its  creed  ere  the  creed 
Won  consecration  from  time  ! 

Turn,  0  Death,  on  the  vile, 
Turn  on  the  foolish  the  stroke 
Hanging  now  o'er  a  head 
Active,  beneficent,  pure  ! 
But  if  the  prayer  be  in  vain, 
But  if  the  stroke  must  fall, 


WORK. 


473 


Her  whom  we  cannot  save 
What  might  we  say  to  console  ? 

She  will  not  see  her  country  lose 

Its  greatness,  nor  the  reign  of  fools  prolonged. 

She  will  behold  no  more 

This  ignominious  spectacle,  — 

Power  dropping  from  the  hand 

Of  paralytic  factions,  and  no  soul 

To  snatch  and  wield  it ;  will  not  see 

Her  fellow-people  sit 

Helplessly  gazing  on  their  own  decline. 

Myrtle  and  rose  fit  the  young, 
Laurel  and  oak  the  mature. 
Private  affections  for  these 
Have  run  their  circle  and  left 
Space  for  things  far  from  themselves, 
Thoughts  of  the  general  weal, 
Country  and  public  cares  : 
Public  cares  which  move 
Seldom  and  faintly  the  depth 
Of  younger  passionate  souls, 
Plunged  in  themselves,  who  demand 
Only  to  live  by  the  heart, 
Only  to  love  and  be  loved. 

MATTHEW  ARNOLD. 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


"  It  is  easier  to  change  many  things  than  one."  —  Lord  Bacon. 

"  Am  I,  therefore,  become  your  enemy,  because  I  tell  you  the  truth  ? " 

Paul  to  the  Galatians. 

I  learn  from  all  her  journals  and  letters  of  this  period,  as  well 
as  by  her  communications  to  myself,  how  deeply  her  American 
intercourses  touched  her  heart  and  mind.  She  felt  that  they 
were  not  mere  formal  or  flattering  expressions,  but  testimonies  of 
grateful  remembrance  and  regard  from  the  members  of  the  Amer- 
ican Antislavery  Society  to  their  co-worker  of  so  many  perilous 
years  both  in  England  and  in  America;  and  they  kept  alive  in  her 
mind  the  recollection  of  the  years  during  which  she  had  cherished 
the  purpose  of  living  with  them  in  their  own  land.  The  value 
of  that  constant  co-operation  was  more  and  more  appreciated,  as 
the  news  of  her  hopeless  illness  from  time  to  time  reached  the 
United  States ;  especially  as  communicated  by  her  American 
friend,  Mr.  Pillsbury,  who  enjoyed  the  hospitalities  of  The  Knoll 
shortly  after  her  consultations  with  Dr.  Latham. 

At  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Antislavery  Society  at  Boston 
in  1856,  Mr.  Garrison,  on  behalf  of  the  business  committee  of 
the  meeting,  reported  the  following  resolution  :  — 

"  Resolved,  That,  since  the  briefest  historical  retrospect  of  the  last 
quarter  of  a  century  would  be  imperfect  without  an  expression  of 
feeling  in  view  of  one  great  and  holy  life  which  the  world  has  seen  so 
unreservedly  and  strenuously  devoted  to  the  welfare  of  mankind  ; 
and  since  that  whole  noble  life,  now  approaching  the  term  that  gives 
freedom  to  speak  the  whole  truth  concerning  it,  has  a  peculiar  claim 
on  our  hearts,  we  feel  privileged  by  our  cause,  to  express  to  Harriet 
Martineau,  while  yet  there  is  time,  our  deep,  affectionate,  and 


476 


MEMORIALS. 


reverential  gratitude  for  the  benefit  of  her  labours,  the  honour  of  her 
friendship,  and  the  sublime  joy  of  her  example." 

And  the  whole  audience  stood  up  in  affirmation. 

Her  illness  at  this  time  subjected  her  to  very  severe  suffering. 
The  frequently  recurring  suspension  of  the  heart's  action  was 
very  alarming.  Her  recovery  from  each  attack  seemed  at  the 
time  as  doubtful  as  resuscitation  after  drowning.  "  Ideally  and 
truly,"  said  her  friend  Lord  Houghton,  who  was  accidentally 
present  at  one  of  these  sudden  seizures,  "  we  may  use  St.  Paul's 
words,  '  She  dies  daily.'  "  She  was  more  than  ready,  —  she  was 
even  joyful  in  the  prospect  of  sudden  departure.  All  her  affairs 
had  been  settled,  her  will  made,  her  friends  remembered,  as  soon 
as  Dr.  Latham's  warning  was  given,  and  while  her  subsequent 
condition  was  becoming  more  and  more  hopeless.  But  she 
wrought  on  unremittingly,  at  every  possible  moment,  with  her 
Autobiography ;  and  when  that  was  finished,  resumed  her  politi- 
cal, antislavery,  and  literary  labours,  while  more  than  cheerfully, 
gladly,  waiting  for  death.  Thus  life  went  on,  kept  in  motion, 
probably,  by  the  quietness  of  her  spirit  as  well  as  the  great  care 
of  her  young  family  friends,  till  1859,  when  her  American  friends 
felt  the  need  of  her  more  immediate  assistance.  For  with  the 
increase,  in  general  estimation,  of  the  importance  of  the  great 
enterprise  to  which  their  lives  had  been  devoted,  grew  a  new 
responsibility,  —  that  of  making  known  on  both  sides  of  the 
sea  whatever  in  relation  to  it  might  concern  the  two  great 
English-speaking  nations.  To  do  the  needed  work  effectually,  it 
was  felt  that  the  enterprise  could  no  longer  be  treated  topically. 
It  would  require  the  trained  power  of  thought  and  observation, 
the  political  intuition  and  accomplishment,  the  historic  faculty 
and  knowledge,  which  it  is  always  the  standing  difficulty  on 
either  side  of  the  Atlantic  to  combine,  and  the  common  despair 
of  both  to  find  united.  The  great  antislavery  enterprise  of  the 
century  demanded,  in  addition,  a  universal  and  impartial  sympa- 
thy, and  a  proved  power  to  forego  all  things  else,  for  the  oppor- 
tunity of  usefulness  to  the  world.  All  these  deeply  felt  needs 
turned  the  antislavery  mind  to  Harriet  Martineau.  She  was 
a  member  of  the  Antislavery  Society,  and  it  was  one  of  her 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


477 


delights  to  look  at  her  certificate  of  membership,  forwarded  in 
behalf  of  the  -women  of  Lynn,  by  Abby  Kelly,*  their  secretary. 
Long  before  that  time  she  had  devoted  herself  to  the  cause.  She 
was  one  of  the  earliest  abolitionists.  She  knew  the-ground  and 
the  subject  thoroughly  in  all  its  bearings ;  and  the  executive 
committee  entreated  her  once  more  to  give  the  cause  the  benefit 
of  her  co-operation  in  their  own  country.  Signs  of  a  coming 
change  in  the  affairs  of  the  nation  then  began  to  be  seen  and 
felt.  The  work  of  wellnigh  thirty  years  began  to  tell,  and  to 
require  additional  processes  in  aid  of  old  principles. 

Harriet  Martineau's  preliminary  reply  was  that  such  was  the 
corruption  that  slavery  had  brought  about  in  our  country,  and 
such  the  defects  in  our  statesmanship,  that  the  difficulties  in 
the  way  of  her  compliance  would  be  very  great.  The  more 
severe  and  uncompromising  we  had  been  in  dealing  with  slavery, 
its  defenders,  the  apologists  for  its  longer  continuance,  and  its 
tongue-tied  minions  whipped  into  silence,  the  greater  was  her 
sense  of  the  responsibility  that  must  devolve  upon  herself  if  she 
accepted  the  proposal.  But  she  did  accept  it,  only,  however,  on 
condition  that  whenever  her  communications  did  not  meet  the 
approval  of  her  American  friends  they  should  at  once  inform  her 
of  it.    She  replied  thus  :  — 

March  10,  1859. 

My  dear  Friend,  —  I  have  received  and  read  with  great  pleasure 
your  letter  of  February  22,  containing  an  invitation  to  me  to  write 
semi-monthly  letters  to  the  "  Standard"  on  political  subjects,  with  the 
object  of  inducing  such  interaction  as  may  be  possible  between  the 
European  and  American  peoples  for  the  extinction  of  slavery.  It 
has  long  appeared  to  me  that  a  link  was  wanting  by  which  much 
benefit  to  your  cause  was  lost  ;  namely,  a  comparison  of  the  doings 
of  the  two  continents,  as  they  affect  the  destinies  of  the  oppressed, 
and  of  the  negro  race  in  particular.  I  perceive  that  our  antislave- 
trade  and  West  India  debates  and  action  are  reported  in  your  news- 
papers without  any  application  to  your  own  great  national  case,  and 
that  American  transactions  are  detailed  in  our  journals  without  any 
apparent  consciousness  that  any  universal  interest  is  at  all  involved 
in  the  case.    It  is  but  little  that  one  person  can  do  towards  establish- 


*  Afterwards  Mrs.  Foster. 


478 


MEMORIALS. 


ing  any  recognition  of  a  common  interest  between  the  two  parties, 
and  my  power  is  much  impaired  by  my  state  of  health.  But  I  have 
experience.  I  have  long  endeavoured  to  make  your  case  understood 
here  ;  and  I  am  most  heartily  disposed  to  try  what  I  can  do  on  the 
converse  side.  I  will  send  a  letter  to  the  "  Standard  "  by  next  week's 
mail,  and  will  devote  my  best  attention  to  the  consideration  of  how  I 
may  most  effectually  carry  out  your  wish.  The  drawback  in  this 
transaction  is  the  pain  of  taking  money  for  my  work.  I  would  not 
do  it  if  I  could  help  it.  My  friends  on  the  committee  know  me  well 
enough  to  know  that.  If  I  were  not  ill  and  helpless  (as  to  my  mode 
of  living),  I  would  beg  you  to  accept  my  services  as  a  free  gift.  As  it 
is  otherwise,  I  can  only  engage  to  make  my  service  as  good  as  study 
and  care  can  make  it,  and  entreat  you  to  speak  frankly,  and  without 
the  slightest  scruple,  if,  for  any  reason  whatever,  you  should  wish 
to  dissolve  our  agreement.  I  trust  you  to  do  so,  with  or  without 
reason  assigned. 

If  you  think  proper,  will  you  communicate  to  your  committee  (all 
of  whom  I  regard  as  dear  friends)  what  I  have  now  said. 

Believe  me,  ever  yours  affectionately, 

H.  MARTINEAU. 

Her  mind  and  time  were  then  very  full  of  army  work,  and  the 
book  she  was  just  preparing  for  the  press  in  aid  of  Florence 
Nightingale's  objects,  and  the  critical  state  of  affairs  in  Europe 
bound  her  to  the  "  Daily  News."  But  it  always  seemed  as  if 
her  heart  were  large  enough 

"  To  take  in  all,  and  verge  enough  for  more." 

She  accompanied  her  official  consent  with  a  private  note, 
urging  still  more  strongly,  in  underlined  sentences,  her  earnest 
desire  to  be  immediately  notified  of  any  change  in  their 
wishes :  — 

March  10,  1859. 

....  That  letter  of  yours  gratifies  me  much  ;  and  I  am  less 
troubled  than  usual  on  such  occasions,  about  my  fitness  and  responsi- 
bility. One  great  thing  is  that  I  absolutely  trust  your  fidelity  to  the 
cause,  to  say  nothing  of  my  claims  on  you  for  honest  treatment,  to 
tell  me  in  the  plainest  and  broadest  way  if  I  do  not  answer  the  commit- 
tee's expectations,  or  aid  the  cause  to  such  a  degree  as  to  make  the  engage- 
ment worth  while  

Understand  that  you  are  simply  to  say  'stop.' 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


479 


In  another  month  my  book  will  be  out,  and  I  can  have  some  real 

long  talks  with  you.    M         will  tell  you  that  I  cannot  to-day. 

You  see  how  critical  our  European  affairs  are  ;  and  I  must  give  what 
help  I  can  here. 

She  always  bore  in  mind  Lord  Bacon's  opinion,  —  "  letters 
are  the  things,"  —  and  it  was  agreed  between  the  friends  that  the 
articles  should  appear  in  this  form,  as  insuring  greater  ease  and 
freedom  of  expression,  and  as  to  plainness  of  speech  and  choice 
of  topics,  the  committee  gave  her  carte  blanche. 

She  wrote  some  ninety  letters  in  "  The  ^National  Antislavery 
Standard  "  during  the  three  succeeding  years,  learning  from  time 
to  time,  through  the  editor,  "  that  the  friends  of  the  cause  on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  might,"  in  his  opinion,  "  will  felicitate 
themselves,  for  the  cause's  sake,  that  the  1  Standard '  was  in 
future  to  have  the  benefit  of  her  guidance  in  respect  to  European 
politics."    He  adds  :  — 

"  Do  not  hesitate,  I  pray  you,  to  utter  any  word  of  counsel  that 
may  be  from  time  to  time  suggested  by  the  course  of  the  American 
abolitionists.  Your  intimate  relations  with  the  cause,  and  your  long- 
continued  and  faithful  devotion  to  it,  will  command  for  you  the  re- 
spectful attention  of  all  its  friends  on  this  side  of  the  water.  Exercise 
the  freedom  and  frankness  of  speech  that  pertains  to  the  most  inti- 
mate and  friendly  relations." 

And  he  disapproves  of  a  disposition  to  magnify  mere  differ- 
ences of  judgment  as  to  individual  character,  and  a  too  great 
unwillingness  to  admit  of  sincerely  offered  aid  for  the  cause  work- 
ing in  political  or  other  channels  than  the  Antislavery  Society. 

"Any  views  which  you  may  be  moved  to  express  in  relation  to 
these  matters  would,  I  am  sure,  be  well  received  by  all  concerned." 

While  the  first  year's  letters  were  appearing,  as  had  been  agreed, 
over  the  signature  of  "  H.  M.,"  the  youth  of  the  cause  used  to 
call  Harriet  Martineau  "  Her  Majesty,"  as  an  expression  of  their 
satisfaction.    But  by  and  by  some  were  offended. 

The  first  occasion  was  the  warning  she  gave  that  the  friction 
of  debate  about  individual  antislavery  character,  which  was  using 
up  the  time  of  the  meetings  at  a  moment  when  change  was  im- 


480 


MEMORIALS. 


pending  over  the  nation,  was  working  ill  to  the  society  and  to 
the  cause. 

"  Why  could  not  these  valued  friends  [and  personal  friends  of  her 
own,  too,  some  of  them  were]  work  apart  by  themselves,  in  their  own 
way,  if  they  found  themselves  unable  to  work  any  longer  with  their 
own  acknowledged  and  chosen  leaders'?" 

But  these  friends,  being  unaware  of  the  technical  parliamentary 
use  of  the  word  "  leaders  "  in  English  politics,  where  it  implies 
neither  disparagement  of  the  members  nor  abatement  of  political 
independence,  were  exceedingly,  indignant.  "  God  is  our  leader ! 
we  have  no  other  !  " 

Other  some  felt  it  an  indispensable  duty  to  tolerate  intoler- 
ance ;  and  declared  their  conviction  that  the  meetings  would  lose 
their  charm  if  these  brethren  should  not  be  sustained.  It  was 
the  duty  of  the  hour.  So  the  framing  and  debating  of  prescrip- 
tive resolutions  went  on. 

A  very  interesting  debate  followed  on  the  presentation  of  one, 
at  a  great  meeting  of  the  abolitionists.  The  Rev.  Samuel  May 
opposed  them,  and  Mr.  William  Lloyd  Garrison,  the  president  of 
the  Antislavery  Society,  seconded  him.  "  I  agree  with  my  friend 
May,"  he  said ;  "asa  matter  of  conscience  and  from  a  sense  of 
duty,  I  cannot  vote  for  these  resolutions."  There  was  a  long 
debate,  the  result  of  which  was,  that  the  proscriptive  resolutions 
were  laid  on  the  table  by  a  large  vote,  and  the  society  adjourned 
sine  die  ;  and  Harriet  Martineau  congratulated  those  with,  whom 
she  was  in  correspondence  upon  the  event.  "  It  is  a  good  thing 
that  your  standpoint  remains  unchanged." 

The  society  did  indeed  remain  uncommitted  to  the  incorpora- 
tion into  its  records  that  Mr.  Greeley,  the  editor  of  the  "  New 
York  Tribune,"  and  Mr.  Cheever,  the  pastor  of  the  New  York 
Church  of  the  Puritans  (the  one  active  in  the  Republican  party, 
and  the  other  engaged  in  organizing  a  New  York  Church  Anti- 
slavery  Society),  were  enemies  of  the  antislavery  gospel ;  but  the 
movers  and  supporters  of  these  resolutions  felt  it  their  duty  to 
carry  them  through  the  country,  and  so  debated  them  as  to 
convey  the  accusation  that  Mr.  Garrison,  the  founder,  the  leader, 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


481 


the  president,  and  the  representative  man  of  the  society  had,  by 
not  acting  in  accordance  with  them,  "  lowered  the  standard"  and 
"  betrayed  the  cause." 

The  next  aB..  M."  letter  was  as  follows  :  — 

It  is  no  part  of  the  object  of  our  correspondence  that  I  should 
engage  in  a  controversy  about  any  American  affairs  ;  and  least  of  all 
about  what  concerns  your  association.  Justice  seems  to  require, 
however,  that  I  should  say  in  reply  to  a  suggestion  in  the  "  Standard" 
that  letters  are  written  by  our  friends  in  the  United  States  to  bias  our 
judgments,  that  I,  for  one,  refer  altogether  to  the  published  reports 
of  your  proceedings  when  I  comment  on  any  of  them.  I  derived 
my  impressions  from  published  documents,  and  the  speeches  on  the 
points  they  embraced.  All  I  have  to  say  is,  that  your  friends  here 
have  always  understood  the  strong  point  of  your  association  to  be 
that  it  was  not  doctrinal  in  any  direction  ;  that  it  set  up  no  test  of 
opinion  and  allowed  none  to  be  set  up  ;  that  (as  Dr.  Follen  used  to 
explain  to  me)  it  had  not  even  any  plan,  but  that  it  left  opinion 
free,  requiring  only  that  its  members  should  earnestly  desire  and 
work  at  the  abolition  of  slavery,  by  the  means  which  should  present 
themselves  at  each  passing  moment,  —  the  object  perdurable,  the 
aim  steady,  the  means  whatever  time  and  change  should  offer.  We 
still  understand  such  to  have  been  the  original  character  of  your 
organization.  If  we  are  mistaken  we  shall  be  grieved  ;  because  the 
failure  of  associations  grounded  on  or  subjected  to  opinion  is  assured 
in  the  nineteenth  century.  When,  therefore,  a  few  members  attempt- 
ing to  introduce  a  new  principle  and  method  require  assent  to  points 
of  opinion  in  which  unanimity  is  wellnigh  impossible,  it  seems  to  us 
that  those  who  propose  to  change  are  the  party  to  withdraw.  They 
say,  "We  believe  this  and  that,  and  we  must  be  faithful  to  our 
convictions."  By  all  means  ;  let  them  say  what  they  think  of  per- 
sons and  parties ;  but  surely  it  is  directly  contrary  to  the  principles 
of  your  association  that  they  should  require  other  members  to  think 
as  they  do,  or  say  whether  they  do  or  not.  To  declare  by  resolution 
the  demerits  of  various  persons  and  parties  is  a  direct  enforcement 
of  a  test  in  a  matter  of  individual  opinion  and  an  infringement  on 
the  liberty  of  every  member  of  the  body.  Any  man  has  a  right  to 
say,  on  his  own  account,  that  he  believes  A  to  be  as  bad  as  B  or  C  ; 
but  when  this  opinion  is  pressed  as  a  resolution,  the  natural  objection 
arises  that  it  is  no  part  of  the  business  of  the  society  to  pronounce  on 
6uch  a  matter.    If  the  movers  go  on  to  intimate  that,  whereas  A  Is  as 

VOL.  II. 


482 


MEMORIALS. 


bad  as  B  and  C,  D  is  as  bad  as  either  of  them  if  he  does  not  admit  it, 
a  further  encroachment  on  liberty  is  made  ;  for  this  is  forcing  D  and 
his  friends  to  assent  or  dissent.  If  they  do  not  dissent,  they  may 
create  a  false  impression  ;  and  if  they  do,  they  are  compelled  to  appear 
as  opponents  of  those  with  whom  they  do  not  desire  to  dispute.  This 
seems  to  us  a  wrong  on  the  one  side  and  a  hardship  on  the  other. 
In  salaried  agents  of  the  society  it  seems  something  graver  than  im- 
policy. To  us  there  is  no  manner  of  doubt  about  the  prodigious 
advance  of  the  cause.  "We  see  Americans  enough,  and  read  and  hear 
enough  of  what  goes  on,  to  be  able  to  compare  the  tone  of  united 
speech  at  this  day  with  what  it  was  ten,  five,  three  years  ago.  An 
association  which  has  to  work  on  through  such  changes  as  you  have 
experienced  and  we  have  watched,  must  necessarily  be  what  we  have 
always  been  assured  that  yours  is,  free  to  act  according  to  the  circum- 
stances of  the  time,  sympathizing  with  all  who  are  doing  any  thing  for 
the  abolition  of  slavery,  and  not  concerned  with  the  shortcomings  of 
any  body  else  when  once  you  have  obtained  an  open  course  for  your- 
selves. 

As  I  have  said  before,  and  as  nobody  will  dispute,  the  church 
stands  on  a  different  ground  from  any  other  portion  of  the  community, 
because  it  assumes  to  be  master  of  the  spiritual  and  moral  situation 
at  all  times  and  under  all  circumstances  ;  and  its  false  pretensions  in 
the  particular  case  must  be  exposed,  because  the  abolition  of  slavery 
is  its  primary  and  express  duty,  and  the  omission  of  its  proper  and 
peculiar  business  is  a  perilous  hypocrisy.  There  is  and  can  be  no 
ease  analogous  to  this  ;  and  there  is,  I  suppose,  no  difference  of 
opinion  in  your  association  about  it.  Those  members  who  think  it 
right  to  "criticise"  colleagues  for  opinions  which  they  force  them 
to  declare,  or  for  a  procedure  on  which  every  man  must  judge  for 
himself,  cannot  be  displeased  at  criticism  on  such  an  occasion  as  their 
attempt  to  shift  your  association  to  a  new  basis.  That  all  are  faith- 
fully and  fervently  devoted  to  the  object  of  your  association,  no  one,  I 
believe,  on  either  side  of  the  water,  ever  had  a  moment's  doubt. 

H.  M. 

The  foregoing  letter,  as  well  as  the  preceding  one,  had  been 
submitted  to  the  editor  of  the  "Standard"  in  the  following  let- 
ter :  — 

August  1,  1859. 

My  dear  Sir,  —  Let  me  beg  the  favour  of  you  to  consider  care- 
fully (with  my  friends  of  the  committee,  if  you  like)  whether  to 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


483 


print  the  last  section  of  my  letter,  especially  the  parts  in  pencil 
brackets.  My  desire  is  to  aid  in  establishing  the  principle  of  your 
association  as  we  understand  it  here,  and  I  should  be  heartily  grieved 
to  do  any  harm.  So  allow  me  to  put  that  part  of  my  letter  absolutely 
under  the  veto  of  my  friends.  Of  course  I  don't  wish  the  part  to  be 
altered.  That  is  of  course  out  of  the  question.  But  the  omission  of 
all  that  section,  or  of  the  parts  I  have  marked,  will  not  in  any  way 
vex  me.  We  all  have  one  object.  To  me  it  seems  well  to  explain 
thus  far,  but  I  may  be  mistaken,  and  unable  to  settle  the  expediency 
at  this  distance,  though  I  feel  sure  of  my  principle. 

Yours  very  truly, 

H.  MARTINEAU. 

The  editor's  conclusion  was  :  — 

"  I  could  not  see  that  there  was  any  thing  calculated  to  do  harm  to 
the  cause  or  to  any  individual  ;  and  could  see  no  good  reason  for 
withholding  what  was  evidently  written  in  charity  to  all  concerned." 

By  this  time  the  political  signs  were  threatening  in  the  United 
States,  and  Mrs.  Martineau  became  more  and  more  careful  to  avoid 
at  such  a  crisis  all  small  issues,  while  desirous  to  keep  open 
whatever  communication  might  be  deemed  useful,  and  she  again 
took  counsel,  as  follows  :  — 

Ambleside,  August  15,  1859. 

Mrs.  H.  G.  Chapman. 

My  dear  Friend,  —  As  you  were  before  the  medium  of  commu- 
nication between  your  committee  'and  myself  on  the  subject  of  my 
correspondence  with  the  "  Standard,"  I  ask  leave  to  transmit  through 
you  an  inquiry  which  new  circumstances  call  upon  me  to  make. 

I  do  not  suspect  my  friends  on  the  committee  of  forgetting  my 
request  that  they  would  speak  frankly  and  without  the  slightest 
scruple,  if  for  any  reason  whatever  they  should  wish  to  dissolve  our 
agreement.  But  it  is  necessary  to  my  own  satisfaction  that  I  should 
repeat  this  request  at  the  present  stage  of  the  correspondence.  I 
hardly  need  explain  that  the  occasion  is  the  letters  ....  in  the 
"  Standard  "  .  .  .  .  which  suggest  to  me  the  possibility  that  the  com- 
mittee may  think  my  correspondence  no  longer  likely  to  be  profitable 
to  the  cause  we  all  have  at  heart.  It  may  be  that  they  think  so,  or 
that  they  think  otherwise.  I  wish  to  know  their  pleasure,  which  I 
am  ready  and  anxious  to  obey. 

I  have  only  to  say  this,  further.    If  I  go  on,  it  must  be  in  frank 


484 


MEMORIALS. 


fulfilment  of  my  engagement  to  write  whatever  I  believed  would  pro- 
mote a  mutual  understanding  and  interaction  between  your  country 
and  mine  in  regard  to  the  antislavery  cause.  If  I  stop,  it  must  be 
publicly  and  clearly  made  known  that  the  arrest  of  the  correspond- 
ence is  by  the  committee's  desire,  and  not  mine. 

My  single  desire  is  to  do  what  is  best  for  the  cause.  On  so  great  a 
question  as  that  of  changing  the  principle  of  the  American  Antislav- 
ery Association  I  could  not  but  remark,  while  obeying  the  invitation 
of  your  committee  ;  but  I  am  equally  willing  to  speak  or  be  silent, 
as  they  may  now  instruct  me.  Till  I  hear  from  them,  I  shall  write 
as  usual  ;  and  under  all  circumstances  and  arrangements  I  shall  re- 
main their  hearty  well-wisher  and  affectionate  friend  in  the  cause. 

HARRIET  MARTIN EAU. 

This  letter  having  been  read  to  the  committee,  the  result  was 
the  adoption  of  the  following  expression  :  — 

Voted,  That  it  is  the  unanimous  desire  of  this  committee  that  Mrs. 
Harriet  Martineau  should  continue  her  correspondence  with  "  The  Anti- 
slavery  Standard,"  exercising  the  largest  liberty  of  thought  and  expres- 
sion according  to  her  own  perceptions  of  right  and  duty,  with  refer- 
ence to  whatever  may  seem  to  affect  the  interests  of  the  American 
Antislavery  Society,  or  the  welfare  of  our  cause  at  large  ;  and  that  her 
continued  co-operation  is  deemed  of  essential  service  to  that  cause  on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic. 

From  the  records  SAMUEL  MAY,  Jr. 

On  receiving  this  vote,  Mrs.  Martineau  immediately  replied  to 
Mr.  May,  conveying  her  grateful  acknowledgments  to  the  execu- 
tive committee,  and  expressing  the  satisfaction  and  pleasure  it 
would  give  her  to  continue  the  letters  :  — 

I  shall  fulfil  my  welcome  duty  with  fresh  animation,  now  that  I  have 
received  decisive  proof  that  my  friends  of  the  committee  and  I  are  of 
one  mind  as  to  the  necessity  of  a  perfect  freedom  in  our  acts  and 
words  while  working  for  the  gravest  and  greatest  cause  now  agitating 
human  society. 

With  cordial  esteem  and  regard,  I  am  yours  faithfully, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

The  scene  between  antislavery  and  proslavery  might  have  now 
reminded  the  beholders  of  that  at  Bothwell  Brigg,  when  the 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


485 


hosts  were  about  to  close  in  front  while  the  preachers  were 
wrangling  in  the  rear ;  for  the  slaveholders'  rebellion,  confusion, 
and  civil  war  were  at  hand. 

First  came  the  enterprise  of  John  Brown.  The  "  H.  M." 
letters  deprecated  the  act,  as  precipitating  the  conflict  and 
placing  the  North  at  a  disadvantage  ;  while  deeply  moved  with 
admiration  for  the  saintly  heroism  of  the  man,  she  questioned 
his  political  sagacity. 

Then  followed,  as  topics,  the  antislavery  and  friendly  feeling 
of  England  ;  the  duty  of  American  abolitionists  to  sustain  the 
United  States  government  the  moment  it  should  take  its  rightful 
position ;  the  importance  to  a  nation,  in  process  of  being  reno- 
vated, of  getting  rid  of  a  protective  tariff ;  the  course  of  damaging 
diplomacy  adopted  by  Mr.  Seward ;  the  neutrality  of  England 
not  hostility  :  on  all  of  which  a  statesmanlike  view  was  taken, 
which,  in  the  opinion  of  so  many,  time  has  since  justified, 
though  some  of  the  American  coadjutors  were  much  dissatisfied 
at  the  moment. 

Still,  as  no  official  disapprobation  came  from  the  antislavery 
committee,  the  "  H.  M."  letters  went  on.  Noticing,  however,  in 
the  "  Standard "  here  and  there,  slight  signs  of  the  discontent, 
the  correspondent  again  sought  information  of  the  editor  of  the 
"  Standard  "  as  to  the  desirability  of  discontinuance.  "  I  trust, 
for  one,"  he  replied,  "  that  the  committee  will  never  discontinue 
them." 

The  next  "  H.  M."  letter  spoke  thus  :  — 

"  I  had  hoped  that  a  recent  paragraph  of  my  American  letters 
would  be  noticed  as  an  explanation  of  my  method.  I  remarked  that 
I  need  say  but  little  of  the  discontent  with  myself  ;  I  do  not  wish  to 
occupy  your  space  in  such  a  way.  Every  practical  purpose  will  be 
answered  by  a  brief  explanation  of  my  point  of  view.  My  course  has 
always  been  to  fight  your  battles  on  this  side  the  water  to  the  utmost 
extent  that  truth  will  allow,  while  speaking  the  plain  truth  on  the 
other  side  on  all  matters  which  relate  to  the  principle  and  conduct  of 
the  cause  of  human  freedom.  This  is  not  the  way  to  gain  popularity, 
it  is  the  way  to  insure  displeasure  on  both  sides.  But  that  is  a  small 
matter  in  comparison  with  the  least  good  that  may  be  done  in  either 
country.    I  certainly  think  that  it  is  the  course  most  conducive  to 


486 


MEMORIALS. 


peace  and  a  clear  understanding  between  the  two  nations.  I  shall  go 
on  as  long  as  I  live  with  that  part  of  the  work  which  lies  here.  As 
to  the  other  half,  it  rests  with  you,  as  you  are  aware,  whether  I  con- 
tinue it.  You  know  that  I  wait  upon  your  pleasure  in  regard  to 
corresponding  with  the  '  Standard/  as  I  have  always  done.  A  word 
from  you,  at  any  time,  will  bring  my  farewell,  as  I  have  repeatedly 
reminded  you  and  the  committee." 

Meanwhile,  she  had  learned  the  empty  condition  of  the  Anti- 
slavery  Society's  treasury,  and  thought,  besides,  that  if  dissatis- 
faction existed  in  a  single  mind  among  her  associates,  it  were 
better  to  remove  all  pecuniary  considerations  out  of  the  way ; 
and  she  wrote  to  the  general  agent  of  the  American  Antislavery 
Society  declining  further  payments. 

The  reply  to  this  was  a  vote  from  the  committee  assuring  her 
that  "  her  generous  offer  to  continue  her  correspondence  without 
pay  if  the  committee  will  be  pleased  to  accept  the  service,  is 
fully  appreciated,  and  that  she  be  requested  to  continue  her 
letters  to  the  '  Standard,'  but  upon  the  same  terms  as  during 
the  past  year." 

The  secretary,  Mr.  May,  went  on  to  say  that  her  "  clear  eye 
and  vigorous  hand  enable  us  to  see  many  things  which  are 
transpiring  in  Europe  which  otherwise  Ave  might  not  and  proba- 
bly should  not  see ;  and  we  need,"  he  added,  "  your  continued 
criticism  here ;  .  .  .  .  trusting  you  may  long  be  spared  and  be 
strong  to  do  the  work  which  so  much  needs  to  be  done,  of 
encouraging  and  directing  the  labours  of  those  who  would  build 
justly  and  benevolently,  and  of  watching  and  thwarting  those 
whose  law  is  selfishness  and  whose  measures  are  oppression." 

Finally  came  the  seizure  of  the  Eebel  commissioners  from  be- 
neath the  British  flag.  Congressional  and  State  approbation 
immediately  followed  the  bursts  of  popular  acclamation  and  the 
banqueting  in  honour  of  the  deed.  The  commercial  neM-spapers 
were  forward  in  checking  anxiety  as  to  any  ill  consequences. 
They  knew  "  what  Great  Britain  always  does  in  such  cases  will 
be  done  now  :  she  will  protract  negotiations  till  the  affair  is 
forgotten."  Still  anxiety  did  arise  in  some  minds,  and  there  was 
talk  in  the  outside  row  of  politicians  surrounding  men  in  office, 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


487 


of  sending  acute  observers  to  watch,  in  England,  the  temper  of 
the  times  j  and  Everett,  Beecher,  Thurlow  Weed,  and  others 
were  mentioned  as  the  right  sort  of  men  to  report  from  thence 
the  actual  feeling  of  the  hour. 

Harriet  Martineau  wrote  instantly  to  the  "  Standard "  that 
England  was  arming ;  but  with  the  deepest  feeling  against  going 
to  war,  and  with  the  strongest  self-control  and  the  most  earnest 
desire — submitting  passion  to  law — that  America  might  recede, 
England  awaited  the  alternative. 

Thereupon  the  editor  of  the  "  Standard  "  says,  "  You  cannot 
imagine  the  storm  about  my  ears  !  " 

Remonstrants  had  rushed  into  the  office,  demanding  the  sup- 
pression of  the  letter.  It  was  the  long,  legal,  just,  eloquent,  and, 
above  all,  the  much-needed  one  that  should  have  been  welcomed 
by  wise  men,  to  turn  back  the  tide  of  popular  emotion  that  does 
not  distinguish  between  a  casus  belli  and  a  self-gratification. 

The  editor  was  able,  however,  to  clear  himself  from  the  charge 
of  "  misusing  the  society's  funds  by  paying  for  such  letters." 
"  The  letters  are  a  gift,"  he  said  to  such  as  accused  him  of  mal- 
appropriation  of  funds.  But  he  was  obliged  to  suppress  the 
very  letter  that  would  have  given  the  needed  information  about 
the  public  mind  and  assured  course  of  England  in  case  the  action 
of  the  American  public  as  displayed  in  Congressional  votes,  popu- 
lar eulogy,  and  the  praises  of  the  press  should  not  be  reversed. 

An  abstract  of  the  suppressed  letter  will  show  that  no  abolition- 
ist need  have  been  dissatisfied.  It  was  the  very  echo  of  the 
antislavery  voice  and  spirit,  and  it  was  no  more  severe  upon  the 
American  government  and  people  in  this  exigency  than  the  re- 
form voice  had  been  ever  wont  to  be. 

It  affirmed  that  this  was  not  a  case  for  the  protracted  nego- 
tiations that  the  commercial  newspapers  had  predicted ;  that  the 
right  of  asylum  had  been  violated,  and  the  English  nation  com- 
pelled with  loathing  to  become  the  champion  and  protector  of 
the  slaveholding  commissioners  ;  that,  while  awaiting  the  alterna- 
tive of  peace  or  war  with  controlled  passion  and  earnest  demand 
for  legal  direction,  England's  dock-yards  and  barracks  and  line- 
of-battle  ships  were  all  alive  with  preparation ;  that  a  terrible 


488 


MEMORIALS. 


condemnation  was  the  due  of  the  Everetts,  the  "Websters,  the 
Sewards,  the  Bigelows,  and  all  who  in  past  times  and  present 
had  misled  the  American  people  on  international  duties  and 
morals  ;  with  scathing  rebuke  of  the  commander  of  the  American 
naval  ship  whose  absurd  folly  the  American  people  seemed  to 
be  hailing  as  "  pluck  "  and  "  dash,"  closing  with  a  fervent  bless- 
ing on  the  American  abolitionists,  and  a  call  to  them  to  come  to 
the  front  with  such  counsel  for  immediate  emancipation  as  they 
in  England  longed  to  hear.  "This  and  this  only  can  avail. 
This  and  this  only  will  secure  foreign  sympathy,  while  a  foreign 
war  in  the  hope  of  thereby  uniting  Xorth  and  South  would  be 
madness,  and  the  negroes  would  be  the  sacrifice.  If  ever  men 
deserved  the  blessing  of  redemption  from  a  national  curse  it  is 
the  abolitionists." 

But  happily  the  "Standard"  was  not  "H.  M.'s"  only  Ameri- 
can correspondent,  nor  her  warnings  confined  to  the  antislavery 
office ;  and  all  English  letters  and  despatches  confirmed  her  in- 
formation. The  Washington  government  was  wise  in  time  ;  and 
they  who  had  cried  at  banquets,  "  Off  coats  and  fight ! "  now 
cried,  "  Off  hats  and  apologize  !  " 

It  would  have  been  absurd  indeed  at  such  an  hour  of  impend- 
ing civil  war  for  any  antislavery  committee  to  debate  over  this 
or  any  other  incidental  action.  The  day  of  free  speech  was  over, 
and  the  day  of  martial  law  had  begun  ;  and  so  thought  Harriet 
Martineau.    She  merely  said  :  — 

"  I  am  sorry  for  them  that  are  so  angry,  but  for  myself  I  have  seen 
a  great  many  such  American  displays  :  they  must,  however,  insert  a 
letter  of  leave-taking  from  me  (as  far  only  as  writing  for  the  '  Standard ' 
is  concerned),  but  my  work  for  you  will  go  on  here  just  the  same  ; 
and,  happily,  I  have  great  opportunities  to  do  it." 

And,  in  effect,  her  writings  on  behalf  of  the  United  States  as 
against  the  Confederates  became  more  and  more  frequent  and 
influential. 

She  wrote  at  this  time,  besides  occasional  articles  in  second- 
rate  periodicals,  in  four  leading  organs  of  English  public  opinion. 

Her  respect  for  Mr.  Garrison  was,  if  possible,  increased  by  the 
way  in  which  he  had  borne  himself  under  the  attempts,  which 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


489 


she  had  rebuked,  to  brand  him  as  unfaithful  to  the  cause.  She 
received  many  entreaties  on  both  sides  of  the  ocean  to  reprint 
the  "  H.  M."  letters  in  book  form,  but  she  constantly  refused. 

"  It  would  defeat  my  plan  to  grant  such  requests.  I  see  our  friends 
have  not  observed  my  previous  paragraph,  which  would  explain  why 
I  refuse  ;  and  they  do  not  remember  that  I  am  one  of  their  com- 
rades." 

It  should  here  be  remembered  that  from  her  earliest  political 
action  Harriet  Martineau's  method  had  been  the  same,  —  to 
use  her  influence  on  both  sides. 

Previous  to  the  exclusion  of  the  "H.  M."  letters,  their  treat- 
ment of  the  subject  of  "  protection  "  had  given  to  some  readers 
much  dissatisfaction. 

The  letters  had  strongly  urged  the  abandonment  of  the  pro- 
tective policy  as  the  highest  expediency  and  the  truest  morality  : 
"  The  sin  of  the  North  is  '  protection,'  as  the  sin  of  the  South 
is  slavery."  If  the  letters  had  said  the  guilt  of  the  two  sections 
on  these  different  grounds  was  equal,  the  indignation  could 
hardly  have  been  greater ;  and  persons  brought  up  upon  the  As- 
sembly's Catechism  to  be  aware  that  some  sins  are  less  heinous 
than  others,  and  yet  classed  as  sins  in  the  Ten  Commandments, 
were  now  laying  it  down  as  a  grievous  offence  that  here  were 
things  mentioned  in  the  same  sentence  that  ought  not  to  be 
mentioned  in  the  same  week ;  and  although  the  committee  had 
given  the  letters  carte  blanche,  it  was  loudly  affirmed  that  they 
were  ' 1  off  the  platform." 

Some  of  Harriet  Martineau's  correspondence  of  this  period  is 
subjoined,  in  illustration  of  her  opinions  on  the  subjects  of  pro- 
tection and  American  politics. 

Now,  as  ever,  was  manifest  Harriet  Martineau's  unshaken  reli- 
ance —  the  consequence  of  her  long  experience  —  on  the  expe- 
diency of  the  frankest  communication  between  individuals  and 
nations  in  cases  of  misunderstanding.  On  receiving  from  Wil- 
liam W.  Story  (the  sculptor,  the  poet,  the  traveller,  the  biog- 
rapher, the  student  of  jurisprudence,  and  the  son  of  her  old  and 
dear  friend,  Judge  Story)  a  long  argument  on  the  American  side 
of  the  pending  questions,  with  the  request  to  procure  for  it  in- 


490 


MEMORIALS. 


sertion  in  the  "  Daily  Xews,"  she  immediately  sent  it  to  the 
editor  with  an  introduction  from  herself,  urging  the  importance 
of  a  knowledge  of  the  American  view  to  England,  as  well  as  of 
the  English  view  to  America  ;  and,  long  as  it  was,  it  was  inserted 
at  full  length.  Her  heart  having  been  so  long  given  to  the 
United  States  for  their  freedom  and  their  peace,  the  "  Daily 
News"  did  but  become  the  more  effectual  in  accomplishing  these 
two  ends,  as  the  change  of  standpoint  made  in  the  "  Standard"  re- 
leased her  from  its  columns.  The  benefit  of  her  influence  in  Eng- 
land in  favour  of  the  Union  was  felt  and  acknowledged  by  many. 

In  the  words  of  "  Harper's  "Weekly,"  a  magazine  of  very  exten- 
sive circulation  under  the  editorship  of  the  Hon.  George  W. 
Curtis,  — 

"  Our  children's  children  may  well  gratefully  remember  this  course 
of  the  London  '  Daily  News.'  " 

It  is  time,  before  going  further,  to  complete  the  story  of  the 
Trent. 

The  Rebel  commissioners  were  carried  to  the  North,  and  im- 
prisoned at  Fort  "Warren  in  Boston  harbour.  One  of  them  was 
of  that  widely  known  Mason  family  which  had  received  Harriet 
Martineau  with  so  much  enthusiasm  half  a  lifetime  before,  now 
separated  from  her  by  her  life  of  opposition  to  him. 

A  sumptuous  banquet  was  prepared  next  day  in  Boston  at  the 
Revere  House  (hotel),  to  do  honour  to  the  deed  of  Commodore 
"Wilkes  in  seizing  the  rebel  commissioners.  Among  the  men  of 
note  who  assisted  at  it  were  Governor  Andrew  of  Massachusetts 
and  his  staff,  the  Mayor  of  Boston,  the  president  of  the  Board  of 
Trade,  and  other  leading  men.    "  "Wilkes  did  right !  "  they  all  said. 

"When,  long  afterwards,  Mr.  George  Thompson  was  demonstrat- 
ing the  friendliness  of  England  before  a  great  public  meeting  in 
Boston,  by  statistics  of  the  vast  gatherings  of  Englishmen  all 
over  their  country ;  by  the  universal  adhesion  of  the  labouring 
classes,  especially  the  population  of  Lancashire  ;  by  the  unvary- 
ing course  (with  but  here  and  there  an  exception)  of  the  press ; 
by  the  steady  refusal  of  the  government  to  acknowledge  the 
Confederates  ;  by  the  constant  support  in  that  refusal  received 
from  Parliament,  he  added,  — 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


491 


"  For  certain  Confederate  sympathizers  among  our  aristocracy,  de- 
feated as  they  were,  I  offer  no  excuse.  You  can  afford  to  pardon 
them." 

Governor  Andrew,  who  sat  near  Mr.  Thompson  on  the  plat- 
form, here  interrupted,  half  rising  and  touching  Mr.  Thompson's 
arm  :  "  Say  no  more,  my  friend  !    We  all  have  need  of  pardon." 

A  further  portion  of  Mrs.  Martineau's  previous  and  subsequent 
correspondence  is  subjoined,  illustrating  her  political  principles. 

May  16,  1861. 

I  am  glad  you  encourage  me  to  answer  Greeley,  and  that  you 
think  Mr.  Johnson  will  print  my  reply.  I  don't  want  to  throw  away 
a  bit  of  work  that  I  hope  may  be  useful.  I  do  wish  your  people 
would  attend  a  little  to  a  subject  which  involves  so  much  of  moral 
and  material  importance,  and  so  affects  their  national  repute.  But  I 
doubt  whether  any  body  there  has  really  studied  the  subject  at  all. 
Greeley  certainly  does  not  understand  it.  All  his  mistakes  cannot  be 
dishonesty.  A  more  flagrant  piece  of  nonsense  could  hardly  be  pointed 
out  since  men  began  setting  up  fancies  against  knowledge  and  science, 

in  political  economy  It  would  be  a  great  thing  to  bring  your 

nation  up  to  simple  principles  which  should  preclude  class  legislation 
and  insure  justice  all  round. 

Tell  me  what  you  think  of  my  answer  when  you  see  it.  There 
will  be  nothing  for  you  to  be  ashamed  of,  for  I  decline  noticing  per- 
sonalities. I  see  that  r-  and  are  both  clearly  un- 
aware of  my  position  in  regard  to  political  economy  generally,  and 
free  trade  in  particular,  and  I  shall  not  in  any  way  refer  to  it.  True, 
I  ought  to  tell  the  editor,  who  may  not  be  aware  that  I  speak  with 
any  authority  ;  but  it  is  not  a  pleasant  thing  to  do,  and  I  had  rather 
not.    Very  likely  you  have. 

Well  !  I  am  glad  you  anticipate  an  answer  It  gives  me  more 
spirit  to  do  it  ;  and  I  trust  it  may  be  of  use.  I  don't  understand  the 
objection  to  my  criticism  which  you  mention,  —  "of  my  country  being 
a  sinner  like  the  United  States."  This  is  not  so.  We  have  not  a 
penny  of  protective  duty  now  ;  and  we  began  to  reform  the  system  as 
soon  as  Adam  Smith  showed  us  where  we  were  wrong.  Your  tariff 
is  a  plunge  back  again  into  barbarism,  when  even  the  late  king  of 
Naples  and  such  like  had  been  removing  protective  duties." 

Her  niece's  postscript  is  to  the  effect  that  her  aunt  is  more 
than  usually  ill,  but  is  at  work  on  one  of  her  articles. 


492 


MEMORIALS. 


May  29,  186]. 

....  To  day  I  am  happier  than  I  have  been  yet  about  your 
war.  Russell's  letter  to  the  "  Times  "  ends  with  a  paragraph  —  date, 
May  2  —  which  seems  to  show  that  the  South  will  collapse  on  hearing 
of  the  spirit  of  the  North.  0,  the  "  instant  turning  tail  "  is  delight- 
ful !  ...  . 

What  a  wretched  figure  the  "  Times "  cuts  in  its  leaders  beside 
Motley's  exposition  !  The  latter  is  a  great  benefit  here  ;  just  what 
was  wanted.  It  feels  so  strange  to  me,  —  every  body  now  coming 
round  to  me  on  American  affairs  

Do  you  know  I  am  very  glad  of  your  sort  of  assurance  that  my 
answer  to  Greeley  will  appear.  It  is  a  very  long  letter,  but  I  shall 
be  really  sorry  if  it  does  not  appear  entire,  because  of  the  importance 
of  the  subject  and  the  desirableness  of  showing  that  Greeley  does  not 
understand  it.  The  Spitalfields  catastrophe  must  go  into  my  next,  — 
the  finest  illustration  of  the  case  that  events  could  furnish.  The  rapid 
conversion  of  the  French  manufacturers  is  excellent  too.  It  is  regret- 
able  that  the  South  should  have  this  handle  against  the  North,  owing 
to  (it  seems  to  me)  the  blank  ignorance  of  society  on  the  question. 
What  does  Greeley  think  of  Motley's  mention  of  it,  I  wonder. 

I  will  say  something  about  sanitary  care  of  your  precious  soldiers 
in  my  "  Standard  "  letter  of  Monday  next. 

After  remarking  that  Mr.  Russell's  situation  precludes  his 
•writing  full  letters  :  — 

"  One  good  consequence  is,  however,  that,  poor  as  they  may  be, 
they  will  dispose  forever  of  the  cry  that  your  rupture  is  the  result  of 
1  Democratic  institutions.' " 

June  13,  1861. 

....  The  feeling  here  is  changed,  —  not  at  all  in  favour  of  the 
South  ;  but  what  a  pity  it  is  that  your  journalists  and  envoys  and 
others  have  no  notion  of  political  rationality  and  propriety !  Cassius 
Clay  and  Burlingame  at  Paris,  and  Seward  at  Washington,  and  bul- 
lies every  where,  have  made  sad  confusion  of  your  cause  and  reputa- 
tion If  it  were  the  bigotry  of  a  high-principled,  narrow  nation 

there  would  be  something  respectable  in  the  rancour,  and  it  would  be 
appreciated  here.  But  coming  from  the  most  profligate  political 
writers  and  speakers  and  actors  in  the  world,  it  is  wholly  disgusting  ; 
and  the  good  people  and  the  best  parts  of  your  case  are  involved 
in  the  general  disgrace.    Clay,  Burlingame,  and  the  speakers  and 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


493 


writers  on  this  question  have  not  the  remotest  conception  of  the 
principles  of  science  on  the  one  hand,  or  of  honour  on  the  other,  on 
which  government  is  carried  on  in  a  European  monarchy.  There  is, 
also,  a  style  of  imputation  which  shows  the  level  of  the  writers'  con- 
ceptions. So  it  is  in  the  motives  found  for  me  by  Mr.  Greeley  and 
others.  It  really  seems  to  he  so  with  every  speaker  and  writer  on 
any  part  of  the  subject.  The  conception  of  a  principled,  consistent, 
independent  national  policy,  such  as  is  a  matter  of  course  under  a 
constitution  like  ours,  and  which  our  statesmen  are  bred  up  to,  is 
altogether  beyond  their  ken.  But  you  abolitionists  will  be  able  now 
to  abate  these  vulgar  disgraces  of  the  Republic.  You  mention  Cob- 
den  and  "  protection." 

You  seem  to  lament  that  a  very  good  man  is  not  a  very  great  one. 
He  is  so  far  great,  however,  as  to  be  equal  to  his  work,  a  very  high 
order  of  work  indeed, — a  diffusion  of  social  justice  which  tends  to 
international  peace. 

"  Protection."  Is  not  protection  a  sin  ?  It  involves  more  sin,  and 
a  greater  variety  of  it,  than  any  system  I  know  of,  except  slavery. 

It  would  astonish  some  folk  not  a  little  to  learn  what  relation  the 
system  (in  any  form  or  degree)  bears  to  sin. 

Mr.  Adams  is  liked  thus  far,  because  less  puerile,  more  moderate, 

not  frantic  in  preaching  and  proselyting  He  must  speak  out, 

decidedly  and  honestly,  and  then  his  self-command  will  tell. 

How  I  have  run  on  politics  !  very  needlessly,  for  I  know  you 
think  just  what  I  have  been  saying. 

Yours  ever, 

H.  M. 

June  26,  1861. 

•  •  •  •  As  to  the  protectionist  matter,  I  need  only  say  that  we  see 
more  and  more  plainly  that  the  subject  is  not  understood  ;  which  is 
quite  natural  among  a  nourishing  new  people.  Mr.  Greeley  ought  to 
understand  it,  if  he  tries  to  make  tariffs  ;  but  he  clearly  does  not,  nor 
do  those  who  have  any  doubt  about  the  "  sin."  I  wish  they  knew  how 
the  degradation  of  our  peasantry  (who  are  now  rising  hourly),  the  crime 
of  our  cities,  the  brigandage  of  our  coasts,  the  deprivation  of  our  poor- 
law  system,  and  the  demoralization  of  whole  classes  have  been  occa- 
sioned by  the  protective  system,  which  they  seem  to  consider  an 
optional  matter,  with  only  some  considerations  of  expediency,  pro  or 
con.  "  Protection  "  has  ruined  more  of  our  people,  body  and  soul,  than 
drink.  Your  people  cannot,  in  this  age,  be  so  overridden  as  ours 
was  before  the  world  was  better  ;  but  if  you  judge  wrong  on  this 


494 


MEMORIALS. 


point,  you  will  settle  the  point  of  progression  or  lapse.  You  will 
establish  an  influence,  second  only  to  slavery,  in  debasing  the  common 
morals  and  manners.  I  know  that  this  is  not  perceived  ;  but  there  is 
our  experience  and  the  French  for  younger  folks'  benefit.  The  rowdy 
and  vagabond  and  plundering  element  will  acquire  a  terrible  ascend- 
ency if  any  ground  is  afforded  for  illicit  trade. 

July  11,  1861. 

About  the  "  Standard."  ....  I  am  very  sorry  it  is  in  need  of  funds. 
Command  me  if  I  can  do  good  by  still  writing.  I  will  send  you  a 
monthly  letter  (gratuitous)  till  you  bid  me  stop.  You  see  by  this 
time  that  there  is  no  cotton-homage  here.  There  is  a  total  absence 
of  all  regards  to  it  in  the  conduct  of  both  government  and  people. 
Every  thing  has  been  said  and  done  as  if  no  cotton  existed.  The 
South  has  been  as  completely  out  in  her  reckoning,  as  the  North  in 
her  judgment  and  temper  about  us.  The  sympathetic  interest  is  over 
here, — in  the  public,  I  mean.  Nothing  can  at  present  restore  the 
feeling  of  last  spring,  because  nothing  can  restore  the  confidence  in 
American  judgment  or  even  perception  of  facts.  Having  made  up 
their  minds  that  England  would  be  mercenary,  the  North  concluded, 
without  evidence,  that  she  was  mercenary.  And  then,  finding  that 
she  was  not  so,  fancied  that  she  had  altered  !  The  despair  of  the 
American  case  is  in  the  vices  of  democratic  government,  which  render 
steadiness  and  consistency  impossible.  This  is  more  fatal  than  even 
the  quarrelsome  temper  ;  and  T  cannot  but  fear  great  mischief  from  it 
during  this  session  of  Congress. 

Talking  of  low  preconceptions,  I  observe  every  where,  in  all  the 
American  newspapers,  the  same  notion,  —  that  we  judge  the  Northern 
policy  of  protection  by  the  rate  of  duty  on  iron  and  woollens  that  we 
have  to  pay.  It  does  not  enter  into  the  heads  of  even  liberal  and 
moral  writers  that  we  can  have  any  other  objection  to  the  principle 
than  its  affecting  our  purse.  They  are  wholly  ignorant  of  the  aristo- 
cratic and  pillaging  character  of  the  system,  and  of  its  damning  in- 
fluence on  the  character  and  reputation  of  a  democratic  republic  ;  and 
they  see  no  further  than  the  damage  to  Britishers,  and  assume  that 
that  is  what  the  Britishers  are  thinking  about. 

It  was  no  vague  impression,  no  mere  wish,  the  parent  of  the 
thought,  that  dictated  this  assurance  that  England  would  not 
break  the  blockade  on  account  of  cotton. 

She  was  then  in  the  midst  of  the  distress  occasioned  by  the 
blockade,  and  witness  to  the  noble  way  in  which  it  was  borne ;  and 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


495 


while  writing  to  her  American  friends  assuring  them  of  English 
sympathy,  she  was  daily  engaged  in  such  correspondence  as  the  fol- 
lowing, —  counselling,  planning,  co-operating,  and  giving  money. 

For  example  :  correspondence  with  Blackburn  about  food 
and  clothing  in  mitigation  of  distress  and  abatement  of  the  intol- 
erance which  was  excluding  Unitarian  dissenters  there  from*  re- 
lief ;  the  same  correspondence  with  Ashton-uncler-Lyne,  —  the 
intolerance,  however,  being  on  the  other  side,  manifested  by  insult- 
ing resolutions  excluding  clergymen  and  ministers  of  religion  ; 
correspondence,  with  aid  to  Denton  Eectory  ;  correspondence, 
with  aid  to  Hulme,  for  Workingmen's  Institute ;  correspondence, 
with  aid  to  relief  fund,  Burnley  Borough ;  correspondence,  with 
aid  to  Stockport,  through  central  relief  committee ;  correspondence, 
with  aid  to  relief  fund,  Oldham  ;  correspondence,  with  donation 
of  clothing,  London  ;  correspondence,  with  donation  to  Lanca- 
shire Emigration  Society,  Manchester ;  donation  to  Denton  Eec- 
tory ;  to  relief  committee,  Salford ;  to  relief  committee,  Old- 
field  ;  to  cooking-schools,  Manchester. 

Again  from  Manchester,  entreating  a  letter  of  counsel  about 
the  management  of  emigration. 

The  following  was  her  appeal  in  behalf  of  the  distress  in  Lan- 
cashire, in  response  to  the  entreaty  to  "  aid  us  with  your  pen  and 
influence." 

To  the  Editor  of  the  "  Daily  News." 

Sir,  —  I  have  just  seen  something  which  impresses  me  so  much 
that  I  hope  you  will  grant  me  space  to  describe  it,  and  to  commend 
the  facts  to  my  countrywomen,  on  behalf  of  the  sewing-schools  of 
Lancashire  and  Cheshire. 

I  need  hardly  explain  that  these  sewing-schools  furnish  at  once  a 
safe  refuge  for  the  unemployed  factory-girls,  a  good  training  in  domes- 
tic needlework,  and  the  means  of  buying  clothing  exceedingly  cheap. 
The  plan  is  in  every  way  admirable  ;  and  to  sustain  and  multiply 
these  schools  is  to  do  unmixed  good.  While  some  people  send  money 
(and  much  money  is  wanted)  others  cannot  do  better  than  send  mate- 
rials for  clothing.  The  cry  for  material  is  very  urgent ;  and  it  is 
about  this  that  I  write.  Whatever  is  sent  should  be  good  and  suita- 
ble. It  would  be  a  cruel  mockery  to  send  rubbish,  when  cold  weather 
is  coming  on,  and  substantial  warm  clothing  is  becoming  a  necessary 


496 


MEMORIALS. 


of  life.  But  there  are  ways  of  getting  good  materials  cheap.  For 
children's  dress  particularly  this  is  easy  ;  and  the  children  have 
the  very  first  claim  if  Lord  Palmerston's  advice  is  to  be  taken, 
and  the  present  dreary  opportunity  is  to  be  used  for  keeping  every 
boy  and  girl  at  school. 

The  other  day  a  Mend  of  mine  went  forth  with  £  5  in  her  pocket, 
to  see  how  much  good  sound  clothing  material  she  could  get  for  that 
sum.   I  have  just  been  looking  over  her  package,  before  it  goes  to  the 
Blackburn  Sewing- School,  and  I  find  the  contents  to  be  as  follows  :  — 
15  Women's  gowns,  seemly  and  serviceable. 
7  Frocks  for  young  girls  and  children. 

6  Petticoats,  linsey  and  stuff. 

4  Petticoats,  woven. 

5  Flannel  petticoats,  very  good. 

1  Child's  pinafore. 

2  Boy's  blouses,  dark  blue  flannel,  very  good. 
11  Women's  shifts,  unbleached  calico. 

7  Caps,  strong  muslin,  checked. 
4  Bonnets,  coburg,  drab. 

A  good  supply  of  tapes,  linen,  buttons,  and  hooks  and  eyes. 

It  will  be  asked  how  such  a  purchase  was  achieved,  and  this  is 
what  I  have  to  tell. 

My  friend  went  to  a  shop  (kept  by  a  good-natured  tradesman, 
which  is  an  important  element  in  the  case)  where  there  was  likely  to 
be  a  remainder  stock  at  the  close  of  each  season  of  the  year.  She  ex- 
plained her  object,  and  was  shown  remnants  of  flannel  and  calico, 
dresses  out  of  fashion,  out  of  season,  or  soiled  (being  washable)  or 
faded.  Pieces  too  short  for  a  gown  would  serve  for  a  frock  ;  odd  ends 
of  stuff  would  make  bonnets  ;  the  discarded  fashions  in  linseys  yield 
excellent  warm  petticoats  very  cheap.  There  were  no  cheap  shawls 
in  stock,  nor  cloaks  ;  but  in  a  town  these  might  probably  have  been 
obtainable.  So  might  the  list  and  cloth  selvages  from  clothiers'  and 
woollen-drapers'  shops,  from  which  warm  capes  may  be  made,  in  away 
which  every  needlewoman  knows. 

Now,  there  are  good-natured  shopkeepers  every  where  ;  and  wher- 
ever there  is  a  draper's  shop  of  any  consideration  there  are  remnants, 
and  faded  and  old-fashioned  articles  of  dress.  Ladies  who  have  hours 
to  spare  can  do  much  to  serve  their  Lancashire  sisters  by  trying,  as 
my  friend  has  done,  how  much  they  can  get  for  £  5.  Fifty  ladies, 
doing  this,  might  go  a  long  way  towards  clothing  the  women  and 
children  of  the  suffering  districts.  And  why  should  there  not  be  fifty 
and  twice  fifty  ladies  doing  this  thing  within  a  week  1 


FRESH  FOREIGN  INTERCOURSE. 


497 


I  may  remind  them  that  there  is  little  time  on  the  spot,  and  little 
space  and  resource  of  convenience  ;  and  that  therefore  every  thing 
should  be  sent  in  readiness  for  the  needle.  The  unbleached  calico  should 
be  washed  out,  the  garments  should  be  cut  out,  in  breadths  at  least,  if 
not  to  fit  ;  and  each  sort  should  be  ticketed,  each  parcel  of  gowns,  petti- 
coats, &c,  being  separate,  and  ticketed  with  the  number  and  quantity. 

It  will  be  a  great  kindness  to  put  in  half-worn  clothes.  As  I  said 
before,  no  rubbish.  But  there  are  few  houses  in  which  there  are 
not  some  articles  of  dress  which  can  be  spared  before  they  are  nearly 
worn  out.  I  will  only  say  further  that  every  charge  of  carriage 
should  be  paid  by  the  sender,  and  as  little  trouble  given  as  possible. 
It  will  add  a  grace  to  the  gift  if  every  thing  that  can  be  wanted  is  put 
into  the  parcel,  —  linings,  tape,  buttons,  hooks  and  eyes,  thread,  and 
even  needles  and  pins.  The  very  completeness  will  be  a  lesson  to  the 
girls,  and  will  give  pleasure  in  places  where  pleasures  are  very  rare  at 
present.  R  ^ 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

July  25. 

"With  regard  to  raising  money  in  Europe  to  sustain  the  "  Standard," 
I  don't  see  any  probability  of  success  whatever.  The  people  would 
be  astonished  at  being  asked,  at  a  time  when  the  American  nation  is 
up  in  arms  (as  is  understood  here)  on  the  very  question,  and  when  the 
government  asks  such  enormous  sums  wherewith  to  battle  for  the  right, 
and  ,£100,000,000  are  being  levied  to  sustain  an  antislavery  revolution 
and  war  ;  why  should  Europe  send  you  a  few  hundreds  ?  So  they 
will  ask,  and  I  think  it  will  not  be  easy  to  answer.  But  /  shall  not 
desert  the  "  Standard."  I  will,  as  I  said,  send  a  monthly  letter  (if 
able)  till  you  or  the  editor  bid  me  stop.  And  I  certainly  shall  not 
take  any  payment  ....  no  use  talking  about  it.  I  wish  you  would 
just  forget  it.  I  shall  not,  of  course,  be  able  to  give  my  annual 
£5  to  the  cause,  but  my  letters  I  can  give,  and  you  will  be  wel- 
come to  them.  As  to  Dr.  Follen's  saying  of  having  no  plan,  —  which 
I  myself  quoted  last  year,  —  I  think  I  know  what  he  would  have 
said  to  the  proposal  that  the  managers  of  a  revolution  and  civil  war 
should  have  no  plan.  I  know  what  he  would  have  said  to  applying 
to  such  a  case  a  proposal  suitable  enough  for  a  little  band  of  moral 
apostles  beginning  to  feel  their  way  to  the  nation's  heart.    So,  again, 

 's  notion  that  no  serious  moral  principle  is  involved  in  the 

financial  regulation  of  industry  and  commerce !  Supremely  silly,  how- 
ever, is  the  confounding  a  censure  of  a  political  system  with  personal 


498 


MEMORIALS. 


impertinences.  Of  course  there  is  no  sort  of  doubt  about  it,  political 
action  is  a  proper  subject  for  discussion,  censure,  denunciation.  Nobody 
here  comprehends  such  soreness  as  is  shown  by  Greeley  and  others. 
Every  political  scheme  here  is  discussed  with  all  possible  freedom, 
and  nobody  dreams  of  being  offended.  But  the  moment  any  man 
passes  from  the  matter  in  question  to  insult  any  body  personally,  he 
is  simply  regarded  as  a  blackguard  (excuse  the  term)  and  sent  to 
Coventry  accordingly.  Nobody  would  speak  to  Greeley  here  after 
reading  those  letters.  You  will  see  I  have  dealt  with  the  whine 
about  personalities  in  two  lines.  I  hardly  liked  stooping  to  do  it, 
but  as  they  really  did  not  seem  to  see  the  distinction  in  the  case,  I 
just  said  there  could  be  no  personality  on  my  side,  as  I  did  not  know 
who  were  the  parties  responsible  for  the  policy. 

Dear  friend,  don't  either  be  or  seem  sensitive  on  my  account.  I 
don't  like  being  insultingly  treated,  so  entirely  as  I  am  unused  to  it 
here,  but  it  is  of  no  real  consequence.  I  must  keep  clear  of  further 
controversy  ;  not  only  that  I  am  too  ill  for  it,  but  I  see  it  is  useless. 
As  to  what  you  say  of  Clay  and  Burlingame,  I  don't  think  any  thing 
of  diplomatic  traditions,  etiquette,  court-manners,  and  all  that.  These 
things  signify  less  and  less,  and  are  not  expected  of  republican  min- 
isters. It  is  the  utter  unfitness  for  political  counsel  that  amazes  us  in 
those  men  ;  the  absence  of  judgment,  temper,  and  decent  manners. 
They  misapprehended  the  plainest  transactions  going  on  before  their 
eyes,  went  into  a  groundless  passion,  assumed  the  function  of  agitators, 
and  tried  to  play  upon  the  supposed  jealousy  between  France  and 
England  ;  getting  only  laughed  at  by  both  sides,  because  the  two 
were  exactly  of  one  mind.  "  A  pretty  sort  of  ambassador  !  "  the 
world  cries.  I  need  not  say  what  qualities  are  indispensable  in  grave 
negotiation  and  in  protecting  the  honour  and  interests  of  one's 
country  ;  nor  need  I  say  that  B.  and  C.  have  shown  a  most  remark- 
able deficiency  in  those  qualities. 

The  function  of  the  "  Times "  (self-assumed)  which  you  speak  of 
I  take  to  be,  leading  the  most  popular  surface  sentiment  or  notion  of 
the  moment,  without  the  slightest  regard  to  truth  or  right  or  con- 
sistency. As  there  is  the  utmost  ignorance  there,  it  is  often  getting 
wrong  and  always  supposing  a  lower  class  (morally)  than  the  real 
one  to  be  the  majority. 


CONVEKSATIONS. 


"  It  was  well  said  by  Themistocles,  that  speech  was  like  cloth  of  gold, 
whereby  the  imagery  doth  appear  in  figures  ;  whereas  in  thought  they  be  but 
as  in  packs  

It  is  good  in  discourse  and  speech  of  conversation  to  vary  and  intermingle 
speech  of  the  present  occasion  with  arguments  ;  tales  with  reasons  ;  asking 
questions  with  telling  of  opinions."  —  Bacon. 

In  the  most  faithful  sketches  of  animated  conversation  it  may 
well  be  that  old  friends  should  hardly  find  the  picture  true ;  so 
tame  and  ineffectual  is  all  such  reproduction,  lacking  the  light- 
ing smile,  the  penetrative  glance,  the  eager  or  earnest  or  watch- 
fully alert  eye,  the  long  look  into  far  futurity,  that  go  with  a 
visible  unfolding  of  the  heart  in  so  transparent  a  being  as  Har- 
riet Martineau ;  but  all  will  recognize  the  opinions. 

Looking  at  the  engraving  of  the  Antislavery  Society's  certifi- 
cate of  membership,  when  the  rights  of  the  women  who  were 
members  were  hotly  contested,  she  said,  "All  that  turmoil  about 
the  rights  of  all  your  members  to  make  speeches  on  your  plat- 
forms, while  the  very  figure-head  of  your  society  is  a  woman 
preaching ! " 

The  word  "  truth "  often  raised  a  ripple  in  conversation : 
"  What  do  you  mean  by  it  1  Are  we  both  meaning  the  same 
thing  %  Is  it  veracity,  or  actualness,  that  you  mean  ]  The  corre- 
spondence of  thing  to  thing  throughout  the  universe  is  what  we 
ought  to  reckon  truth  to  be." 

"True  to  our  colours,"  "true  to  our  convictions,"  "true  to 
ourselves,"  "true  to  our  friends,"  "speaking  the  truth,"  were 
texts  as  the  talk  went  on.  At  last  the  inquiry  was  made  whether 
it  were  justifiable  or  not  for  philosophers  to  quote  Scripture  or 


500 


MEMORIALS. 


enrich  their  intercourse  with  biblical  phraseology.  "  Who  finds 
fault  with  us,"  said  one,  "for  talking  about 

"The  fair  humanities  of  old  religion,' 

or  for  quoting  with  gusto  the  old  classics]"  "Why  not  in- 
deed ]  "  she  asked, —  "  why  not  ]  Why,  because  every  body  has 
transcended  them  as  completely  as  you  have  done  ;  and  there  is 
no  danger  in  the  case  of  becoming  double-minded,  or  of  being 
accused  of  duplicity  or  insincerity.  But  about  the  Bible,  and  the 
existing  forms,  we  must  be  more  careful.  We  can  have  respect 
and  sympathy  for  others  in  all  their  forms  and  all  their  books  of 
religion.  But  we  must  not  give  occasion  for  these  accusations. 
We  must  take  care  not  to  deceive  our  listeners  as  to  our  real 
mental  condition.  No,  no  !  better  forbear  the  phraseology  than 
be  constantly  encumbered  with  explanations. 

"  But  one  accused  of  infidelity  may  rightly  affirm  his  attach- 
ment to  religion  ]  Is  it  not  the  true  name  of  all  that  binds 
the  human  race  together  ?  —  and  1  piety  '  too  ] "  "  Xo,  I  should 
hardly  allow  you  the  word ;  there  is  no  piety  without  a  personal 
God  in  these  days."  "  But  there  was  the  pious  zEneas?"  "  True  ; 
but  you  cannot  use  these  words  in  any  such  philological,  old- 
world  way,  at  this  time  of  day,  without  being  misunderstood." 
"  But  is  it  not  really  so,  if  these  words  do  really  mean  what  we 
define  them  to  mean?"  "Look  in  your  Johnson's  Dictionary. 
What  you  say  may  be  true  to  you,  but,  as  he  would  say,  '  such 
is  not  the  common  opinion  of  mankind.' " 

"  I  see  the  London  correspondent  of  one  of  your  American 
papers  says  that  he  trusts  the  Grote  Memoir  will  be  '  racy ' 
and  '  sprightly.'  It  sickens  me.  Professor  Bain  shares  the  task 
of  Mr.  Grote's  aged  widow,  and  is  no  less  grave  than  she  in  re- 
gard to  the  great  scholar  and  philosophic  historian  whose  labours 
they  record." 

"  Tell  me  about  the  '  Westminster  Review,'  was  a  question  I 
asked  her.  "It  was  mortgaged  to  me  in  1854,"  she  replied; 
'•and  if  I  had  then  known  of  the  plots  and  devices  going  on  in 
the  office,  I  would  not  have  advanced  the  sum.  It  was  £  500, 
and  the  Westminster  was  in  danger  of  stopping.    A  base  attempt 


CONVERSATIONS. 


501 


having  been  made  to  get  it  out  of  Dr.  Chapman's  hands  in  order 
to  give  it  over  to  an  anti-Comtist,  some  indignant  friends  of 
Chapman  and  of  myself  made  great  sacrifices  to  keep  it  in  its 
proper  track.  The  three  greatest  of  these  friends  were  Mr. 
Grote,  Mr.  Courtauld,  and  Mr.  Octavius  Smith  ;  the  two  latter 
bought  off  the  conspirators,  who  would  otherwise  have  made 
Chapman  a  bankrupt  and  taken  the  Review  out  of  his  hands. 
It  was  then  necessary  to  disburden  the  Review  of  the  mortgage  ; 
Mr.  Grote  offered  to  manage  that  business,  I  offering  to  surren- 
der £  50  of  my  claim ;  which,  however,  turned  out  but  £  45,  the 
money  contributed  being  £  5  more  than  was  necessary.  I  believe 
[she  went  on  in  reply  to  my  inquiry  whether  Mill  gives  the  his- 
tory of  the  origin  of  the  Westminster  correctly]  that  his  account 
is  correct.  It  was  established  as  the  organ  of  the  advanced 
liberals,  but  it  never  had  capital  enough  to  prosper." 

Talking  of  forgiveness,  she  one  day  said,  "  I  do  not  know 
what  people  in  general  mean  by  the  word.  Some  use  it  as  if  it 
implied  that  they  were  to  act  against  common-sense."  "  How  1 
Pray  exemplify."  "  Why,  when  Jack  or  Gill  are  persisting  in 
doing  you  a  wilful  injury  and  from  no  good  motive,  of  course 
you  are  to  forgive  them,  till  seventy  times  seven  if  you  will ; 
that  is,  you  are  not  to  revenge  yourself,  but  do  them  all  the  good 
you  can  :  but  does  this  imply  that  you  are  to  expose  yourself  to 
their  malice  1  You  forgive  such  a  one  ;  but  can  you  respect,  can 
you  esteem  such  a  one  1  Can  you  trust  such  a  one  1  You  may 
have  forgiven  one  that  it  is  not  safe  for  you  to  meet  except  before 
witnesses  ;  or  to  meet  at  all  if  you  chance  to  be  so  low  in  health 
as  to  be  easily  shocked,  or  if  the  enemy  chances  to  be  one  trying 
to  take  advantage  of  your  society  to  put  you  in  a  false  position." 

"  Do  you  agree  with  Dr.  Channing  in  his  preference  for  indi- 
vidual to  associated  action  % "  "  To  a  certain  extent.  I  do  hate 
decent  time-wasting  work  done  together  by  many  which  could 
be  better  done  singly  and  apart.  I  am  not  fond  of  routine- 
doings,  —  work  done  to-day  that  had  better  cease,  and  for  which 
no  other  reason  can  be  given  than  that  it  was  done  yesterday. 
I  often  see  people  preferring  the  spinning-wheel  after  the  great 
manufactories  are  in  motion.    All  that  I  dislike.    But  we  must 


502 


MEMORIALS. 


eacli  judge  for  ourselves,  and  I  think  we  shall  no  doubt  follow 
our  natures.  When  individual  action  is  insufficient  for  individ- 
ual enterprise  and  desire,  one  naturally  seeks  association.  In 
that  case  only  is  it  likely  to  be  other  than  a  decent  form.  Asso- 
ciations for  the  promulgation  of  ideas  should  have  enterprises 
involved,  or  they  will  soon  die  out,  or  be  turned  to  selfish  pur- 
poses." 

Reading  an  article  of  Miss  Alcott's,  she  says,  "  '  Transcendental 
Wild  Oats  ' !  —  what  a  capital  title  !    It  has  genius  in  it." 

"  Sara  Coleridge's  Life,  at  last.  A  melancholy  book  it  seems 
to  me.  What  a  contrast  is  Mrs.  Somerville's  !  What  absolute 
serenity  !  What  low  expectations  from  human  kind  !  But  she 
took  things  and  people  as  they  came,  and  supposed  all  was  right. 
She  was  a  charming  woman,  and  I  am  thankful  the  world  has 
had  her." 

"This  vote  of  the  members  of  Congress  to  enrich  themselves 
prospectively  seems  to  me  the  most  menacing  disgrace  and  dis- 
couragement that  has  yet  wounded  the  spirit  of  republicanism. 
But  nothing  pleases  me  like  what  I  hear  of  the  awakening  sense 
in  the  United  States  of  the  need  of  a  training  in  statesmanship. 
I  think  hitherto  the  Americans  have  seen  the  English  governing 
classes  in  one  light  alone,  - —  as  lovers  of  power  and  dignity,  get- 
ting grandeur  and  wealth  by  claims  of  birth  and  position ;  as,  in 
short,  a  selfish  aristocracy  living  for  their  own  purposes.  We 
regard  '  the  governing  classes '  as  a  portion  of  society  of  very 
great  value,  as  qualified  from  the  outset  to  render  social  services 
for  which  no  other  class  or  order  of  citizens  can  be  qualified.  One 
may  meet  with  a  man  here  and  there  in  promiscuous  society  who 
knows  something  of  political  history,  or  understands  more  or  less 
of  political  philosophy,  but  the  cases  are  rare,  and  their  worth 
needs  proving  before  it  can  be  used,  and  they  may  never  light 
upon  an  entrance  into  public  life.  Whereas,  where  there  is  an 
aristocracy  like  ours,  educated  at  the  universities,  and  connected 
with  statesmen  on  all  hands,  and  with  hereditary  duty  of  states- 
manship for  their  birthright,  their  country  is  tolerably  secure 
against  moral  corruption  (political)  on  the  one  hand,  and  social 
blundering  on  the  other.    The  Americans  have  wonderful  energy 


CONVERSATIONS. 


503 


in  bearing  and  vanquishing  the  mischiefs  of  misgovernment,  but 
it  would  be  a  happier  spectacle  and  a  finer  lesson  for  the  rest  of 
the  world,  if  the  men  in  office  were  educated  for  their  work." 

"  My  beloved  '  Nation '  has  just  come  to  hand ;  but  the  article 
about  Mill  at  the  Carlyles'  [as  to  the  destruction  of  Carlyle's 
manuscript  by  a  careless  servant]  (p.  368)  is  incorrect,  and  at 
p.  372  I  find  a  misunderstanding  of  Mr.  Grote's  action  in  the 
matter  of  the  philosophical  chair  in  University  College.  It 
would  be  a  complete  breach  of  the  very  principle  which  is  the 
raison  d'etre  of  the  institution  and  of  the  chair  itself,  to  install  a 
teacher  whose  philosophy  is  the  product  of  his  theology.  The 
college  was  largely  founded,  and  has  since  been  supported,  by 
Jews,  for  the  education  of  Jewish  youth ;  and  there  are  many 
Hindoos,  and  the  sons  of  others ;  and  for  special  ideal  Christian 
philosophy  people  must  go  elsewhere.  It  is  no  question  of  tol- 
eration or  intolerance  at  all.  As  we  hoped,  the  result  is  admira- 
ble. '  The  Unknown  Man '  *  was  thoroughly  known  to  Mr. 
Grote,  Mr.  Bain,  and  others,  and  he  is  wholly  successful  and 
highly  valued  in  his  office.  I  wish  the  '  Nation '  could  see  this 
matter  as  I  do.    Do  you  know  who  is  the  writer  1 

"  Mill's  melancholy  book  is  out  ;  he  is  much  overrated  as  a 
man,  but  his  book  is  the  book  of  the  season." 

"  We  have  heard  of  the  great  Boston  fire,"  she  writes  to  Mrs. 
Chapman  in  New  York,  "  and  my  first  anxiety  was  for  Mary 
Chapman,  and  whether  she  was  safe,  and  whether  you  and  she 
had  lost  much  endeared  property  such  as  no  insurance  could 
compensate  for.  Then  came  the  thought  whether  my  chest  of 
papers  had  been  perhaps  consumed  by  the  fire.  Now,  mind,  I 
am  prepared  to  hear  this  ;  yet  it  will  not  trouble  me  injuriously, 
be  assured.  If  the  whole  mass  should  be  lost,  do  not  heed  it. 
Be  assured  my  mind  is  free  from  all  care  about  it,  or  about  any 
thing,  indeed.  The  truth  is,  I  have  been  unusually  glad  and 
easy  at  heart  for  above  a  week  past.  You  will  know  at  once 
what  this  means,  as  you  will  feel  that  I  am  again  worse.  Yes, 
that  is  what  it  means.  I  am  too  far  gone  for  any  thing  but 
humouring.    I  fully  recognize  the  fact,  and  do  not  feel  humbled 

*  Professor  Croome  Robertson  holds  the  chair  in  University  College. 


504 


MEMORIALS. 


by  it.  I  have  no  pride  about  owning  or  denying  the  great  suf- 
fering belonging  to  my  present  state.  The  truth  is,  it  is  great 
Buffering,  and  I  am  thankful  for  any  soothing  or  intermission  of 
it.  When  your  time  comes,  may  it  be  easy  and  gentle,  —  this 
process  of  surrendering  life.  Every  body  is  so  kind  and  watch- 
ful :  I  have  had  a  sweet  greeting  from  Madame  Mohl  and  from 
Elizabeth  Pease." 

The  conversation  turning  on  what  is  allowable  in  publication, 
and  on  the  shells  and  husks  of  lives  given  as  biography,  she  ex- 
pressed the  opinion  that  what  concerned  the  public  should  in  a 
general  sense  be  given  to  the  public.  "  Not,"  she  added,  "  but 
what  I  feel  myself  suddenly  turning  hot,  in  sympathy  for  the 
pain  they  must  feel,  when  I  see  persons  praised  in  print  more 
than  they  deserve."  I  spoke  of  her  own  praise  of  Mary 
Wate  of  Boston,  the  story  of  whose  devotedness  to  an  English 
village  ravaged  by  fever  she  had  herself  made  public,  and  that 
too  in  Mrs.  Ware's  lifetime  j  and  of  the  pain  that  publicity 
gave  to  Mrs.  Ware's  daughter.  "  Yes,"  replied  Mrs.  Martineau. 
"  She  found  fault  with  me  vehemently,  —  unreasonably,  as 
I  thought ;  but  I  said,  '  My  dear  child ;  your  mother's  high 
character  and  noble  life  made  a  part  of  our  riches  before  you 
were  born  ! '  " 

"  Senior's  Book  of  Conversations  1  Yes ;  with  its  journals  and 
talk  with  prominent  men  in  France  between  1848  and  1852  it 
is  the  fullest  representation  yet  given  or  likely  to  be  given  of 
the  interior  life  of  the  politics  of  both  countries  during  an  im- 
portant period." 

"Paulding?  Xo  ;  we  never  saw  him,  nor  wished  to  see  him, 
nor  thought  of  seeing  him.  Miss  Jeffrey  says  the  same.  Some- 
body has  been  falsifying.  An  odd  thing  to  take  up  thirty  years 
after." 

At  another  time,  free  speech  being  the  topic,  Mrs.  Martineau 
spoke  as  she  always  did  of  its  necessity.  "  Yet,"  she  continued, 
"  it  is  to  be  used  with  judgment.  Free  speech  on  a  criminal  case, 
for  example,  through  the  press,  undisputed  and  universal  when 
the  trial  is  over,  must  be  mischievous,  and  may  be  and  generally 
is  illegal  and  unjust,  while  the  trial  is  in  progress.    The  Ameri- 


CONVERSATIONS. 


505 


can  correspondents  of  newspapers  seem  not  to  be  clear  in  this 
matter.  They  mislead  the  American  public  upon  the  two  great 
points  of  the  liberty  of  speech  and  the  administration  of  justice 
in  English  law-courts." 

"  How  many  times  in  my  life  have  I  virtually  said  the  same 
thing,  —  that  if  we  all  knew  that  half  the  existing  generation  of 
mankind  would  die,  and  half  be  immortal,  who  would  not  long 
to  be  sure  of  being  in  the  dying  half  ] " 

"  The  managers  of  the  Mill  memorial  put  my  name,  without 
even  leave  asked,  on  their  executive  committee.  I  wrote  a  re- 
monstrance, desiring  it  to  be  withdrawn.  It  was  reason  enough 
to  assign  that  age  and  illness  incapacitated  me  for  any  duty  of 
the  sort.  But  there  are  other  reasons.  I  do  not  wish  to  impli- 
cate myself  with  his  repute.  I  have  a  great  admiration  for  his 
intellect,  and  a  strong  regard  for  his  heart,  and  a  full  belief  in 
his  innocence  of  intention.  But  he  was  deplorably  weak  in 
judgment,  with  the  weakness,  so  damaging  to  a  man,  of  being  as 
impressionable  as  a  woman. 

"  My  contemporaries  are  dying  off  fast.  I  am  thankful  for 
your  sympathy  about  Bulwer's  death.  There  was  the  making 
of  a  great,  good  man  in  him." 

Talking  of  the  "  Liberty  Bell,"  an  antislavery  annual  for  which 
she  used  to  write  and  procure  articles  from  her  friends,  I  recalled 
contributions  of  Milnes  and  others,  written  at  her  request. 
"  Yes,"  she  said,  "  and  I  should  have  got  you  a  sonnet  from 
Wordsworth,  too,  if  Quincy  had  not  been  so  witty  and  Lowell 
so  crushing  upon  his  sonnets  on  capital  punishment.  I  could 
not  ask  him  after  one  of  you  had  called  him  1  the  Laureate  of 
the  gallows  '  and  the  other 

1  An  old  man,  faithless  to  humanity.'" 

Eeminding  her  one  day  of  her  strenuous  efforts  in  the  United 
States  for  an  international  copyright,  "  Yes  ! "  she  replied,  I  did 
a  work  —  a  vain  one  up  to  this  time  —  on  that  behalf  in  England 
and  in  America  both." 

Before  me  lies  the  English  circular  on  the  blank  page  of  which 
she  had  written  one  of  a  sheaf  of  letters  addressed  to  Judge 

VOL.  II. 


503 


MEMORIALS. 


Story,  Mr.  Adams,  Mr.  Clay,  Mr.  Palfrey,  Dr.  Follen,  and  others, 
with  whom  she  had  consulted  in  1836. 
The  letter  is  as  follows  :  — 

London,  November  8,  1836. 
Dear  Friend,  —  Here  is  our  petition.    Help  us  get  up  a  similar 
one  from  American  authors.    House  all  Boston  and  New  York.  No 
time  for  more. 

H.  MARTINEAU. 
"  I  do  admire  Miss  Thackeray's  '  Old  Kensington.'  " 
"  The  Ballantines  were  deceived  by  Scott  and  insulted  by 

Lockhart.    I  do  hope  Constable's  third  volume  will  do  justice  to 

them" 

No  sooner  had  the  American  antislavery  cause  been  merged 
in  the  national  one,  than  the  English  cause  of  social  virtue  and 
national  existence  appealed  to  her  whole  nature. 

"  I  am  told,"  she  said,  "  that  this  is  discreditable  work  for 
woman,  especially  for  an  old  woman.  But  it  has  always  been 
esteemed  our  especial  function  as  women,  to  mount  guard  over 
society  and  social  life,  —  the  spring  of  national  existence,  —  and 
to  keep  them  pure ;  and  who  so  fit  as  an  old  woman  1 " 

Being  told  that  American  ladies  were  shocked  to  think  of 
such  personal  exposure,  "English  ladies  think  of  the  Lady 
Godiva  !  "  was  her  reply. 

Speaking  of  herself,  she  one  day  said  :  "  I  have  an  inveterate 
contentedness  of  disposition,  —  not  constitutional,  I  think,  but 
induced,  — which  makes  me  satisfied  from  day  to  day,  whatever 
happens,  and  without  the  merit  of  much  effort.  How  this  would 
serve  if  I  had  not  so  much  to  do,  I  do  not  know." 

Referring  to  the  invectives  poured  out  in  leading  American 
journals  against  Great  Britain,  by  representative  men  high  in 
office,  after  the  proclamation  of  neutrality  and  the  escape  of  the 
Alabama,  she  said  :  "  How  gladly  would  I  die,  to  put  a  stop 
to  these  senseless,  fearful  outbursts  !  Men  do  not  know  how 
mischievous  they  are.  One  insulting  word  is  sometimes  more 
dangerous  to  nations  than  even  a  hostile  deed  ;  and  always  more 
disgraceful  to  him  who  utters  it.  See  what  your  wisest  states- 
men thought  of  such  words  in  1793!  They  are  alarming,  fear- 
ful, for  there  is  no  telling  where  they  will  end." 


CONVERSATION'S. 


507 


Speaking  of  Margaret  Fuller's  regret  that  "  Society  in  Amer- 
ica "  was  such  a  hasty  book,  she  said,  "  She  ought  not  to  have 
said  that.    It  had  three  years  of  the  best  of  my  life." 

"  Tell  us,"  we  one  day  said,  "  what  was  the  condition  of  politi- 
cal economy  before  your  '  series '  appeared  1 " 

"  It  was  never  heard  of  outside  of  the  Political  Economy  Club, 
except  among  students  of  Adam  Smith  ;  but  the  '  series '  made  it 
popular,  aided  as  it  was  by  the  needs  and  events  of  the  time  ; 
such  as  strikes,  the  pressure  of  the  Corn-Laws,  &c.  There  was 
cheering  evidence  of  this  in  1842,  when  the  agitation  of  chartism 
tested  the  relation  between  employers  and  employed,  and  proved 
it  clear  and  sound.  Still  more  striking  was  the  proof  during  the 
recent  American  war,  when  the  operatives  throughout  the  man- 
ufacturing districts  braved  the  cotton  famine,  instead  of  seeking 

escape  at  the  expense  of  sound  economical  principles  But 

I  wish  to  impress  it  upon  your  Americans  that  these  tales  relate 
to  a  state  of  things  that  has  for  the  most  part  passed  away, 
though  they  did  certainly  contribute  largely  to  that  result.  The 
young  people  —  a  multitude  of  them  —  were  interested  and 
instructed  in  what  to  strive  for  in  politics  in  their  school- 
days." 

"  "When  the  secularists  applied  to  you  to  give  them  a  service 
for  the  grave,  may  I  ask  if  you  granted  the  request  1 " 

"  I  have  never  done  so  :  I  have  been  busier  with  their  lives 
than  their  graves  j  and  I  have  my  doubts  about  the  utility  of  a 
formal  service,  except  in  the  case  of  great  men,  dying  in  public 
stations." 

In  the  course  of  one  of  our  conversations  on  the  characteristics 
and  merits  of  her  works  and  those  of  other  authors,  she  said  : 
"  My  article  on  the  census  is  the  most  marked  thing  I  have  ever 
done."* 

One  day,  after  Lord  and  Lady  Belper  had  sent  to  The  Knoll  a 
magnificent  basket  of  game  and  fruit,  the  conversation  turned  on 
what  Sydney  Smith  said  to  her  on  such  an  occasion  :  "  They 
who  send  you  good  things  are  sure  of  heaven,  provided  they 

*  Results  of  the  Census  of  1851.  Westminster  Review  for  April,  1854. 
No.  CXX. 


508 


MEMORIALS. 


also  pay  her  clues  to  the  Church  of  England."  This  set  all  pres^ 
ent  to  considering  how  far  the  absolution  extended  :  and  it  was 
thought  to  be  an  enormous  act  of  indulgence,  till  philosophically 
examined ;  and  then  it  was  found  to  have  a  good  foundation. 

Harriet  Martineau's  heart  being  in  the  work  of  freeing  the 
United  States  from  slavery  and  preserving  peace  between  the 
two  countries,  the  "Daily  News  "  did  but  become  the  more  effec- 
tual in  accomplishing  those  two  ends,  and  the  benefit  was 
acknowledged  in  America  by  many.  The  fear  she  felt  on  hear- 
ing of  the  early  disasters  of  the  war  was  very  great,  as  her  letters 
from  time  to  time  show. 

EXTRACTS  OF  LETTERS  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

August  8,  1861. 

I  hear  of  Bull  Run  with  an  anguish  of  shame  and  discouragement 
such  as  I  never  thought  to  feel  again,  ....  yet  I  can  understand 
your  Henry's  even  thinking  it  desirable  (as  cutting  off  all  chance  of 
compromise).  But  it  troubles  my  very  soul.  I  am  glad  to  be  living 
so  apart.    I  groan  over  it  on  all  accounts  

Davis's  message  makes  one's  heart  sink  and  one's  gorge  rise.  Well, 
all  this  is  better  than  previous  hypocrisy.  You  are  happily  more 
hopeful  than  I  about  the  effect  of  the  misfortune.  I  have  no  doubt 
whatever  about  the  eagerness  to  make  sacrifices  ;  but  there  is  no  sud- 
den cure  for  such  an  inveterate  habit  of  rash  and  conceited  judgment, 
such  unconsciousness  of  ignorance  and  insensibility  to  the  require- 
ments of  the  occasion,  as  have  overborne  military  commanders  

Every  mail  brings  a  bushel  of  letters  from  Northern  citizens,  insist- 
ing that  the  only  question  is  of  the  Union,  and  that  nothing  will  be 
done  about  slavery. 

And  then  the  preference  of  passion  to  reason,  and  fancy  to  fact !  .  .  .  . 

Whether  they  really  believe  that  nothing  will  be  done  about 
slavery,  or  say  so  because  they  think  it  will  please  people  here 
(which  is  a  mistake),  the  act  is  equally  disgusting.  But  such  people 
have  not  been  truckling  and  trimming  all  these  years  to  be  trusted 
by  you  or  me  to-day. 

October  2,  1861. 

My  dear  Friend,  —  I  have  been  writing  this  week  to  somebody 
else  in  the  United  States  ;  to  whom,  do  you  think  ?  Hon.  Simon 
Cameron,  Secretary  of  War.    "  What  about  ? "    Well,  I  had  told 


CONVERSATIONS. 


509 


F.  Nightingale  (glad  to  send  her  any  word  of  cheer  in  her  affliction) 
that  our  book  was  known  and  read  in  America.  She  is  thankful, 
and  wrote  at  once  to  offer  me,  for  your  government,  not  only  the 
military  sanitary  reports  (which  I  should  have  sent  to  Dr.  Howe), 
but  all  our  war-office  regulations  arising  out  of  them,  some  of  which 
are  not  yet  under  cognizance  of  Parliament,  and  others  are  admitted 
to  be  the  best  in  existence,  and  are  applied  for  by  foreign  govern- 
ments. 

I  thought  these  ought  to  go  straight  to  your  war-office,  and  got 
them  packed  in  London,  and  despatched  this  week.  In  writing  an 
explanation,  I  took  occasion  to  say  that  we  should  be  thankful  to 
furnish  the  results  of  our  experience  and  our  reforms  to  all  armies, 
every  where,  if  we  had  the  power.  I  also  marked  my  letter  "pri- 
vate," lest  the  transaction  should  come  out  in  American  newspapers  as 
an  act  of  "  aid  and  comfort "  to  the  North,  preferentially,  on  the  part 
of  England  :  whereas  it  is  F.  N.'s  and  my  doing,  and  nobody's  else  ; 
and  we  should  have  done  the  same  by  any  other  army,  of  course, 
if  we  could.    If  duly  attended  to,  I  really  hope  and  believe  these 

documents  may  save  some  of  your  good  soldiers'  lives  The 

confidential  part  in  them  relates  chiefly  to  delicate  and  difficult  con- 
siderations about  the  quality,  attributes,  conditions,  and  circumstan- 
ces of  nurses,  nuns,  seculars,  married  or  single,  &c,  &c. 

Mr.  H.  Reeve  gives  me  the  most  cheering  account  of  the  effect 
of  free  trade  on  the  French,  and  on  our  relations  with  them. 
Really  there  seem  to  be  no  limits  to  the  good  to  be  expected  in  the 
diminution  of  the  false  military  spirit  and  evil  ambition  fostered  by 

discouragement  at  home  The  extension  of  commerce  for  the 

benefit  of  every  body  will  evidently  be  enormous.  I  do  wish  I  had 
had  Mr.  Reeve's  letter  before  I  wrote  the  leader  which  appeared 
yesterday  (in  this  1st  October,  on  France).  I  could  have  made  it 
a  brighter  picture.  The  consumers  are  beginning  to  see  how  they 
have  been  oppressed,  and  the  protected  are  so  far  consumers  that 
they  are  becoming  free-traders  as  fast  as  possible.  I  shall  have  to 
speak  of  these  facts  in  the  "  Standard  "  in  their  bearing  on  European 
politics  and  African  prospects,  and  in  connection  with  the  awful  state 
of  society  in  Russia.    I  have  not  heard  from  Sumner  since  I  wrote  to 

him  It  is  a  misfortune  to  a  public  man,  in  such  times,  to 

have  the  sort  of  egotism  in  his  way  (if  it  be  so)  which  could  make 
him  ignore  me  on  account  of  my  opinion  of  vituperative  oratory  from 
a  man  in  office.  And  we  who  are  otherwise  with  him  are  bound  to 
dissent  from  his  choice  of  a  mode  of  utterance  which  we  consider 


510 


MEMORIALS. 


indefensible.  However,  he  may  be  all  right  as  to  temper  ;  and  he 
has  sent  me  documents  since  I  gave  him  that  offence  ;  and  he  may 
reply  as  soon  as  he  has  news.    I  wonder  if  those  poor  Andersons 

will  ever  see  one  another  again  

0,  no  !  I  do  not  get  out  on  the  terrace,  nor  ever  shall,  —  not 
beyond  the  porch.  As  seen  from  the  windows  the  valley  is  gloriously 
beautiful  just  now. 

October  17. 

My  news  is,  this  week,  that  our  ministers  have  the  extremest  diffi- 
culty in  holding  back  Louis  Napoleon  and  Spain  from  breaking  the 
blockade.  It  is  actually  playing  into  the  enemy's  hands,  to  distrust 
and  insult  a  government  which  is  doing  its  duty  well  in  difficult 
times.  Your  correspondent,  's,  letters,  have  been  so  exceed- 
ingly good  on  the  whole,  that  I  the  more  regret  this  senseless  freak  of 
his.  Well  as  he  judges  of  your  affairs  and  of  others  which  he  has 
the  means  of  understanding,  he  really  is  almost  always  more  or  less 
wrong  about  London  doings,  —  Ministry  and  Parliament.  He  reads 
scarcely  any  papers  on  general  politics.  He  can  please  himself  about 
that,  but  he  should  not  speak  unless  he  will  first  qualify  himself  on 
that  set  of  subjects. 

I  hope  somebody  will  tell  me  when  either  "  yes  "  or  "no  "  becomes 
apparent  about  Anderson's  family.  Surely  Sumner  will  tell  either 
you  or  me  when  he  has  any  sort  of  notion  whether  there  will  be  any 
sort  of  result. 

.  ...  It  is  mischievous  for  the  cause  that  and  and  

do  not  know  what  a  "  personality  "  is.  Let  them  look  for  "  personal " 
in  Johnson.  It  is  the  third  or  fourth  meaning,  I  believe.  Never 
mind  it  all.  I  don't.  But  they,  in  their  mood,  will  be  likely  to  fancy 
every  thing  sensitiveness.  It  is  only  to  say  "  stop  writing,"  and  I 
stop.  I  have  no  sort  of  personal  interest  in  the  matter,  and  all  this  is 
to  me  simply  an  unaccountable  spectacle.    Very  odd. 

Harriet  Martineau  wrote  during  this  period  a  series  of  papers 
on  Army  Hygiene  for  Messrs.  Fields  and  Osgood's  "Atlantic 
Monthly." 

There  was  a  time  in  England  when  the  mistakes  of  American 
envoys  abroad,  of  officials  at  home,  of  editors  undertaking  mili- 
tary movements,  with  expressions  of  ill-will  from  popular  journal- 
ists de  part  et  d1  autre,  —  added  to  the  assurances  of  the  American 
government  that  the  conflict  was  going  on  for  the  status  quo  ante 
helium,  —  had  both  irritated  and  depressed  the  English  public 


CONVERSATION. 


511 


mind.  At  such  a  moment  it  was  that  the  lit.  Hon.  W.  E.  Fors- 
ter  made  his  great  speech  at  Bradford  on  American  affairs.  He 
was  able  to  do  a  statesman's  duty  by  both  countries  in  the  face 
of  all  discouragements ;  for  he  had  sympathy  at  home  and  a 
friend  at  hand  able  in  counsel,  with  whose  mind  he  had  been 
intimate  during  his  whole  political  life.  Yet  at  that  moment  of 
national  agitation  he  could  not  help  saying  that  it  seemed  as  if 
Harriet  Martineau  alone  was  keeping  this  country  straight  in 
regard  to  America.    Beferring  to  this  afterwards,  she  says  :  — 

"  It  made  my  heart  stop ;  but  I  am  sure  it  was  not  so  exactly,  because 
I  know  how  finely  our  ministers  were  and  are  putting  forth  their 
whole  power  to  restrain  France  and  Spain  from  breaking  the  block- 
ade. But  that  any  thing  like  what  he  said  should  hang  on  my  life 
makes  me  willing  to  live  longer." 

Shortly  after,  in  allusion  to  this  incident,  she  writes  :  — 

"  It  was  not  about  the  cotton  that  W.  E.  Forster  was  discouraged. 
We  shall  do  well  enough  for  cotton.  It  is  really  surprising  how  very 
little  influence  that  question  has  had  throughout.  The  feeling  here  is 
owing  to  a  lowness  of  spirit  and  conduct  observable  from  hence  where 
better  things  were  expected  ;  the  ignorance  of  the  many  at  the  North, 
and  the  concealments  and  falsehoods  of  the  few." 

October  31,  1861. 

I  don't  believe  Fremont  will  do  for  a  hero.  A  man  who  has  done, 
in  such  a  way,  what  he  has  done,  cannot  be  a  statesman  or  a  far- 
sighted  or  adequate  man  in  any  way,  unless  a  purely  military  way, 
which  remains  to  be  proved. 

I  perceive  you  ground  your  disapprobation  of  the  protective  system 
on  the  injustice  and  unkindness  to  foreign  peoples.  This  is  a  very 
strong  and  quite  indisputable  ground,  but  it  is  not  the  one  I  have  at 
all  had  in  view  at  this  time,  or  wished  to  bring  forward  in  discussing 
the  matter  in  the  "  Standard  "  or  elsewhere.  /  protest  against  the 
vicious  aristocratic  principle,  and  the  rank  oppression  exercised  over 
the  American  people  at  large,  for  the  selfish  interest  of  certain  classes. 
It  is  true  your  shippers  and  merchants  are  concerned  in  and  injured 
by  every  injury  inflicted  on  foreign  commerce  ;  but  it  is  a  graver 
consideration  to  my  mind  that  every  workingman  in  the  country  is 
injured  for  the  illicit  benefit  of  wealthier  classes.  Popular  ignorance 
alone  can  have  permitted  it  thus  long.    It  is  true  the  disposition  to 


512 


MEMORIALS. 


tyranny  and  greed,  which  is  conspicuous  -wherever  a  democracy  exists, 
has  made  protectionists  of  all  or  most  democratic  associations,  such 
as  the  most  stringent  trades-unions,  and  other  socialistic  organiza- 
tions ;  but  still,  it  is  inconceivable  that,  in  a  country  lull  of  working- 
men  like  yours,  a  handful  of  monopolists  will  be  permitted  to  saddle 
and  bridle  the  industrial  majority,  as  at  p resent.  When  the  case  is 
understood,  it  is  inconceivable  that  the  majority  will  put  up  with  it. 
I  wish  some  Member  of  Congress,  or  other  man  who  would  be  listened 
to,  would  propose,  as  a  matter  of  economy,  a  handsome  direct  appro- 
priation  to  the  iron-masters  and  mill-owners,  instead  of  preserving  the 
tariff.  It  would  be  a  vast,  incalculable  saving  to  pension  them  in  a 
thoroughly  handsome  way  and  throw  trade  open.  The  proposal  would 
open  people's  eyes  to  the  aggression  they  are  submitting  to. 

I  look  anxiously  for  some  sort  of  news  of  Anderson's  wife.  I  fear 
the  poor  fellow  is  in  wearing  suspense.  C.  Sumner  has  sent  me  his 
speech,  which  I  am  glad  of,  (but,  entre  nous,  how  very  bad  it  is  '.) 

Your 

H.  M. 

November  25,  1861. 

Your  letters  make  my  heart  ache,  "but  it  would  ache  ten  times 
worse  if  they  were  any  thing  but  what  they  are  

That  young  Putnam  martyr's  glimpse  of  the  future*  is  dreadfully 
painful,  notwithstanding  the  satisfaction  from  his  devotedness.  Ten 
thousand  precious  lives  thrown  away  through  "bad  government,  in  a 
self-governing  nation  !...." 

You  and  I  attribute  these  calamities  to  the  influence  of  slavery, 
while  ignorant  and  distant  observers  generally  attribute  too  little 

to  that  and  too  much  to  the  democratic  system  There  is 

cotton  enough  now  for  six  months  of  three  fourths  time,  and  plenty 
coming. 

It  is  pleasant  to  find  that  the  temptation  even  will  be  less  than  we 
expected,  and  that  we  can  cut  all  connection  with  the  South  in  future 
if  duty  requires  it.  I  never  believed  that  we  should  act  essentially 
different  on  cotton  considerations. 

Ambleside,  March  27,  1862. 
My  dearest  Friend,  —  I  had  pen  and  paper  before  me  when  your 
letter  and  the  "  Tribune"  came,  and  ill  fared  all  the  intended  letters. 
I  wrote  off  a  letter  for  "  Daily  News "  on  Schurz's  speech  as  the 

*  This  gallant,  devoted  young  man  said,  "Ten  thousand  of  us  must  fall,  and 
all  will  then  go  right." 


CONVERSATIONS. 


513 


happiest  incident  since  Lincoln's  accession.  I  yielded  to  the  impulse 
to  tell  the  good  news  to  the  English.  I  need  not  spend  space  or 
strength  in  telling  you  what  I  think  of  it,  only  this,  —  that  even  you 
can  perhaps  scarcely  conceive  the  relief  and  pleasure  it  is  to  read  a 
political  speech  which  is  wholly  clear  of  adulation  of  any  body,  and 
of  self-praise  (American).    And  0,  how  wise,  and  —    Well,  we  agree 

about  it,  of  course  It  promises  what  we  had  been  sickening 

for  want  of,  —  the  uprising  of  men  fit  for  the  crisis,  men  made  by  the 

time  to  make  a  new  time  

One  cannot  help  laughing,  shocking  as  the  thing  is,  at  the  idiotic 
notion  we  hear  of,  that  we  (the  English)  shall  be  grieved  and  mor- 
tified at  American  virtue  and  happiness  !  On  the  very  lowest  sup- 
position, —  that  we  could  spare,  time  and  thought  for  our  own  little 
complacencies,  —  it  is  for  our  interest,  our  repute  as  the  champions 
of  the  North,  that  the  North  should  justify  our  championship.  Can't 
they  comprehend  that?  It  is  no  laughing  matter,  however,  that 
there  should  be  any  where  malice  enough  to  make  such  a  delu- 
sion  

I  hear  that  Professor  Masson,  editor  of  "  Macmillan's  Magazine," 
desires  me  to  write  in  it  on  American  matters.  Yet  keep  it  to  your- 
self, please,  at  present,  as  it  may  not  come  to  pass  This  week  I 

have  got  "  Pierce  and  his  Clients  "  into  "  Once  a  Week,"  but  there  is 
not  much  satisfaction  in  treating  of  American  subjects  there,  the  editor 
being  too  much  of  a  "  Times  "  contributor  to  like  what  I  say  about 
America.  It  is  only  out  of  deference  that  he  inserts  such  things. 
To  be  sure,  it  is  ground  rescued  from  the  enemy,  and  that  is  good  

I  am  abundantly  disgusted  with  Club  and  "  Times  "  insolence  and 
prejudice,  and  I  speak  and  write  against  them  with  all  my  might. 
I  also  see  that  distaste  to  Americans  and  disapprobation  aroused  by 
the  instances  of  lowness  of  official  conduct  and  national  morality 
have  increased  during  the  last  year  ;  but  I  do  not  believe  there  is 
any  ill-will  whatever.  It  is  a  case  of  impaired  esteem,  and  not  of  ill- 
will  ;  and  of  course  the  esteem  may  be  and  certainly  will  be  recovered 
by  good  desert.  The  ideal  of  temper  and  manners  is  widely  different 
in  the  two  nations. 

Because  we  hear  so  little  from  the  South,  ignorant  people  suppose 
the  conduct  and  manners  are  better  there  ;  you  and  I  know  to  the 
contrary  ;  but  the  inference  is  natural  from  the  greater  reticence 
(or  what  here  appears  so)  of  the  Southerners  ;  and  then  we  do  not 
get  from  the  South  the  petty  spite  which  amazes  the  readers  of 
Northern  newspapers. 


514 


MEMORIAL. 


If  your  people  would  but  abstain  from  boasting  till  they  may  put 
off  their  armour  !  .  .  .  . 

The  finance  is  the  doom  which  they  evidently  do  not  perceive. 
Well,  they  will  find  it  out ;  and  meantime  the  aspect  of  affairs  has 
brightened  every  way. 

December  13,  1863. 
One  of  the  American  correspondents  of  "  Daily  News,"  I  think, 
concludes  "  S.,"  the  letter- writer  in  the  "  Times,"  to  be  Slidell.  But 
it  is  Spence,  as  I  dare  say  you  know.  If  it  happens  that  you  hear  the 
mistake  repeated,  just  set  it  right.  Even  the  "Times"  would  not 
admit  a  Southern  editor  to  write  letters  as  a  contributor.  You  see, 
according  to  Cobden,  the  "  Times"  has  one  tenth  of  the  circulation 
of  the  daily  papers.  Why  should  Northern  people  seem  to  believe 
that  the  "  Daily  News,"  the  organ  of  the  great  liberal  party  in  Great 
Britain,  and  to  a  considerable  extent  in  Europe,  has  no  subscription  ? 
I  can't  understand  the  sense  of  running  down  the  best  friend  the 
North  has  in  the  European  press.  But  the  delusion  is  even  odder 
than  the  impolicy.  The  superior  order  of  the  press  here  is  pretty 
strong  on  the  right  side.  But  I  suppose  it  is  difficult  for  some  to 
admit  any  thing  to  be  friendly,  short  of  large  draughts  of  unqualified 
praise. 

The  puzzle  is  to  me  that  those  who  have  been  impressing  upon 
England  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  that  the  crowning  evil  of  slavery 
was  its  having  deteriorated  the  national  morale,  —  the  very  people 
who  have  been  denouncing  the  corruption  of  all  but  a  very  few  of  the 
whole  of  Northern  society,  —  seem  to  have  forgotten  all  this,  and  to 
stand  up  for  the  virtue,  on  all  points,  of  the  society  they  condemned 
before.  Now,  we  cannot  forget  these  lessons  in  an  hour  in  that  way. 
We  do  believe  such  to  be  the  operation  of  slavery  ;  and  we  see  that  it 
has  been  so  ;  and  a  nation  and  its  moral  sense  cannot  be  regenerated 
—  made  pure,  and  free,  and  steadfast  in  virtue  —  in  a  day,  or  a  year,  or 
a  generation.  But  they  are  not  satisfied  unless  every  soil  of  American 
people  are  admitted  to  be  greater  and  wiser  and  better  than  any  body 
else  ;  and  all  the  advantages  to  be  owing  to  the  excellence  of  the  peo- 
ple. We  know  this  not  to  be  true  ;  and  we  don't  pretend  to  think  it. 
I  am  sure  we  recognize  the  improvement  as  far  as  it  is  apparent ;  but 
we  do  not  believe,  and  we  will  not  say  we  believe,  that  the  moral 
devastation  caused  by  slavery  in  every  part  of  the  Union  can  be 
suddenly  and  completely  repaired.  We  see  that  it  is  not  by  this  very 
passion  which  has  no  patience  in  it  Look  at  the  flagrant  dis- 
regard of  truth  in  patriotic  Americans.    Look  at  Beecher's  statement 


CONVERSATION'S. 


515 


about  the  Trent  in  matters  in  which  I  for  one  could  teach  him.  Look 
at  Sumner's  speech,  furious  and  untrue,  which  any  school-boy  in 
England  would  despise,  and  then  look  at  the  reckless  statements  that 
Sumner's  speech  caused  the  stopping  of  the  rams  ;  when  the  truth  is 
that  Mr.  Adams  and  the  editor  of  the  "  Daily  News,"  and  Mr.  Forster 
and  I,  and  many  more  knew  that  the  rams  were  stopped  twelve  days, 
and  the  newspapers  announced  it  on  authority  nine  days,  before  Sum- 
ner's speech  arrived  in  England.  (I  will  put  the  dates  down  on 
another  sheet.) 

I  do  not  talk  in  this  way  to  English  folk,  except  to  Maria  and 
W.  E.  Forster,  —  to  those  who  will  help  the  more  the  more  has  to  be 
done. 

About  this  Cobden  turmoil  ;  I  am  very  sorry  Cobden  is  so  cross,  — 

so  often  and  so  very  cross  One  comfort  is  that  the  "  Times' " 

ways  are  exposed.  It  will  do  good  in  many  directions  ;  but  it  is  a 
pity  that  the  injury  to  Cobden  should  be  so  great,  after  the  vast  ser- 
vices he  has  rendered  to  both  England  and  France.    I  must  stop. 

Yours  always, 

H.  M. 

July  8,  1862. 

I  think  the  very  worst  thing  yet  done  on  this  side  the  water  is  the 
"  Times  ■  leader  on  the  4th  of  July.  I  call  every  body  I  know  to 
witness  that  if  we  have  war  with  the  United  States  the  u  Times  "  may 
be  considered  answerable  for  it.  It  seems  to  me  to  be  a  sort  of  crazy 
malignity. 

....  TVe  are  so  pleased  that  Professor  Cairnes's  book  has  had  such 
a  circulation  ;  out  of  print  a  fortnight  ago.    This  is  beyond  my  hopes. 

I  meant  to  try  to  send  you  my  second  Historiette  to-day.  I  wonder 
how  you  will  like  it.  And  I  wonder  how  I  shall  like  it  too,  with 
Millais's  illustrations. 

Hoo-ray  !  here  is  your  letter.  It  comforts  me  about  the  plain 
speech  with  which  we  go  on  together.  Yes,  we  are  agreed  as  regards 
ourselves,  —  plain  truth  spoken  ;  kindly,  generously  received,  and  done 
with.  Louis  Napoleon  is  in  a  mess  about  Mexico.  He  cannot  be 
quiet.  He  will  be  meddling  with  you,  and  in  Eastern  Europe,  and 
coaxing  Russia,  and  teazing  Germany.  At  home,  however,  and  in 
France,  many  things  are  improving.  If  Mr.  Lucas's  book  should 
come  in  your  way  ("  Secularia  :  Surveys  on  the  Main  Stream  of  His- 
tory") do  look  at  the  chapter  last  but  one,  —  "Absolutism  in  Ex- 
tremis," —  for  his  revelations  of  the  conditions  and  perplexity  of 
French  politics.    To  my  taste  this  book  is  charming,  though  he  and 


516 


MEMORIALS. 


I  differ  about  American  politics.  Nearly  all  the  rest  is  a  very  great 
treat  to  me.    But  that  is  much  owing  to  the  work  I  do. 

Yes,  I  am  pleased,  as  you  suppose,  at  my,  or  any  body's,  Political 
Economy  being  read  by  any  of  your  people.  I  hope,  however,  that 
some  one  will  bid  them  remember  that  the  abuses  shown  up  are 
nearly  or  quite  all  remedied  here,  —  some  mainly  through  that  very 
book.  It  really  should  be  understood  that  the  evils  have  long  ceased 
to  exist. 

Ever  your 

H.  M. 

July  22,  1862. 

My  dearest  Friend,  —  Our  hearts  and  heads  are  too  full  now  for 
writing,  since  this  bad  news  from  the  army  

Before  you  get  this  you  will  have  seen  the  debate  on  Friday  last 
("Daily  News,"  July  19).  Mason  was  under  the  gallery  during 
Forster's  speech.  Lindsay  went  straight  up  to  speak  to  Mason  on 
finishing  his  own  dull,  silly  speech.  You  will  be  struck  by  the  wari- 
ness of  Forster  (in  one  so  impetuous,  especially).  It  produced  a  very 
great  effect,  and  I  think  Lord  P.'s  conclusion  must  have  damped  any 
hopes  of  Mason's  very  effectually.  I  doubt  not  the  French  Emperor 
is  as  eager  for  intervention  as  people  say  ;  but  I  am  confident  there 
never  was  an  idea  of  it  here.  None  but  the  cronies  of  the  Southern 
agitators  can  ever  have  imagined  it  possible.  As  for  the  "  small  and 
strong  war  party "  that  you  hear  of,  if  you  will  read  instead  hostile 
party.  I  could  agree  ;  but  I  know  no  person  who  believes  there  is  a 
man,  woman,  or  child  in  the  kingdom  who  desires  war.  There  is  a 
singular  recoil  from  American  temper  and  manners,  on  account  of  the 
newspapers  there  being  mistaken  for  organs  of  the  national  spirit  and 
intellect.  There  is  the  gross  mistake  also  of  fancying  the  South  more 
sensible,  practicable,  and  better  behaved  than  the  North.  But  this  is 
very  different  from  wishing  for  war.  The  feeling  is  not  pugnacious, 
but  rather  of  weariness  and  disgust ;  a  wishing  never  to  hear  of 
America  again.  The  most  insulting  letters  are  sent  to  "  Daily  News  " 
as  if  from  Lancashire,  but  they  are  understood  to  be  a  Southern 
device.  Our  editor  has  been  very  ill,  but  is  recovering.  He  will  not 
be  at  the  office  till  September,  and  I  have  promised  to  help  all  I 
can.  He  was  sub-editor  when  Mr.  Weir  died,  and  succeeded  him,  of 
course,  having  risen  and  risen  to  that  post,  and  was  for  some  time  in 
charge  of  the  foreign  department,  which  requires  languages  and  large 
knowledge.  He  is  now  editor,  and  long  may  he  continue  so.  They 
write  from  the  office  thus  :  "  The  truth  is,  he  takes  his  work  very 


CONVERSATIONS. 


517 


much  to  lieart,  and  on  the  American  question  especially.  There  is  no 
editor  in  Europe,  I  am  persuaded,  so  nobly  conscientious  and  high- 
minded."  Is  not  this  pleasant  ?  M.  A.  (I  think  I  told  you,  —  the  most 
fastidious  of  men  and  scholars)  met  him  at  dinner,  and  was  profoundly 
struck  by  his  power  and  earnestness.  You  ask  how  many  articles  I 
have  written  for  "Daily  News."  Well,  there  is  a  boxful  of  them 
here  and  a  list  at  the  office,  all  safe,  if  that  were  of  any  conse- 
quence ;  but  all  I  care  for  is,  not  to  be  credited  with  articles  I  did 

not  write.    Any  body  is  welcome  to  the  credit  of  those  I  did  

Lord  Palmerston  I  believe  to  have  no  principle,  no  heart  ;  he  is 
insolent,  light,  unscrupulous,  and  kept  right  about  the  United  States 

now  by  national  opinion  and  by  his  colleagues  How  on 

earth  can  any  body  admire  Louis  Napoleon  !  I  hope  it  is  not 
being  illiberal,  but  I  find  it  difficult  to  admire  any  body  that  does 
admire  him.  "Daily  News"  is  as  far  from  doing  so  as  can  be,  as 
you  must  perceive  

Abolition  I  consider  secure,  in  one  way  or  another,  but  I  see  noth- 
ing else  cheering  ;  and  the  financial  difficulties  — 

0  my  friend,  how  I  mourn  with  you  over  this  bad  news  from  the 
army  !  I  hardly  venture  near  the  subject,  it  is  so  overwhelming. 
Day  and  night  I  am  thinking  of  your  suffering  country  and  the  ten- 
sion upon  you. 

December,  1862. 

My  Friend,  —  I  cannot  let  my  mere  envelope  go  without  a  line, 
especially  because  you  have  answered  my  questions  so  distinctly  and 
openly,  just  as  I  wished.  I  must  repeat  just  one  ;  because  I  really, 
as  an  advocate,  need  the  answer.  What  do  your  best  citizens,  such 
as  Mr.  Jay,  say  at  this  time  as  to  the  clause  in  the  Declaration  of 
Independence,  that  "  Government  derives  its  just  powers  from  the 
consent  of  the  governed "  ?  Do  they  give  up  the  doctrine  as  un- 
sound ?  If  so,  what  do  they  substitute  ?  If  not,  how  justify  coer- 
cion ?  You  will  see  at  once  that  this  is  a  stumbling-block  here. 
As  men  say,  "  Who  may  have  a  will  as  to  the  government  they 
will  live  under,  if  not  five,  six,  or  seven  millions  of  people  of  our 
own  race  1 " 

We  do  rejoice  over  that  First  South  Carolina  Regiment.  It  is  the 
only  thing  in  the  actual  fighting  that  has  given  me  any  pleasure  at 
all.    How  manly  and  rational  the  good  fellows  were ! 

How  few  on  your  side  of  the  water  who  do  not  seem  crazy  with 
revolutionary  passion  !  Some  of  the  feelings  are  fine,  and  some  of 
the  conduct ;  but  reason  seems  gone,  and  knowledge  and  philosophy 


518 


MEMORIALS. 


of  no  effect.  It  is  more  than  mournful ;  it  is  fearful.  You  see  that 
there  is  no  fear  of  English  intervention,  nor  ever  was.  Scamp*  will 
do  you  a  mischief  if  he  can. 

My  best  love. 

H.  M. 

Remarking  upon  the  consequences  of  the  Legal  Tender  Act, 

she  says  :  — 

"  I  suppose  there  must  be  some  people  among  you  who  know  now 
what  to  expect  about  finance.  I  wish  they  could  influence  the  news- 
papers not  to  mislead  the  people  so  cruelly.  The  prolific  character 
of  the  country,  the  triumphant  industry  of  the  people,  —  it  is  all  true  ; 
and  in  course  of  time  these  may  create  any  amount  of  wealth  ;  but 
this  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  deficit  of  the  case  in  hand.  It 
does  not  apply  to  the  agony  caused  meanwhile  to  the  people  by  the 
creation  of  money  which  turns  to  dry  leaves  in  the  use  ...  .  actually 
appeals  to  the  briskness  of  trade  and  plenty  of  money  as  a  sign  of 
Mr.  Chase's  wisdom  and  the  prosperity  of  the  country,  when  these 
are  precisely  the  symptoms  of  the  coming  destruction.  He  wonders 
that  foreigners  are  not  eager  to  lend  their  money,  at  the  very  moment 
when  the  last  chance  of  any  security  is  destroyed  by  such  a  creation 
of  fictitious  wealth  as  the  world  should  never  have  seen  again." 

The  annexed  poem,  an  effusion  of  the  heart  whose  sympathies 
in  joy  as  in  sorrow  knew  no  distinction  of  class  or  nationality, 
ought  to  find  a  place  at  this  date  (March  10,  1863). 

THE  SISTER  BRIDES. 

The  sun  is  up  ;  the  cottage  girl  is  springing  from  her  bed. 
The  day  is  come,  —  there 's  much  to  do  ;  and  soon  her  prayers  are  said  : 
She  feeds  the  chicks,  she  sweeps  the  house  and  makes  the  kettle  boil ; 
Once  more,  this  once,  she  does  it  all,  to  save  dear  mother's  toil. 
Now  she  puts  on  her  Sunday  gown,  pets  Dicky  on  his  perch,  — 
She  knows  her  love  is  there  outside,  all  ready  for  the  church. 
Her  face  tells  what  is  in  her  heart  in  turning  from  the  door,  — 
"  To  live  with  him  all  day !  my  love,  my  own  for  evermore." 

The  Danish  maiden  by  the  sea  is  looking  far  and  wide,  — 
She  knows  the  boat  will  soon  come  in  with  this  fresh  morning  tide  : 
And  there  it  comes  ;  deep-laden  sure,  for  well  the  nets  are  blest : 
She  could  not  stay  within  before,  but  now  she  must  be  dressed. 

*  This  was  her  abbreviation  for  Louis  Napoleon. 


CONVERSATIONS. 


519 


He  lifts  his  oar,  —  she  moves  her  hand,  and  trips  within  the  cot ; 
'T  is  the  last  time  he  '11  land  without  one  waiting  at  that  spot. 
When  evening  comes  those  twain  are  one,  and  whispering  on  the  shore, 
"  To  live  together,  O  my  love  !  my  own  for  evermore." 

The  factory-girl  is  up  before  the  early  bell  is  ringing  ; 

"  The  day  is  come,  —  my  wedding-day,"  her  busy  heart  is  singing. 

The  noisy  mill  is  music  now  ;  her  secret  is  her  own  ; 

The  neighbours  feel  how  gay  she  is,  how  kind  in  every  tone. 

The  breakfast-hour  gone  by,  they  see  the  ring  upon  her  finger, 

They  tell  how  at  the  factory -gate  they  saw  her  lover  linger. 

She  lets  them  talk  ;  she  thinks  all  day,  till  that  day's  task  is  o'er, 

"  It  is  my  husband  now,  my  love  !  my  own  for  evermore. 

The  handmaid  early  comes  to  wake  the  daughter  of  the  house  ; 
The  slumber  is  but*feigned,  for  she  is  still  as  any  mouse,  — 
Is  full  of  thoughts  ;  more  silent  she,  the  more  her  heart  is  singing. 
What  is 't  to  her  that  guests  are  come,  that  the  church-bells  are 
ringing  ? 

The  day  is  like  a  dream,  —  the  feast,  the  flowers,  the  bridal  veil ; 
The  blessing  in  the  church  and  home.    Who  cannot  read  the  tale 
Her  eyes  relate  to  him  who  with  her  leaves  her  father's  door  ? 
"  To  live  my  life  with  him,  my  love  !  my  own  for  evermore." 

All  England  rings  with  wedding  peals.    The  people  cry  aloud 
Their  blessing  on  the  royal  pair  whose  lot  is  bright  and  proud. 
In  sweetness  all  the  pride  is  lost  to  her  whose  day  is  come  ; 
The  brightness  all  is  in  the  thought  of  husband  and  of  home. 
What  though  within  the  chapel  throng  the  nobles  of  the  realm, 
Her  in  her  bliss  no  splendour  daunts,  no  pomp  can  overwhelm : 
The  bridal  song  in  low  or  high  is  still,  the  wide  world  o'er, 
"  To  live  my  life  with  him,  my  love  !  my  own  for  evermore." 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 
March  10,  1863.    (Wedding-day  of  Albert  Edward  and  Alexandra.) 

LETTER  TO  MRS.  F.  G.  SHAW. 

Ambleside,  March  24,  1864. 
My  dear  Madam,  —  An  hour  ago  arrived  the  precious  portrait  of 
your  son  ;  and  it  stands  before  me  now,  as  it  will  for  many  a  day,  to 
cheer  me  for  his  country,  and  to  melt  my  heart  for  you.  I  think  you 
must  have  perceived  that  no  one  feature  of  this  fearful  war  has  inter- 
ested people  so  much  as  the  career  and  death  of  your  son.  Many 


520 


MEMORIALS. 


hearts  have  been  touched  and  many  minds  enlightened  by  that  sacri- 
fice, which  were  blind  and  insensible. 

While  I  was  writing  Dr.  Arnold's  youngest  daughter  came  in. 
She  had  told  me  before  that  she  could  not  look  at  the  portrait  (the 
smaller  one)  without  tears,  for  its  singularly  touching  expression. 
You  may  imagine  her  pleasure  at  finding  here  the  larger  one,  where 
she  can  come  and  see  it  whenever  she  likes.  She  and  her  mother  are 
the  best  sympathizers  I  have  here  in  the  American  cause. 

It  is  so  good  of  you  to  send  me  this  sacred  gift,  that  I  really  do  not 
know  how  to  thank  you  for  it.  I  can  only  say  that  it  is  a  sacred 
possession  to  me,  and  that  it  shall  go  next  to  no  one  who  does  not 
regard  it  as  I  do,  after  I  am  gone. 

Believe  me,  with  much  respect  and  sympathy,  yours, 

H.  MARTINEAU. 

LETTER  TO  THE  EDITOR  OF  THE  "  STANDARD." 

Ambleside,  June  14,  1865. 
Sir,  —  I  beg  to  express  my  thanks  for  the  kindness  shown  in  send- 
ing me  the  "  Standard  "  up  to  this  time  ;  and  to  say  that  I  shall  now 
be  obliged  by  your  discontinuing  to  forward  it  to  me.  The  American 
Antislavery  Society,  having  fulfilled  its  mission  of  rousing  and  con- 
vincing the  nation  and  securing  the  emancipation  of  the  negroes,  may 
now  work  in  fellowship  with  society,  and  no  longer  in  opposition  to, 
or  censure  of  it.  The  interest  of  the  friends  of  the  negroes  and  their 
rights  now  passes  over  to  the  efforts  made  on  behalf  of  the  freed 
people.  Neither  that  strong  interest  nor  any  other  will  ever  in  the 
slightest  degree  impair  the  world's  gratitude  to  the  great  leaders  of 
this  moral  revolution,  who  have  completed  their  great  task,  and  are 
now  ready  for  the  new  labours  in  which  the  old  have  merged.  Of 
their  many  distinctions,  none  will  be  brighter  in  the  eyes  of  future 
generations  than  this  particular  manifestation  of  their  disinterested 
patriotism.  It  is  so  profoundly  impressive  to  old  friends  of  the  cause 
watching  from  a  distance.  To  such,  of  course,  the  "  Standard  "  has 
lost  its  interest,  even  if  it  does  not  become  misleading  ;  and  this  is 
the  reason  of  my  request  to  you.    I  am,  sir, 

Your  obedient  servant, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

November  27,  1871. 
What  capital  news  New  York  is  sending  to  the  civilized  world! 
What  a  fine  spectacle  it  is,  —  the  higher  order  of  citizens,  the  men  of 


CONVERSATIONS. 


521 


culture,  trained  tastes,  and  gentle  manners,  repairing  to  the  field  of 
political  action  because  it  is  the  field  of  patriotic  duty  ;  the  more 
zealously  the  greater  disgust  they  must  encounter.  If  they  now  per- 
severe, they  will  have  regenerated  their  city  and  State  ;  they  will  have 
done  more  to  republicanize  the  world  than  has  been  done  yet.  They 
will  have  exactly  met  the  fatal  doubt  that  has  not  yet  been  solved  in 
connection  with  genuine  republican  government. 

March  6,  1873. 

I  think  you  had  rather  have  a  short,  sincere  letter,  neither  gay  nor 
comfortable,  than  none.  I  feared  I  must  fail  to-day.  It  is  one  of  my 
worst  days.  Meantime,  this  will  be  a  busy  month,  with  the  spring 
cleaning  and  whitewashing.  (Do  you  remember  the  turning  out  of 
the  books  on  the  terrace,  which  you  thought  so  unnecessary  ?)  Then 
the  new  carpet  for  the  drawing-room  for  my  successor,  the  killing 
and  curing  the  pig,  and  then  my  maid's  journey. 

March  20, 1873. 

The  Life  of  Dickens  is  far  too  exclusively  occupied  by  his  personal 
relations  with  Forster.  The  book  must  lower  Dickens  in  popular  es- 
timation, and  can  do  no  credit  to  Forster.  Yet  it  has  an  interest,  and 
is  worth  reading.  In  the  second  volume  I  am  much  struck  by  Dick- 
ens's hysterical  restlessness.  It  must  have  been  terribly  wearing  to 
his  wife.  His  friends  ought  to  have  seen  that  his  brain  was  in 
danger,  —  from  apoplexy,  not  insanity.  To  how  great  an  extent  the 
women  of  his  family  are  ignored  in  the  book  !   The  whole  impression 

left  by  it  is  very  melancholy  At  all  times,  in  all  his  writings, 

Dickens  opposed  and  criticised  all  existing  legal  plans  for  the  relief 
of  the  poor.  I  had  almost  forgotten  the  "  Historiettes  "  [her  stories 
in  "  Once  a  "Week  "].  I  have  no  copy  of  them.  You  ask  why  they 
should  not  be  republished.  If  they  and  "  Representative  Men  "  are 
worth  it,  I  should  be  quite  willing. 

April  3,  1873. 

....  If  your  statesmen  could  only  be  trained  for  their  offices,  better 
qualified  to  meet  and  fulfil  the  wishes  of  the  best  republicans  in  the 
commonwealth  !  No  doubt  matters  will  come  to  this.  Rising  disgust 
at  the  evils  of  the  present  time  has  risen  as  high  as  it  will  go.  You 
will  again  have  real  statesmen,  as  in  the  early  days  of  the  Republic  ; 
and  what  nation  has  ever  been  so  happy  as  yours  may  be  then  ? 

But  I  did  not  mean  to  scribble  on  in  this  way,  and  will  tell  you 
something  you  will  care  for  far  more.  I  have  just  been  in  the  midst 
of  our  parting  emotions  with  our  friends  the  Arnolds,  who  are  to  be 
away  three  months.    I  miss  them  more  and  more  painfully  every 


522 


MEMORIALS. 


time  they  go  ;  and  the  changes  in  my  state  of  health  are  so  many, 
that  I  have  no  expectation  of  being  in  my  present  condition  when 
they  return.  I  am  now  putting  before  them  the  great  enterprise 
which  has  grown  out  of  the  C.  D.  Acts  agitation,  and  the  national 
Association  for  the  Promotion  of  Social  Purity,  —  the  combination  of 
people  who  believe  personal  purity  to  be  as  possible,  as  desirable, 
as  absolutely  requisite,  in  men  as  in  women. 

I  send  you  some  letters  and  papers  which  will  give  you  an  idea 

of  what  is  doing  It  is  a  blessing  to  see  if  one  cannot  help  such 

an  enterprise,  undertaken  in  the  spirit  of  hope  and  faith  by  such 
people  as  Mr.  Shaen,  Mr.  Warr,  Mrs.  Butler,  and  the  Sheldon  Amos 
family,  and  many  more,  who  know  what  it  is  to  go  into  a  great 
cause,  into  conflict  with  the  passions  of  the  most  unscrupulous  men, — 
the  influence  of  the  medical  profession  in  particular. 

July  9,  1873. 

I  don't  think  there  is  much  change  in  me.  I  am  sure  I  don't 
make  blunders,  but  the  ineffectiveness  increases.  I  do  not  fancy 
unreal  things. 

I  am  in  a  state  of  something  like  remorse  about  a  visitor  who  came 
last  week,  —  Mrs.  Wistar,  once  Anne  Furness.  That  any  Furness 
should  be  here,  and  I  not  ready  with  such  a  welcome  as  I  long  to 
give,  and  they  so  richly  deserve  from  me  !  But  I  was  so  much  more 
than  usually  ill  and  worn  out,  that  I  could  with  difficulty  see  or 
hear.  How  beautiful  was  Mrs.  Furness  when  I  saw  her !  I  like 
to  hear  of  her  being  so  still. 

I  see  in  an  American  paragraph,  commenting  on  a  statement  in 
the  "  London  Athenaeum,"  that  Mr.  Grote  was  the  author  of  a  work 
called  "An  Analysis  of  the  Operation  of  Natural  Religion."  Now, 
it  was  not  written  by  Mr.  Grote,  but  by  Jeremy  Bentham  ;  nor  was 
it  published,  only  printed.  If  you  should  at  any  time  or  any  where 
hear  of  that  atheistical  work  as  written  by  either  Mr.  or  Mrs.  Grote, 

please  to  contradict  it.   and  I  not  only  decline  being  on  the  Mill 

memorial  committee,  but  keep  back  for  the  present  our  contribution 
to  the  memorial  fund.  I  would  willingly  pay  my  tribute  to  Mill  in 
certain  capacities,  but  we  have  warning  to  wait  and  see  what  construc- 
tion is  put  upon  the  act. 

August  21,  1873. 

"Worse  than  ever,  no  delusions,  or  mistakes,  or  haunting  ideas, 
but  the  strange  feelings  I  have  tried  to  convey  to  you, — in  vain ;  as  I 
am  aware  one  cannot  convey  a  sensation.  But  it  is  no  morbid  fancy 
that  I  am  failing,  and  I  don't  object  to  the  fact,  if  it  is  probable 


CONVERSATIONS. 


523 


that  the  general  power,  the  life,  fails  naturally  and  uniformly.  I 
will  endeavour  to  occupy  and  amuse  myself,  and  let  the  near  future 
take  care  of  itself.    I  am  not  always  unable  to  read. 

October  21,  1873. 

Worse  in  health.  No  second  fainting-fit,  nor  any  loss  of  sense  ;  a 
pretty  complete  consciousness  ;  but  the  days  grow  dim  and  uncertain 
as  they  recede,  and  I  seem  unable,  without  exactly  understanding 
why,  to  get  any  thing  done.  Happily,  strength  and  power  of  brain 
diminish  in  about  equal  proportions,  so  that  all  who  love  me  may 
reasonably  hope  that  the  last  stage,  with  its  irksome  characteristics,  . 
will  not  be  a  long  one.  Surely  your  love,  so  faithful  and  so  strong, 
will  unite  you  with  me  in  this  hope.  I  am  certain  it  would,  if  you 
could  feel  one  hour  what  I  am  feeling  always.  My  anxiety  is  to  keep 
exactly  the  right  line  between  complaint  on  the  one  hand  and  con- 
cealment on  the  other.  Those  who  have  the  care  of  me  ought  to 
know  what  I  only  can  tell  them,  yet  I  dread  troubling  them  with 
evils  which  cannot  be  mended. 

November  20,  1873. 
Our  chief  interest  now  is  the  election  of  the  school-boards  at  Bir- 
mingham. The  League  has  an  immense  triumph,  —  eight  League  men 
and  women  heading  the  poll.  Their  association  for  religious  edu- 
cation apart  from  secular  has  set  them  right  with  those  who  fancied 
them  irreligious.  My  sister-in-law,  aged  eighty,  went  in  a  car,  with 
an  invalid  friend,  to  vote.  My  nephew  Frank,*  an  official  in  the 
League,  was  entreated  by  an  elderly  Quaker  to  write  to  his  mother,  a 
Quaker  lady  of  ninety,  imploring  her  to  come  some  miles  into  Bir- 
mingham to  vote.  I  hope  she  did.  No  one  election  in  the  country 
is  of  so  much  consequence.  The  League  did  a  clever  thing  in  printing, 
as  a  prodigious  poster,  a  passage  from  the  Queen's  book  about  the 
Dublin  schools,  which  her  husband  and  she  visited,  ending  with  a 
well-expressed  view  of  the  true  Christian  way  of  combining  religious 
education,  where  desired,  with  liberty  of  conscience.  Household  news  : 
Our  superb  meal-fed  pig  weighs  nearly  nineteen  stone.  I  have  had 
the  ivy  clipped  close ;  in  mercy  to  the  small  birds  I  do  it  in  late 
autumn,  when  the  nests  are  found  deserted,  and  in  spring  they  new- 
build. 

TO  MRS.  F.  G.  SHAW. 

Ambleside,  July  17,  1874. 
Dear  Mrs.  Shaw,  —  I  wish  to  send  you  my  thanks  under  my  own 
hand,  —  if  I  can  but  do  it,  —  for  sending  me  what  I  so  much  wished 

*  Mr.  Councillor  R.  F.  Martineau,  of  Birmingham. 


524 


MEMORIALS. 


to  see  as  Mr.  Curtis's  "  Eulogy "  on  his  friend.  It  is  very  beautiful, 
and  in  ways  which  are  not  interfered  with  by  differences  of  opinion 
in  regard  to  its  subject. 

Nobody  can  have  admired  Charles  Sumner  more,  in  his  day,  nor 
expected  more  from  him,  than  myself  ;  and  so  many  associations  of 
this  kind  remain  affectionately  linked  with  his  name,  that  it  is  a  deep- 
felt  enjoyment  to  his  oldest  friends  —  of  my  own  generation  —  to  read 
such  an  estimate  of  him  as  Mr.  Curtis  has  given  us.  But  it  is  re- 
quired by  self-respect,  in  such  a  case  as  my  own,  that  one  should  dis- 
claim any  thing  like  a  full  agreement  with  that  estimate,  or  perfect 
sympathy  with  the  mourning  of  those  who  believed  him  to  have  been 
greater  than  he  really  was. 

I  knew  him  well,  from  the  time  of  his  being  a  law-student,  —  a 
favourite  of  Judge  Story,  from  whom  I  took  my  first  estimate  of  him. 
Just  after  my  return  home  he  appeared  in  London,  and  my  mother 
and  I  had  the  pleasure  of  introducing  him  into  some  of  the  best 
society  that  he  saw.  I  was  struck  by  the  character  of  the  remarks 
made  on  him  by  friends,  —  the  same  in  the  case  of  all  eminent  in 
political  life.  They  found  him  morally  delightful,  and  a  thorough 
gentleman  in  mind  and  manners  ;  but  they  could  not  understand  the 
ground  of  any  high  expectation  from  him  in  a  political  career. 

When  he  came  again,  many  years  later,  —  some  twelve  or  more 
years  ago,  —  and  spent  a  few  days  with  me  here,  I  was  inexpressibly 
surprised  by  his  change  of  manner  and  air  of  assumption  in  political 
matters.  It  was  the  saddest  disappointment  in  the  career  of  a  politi- 
cal aspirant  that  in  my  long  and  special  experience  I  had  ever  known. 
Then  followed  the  dreadful  Alabama  speech,  —  the  introduction  of  the 
"  Indirect  Claims,"  —  which  might  have  plunged  two  nations  in  war 
but  for  Mr.  Forster's  effective  reply  ;  and  it  left  no  choice  to  Charles 
Sumner's  friends  but  to  admit  his  absolute  incapacity  for  political 
action,  or  —  worse.  I  had  no  hope  of  him  after  that ; .  .  .  .  but  here  is 
enough.  It  is  a  comfort  to  turn  to  the  bright  aspects  presented  by 
Mr.  Curtis,  not  only  in  all  sincerity,  but  with  actual  truth. 

And  here  I  should  like,  if  my  strength  holds  out,  to  give  you  one 
anecdote  characteristic  of  two  good  men,  in  the  vigour  of  their  polit- 
ical life,  and  friends  worthy  of  each  other,  —  at  that  time.  (After- 
wards one  lost  ground,  while  the  other  continued  to  rise.)  Charles 
Sumner  and  Lord  Carlisle  wished  to  know  each  other,  and  I  brought 
them  together.  Lord  Carlisle  was  then  viceroy  of  Ireland,  and  Charles 
Sumner  became  his  guest  at  the  castle  at  Dublin,  when  he  wanted  to 
see  Ireland. 


CONVERSATIONS. 


525 


On  his  return  to  the  castle,  after  a  tour  in  the  provinces,  he  found 
his  host  full  of  one  subject,  the  "Westminster  Review"  having 
just  appeared  with  the  article,  "The  Martyr  Age  of  the  United 
States." 

"  Have  you  read  it  ? "  asked  Lord  Carlisle. 
"  Yes,"  said  Sumner. 
"  Then  you  can  tell  me,  —  is  it  true  ?  " 
"  I  believe  it  is  true." 

"  Is  it  wholly  true,  —  true,  so  that  you  could  abide  by  it?" 

"Except  on  two  points,"  said  Sumner,  "I  could  agree  to  it  all. 

I  believe  that  would  have  been  arrested  if  he  had  not  been  an 

abolitionist ;  and  I  do  not  think  Mrs.  Chapman  so  beautiful  as  Miss 
Martineau  does." 

"  So  that  is  all  ?"  said  Lord  Carlisle. 

"  That  is  all,"  replied  Sumner. 

"Then  may  I  ask, — if  such  is  the  state  of  things  with  you, — what 
DO  you  propose  to  do  1 "  (very  emphatically.) 

Sumner's  answer  was,  "  Well  I  I  think  we  cannot  stand  the  moral 
blockade  of  the  world  longer  than  ten  years." 

Charles  Sumner  told  me  this  the  next  time  we  met ;  and  it  shows 
him  as  he  was  then  (in  1839),  and  I  like  to  dwell  upon  it  rather  than 
on  later  times. 

Dear  Mrs.  Shaw,  you  will  excuse  the  look  of  my  scrawl,  —  if  you 
know  into  what  depths  of  illness  I  have  sunk.  My  remaining  days, 
we  all  think,  must  now  be  very  few.  There  is  infinite  sweetness  in 
them,  from  the  love  which  surrounds  me  ;  but  the  fatigue  does  make 
me  long  for  rest.  So  you  will  not  be  sorry  when  you  hear  that  I  am 
gone. 

Mrs.  Chapman  still  writes  weekly  !  Only  think  of  it !  And  she 
has  sent  me  the  two  best  photographs  of  Sumner.  I  like  both,  but 
much  prefer  the  one  so  pathetic  and  full  of  mind,  —  taken  a  very 
short  time  before  his  death. 

Kindly  accept  my  warm  thanks  for  what  you  have  sent,  and  be- 
lieve me, 

Truly  and  gratefully  yours, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

January  14, 1874. 

Now  let  me  try  to  say  what  I  like  !  Not  that  there  is  any  thing 
remarkable  or  new  to  tell,  but  I  long  at  times  to  feel  as  I  used  to  do 


526 


MEMORIALS. 


and  to  -write  as  of  old,  —  as  if  I  were  speaking.  Certainly  I  am  much 
altered,  though  I  could  not  point  to  any  marked  change  at  any  par- 
ticular date,  and  could  not  say  that  my  "  faculties  are  failing,"  in  the 
popular  sense  of  the  term.  But  it  is  mere  waste  of  strength  to  de- 
scribe what  is  so  indescribable  as  my  condition.  I  have  just  dis- 
covered that  I  can  still  read  as  I  used  to  do. 


WAITING  FOE  DEATH. 


'  "  Sunt  homines  qui  cum  patientia  moriuntur :  sunt  autem  quidam  perfecti 
qui  cum  patientia  vivunt."  —  St.  Augustine. 

"  0,  yet  a  nobler  task  awaits  thy  hand."  —  Milton. 

All  misliking  of  sudden  death  was  taken  away  from  them  who 
years  before  had  seen  its  approach  at  The  Knoll  in  a  form  so  con- 
soling that  they  said,  as  did  Madame  de  Motteville  in  attendance 
on  Anne  of  Austria,  "  La  mort  en  elle  sembloit  belle  et  agreable." 

And  so  it  did  not  fail  to  be  during  the  ten  years  succeeding 
her  relinquishment  of  regular  daily  work,  supported  as  she  was, 
under  the  severe  and  various  suffering  that  slowly  wears  out  life, 
by  the  "  still  unfailing  sweetness  of  temper  "  told  of  by  all  who 
knew  her  earlier  years ;  by  the  imperturbable  patience,  the  sub- 
dued self-will,  and  the  never-ceasing  disinterested  devotedness 
to  the  highest  purposes  on  the  justest  principles. 

The  necessity  of  the  case,  however,  compelled  the  relinquish- 
ment of  the  "  Daily  News."  And  to  one  so  accomplished  for 
sage  counsel  whether  best  to  preserve  peace  or  to  uphold  war, 
knowing  what  so  few  do  know  respecting  civil  and  spiritual 
powers  and  the  limitations  of  each,  the  act,  however  unavoidable, 
was  a  difficult  one  to  perform.  She  had  literally  and  truly  sat 
under  the  palm-tree  for  forty  years,  and  all  Israel  had  come  up 
to  her  for  judgment ;  and  when  the  judgment,  ripened  by  ex- 
perience, is  at  its  highest  perfection,  the  suspension  of  the  power 
to  wield  it  is  the  most  deeply  felt. 

So  thought  Arago,  when  he  told  us  of  his  readiness  to  die,  with 
a  shade  of  regret  as  he  realized  that  till  now  he  had  never  been 
so  competent  to  live. 


528 


MEMORIALS. 


With  her  this  feeling  was  hut  momentary,  and  what  it  was 
will  be  better  seen  from  her  own  letters  than  in  any  other  way. 

LETTER  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

My  dearest  Friend,  —  I  have  never  before,  for  above  two  years, — 
never  since  Maria's  death,  —  shrunk  from  writing  to  you.  I  do  now, 
though  it  is  a  comfort  to  myself,  for  I  know  how  you  will  feel  when 
you  hear  that  my  work  in  life  —  my  special  business  —  is  done  and 
over.  You  will  have  been  prepared  for  this  by  what  I  said  and  asked 
of  you  about  resigning  my  engagement  at  "  Daily  News,"  but  no  fore- 
warning lessens  the  feeling  when  the  parting  moment  comes,  and  the 
signs  and  tokens  of  office  and  the  materials  of  business  have  to  be 
cleared  away.  To  me  it  is  not  the  great  pain  that  my  friends  sup- 
pose. I  am  too  far  gone  to  feel  it  in  that  way  ;  but  I  know  what 
it  will  be  to  you,  and  I  have  dreaded  sending  this  letter  more  than 
any  thing.  By  last  Tuesday  week  it  had  become  impossible  to  doubt 
that  I  must  resign  all  engagements,  and  free  myself  from  all  obliga- 
tion and  temptation  to  work.  On  that  clay,  therefore,  I  wrote  fully 
to  the  editor,  resigning  my  engagement,  and  telling  him  exactly  the 
state  of  the  case  about  my  health,  and  what  my  physician  said,  as  an 
honest  man,  and  what  he  anticipated  :  "  Why,  you  know  the  stormy 
weather  has  been  against  you.  It  is  possible  that,  with  settled  weather, 
you  may  rally  —  a  little."  I  believed  that  I  had  fully  prepared 
Mr.  Walker  by  my  preceding  letter ;  but  it  seems  not.  I  am  sure 
his  reply  will  go  to  your  heart,  as  it  has  done  to  all  ours.  I  was 
always  sure  he  was  a  man  of  deep  and  warm  feelings,  but  he  is  so 
undemonstrative  that  even  I  had  no  conception  of  what  he  and  his 
staff  felt  towards  me  as  a  comrade  ;  and  I  am  not  sure  now  how 
much  belongs  to  my  leaving  "  Daily  News  "  and  how  much  to  the 
closing  of  my  career  of  authorship,  —  for  these  men  are  of  an  age  to 
have  been  in  a  manner  "brought  up,"  as  they  say,  on  my  earlier 
works,  —  yet  the  strength  of  their  regret  and  tenderness  surprises 
almost  as  much  as  it  moves  me.  The  most  emotional,  penetrating, 
true,  and  exquisite  letter  I  have  received  within  the  last  remarkable 
week,  with  many  more,  all  kind  and  gravely  tender,  while  otherwise 
as  various  as  possible,  is  from  my  sister  Rachel  

It  is  a  great  satisfaction  to  me  that  the  effort  fell  naturally  in  the 
time  of  my  dear  niece's  absence.  Not  only  was  it  her  pride  and  her 
joy  to  help  me,  but  she  fully  believes  that  I  cannot  live  without 
working,  or  at  least  shall  languish  for  want  of  it.  I  am  not  so  sure 
of  this  ;  and  I  don't  care  a  straw,  except  for  her  and  you,  whether 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


529 


it  is  so  or  not.  But  as  she  thinks  so,  I  am  glad  she  is  spared  all 
details. 

All  is  being  done  in  her  absence,  —  putting  the  peculiar  paper  and 
envelopes  out  of  sight,  —  and  now  I  desire  nothing  except  in  the  lan- 
guid way  which  is  all  I  ever  feel  since  I  lost  Maria,  —  I  mean  as  to 
daily  life.    I  care  as  much  for  the  great  and  the  distant  as  ever. 

Ever  yours, 

H.  M. 

The  extracts  given  below  are  from  the  letter  of  the  editor  of 
the  "  Daily  News/'  told  of  in  the  preceding  page. 

"  Daily  News  "  Office,  April  26,  1866. 
Dear  Madam,  — ....  I  was  very  poorly  yesterday,  from  influ- 
enza, when  your  letter  arrived  ;  and  it  had  such  an  effect  upon  me  that 
I  was  at  the  time  quite  unable  to  reply  to  it.    The  resolution  you 
announce  is  one  which  I  cannot  discuss,  but  only  bow  to,  after  the 

grounds  on  which  you  put  it.    I  showed  your  letter  to  Mr.  and 

to  Mr.  . 

There  is  only  one  feeling  among  us,  —  regret  that  a  connection 
which  has  lasted  so  long  under  different  administrations,  and  been 
so  pleasant  and  fruitful,  should  terminate.  But  let  us  be  thankful 
that  it  ends,  as  it  has  flowed  on,  in  peace  and  mutual  regard.  I  trust 
that  you  may  have  before  you  a  more  comfortable  future  than  you 
apprehend.  If  there  is  any  thing  the  office  can  do  for  you  now,  or 
at  any  time,  pray  let  us  know,  and  you  may  always  command  our 
services. 

With  kindest  regards, 

I  am  yours  ever  truly, 

T.  WALKER. 

And  this  tender  of  service  from  the  office  was  no  mere  com- 
pliment. When  the  time  came  for  the  publication  of  "  The 
Biographical  Sketches,"  her  excellent  friend  Mr.  Eobinson,  over- 
whelmed as  he  was  by  office  duties,  took  upon  himself  gratui- 
tously the  whole  burden  of  putting  that  book  through  the  press. 
His  friendship  found  ample  remuneration  in  the  fact  that  it  was 
hailed  by  the  public  as  if  in  renewal  of  her  early  fame.  The 
truth  of  her  method  commended  it  to  the  whole  press  of  Eng- 
land and  America. 

I  was  about  to  say  from  my  own  knowledge  what  Harriet 
Martineau  had  been  to  the  "  Daily  News,"  when  I  came  across 

VOL.  II. 


530 


MEMORIALS. 


the  following  letter  from  a  man  not  accustomed  to  eulogize,  on 
the  occasion  of  her  ceasing  to  write  for  it  any  longer. 

London,  May  3, 1866. 
Mr  dear  Friend,  —  I  return  you  Mr.  Walker's  note.  Nothing 
could  be  better  or  more  satisfactory  on  such  an  occasion.  They  must 
have  all  felt  not  only  your  intellectual  gifts,  resources,  and  reliable- 
ness, but  your  great  womanly  kindness,  as  a  helpmate  at  all  times, 
when  absent  to  recruit  health,  or  really  suffering  from  actual  illness. 
You  could  not  nurse  them,  but  took  extra  labour  on  yourself  to  ena- 
ble them  to  be  nursed,  and  to  give  them  repose.  Nothing  could  be 
more  admirable  than  your  relationship  with  the  "  Daily  News  "  and 
its  different  conductors,  or  more  touching  than  the  editor's  expres- 
sions on  your  finding  it  necessary  to  withdraw  after  a  joint  and  har- 
monious action,  enduring  for  such  a  length  of  time.  And  without 
doubt,  in  now  retiring,  you  have  done  the  right  thing  at  the  right  time, 
and  what  was  at  once  most  prudent,  just,  and  wise  ;  leaving  a  lasting 
lesson  to  the  world  that  even  bishops  might  take  a  hint  from.  You 
have  had  a  glorious  reign  of  forty-five  years,  and  now  have  abdicated 
gracefully,  at  your  own  free-will  and  discretion,  actuated  by  an  abiding 
sense  of  the  highest  law  of  moral  action,  —  duty.  You  are  one  of 
those  who  have  always  been  supremely  wise  and  right  in  regard  to 
your  own  actions  ;  and  your  present  resignation  crowns  the  sequence 
it  will  not,  I  trust,  terminate.  And  now,  my  dear  friend,  you  are 
one  of  us  ;  and  I  hail  you  amongst  the  noble  band  of  lookers-on. 
The  business  of  a  philosopher,  said  Pythagoras,  is  to  look  on.  How- 
ever, it  is  not  so  literally,  nor  do  I  suppose  you  will  ever  be  such 
literally  ;  any  how,  you  will  do  what  is  best,  and  be  equal  to  the 
occasion,  come  what  may.  And  as  for  Death,  he  is  a  quiet, 
kind,  gentlemanly  fellow,  and  will  pay  us  all  a  friendly  visit  at 
his  own  time  and  leisure,  though  in  truth  he  is  a  person  we  need 
not  much  concern  ourselves  about.  At  least,  so  preached  the 
wise  Epicurus,  who  said,  "  Death  does  not  concern  us  ;  for  whilst 
alive  it  is  nothing  to  us,  and  when  dead  we  no  longer  exist."  I 
am  sure  your  kind  and  constant  friends  will  highly  approve  the  step 
you  have  taken. 

Sincerely  yours, 

H.  G.  ATKINSON. 

There  was  now  a  widespread  idea  that  spiritualism  as  well  as 
mesmerism  had  been  studied  by  her.  The  following  note  upon 
the  subject  will  explain  her  position  with  respect  to  it :  — 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


531 


H.  MARTINEAU  TO  MARY  CARPENTER. 

Ambleside,  April  17,  1866. 
....  What  your  friend  has  heard  of  my  belief  in  spiritualism  (so 
called)  is  not  true.  As  far  as  direct  personal  knowledge  goes,  I  am 
in  a  state  of  blank  ignorance  of  the  whole  matter.  I  have  never 
witnessed  any  of  the  phenomena,  nor  conversed  with  any  qualified 
observer  wTho  had.  This  would  be  wrong  if  I  could  have  helped  it, 
but  the  whole  thing  has  come  up  (in  a  popular  way)  since  my  illness 
began.  Mr.  Home  endeavoured,  through  more  than  one  channel,  to 
get  permission  to  come  and  show  me  his  wonders  ;  but  I  have  been 
in  no  condition  for  watching  and  testing  such  experiments,  and 
declined  it  altogether.  Of  course  one  has  some  impression  or  other 
from  what  one  hears  ;  and  mine  is  this.  From  what  I  learned  in  my 
experience  and  observation  of  mesmerism,  I  am  so  far  aware  of  the 
existence  of  rarely  used  and  undeveloped  powers  and  capacities  in 
the  brain,  as  to  disapprove  very  strongly  the  gratuitous  supposition, 
in  the  spirit-rapping  case,  of  pure  imposture  on  the  one  hand  and 
of  the  presence  of  departed  spirits  on  the  other.  I  see  no  occasion 
or  justification  whatever  for  either  supposition :  and  I  observe  this 
is  the  view  of  persons  whose  j  udgment  is  most  respected,  —  persons 
wTho  have  waited  till  the  first  excitement  had  passed  off,  and  they 
could  look  into  the  matter  as  philosophers  should.  About  the  facts 
of  mesmerism,  my  position  is  the  same  that  it  was  twenty  years  ago, 
—  simply  because  I  hold  not  an  opinion  based  on  any  theory  (for  I 
never  had  any  theory  on  it),  but  knowledge  of  facts.  If  Cuvier  and 
other  eminent  naturalists  justly  insisted  that  no  group  of  facts  in 
natural  history  is  better"  established  on  observation  and  experiment 
than  those  of  mesmerism,  it  is  not  possible  for  any  reasonable  person 
who  knows  the  facts  to  have  variable  opinions  on  the  case. 

In  Harriet  Martineau's  Tynemouth  journal  stands  a  passage 
which  records  the  strong  feeling  that  moved  her  to  the  service 
of  unhappy  women,  and  her  conviction  that  it  must  be,  if  possi- 
ble, a  part  of  her  future  life.  "  If  not,"  she  says,  "  some  one  else 
wiU  do  it." 

This  feeling  and  purpose  never  left  her  from  that  time  for- 
ward ;  and  I  learned  from  herself  the  mingled  dread  and  doubt 
that  wrought  together  in  her  mind  when  consulted  by  a  sanitary 
commission  appointed  under  King  "William  IV.  to  consider,  with 
regard  to  the  case  to  come  before  it,  whether  the  good  of  govern- 


532 


MEMORIALS. 


ment  regulation  could  overbalance  the  evil  of  government  sanc- 
tion. 

The  death  of  King  William  stayed  proceedings,  and  they 
were  not  revived  under  Queen  Victoria,  except  by  a  mischievous 
influence  on  the  public  mind  through  the  press  in  1859.  Har- 
riet Martineau  felt  the  coming  danger,  and  met  it  by  correspond- 
ence with  Florence  Nightingale  and  other  influential  persons 
who  had  like  herself  been  long  aware  of  the  growing  evil ;  and 
in  1859  she  met  it  by  a  series  of  powerful  leading  articles  in  the 
"Daily  News."  The  "Times"  took  service  in  opposition;  and 
thus,  in  1864,  the  government  was  committed  to  the  wrong  side. 

Her  early  prevision  that  some  one  would  arise  to  do  the  work 
that  had  taken  such  strong  possession  of  her  mind  at  Tyne- 
mouth,  was  now  amply  fulfilled  in  the  person  of  her  honoured 
and  beloved  friend  Mrs.  Josephine  Butler,  with  whom  she  in- 
stantly put  herself  in  communication  ;  and  they  wrought  together 
through  all  the  last  suffering  period  of  her  life.  Her  leading 
articles  of  1863  were  circulated  afresh,  and,  all  the  while  aiding 
this  cause  of  social  purity  and  national  preservation  by  various 
efforts,  she  went  on  in  its  service  till  1869.  It  was  during  this 
period  that  the  interest  she  had  taken  in  the  abolition  of  com- 
pulsory church-rates  found  its  reward.  She  had  been  one  of 
Mr.  Courtauld's  most  active  fellow-labourers,  and  had  been  threat- 
ened with  distraint ;  she  had  circulated  arguments  and  practical 
directions  how  to  proceed  against  them  ;  and  she  had  worked  as 
an  individual  and  in  conjunction  with  others  ;  and  now,  August 
11,  1868,  she  writes,  "Accomplished  at  last!"  It  had  been 
a  severe  and  protracted  struggle,  in  which  the  patient  and  self- 
sacrificing  exertion  of  those  who  carried  it  on  exposed  them 
to  distraint,  prosecution,  and  imprisonment ;  till  at  length  Par- 
liament put  an  end  to  the  unrighteous  system  throughout  the 
kingdom. 

It  was  during  this  last  period  of  her  life  that  the  condition  of 
the  London  and  Brighton  Railroad  threatened  her  with  a  loss 
of  her  principal  means  of  living.  This  she  took  very  little 
notice  of,  merely  giving  the  fact  as  news  to  a  friend,  with  this 
remark  :  — 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


533 


"  I  am  surprised  that  I  feel  it  so  little.  I  shall  go  into  small  lodgings 
and  live  by  letting  my  Knoll,  and  am  beyond  the  reach  of  anxiety  in 
any  event,  my  time  being  so  short." 

The  railroad  company  ultimately  retrieved  its  affairs,  and 
resumed  payment  so  soon  that  she  was  not  obliged  to  make  any 
change  in  her  mode  of  living  ;  and  the  many  friends  in  both 
hemispheres  who  had  entreated  her  to  allow  them  to  insure  her 
against  inconvenience  were  met  by  thanks  as  warm  as  if  they 
had  been  accompanied  by  acceptance. 

Perhaps  nothing  will  so  well  acquaint  one  with  the  current  of 
Harriet  Martineau's  days  of  waiting  for  death  as  a  letter  she 
addressed  at  this  time  to  Mrs.  Chapman. 

"  A  happy  new  year  to  you  and  yours,  my  dearest  friend.  The  wish 
is  in  time,  though  you  will  be  some  way  into  the  year  before  you  get 
it.  We  shall  be  almost  more  glad  than  usual  to  get  past  the  anni- 
versaries, —  i.  e.  into  the  new  year, —  for  our  minds  have  been  tilled 
full  of  business  and  interests  (some  sad),  and  a  variety  of  ideas  too 
great  for  my  now  weak  state.  Instead  of  writing  to  you  yesterday 
(as  I  like  to  do  on  Wednesdays  to  make  sure),  I  had  to  write  three 
other  letters,  as  the  day  before  and  also  on  Sunday.  It  feels  like  a 
holiday  to  be  able  to  pour  out  to  you  to-day  in  the  free  way  which 
makes  writing  a  relief.  We  have  a  rather  heavy  secret, —  Jenny  *  and 
I,  —  and  I  am  going  to  tell  it  to  you.  I  fear  it  will  be  all  out  in  a 
few  days  ;  but  it  will  be  a  secret  for  you  till  you  know  it  is  all 
abroad. 

"  I  told  you  something,  but  I  forget  how  much,  about  the  Ladies' 
Association,  founded  to  obtain  the  repeal  of  the  Acts  (Contagious  Diseases 
Acts)  for  establishing  the  French  and  Belgian  system,  first  in  military 
stations,  and  then  over  nine  times  as  large  an  area,  comprehending  a 
large  civil  population.  The  members,  headed  by  Mrs.  Butler,  are 
working  zealously  to  get  up  an  irresistible  demand  to  Parliament  to 
undo  its  evil  work  ;  and  they  make  great  use  of  my  name  and  Florence 
Nightingale's.  Mrs.  Butler  is  familiar  with  the  workingmen  in  town 
and  country  ;  her  position  as  the  wife  of  a  working  clergyman  and 
head  of  a  great  school,  and  her  courage,  enthusiasm,  and  intelligence, 
give  her  great  power.  She  has  been  visiting  several  of  the  great  man- 
ufacturing towns  and  addressing  the  workingmen,  and,  by  their  eager 
request,  their  wives.    They  are,  every  man  and  woman  of  them,  on 

*  Her  niece,  Miss  Jane  Martineau. 


534 


MEMORIALS. 


the  right  side  on  this  subject,  and  aware  of  the  enormous  importance 
of  the  crisis."  * 

The  work  went  on,  of  forming  societies,  calling  meetings,  send- 
ing out  agents,  and  signing  petitions,  and  its  objects  were  pro- 
moted by  her  in  the  same  fervent  spirit  that  prompted  her  early 
energies  in  and  for  America.  The  labour  was  exhausting,  as  it 
threw  upon  her  a  weight  of  private  correspondence  that  she  was 
ill  able  to  sustain.  "  But  how  can  I  refrain,"  she  said,  "  when 
A  and  B  and  C  (all  friends  high  in  place  and  influence)  need 
to  have  principles  exhibited  to  them,  and  doubts  removed  1 " 

More  than  a  paragraph  or  two  should  be  accorded  in  memorial 
of  one  of  the  noblest  among  the  deeds  that  illustrate  this  great 
life,  —  in  nothing  more  radiant  than  in  its  closing  years  of  labour 
for  the  classes  whose  degradation  puts  in  peril  the  very  existence 
of  nations. 

There  were,  at  this  time,  two  Acts  of  Parliament, —  one  passed 
in  1866  and  the  other  in  1869,  —  most  oppressive,  insulting,  and 
outrageous  in  their  application  to  women,  while  men  in  the  same 
conditions  were  wholly  exempt  from  their  penalties.  A  Ladies' 
National  Association  for  their  repeal  was  formed,  and  a  protest 
signed  by  Harriet  Martineau,  with  Florence  Nightingale,  Jose- 
phine E.  Butler,  Martha  E.  Baines,  Ursula  Bright,  Margaret 
Lucas,  Jane  "Wigham,  Elizabeth  Pease  Nichol,  Eliza  Wigham, 
Mary  Estlin.  But  so  numerous  are  the  names  following  that  of 
Harriet  Martineau  in  protest,  that  it  is  impossible  to  do  more  on 
such  a  page  as  this  than  to  crown  with  thanks  and  blessing  every 
one  of  the  great  cloud  of  witnesses. 

THE  LADIES'  NATIONAL  ASSOCIATION  FOR  THE  KEPEAL 
OF  THE  CONTAGIOUS  DISEASES  ACTS. 

There  are  two  Acts  of  Parliament  —  one  passed  in  1866,  the  other 
in  1869  —  called  the  Contagious  Diseases  Acts.  These  Acts  are  in 
force  in  some  of  our  garrison  towns,  and  in  large  districts  around  them. 
Unlike  all  other  laws  for  the  repression  of  contagious  diseases,  to 

*  Mrs.  Butler  afterward  said,  "When  I  mentioned  Harriet  Martineau  as 
sympathizing  with  them,  a  bright  gleam  passed  over  their  faces,  from  town  to 
town  as  I  went." 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


535 


which  both  men  and  women  are  liable,  these  two  apply  to  women 
only,  men  being  wholly  exempt  from  their  penalties.  The  law  is 
ostensibly  framed  for  a  certain  class  of  women,  but  in  order  to  reach 
these,  all  the  women  residing  within  the  districts  where  it  is  in  force 
are  brought  under  the  provisions  of  the  Acts.  Any  woman  can  be 
dragged  into  court,  and  required  to  prove  that  she  is  not  a  common 
prostitute.  The  magistrate  can  condemn  her,  if  a  policeman  swears 
only  that  he  "has  good  cause  to  believe"  her  to  be  one.  The  accused 
has  to  rebut,  not  positive  evidence,  but  the  state  of  mind  of  her  ac- 
cuser. When  condemned,  the  sentence  is  as  follows  :  To  have  her 
person  outraged  by  the  periodical  inspection  of  a  surgeon,  through  a 
period  of  twelve  months  ;  or,  resisting  that,  to  be  imprisoned,  with 
or  without  hard  labour  —  first  for  a  month,  next  for  three  months,  — 
such  imprisonment  to  be  continuously  renewed  through  her  whole 
life  unless  she  submit  periodically  to  the  brutal  requirements  of  this 
law.  Women  arrested  under  false  accusations  have  been  so  terrified 
at  the  idea  of  encountering  the  public  trial  necessary  to  prove  their 
innocence,  that  they  have,  under  the  intimidation  of  the  police,  signed 
away  their  good  name  and  their  liberty  by  making  what  is  called  a 
"voluntary  submission"  to  appear  periodically  for  twelve  months 
for  surgical  examination.  Women  who,  through  dread  of  imprison- 
ment, have  been  induced  to  register  themselves  as  common  prostitutes, 
now  pursue  their  traffic  under  the  sanction  of  Parliament  ;  and  the 
houses  where  they  congregate,  so  long  as  the  government  surgeons  are 
satisfied  with  the  health  of  their  inmates,  enjoy,  practically,  as  com- 
plete a  protection  as  a  church  or  a  school. 

We,  the  undersigned,  enter  our  solemn  protest  against  these  Acts  — 

1.  Because,  involving  as  they  do,  such  a  momentous  change  in  the 
legal  safeguards  hitherto  enjoyed  by  women  in  common  with  men, 
they  have  been  passed,  not  only  without  the  knowledge  of  the  coun- 
try, but  unknown  to  Parliament  itself  ;  and  we  hold  that  neither 
the  representatives  of  the  people  nor  the  press  fulfil  the  duties  which 
are  expected  of  them,  when  they  allow  such  legislation  to  take  place 
without  the  fullest  discussion. 

2.  Because,  so  far  as  women  are  concerned,  they  remove  every 
guaranty  of  personal  security  which  the  law  has  established  and  held 
sacred,  and  put  their  reputation,  their  freedom,  and  their  persons 
absolutely  in  the  power  of  the  police. 

3.  Because  the  law  is  bound,  in  any  country  professing  to  give 
civil  liberty  to  its  subjects,  to  define  clearly  an  offence  which  it  pun- 
ishes. 


536 


MEMORIALS. 


4.  Because  it  is  unjust  to  punish  the  sex  who  are  the  victims  of  a 
vice,  and  leave  unpunished  the  sex  who  are  the  main  cause,  both  of 
the  vice  and  its  dreaded  consequences  ;  and  we  consider  that  liability 
to  arrest,  forced  surgical  examination,  and,  where  this  is  resisted,  im- 
prisonment with  hard  labour,  to  which  these  Acts  subject  women,  are 
punishments  of  the  most  degrading  kind. 

5.  Because,  by  such  a  system,  the  path  of  evil  is  made  more  easy 
to  our  sons,  and  to  the  whole  of  the  youth  of  England  ;  inasmuch  as 
a  moral  restraint  is  withdrawn  the  moment  the  State  recognizes  and 
provides  convenience  for  the  practice  of  a  vice  which  it  thereby  de- 
clares to  be  necessary  and  venial. 

6.  Because  these  measures  are  cruel  to  the  women  who  come  under 
their  action,  — violating  the  feelings  of  those  whose  sense  of  shame  is 
not  wholly  lost,  and  further  brutalizing  even  the  most  abandoned. 

7.  Because  the  disease  which  these  Acts  seek  to  remove  has  never 
been  removed  by  any  such  legislation.  The  advocates  of  the  system 
have  utterly  failed  to  show,  by  statistics  or  otherwise,  that  these  reg- 
ulations have  in  any  case,  after  several  years'  trial,  and  when  applied 
to  one  sex  only,  diminished  disease,  reclaimed  the  fallen,  or  improved 
the  general  morality  of  the  country.  We  have,  on  the  contrary,  the 
strongest  evidence  to  show  that  in  Paris  and  other  Continental  cities, 
where  women  have  long  been  outraged  by  this  forced  inspection,  the 
public  health  and  morals  are  worse  than  at  home. 

8.  Because  the  conditions  of  this  disease,  in  the  first  instance,  are 
moral,  not  physical.  The  moral  evil  through  which  the  disease  makes 
its  way  separates  the  case  entirely  from  that  of  the  plague  or  other 
scourges,  which  have  been  placed  under  police  control  or  sanitary 
care.  We  hold  that  we  are  bound,  before  rushing  into  the  experiment 
of  legalizing  a  revolting  vice,  to  try  to  deal  with  the  causes  of  the 
evil,  and  we  dare  to  believe  that  with  wiser  teaching  and  more  capable 
legislation  those  causes  would  not  be  beyond  control. 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU.  FLORENCE  NIGHTINGALE. 

(And  a  great  number  of  others.) 

But  other  things  fell  to  her  lot  than  writing  petitions,  sum- 
moning meetings,  and  raising  funds.  She  had  learned  the  use 
of  placards,  when  Joseph  Sturge,  after  his  exchange  of  flatteries 
with  the  Czar  of  Russia,  covered  the  walls  of  Birmingham  with  a 
quotation  from  her  writings  in  favour  of  peace,  wrested  to  pro- 
mote his  "peace"  at  any  price,  at  a  crisis  when  she  thought  that 
national  honour  demanded  war ;  and  this  gave  her  the  trouble 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


537 


and  expense  of  posting  a  strong  denial  below  his  every  affirma- 
tion. 

To  this  means  the  Eeform  Association  had  recourse  ;  and  this 
is  a  copy  of  their  placard,  written  and  first  signed  by  Harriet 
Martineau  :  — 

TO  THE  WOMEN  OF  COLCHESTER. 

As  Englishwomen  loving  your  country,  and  proud  of  it,  as  many 
generations  of  women  have  been,  listen  to  a  word  from  three  of  your 
countrywomen. 

The  most  endearing  feature  in  our  English  life  has  been  the  reality 
of  its  homes.  Married  life  is,  with  us,  we  have  been  accustomed  to 
think,  more  natural  and  simple  than  in  most  other  countries,  youth 
and  maidenhood  at  once  more  free  and  pure,  and  womanhood  more 
unrestrained,  more  honoured  and  safe  beyond  comparison,  in  person 
and  repute. 

Are  you  aware  that  this  eminent  honour  and  security  of  our  sex 
and  our  homes  are  at  present  exposed  to  urgent  danger,  and  even 
undergoing  violation  ?  You  women  of  Colchester  ought  to  be  aware 
of  this  fact,  for  the  violation  is  going  on  within  your  own  town.  The 
story  is  short. 

Some  fifteen  months  ago  a  bill  was  carried  through  Parliament,  by 
trick  and  under  a  misleading  title,  and  without  awakening  the  sus- 
picions of  the  country,  by  which  the  personal  violation  of  hundreds 
of  thousands  of  Englishwomen  is  not  only  permitted,  but  rendered 
inevitable.  And  it  is  the  aim  and  purpose  of  the  authors  of  the  law 
and  its  policy,  to  have  the  act  extended  over  the  whole  country.  It 
was  asked  for  on  account  of  our  soldiers  and  sailors.  It  is  now  sought 
to  be  extended  to  the  population  of  the  whole  kingdom.  It  was  in- 
tended to  mitigate  the  disease  occasioned  by  debauchery  ;  but  it  has 
aggravated  it.  It  has  not  diminished  the  vice,  but  encouraged  it  by 
a  false  promise  of  impunity.  It  gives  a  distinct  government  sanction 
to  profligacy,  and  is  degrading  to  English  society  wherever  it  operates, 
to  the  fearful  condition  of  health  and  morals  existing  on  the  continent 
wherever  such  legislation  has  been  established  long  enough  to  show 
its  effects. 

Foremost  among  the  promoters  of  this  fearful  system  and  fatal  law 
is  Sir  Henry  Storks,  one  of  the  candidates  for  the  representation 
of  Colchester.  He  was  a  candidate  at  the  Newark  election,  some 
months  since  ;  but  the  Newark  people  knew  what  he  had  been  doing, 


538 


MEMORIALS. 


and  they  would  not  hear  of  him  as  a  representative.  He  had  no 
chance  when  the  facts  were  understood,  and  he  withdrew  from  certain 
defeat. 

Do  the  people  of  Colchester  know  these  facts  ?  Let  it  be  your 
work  to  take  care  that  your  husbands,  fathers,  and  brothers  hear 
of  them.  Sir  Henry  Storks's  own  words  are  to  be  found  in  the 
printed  evidence  offered  to  the  Committee  of  the  Lords  on  the  Acts. 
At  Newark  he  complained  of  false  accusations  and  libels  ;  but  the 
following  words  written  by  his  own  hand,  in  a  letter  produced  in  that 
evidence,  are  full  justification  for  any  efforts  you  will  make  to  drive 
him  from  Colchester  :  — 

"  I  am  of  opinion  that  very  little  benefit  will  result  from  the  best- 
devised  means  of  prevention,  until  prostitution  is  recognized  as  a 
necessity  ! " 

This  is  the  professed  "  opinion  "  of  a  man  who  is  regarded  as  a 
Christian  gentleman,  who  cannot  but  be  aware  how  fornication  is 
denounced  in  the  Scriptures. 

Let  his  evidence  be  further  studied  in  regard  to  the  operation 
of  the  legal  outrage  which  Sir  Henry  Storks  is  endeavouring  to 
introduce  wherever  the  sceptre  of  our  virtuous  queen  bears  sway, 
and  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  his  rejection  at  Colchester  by  every 
elector  who  values,  as  an  Englishman  should,  the  sanctity  of  his 
home,  the  purity  of  his  sons,  and  the  honour  and  safety  of  his 
daughters. 

You  surely  will  not  sacrifice  greater  things  to  less  by  any  indul- 
gence of  prudery.  The  subject  is  painful,  even  hateful  to  ever}'  one 
of  us  ;  but  that  is  not  our  fault,  and  our  country  is  not  to  be  sacrificed 
to  our  feelings  as  women.  We  are  not  fine  ladies,  but  true-hearted 
Englishwomen ;  and  there  are  thousands  at  this  hour  who  have  proved 
that  in  this  cause  they  can  sacrifice  whatever  is  necessary  to  save  our 
country  from  the  curse  of  these  Acts. 

It  is  your  business  to  lift  up  your  voices  within  your  homes  and 
neighbourhoods,  against  being  ruled  by  lawmakers  like  the  authors 
of  these  Acts  ;  in  other  words,  against  Sir  Henry  Storks  as  candidate 
for  Colchester. 

HARRIET  MARTIXEAU. 
URSULA  BRIGHT. 
JOSEPHINE  BUTLER. 

Sir  Henry  Storks's  election  was  defeated. 

The  same  process  of  election-placards  was  repeated  afterwards, 
abridged,  as  follows  :  — 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


539 


OLD  ENGLAND! 

PURITY  AND  FREEDOM! 

To  the  Electors  of  North  Nottinghamshire. 

We,  as  Englishwomen,  loving  our  country  and  our  Old  National 
Constitution,  entreat  you,  the  Electors  of  North  Nottinghamshire,  in 
the  name  of  Religion,  of  Morality,  and  of  our  National  Freedom,  to 
vote  for  no  man  who  will  not  pledge  himself  to  vote  for  the  total 
and  unconditional  Repeal  of  those  un-English  Laws,  that  Continental 
abomination  stealthily  smuggled  into  our  Statute-Book,  called  the 
Contagious  Diseases  Acts,  and  to  oppose  any  Future  Legislation  that 
involves  their  Principles. 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 
JOSEPHINE  BUTLER. 
URSULA  BRIGHT. 
LYDIA  E.  BECKER. 

Thus  the  kingdom  was  made  aware  of  the  earnestness  of  its 
women  in  the  cause. 

In  1871  a  correspondent  received  the  following  words  of 
rejoicing  from  Mrs.  Martineau  :  — 

"  The  conspiracy  of  silence  is  broken  up,  and  the  London  papers 
have  burst  out.  Our  main  point  now  is,  to  secure  every  variety  of 
judgment  inside  and  outside  of  the  Commission.  The  '  Daily  News ' 
came  out  clearly  and  strongly  on  the  right  side  before  any  other 
London  paper  broke  the  silence.  The  satisfaction  to  us  all  is  im- 
mense, to  see  the  paper  uphold  its  high  character —  the  very  highest  — 
in  this  hour  of  crisis.  I  feel  unusually  ill  in  consequence  of  heart- 
failure,  but  I  must  make  you  know  something  of  what  you  shall 
know  more  of  hereafter  

"  Samuel  J.  May !  —  how  well  I  remember  the  snowy  day  he  came 
over  to  Hingham,  to  open  the  cause  to  me." 

Again,  in  1871  :  — 

"  I  must  tell  you,  though  so  feeble  to-day,  that  our  cause  is,  for  this 
time,  safe.  The  packed  Commission,  supplied  with  packed  evidence, 
comes  out  thirteen  to  six  in  our  favour!  The  conversions  under 
every  disadvantage  are  astonishing.  Huxley's  delights  me.  He  and 
two  others  —  Sir  Walter  James,  military,  and  Admiral  Collinson,  naval 
—  made  speeches  on  the  Commission,  declaring  that  they  had  verily 


540 


MEMORIALS. 


believed  in  the  good  of  the  C.  D.  Acts,  but  they  have  been  compelled 
to  see  that  they  are  thoroughly  mischievous.  We  never  could  have 
dreamed  of  such  a  victory.  As  victory  no  matter.  But  what  a  pros- 
pect is  opened  for  the  whole  sex  in  Old  England  !  For  the  stronger 
and  safer  sort  of  women  will  be  elevated  in  proportion  as  the  helpless 
or  exposed  are  protected." 

At  about  this  time  Mrs.  Butler  received  the  following  letter 
from  Mrs.  Martineau. 

LETTER  FROM  HARRIET  MARTINEAU  TO  MRS.  BUTLER. 

The  Knoll,  Ambleside. 

My  dear  Friend,  —  I  am  truly  grateful  to  you  for  taking  charge 
of  the  chair  which  I  have  worked  in  hope  of  its  bringing  in  some 
money  —  more  money  than  I  could  offer  in  any  other  form — towards 
obtaining  the  repeal  of  the  Contagious  Diseases  Acts.  I  assure 
you  very  earnestly  that  no  one  can  be  more  thoroughly  aware  than 
I  am  that  this  is  the  very  lowest  method  of  assisting  the  movement. 
I  can  only  say  that  I  have  adopted  it  simply  because,  in  my  state 
of  health,  no  other  is  open  to  me.  While  you  and  your  brave  sisters 
in  the  enterprise  have  been  enduring  exhausting  toils,  and  facing  the 
gravest  risks  that  can  appall  the  matronage  and  maidenhood  of  our 
country,  I  have  been  content  to  ply  my  needle  when  I  could  do  no 
better,  and  thankful  to  witness  the  achievements  of  the  younger  and 
stronger  who  will  live  to  rejoice  in  the  retrieval  of  their  dear  nation. 

It  was  no  dream  that  I  indulged  in  over  my  work.  Nearly  forty 
years  ago  I  saw  and  felt  the  first  stir, — saw  the  first  steps  taken  in  the 
wrong  direction  to  suppress  the  evils  of  prostitution.  After  a  long 
enforced  pause  the  attempt  was  renewed  eight  years  ago,  and  with  a 
success  which  saddened  a  multitude  of  hearts  besides  my  own.  That 
triumph  of  wrong  and  ignorance  has  clouded  the  lives  of  some  of  the 
best  men  and  women  of  England  since  1864  ;  but  I  have  seen,  for 
months  past,  from  my  easy-chair,  as  I  looked  abroad  over  your  field 
of  action,  the  foul  vapours  dispersed  before  the  strong  breeze  of  the 
popular  opinion  and  will,  and  the  clear  light  of  our  ancient  domestic 
virtue  spreading  from  roof  to  roof  among  the  homes  of  our  land. 
The  few  dark  years  that  are  past  will  be  remembered  as  a  warning 
when  the  Acts  that  disgraced  them  are  repealed.  Once  understood, 
such  legislation  can  never  be  renewed  ;  and  therefore  is  it  reasonable 
for  us  to  hope  all  things  as  we  ply  our  task,  whether  our  labours  be 
as  high  and  arduous  as  yours,  or  as  humble  as  mine. 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


541 


Experience  is  the  great  teacher  in  the  conduct  of  reforms. 
The  first  impulse  of  a  mind  deeply  impressed  with  their  neces- 
sity is  to  seek  the  most  powerful  influence  for  their  promotion, 
whether  from  politics,  pulpit,  or  press. 

But  there  is  a  preparatory  work  to  be  done,  before  these,  as 
such,  can  take  the  field.  The  devotedness  of  individuals  must 
alone  bear  the  burden  and  heat  of  the  day,  and  so  it  was  with 
this  cause  of  national  purity.  One  may  cite  in  proof  the  "West- 
minster Review  "  of  1876. 

The  editor  says  that  in  1859  an  article  was  prepared  on  this 
subject ;  but  considering  how  strong  was  the  repugnance  felt  to 
its  general  discussion,  it  was  laid  asicTe  for  ten  years,  as  he  was 
convinced  that  the  time  had  not  come  for  dealing  with  the  mat- 
ter to  good  effect.  It  was  imperative,  however,  on  some  one  to 
bring  about  that  time,  and  therefore  it  was  that  Harriet  Mar- 
tineau  and  others  —  the  noblest  women  of  England  —  devoted 
themselves  to  "  break  the  conspiracy  of  silence."  So  in  the  na- 
ture of  things  must  such  work  ever  be  done  ;  and  so  was  it  made 
practicable  for  the  "  Westminster  Review  "  and  other  periodicals 
to  admit  admirable  articles,  like  that  of  the  July  number  of  1876, 
combating  the  subtle,  all-pervading,  ruinous  influence  of  govern- 
ment sanction  and  copartnery  in  vice. 

Writing  to  Mrs.  Chapman  in  America,  Mrs.  Martineau  pro- 
ceeds :  — 

....  Day  by  day  information  reaches  me  which  satisfies  me  that 
this  question  of  national  purity  plunges  us  into  the  most  fearful 
moral  crisis  the  country  was  ever  in,  involving  our  primary  personal 
liberties,  and  the  very  existence,  except  in  name,  of  the  home  and 
the  family.  It  struck  me  (and  I  was  so  cowardly  as  almost  to  wish 
that  it  had  not)  that  some  "letters"  in  the  "  Daily  News,"  explaining 
the  state  of  the  case,  and  the  grounds  (eight)  of  the  protest  of  the 
women  of  England  against  the  Acts,  would  do  more  to  rouse  the 
country  to  inquire  and  act,  than  any  amount  of  agitation  by  indi- 
viduals. It  was  sickening  to  think  of  such  a  work  ;  but  who  should 
do  it  if  not  an  old  woman,  dying  and  in  seclusion,  &c,  &c.  I  felt 
that  I  should  have  no  more  peace  of  mind  if  I  did  not  obey  "  the 
inward  witness."  So  I  did  it  last  week,  —  wrote  four  letters  signed 
"An  Englishwoman,"  and  sent  them  to  Mr.  Walker,  who  still  manages 


542 


MEMORIALS. 


the  editing  of  the  "  Daily  News "  till  the  proprietors  decide  how  to 
fill  the  office  for  which  he  alone  seems  tit.  He  was  ill  in  bed  when 
the  packet  arrived,  and  his  wife  read  the  letters  to  him.  He  says, 
"  At  first  she  was  horrified,  but  she  ended  by  demanding  the  instant 
publication  of  every  word  of  them."  One  of  the  proprietors  was  dead 
against  the  insertion  of  any  part  of  them  ;  but  Mr.  Walker  writes 
that  he  approves  them  so  strongly  that  he  cannot  but  print  them," 
but  that  he  doubts  being  able  to  support  them  by  any  "leader." 
Still  I  shall  not  be  surprised  if  he  manages  it  when  the  op- 
posing proprietor  has  seen  the  letters  themselves.  I  could  not  have 
undertaken  in  my  sick  condition  to  write  them  ;  and,  though  done 
under  impulse,  they  cost  a  dreadful  effort.  Happily  I  thought  of 
Godiva  ;  and  that  helped- me  through.  Two  have  appeared,  and 
I  dare  say  to-morrow  will  finish  them.  Then  the  "Times"  and  the 
"Saturday  Review"  and  the  "Pall  Mall  Gazette"  and  others  will 
open  out  against  them.  I  do  dread  having  to  reply  to  the  lies  of 
opponents  ;  perhaps  Mrs.  Butler  and  her  colleagues  may  relieve  me 
of  this,  when  they  know  it  was  I  ;  but  Mr.  Walker  says  he  will  not 
enter  into  any  general  controversy  while  it  is  possible  to  avoid  it. 
I  know  it  was  a  right  thing  to  do,  and  that  it  is  the  fault  of  the  other 
side,  if  modesty  in  others  and  myself  is  outraged  ;  yet  it  turns  me 
chill  in  the  night  to  think  what  things  I  have  written  and  put  in 

print.    The  s  are  here  at  Fox  How,  and  I  have  had  a  long 

conversation  with  him  about  these  Acts.    He  and          are  my  two 

friends  in  the  Ministry.  This  subject  belongs  to  the  department  of 
one  of  them,  but  it  is  uncertain  which.  Both,  I  believe,  certainly  are 
on  the  right  side.  instructs  me  how  to  proceed  in  Parlia- 
ment, and  in  preparation  for  it,  and  I  had  to  write  it  all  to  Mrs.  Butler 
yesterday,  instead  of  writing  to  you.  I  will  say  no  more  now  on  the 
subject,  of  which  I  am  compelled  to  think  too  much  day  and  night. 

One  great  interest  just  now  to  me  is  the  future  of  that  excellent 
paper,  the  "  Daily  News."  I  cannot  tell  you  any  thing,  because  my 
knowledge  is  derived  from  confidential  letters  ;  but  I  may  just  say 
that  the  importance  of  these  great  newspapers  impresses  me  more 
and  more.  This  means  chiefly,  "  Daily  News."  The  "  Times  "  has 
declined  a  good  deal,  though  its  influence  is  still  vast.  The  "  Star"  is 
dead  and  gone  ;  meantime  "  Daily  News  "  quietly  holds  its  course, 
enlarging  its  circulation  from  day  to  day,  and  becoming  a  really  splen- 
did property. 

I  think  you  must  be  much  concerned,  as  we  all  are,  at  the  corre- 
spondence of  Mr.  Fish,  and  President  Grant's  message  as  far  as  regards 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


543 


England.  The  trouble  is,  that  the  conduct  of  the  United  States 
government  damages  so  fatally  the  character  of  republican  govern- 
ment. I  (and  others)  don't  at  all  believe  that  such  utterances  as 
Seward's  and  Sumner's  and  Fish's  and  Grant's  are  acceptable  to  the 
substantial  part  of  the  nation  ;  but  that  their  rulers  should  believe 
it,  and  should  be  ever  repeating  all  this,  as  if  it  were  the  way  to 
gratify  the  people,  is  the  most  unfavourable  indication  possible  of  the 
jorospects  of  democratic  government.  Your  citizens  are  well  able  to 
see  and  feel  the  discredit  of  being  courted  in  such  a  way.  They  must 
see,  as  the  rest  of  the  world  does,  that  the  Washington  government 
makes  no  way.  Its  members  take  up  the  story  again  and  again, 
repeating  the  same  complaints  and  reciting  the  same  things  as  if 
they  had  never  been  answered.  This  time  it  really  seems  as  if  they 
must  be  ashamed  of  themselves  and  their  country  of  them  ;  Lord 
Clarendon's  dates  and  authorities  and  clear  statement  being  so  un- 
questionable as  they  are,  from  end  to  end. 

My  aged  cousin,  the  head  of  the  family,  Peter  Martineau,  died  on  the 
10th.  He  was  eighty-four  years  old.  He  was  always  good  to  me, 
and  I  feel  his  departure,  though  I  knew  we  should  never  meet  again. 

My  dearest  friend,  farewell  for  this  time  and  for  the  old  year. 

Ever  your  loving 

H.  M. 

In  another  letter  to  the  same  friend  she  expresses  her  delight 
at  a  speech  of  Mr.  Motley  which  she  had  received  from 
America :  — 

"  '  Motley 's  your  only  wear  ! '  —  at  the  present  juncture.  That  is,  I 
have  seen  nothing  on  your  public  affairs  to  compare  with  this  address. 
It  would  have  been  extremely  interesting  in  itself,  even  if  we  had  not 
been  all  eager  to  hear  what  he  had  to  say  after  he  had  passed  the 
war-season  in  so  peculiar  a  position.  The  paper  of  your  newspaper 
is  sadly  flimsy  !  but  we  hope  that  with  care  it  will  hold  together  till 
it  has  been  read  by  the  worthy  ones  among  our  neighbours.  The 
 s  and  the   s  are  in  perfect  delight  about  it." 

Mr.  Sumner's  course  gave  her  as  much  of  regret  as  Mr. 
Motley's  speech  had  done  of  pleasure.  In  a  letter  to  America 
she  said  :  — 

Ambleside,  June  16,  1869. 
....  I  trust  you  have  received  the  newspapers  we  have  sent,  with 
Forster's  speech,  the  "Daily  News"  leader,  about  the  Confederate  ships, 
&c,  showing  the  process  of  the  turning  of  the  tables.    The  news- 


544 


MEMORIALS. 


papers  and  the  talk  of  Americans  under  the  change  are  thoroughly 
bad  in  spirit,  temper,  and  manners.  They  charged  the  English  -with 
gross  crimes  of  deceit  and  malignity,  imputed  to  them  unbounded 
losses  and  years  of  war,  roused  hatred  against  them  throughout  the 
republic,  clamoured  for  damages,  called  names,  hoped  for  the  future 
adversity  of  England,  and  proposed  to  wait  for  vengeance  till  England 
should  be  incapable  of  defence,  &c.  ;  and  the  most  vindictive  accuser 
was  extolled  with  the  highest  enthusiasm. 

As  soon  as  possible  the  charges  were  shown  to  be  all  false,  and  the 
very  reverse  of  truth  ;  and  what  course  do  the  accusers  take  ?  They 
announce  that  the  English  are  coming  round,  that  they  are  recover- 
ing their  tempers,  that  there  will  be  no  war  ! 

No  word  of  shame  or  regret,  no  sign  of  consciousness  that  Eng- 
land is  the  injured  party,  has  yet  reached  us,  though  your  papers 
contain  notices  of  the  opinions  of  your  eminent  legists,  and  other  facts 
damning  to  the  speech  of  Sumner  and  his  multitude.  The  next  mail 
must,  I  think,  bring  some  notices  of  Forster's  speech  

Sumner's  concealment  of  the  fact  of  the  English  government  having 
prevented  the  interference  of  France  is  a  thing  inexplicable  to  Eng- 
lishmen. 

I  have  been  thinking  of  showing  in  a  brief  statement  for  some  one 
of  your  newspapers,  how  completely  the  tables  are  turned  ;  but  some- 
body stronger  and  more  in  the  world  will  do  it  better,  I  doubt  not. 
The  only  thing  I  have  done  is  getting  the  catalogue  of  the  ships 
looked  up  and  used,  and  reviving  the  fact  that  our  government  was 
obliged  to  issue  orders  to  our  sea-captains,  who  were  perplexed  by  the 
declaration  of  the  blockade,  —  but  was  there  ever  a  stronger  case  of 
false  accusation  than  that  which  is  now  in  course  of  exposure  ! 

1.  We  were  proslavery,  hating  the  North. 

Answer.  Our  difficulty  in  sympathizing  was  that  the  North  pertina- 
ciously disclaimed  antislavery  views  and  intentions. 

2.  ^Ye  encouraged  the  South  in  public  and  private,  upheld  their 
cause,  had  no  interest  in  the  Union  cause,  &c. 

Answer.  The  Confederate  envoys  could  obtain  no  access  to  our 
government  ;  and  while  there  were  under  a  score  of  public  meetings 
on  behalf  of  the  South,  there  were,  I  think,  one  hundred  and  ninety- 
five  on  behalf  of  the  North,  most  of  them  crowded,  and  some  enor- 
mous. 

The  fact  is,  the  travelling  Americans  usually  care  to  know  only  the 
aristocracy  and  distinguished  persons  ;  and  their  retribution  was, 
finding  the  aristocracy  highly  Confederate,  when  put  to  the  proof,  and 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


545 


being  unable  to  enjoy  the  hearty  and  general  sympathy  that  the  mass 
of  our  people  felt  and  expressed  on  behalf  of  the  Union. 

3.  We  destroyed  American  commerce  by  maliciously  letting  out  the 
Alabama,  and  we  ought  to  be  made  to  pay  the  value  of  the  lost 
vessels  and  the  diverted  commerce. 

Answer.  There  were  four  notorious  privateers  ravaging  the  Northern 
commerce  for  a  year  before  the  Alabama  was  built ;  of  those  one  is 
known  to  have  destroyed  fifty-four  merchant-ships. 

4.  We  lent  our  ports,  at  home  and  in  the  colonies,  to  the  Confeder- 
ates, because  they  had  none  ;  and  we  are,  therefore,  answerable  for 
all  the  damage  done  at  sea. 

Answer.  There  were  four  Confederate  ports  sending  out  and  re- 
ceiving back  privateers,  for  a  year,  before  any  such  attempt  was  made 
in  England,  and  they  were  not  free  of  our  colonial  ports. 

5.  Our  "  intent "  to  ruin  the  North  was  shown  by  the  escape  of  the 
Alabama  and  others. 

Answer.  See  the  catalogue  of  vessels,  some  three  escaping  to  about 
thirty-seven  detained,  with  infinite  care,  pains,  and  trouble. 

6.  We  furnished  material  aid  to  the  South  during  the  blockade. 
Answer.  The  blockade-runners  risked  all  the  penalties  of  the  law 

which  could  be  provided.  And  the  material  aid  afforded  to  the  North 
exceeded  tenfold  (more  likely  twenty-fold)  that  obtained  by  the 
South. 

7.  "  Premature  proclamation  of  neutrality,"  whereby  we  "  cast  our 
sword  into  the  scale  of  war,"  lengthened  out  the  war  by  two  years,  — 
caused  an  expenditure  which  cannot  be  computed  ;  disheartened  the 
North,  cheered  the  South,  &c. 

Answer.  Our  government  was  a  month  behind  the  Washington  one 
in  proclaiming  ;  the  Supreme  Court  having  declared  the  blockade 
a  month  before  the  queen  proclaimed  neutrality.  The  act  was  a 
friendly  one,  urged  on  by  W.  E.  Forster,  because  there  were  letters  of 
marque  known  to  be  in  England  from  the  Confederate  government  ; 
and  they  were  thus  rendered  ineffectual.  If  the  act  had  not  been  done 
out  of  friendliness,  it  must  from  necessity  ;  from  the  urgency  of  our 
captains  as  aforesaid. 

While  this  charge  and  the  sum  of  damages  have  been  shouted  out 
against  England  from  end  to  end  of  the  United  States  for  weeks  past, 
there  was  a  correspondence  lying  at  Washington  which  shows  that 
the  very  same  act  on  the  part  of  the  queen  of  Spain  was  received  with 
good- will  and  thanks.  What  will  the  American  people  now  do  about 
this  clamorous  complaint  of  theirs,  and  their  charge  of  protracting- 


546 


MEMORIALS. 


the  war,  and  their  notion  that  England  should  pay  the  cost  of  the  last 
half  of  it  ? 

There  is  another  question, — "What  do  they  think  of  the  suppression 
of  the  fact,  known  in  the  United  States  as  well  as  in  Europe,  that  the 
English  government  prevented  an  alliance  between  the  Confederates 
and  France  ?  The  Confederates  were  first  disheartened  by  the  English 
proclamation  of  neutrality,  and  then  thrown  into  despair  by  our  hold- 
ing back  the  French  emperor  from  an  alliance  with  them. 

As  W.  E.  Forster  says,  by  this  England  shortened  the  war,  doubt- 
less by  many  years.  Yet  Mr.  Sumner  conceals  this  essential  fact ; 
and  all  his  countrymen,  as  far  as  we  see,  follow  his  example. 

And  now,  on  beginning  to  find  themselves  in  the  wrong,  the  wrong- 
doers announce  that  the  English  are  coming  round,  —  are  recovering 
their  tempers  ! 

It  looks  very  idle  to  write  all  this  to  you,  who  have  been  just  and 
calm  and  accurate  throughout.  But  it  is  not  for  your  sake  that  I 
write  it ;  but  partly  for  the  chance  of  its  being  of  some  possible  use  at 
some  time  to  somebody,  and  partly  for  the  relief  to  myself  of  setting 
down  in  some  sort  of  order  what  has  been  in  my  mind  lately. 

.  .  .  .  W.  E.  Forster  writes  that  Sumner's  speech  will  turn  out  a 
good  thing,  as  bringing  out  the  truth.  May  it  prove  so,  —  but  will 
Americans  admit  the  truth,  however  plainly  shown  1  —  And  it  is  no 
small  matter  that  mischief  has  been  done  to  American  repute  and  to 
English  feelings  by  the  recent  display  of  evil  passions  and  shallow 
mental  action,  which  it  will  take  time  to  repair. 

We  are  very  happy  to-day  in  the  domestic  direction  ;  my  three 
young  women  have  all  had  their  journey  of  pleasure  and  refreshment, 
and  are  in  full  vigour  accordingly.  Yes,  —  my  niece's  plan  goes  on  ; 
—  and  we  hope  that  four  working  governesses  and  artists  will  have  a 
happy  month  of  August  here.  We  shall  soon  have  details  to  tell  you, 
as  the  time  draws  near.  —  Yes,  —  I  can  and  do  read,  but  I  am  slow, 
and  get  through  no  great  deal. 

When  Lord  Brougham's  memoirs  of  his  life  and  times  ap- 
peared, they  contained  several  inaccurate  statements  about  her- 
self, which  Mrs.  Martineau  corrected  in  the  following  note  to 
the  editor  of  the  "  Daily  News." 

The  Knoll,  Ambleside,  December  26,  1871. 
Sir,  —  It  has  been  my  practice  throughout  a  long  literary  life  to 
let  pass  without  notice  any  misstatement  in  print  of  my  personal 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


547 


affairs,  for  the  obvious  reason  that  to  rectify  any  such  mistakes  would 
involve  an  apparent  acquiescence  in  whatever  was  left  unanswered. 

If  now,  therefore,  I  object  publicly  to  some  statements  of  Lord 
Brougham's  in  the  third  volume  (p.  302)  of  his  memoirs  of  his  life 
and  times,  it  is  because  I  owe  the  duty  to  others.  There  are  several 
inaccuracies  in  Lord  Brougham's  kindly  intended  representation  of 
my  "  case  "  to  Lord  Grey  ;  but  all  that  I  desire  to  say  is  that  my  fa- 
ther did  not  fail,  "  in  the  panic  "  or  otherwise  ;  and  that  I  never  had 
the  honour  of  supporting  my  mother,  for  the  simple  reason  that  she 
did  not  need  it. 

I  am,  sir,  yours, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

It  was  after  this  time  that,  writing  to  one  of  her  friends  in 
America,  she  says  :  — 

"  I  have  spent  the  whole  month  struggling  with  an  agony  that  I 
can  conceal  but  cannot  forget  for  a  moment." 

Meanwhile  her  friend  Samuel  May  wrote  of  her  thus  to  their 
friend  E.  D.  Webb. 

"  What  extraordinary,  almost  incredible  industry  !  What  pre- 
eminent services  to  mankind  !  Most  persons  in  her  condition  would 
have  died  long  ago,  or  shelved  themselves  in  a  helpless  and  useless 
state.  She  is  a  wonder  and  a  monument  of  what  a  human  being  in 
firm  or  infirm  health  is  capable." 

At  the  same  time  her  niece,  Miss  Jane  Martineau,  wrote  :  — 

"  My  aunt  is  cheerful  and  bright,  but  I  see  she  is  not  so  well." 

The  remainder  of  the  year  seems  to  have  been  a  period  of  more 
severe  illness,  during  which,  according  to  the  usual  way  in  such 
slow  decline,  she  became  used  to  the  lower  level,  and  her  family 
and  friends  hoped  she  might  perhaps  be  gaining  a  little  in  health. 
It  was  not  an  agreeable  idea  to  her.  In  a  postscript  to  a  letter 
from  her  niece,  Miss  Jane  Martineau,  which  tells  how  cheerful  her 
aunt  is,  she  says  :  — 

"  I  suffer  much  less,  but  it  is  a  disappointment  to  come  back  to  life 
when  I  seemed  so  nearly  to  have  done  with  it." 


548 


MEMORIALS. 


This  waiting  for  death  had  every  possible  solace,  her  niece's 
impaired  health  being  now  so  far  restored  that  she  was  able  to 
resume  her  loving  watch,  —  kinsfolk  and  friends  dividing  the 
sinking  years  with  her,  that  she  might  run  no  risk  of  being  alone 
at  last  with  death.  Her  servants  were  more  and  more  devoted. 
Distant  friends  placed  themselves  at  her  disposition,  if  so  they 
might  in  any  way  give  help  and  comfort.  There  seemed  so 
many  associations  with  her  name  in  the  world,  that  every  thing 
reminded  men  of  her.  Without  troubling  her  with  letters  that 
she  lacked  strength  to  answer,  they  sent  her,  from  wherever  they 
stood,  on  hearing  of  her  steady  descent  to  the  grave,  their  as- 
surances of  affectionate  and  admiring  remembrance. 

Her  friend  Lord  Houghton  when  at  Norwich,  delivering  an 
inaugural  address  at  the  Social  Science  Congress,  closed  thus  :  — 

"  I  know  no  provincial  city  adorned  with  so  many  names  illustrious 
in  literature,  the  professions,  and  public  life.  Those  of  Taylor,  Mar- 
tineau,  Austin,  Alderson,  Opie,  come  first  to  my  recollection,  and  there 
are  many  more  behind.  And  there  is  this  additional  peculiarity  of 
distinction,  that  these  are,  for  the  most  part,  not  the  designation  of 
individuals,  but  of  families  numbering  each  men  and  women  conspic- 
uous in  various  walks  of  life.  For  one  of  them  I  will  ask  you  to  per- 
mit me  to  pass  from  the  expression  of  public  esteem  to  that  of  pri- 
vate friendship  for  one  who,  from  a  sick-bed  of  twenty  years,  still 
looks  out  at  the  world  of  action  with  a  mind  interested  in  all  that 
affects  the  well-being  of  humanity,  —  Harriet  Martineau." 

In  consequence  of  having  learned  through  Mrs.  Grote's  book 
of  her  friend's  failing  condition,  Mr.  Gladstone  hastened  to  in- 
quire of  others  whether  it  were  possible  that  she  were  subjected 
to  any  anxiety  on  account  of  restricted  means.  He  was  aware 
that  she  had  once  declined  the  offer  of  a  civil-list  pension,  "  so 
amply  justified,"  he  said,  "  by  her  literary  distinctions,"  and  if  a 
renewal  of  it,  after  so  long  an  interval,  would  be  acceptable  or 
appropriate,  it  was  decided  to  make  it.  Her  reply  was  as  fol- 
lows :  — 

June  8,  1873. 

The  Right  Honourable  W.  E.  Gladstone. 

Sir,  —  I  have  just  received  through  my  brother  and  sister  your 
letter  expressive  of  concern  and  sympathy,  which  are  deeply  moving 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


549 


to  me.  This  kindness  from  you  goes  far  towards  compensating  me 
for  the  shock  with  which  I  saw  that  Mrs.  Grote  had  published  expres- 
sions on  personal  matters  which  I  am  shocked  to  have  written,  how- 
ever privately. 

But  this  evidence  of  your  goodness  is  sufficient  in  itself.  The  work 
of  my  busy  years  has  supplied  the  needs  and  desires  of  a  quiet  old 
age.  On  the  former  occasions  of  my  declining  a  pension  I  was  poor, 
and  it  was  a  case  of  scruple  (possibly  cowardice).  Now  I  have  a 
competence,  and  there  would  be  no  excuse  for  my  touching  the  pub- 
lic money. 

You  will  need  no  assurance  that  I  am  as  grateful  for  your  consider- 
ate offer  as  if  it  had  relieved  me  of  a  wearing  anxiety. 

Believe  me,  with  much  respect  and  gratitude, 
Yours, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

MR,  GLADSTONE  TO  MRS.  H.  MARTINEAU. 

Whitehall,  10  Downing  Street,  June  9,  1873. 
Dear  Madam,  —  I  have  received  your  note  of  yesterday.    It  de- 
prives me  of  a  pleasure  I  had  hoped  to  enjoy,  but  it  enhances  the  re- 
spect and  regard  felt  for  your  character  by  all  who  have  had  any 
acquaintance  with  it. 

I  am  glad  that  you  have  construed  so  kindly  and  favourably  the 
spirit  of  my  inquiry. 

With  every  good  wish,  I  remain, 
Dear  madam, 

Your  very  faithful  and  obedient 

W.  E.  GLADSTONE. 

Miss  Martineau. 

In  writing  to  her  friend  in  America  of  this  offer  and  of  her 
having  declined  it,  she  says,  — 

My  dear  Friend,  —  I  have  to  tell  you  a  bit  of  a  story  ;  and  now, 
please  let  me  impress  you  with  what  is  really  of  serious  consequence 
to  me,  in  more  ways  than  one,  —  that  it  must  no  where  and  no  how 
get  into  print  in  my  lifetime.  It  was  a  great  mischief  that  it  did  on 
a  similar  occasion  thirty  years  ago.  That  it  should  happen  again 
would  be  an  irreparable  misfortune.  I  am  afraid  it  is  difficult  in  the 
United  States  to  talk  freely  about  any  matter  without  danger  of  its 
getting  into  the  newspapers.    But  it  is  no  secret ;  before  the  week  is 


550 


MEMORIALS. 


out  it  will  be  talked  of  all  over  the  kingdom  ;  yet  nobody  will  give 
it  to  a  newspaper  without  authority. 

I  need  only  say  a  few  words,  and  leave  the  letters  to  speak  for 
themselves.  If  you  have  Mr.  Grote's  "  Life,"  you  will  have  seen  a 
letter  of  mine  to  Mrs.  Grote,  on  his  death.    She  ought  not  to  have 

printed  the  last  part  of  it  without  leave  Those  closing  lines 

moved  Mr.  Gladstone's  sympathy,  and  he  has  asked  in  the  most 

delicate  way  whether  he  could  remove  any  pressure  of  anxiety  

But  there  was  no  agitation  about  the  matter.*  Mr.  Gladstone's  share 
(the  queen's  understood)  gives  me  nothing  but  pleasure,  and  there 
was  no  perplexity.  The  former  reasons  for  declining  a  pension 
remain  ;  and  there  are  two  additional  ones,  viz.  that  I  now  have  a 
sufficient  income  for  my  needs,  and  that  the  queen  and  her  premier 
would  be,  though  they  perhaps  do  not  know  it,  exposed  to  insult  for 
showing  friendliness  to  an  infidel  like  me.  I  could  not  think  of 
exposing  the  queen  to  such  anonymous  abuse  as  has  come  to  me,  if 
I  were  under  any  amount  of  temptation.  But  there  is  no  temptation 
whatever. 

I  am  yours  ever, 

H.  MARTIXEAU. 
Copy  of  Mr.  Gladstone's  note  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  :  — 

Hawarden,  August  19, 1876. 
Sir,  —  In  reply  to  your  considerate  letter,  I  give  my  full  consent 
to  the  publication  of  the  correspondence,  as  far  as  I  am  a  party  to  it, 
and  I  am  glad  to  think  of  the  honour  it  will  do  to  the  person  princi- 
pally concerned. 

Your  most  faithful 

W.  E.  GLADSTONE. 
Thomas  Martixeau,  Esq.,  26  Calthorpe  Road,  Birmingham. 

To  a  friend  sending  her  a  present  from  America  she  writes  :  — 

"  What  a  gift  is  this  year's  volume  of  '  Harper/  setting  New  York 
and  its  affairs  so  wonderfully  before  us  !  It  would  do  you  good  to 
know,  if  I  could  tell  you,  the  enjoyment  your  great  and  glorious  Nast 
is  giving  in  this  valley.  I  sent  the  numbers  to  Fox  How  when 
W.  E.  Forster  was  there,  and  they  are  borrowed  again  for  the  Stan- 
leys and  Lady  Richardson.  The  favourite,  the  one  supremely  ex- 
tolled, is  that  of  the  Romish  crocodiles  and  the  children.    The  Dean 

*  Her  health  was  then  so  frail  that  precaution  was  needed  in  the  examina- 
tion of  correspondence . 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


551 


was  delighted  with  it.    Of  course  I  told  them  of  Nast's  patriotic 

strength  against  temptation  

"  It  seems  as  if  all  could  die  but  me.  I  do  long  for  rest  more  and 
more  as  the  downward  change  goes  on." 

It  was  in  1872  that  she  and  five  hundred  others  petitioned 
Parliamint  against  Mr.  Straight's  bill  proposing  the  extension 
of  flogging,  for  the  reasons  assigned  below  :  — 

THE  "CAT." 

Mr.  P.  A.  Taylor  presented  a  petition,  signed  by  Miss  Harriet 
Martineau  and  five  hundred  other  women,  against  Mr.  Straight's  bill 
proposing  the  extension  of  the  punishment  of  flogging  to  certain  cases 
of  brutal  attacks  upon  women  and  children.  The  petitioners,  while 
thankfully  welcoming  this  evidence  that  the  attention  of  the  Legisla- 
ture was  being  directed  to  the  flagrant  insufficiency  of  the  punishment 
inflicted  for  such  offences,  utterly  repudiated  the  proposed  infliction 
of  torture  by  the  "  Cat "  as  a  protection  to  their  sex,  regarding  it  as 
certain  to  increase  the  brutal,  cruel,  and  revengeful  spirit  from  which 
such  crimes  invariably  spring.  The  petitioners,  therefore,  prayed  the 
House  not  to  pass  the  bill,  and  to  abolish  entirely  the  infliction  of 
torture  by  the  "cat."  —  Daily  Neivs,  May  29,  1872. 

Great  numbers  of  letters  were  continually  addressed  to  Mrs. 
Martineau,  telling  her  of  the  cheer  and  stimulus  she  had  given 
in  various  ways  to  the  rising  generation,  and  to  the  men  and 
women  of  middle  age.  Let  one  suffice,  from  the  Hon.  Secretary 
of  the  Social  Purity  Association  to  Mrs.  Harriet  Martineau. 

April,  1873. 

Dear  Madam,  —  I  wish  I  could  express  my  thankfulness,  which 
will  be  shared  by  every  member  of  our  association,  for  your  support 
and  the  sympathy  which  you  so  generously  spare  us  in  your  own 
suffering.  It  is  possible  that  we  shall  print  a  few  letters,  to  make 
known  the  ideas  and  the  spirit  underlying  the  movement.  I  am 
highly  honoured  by  your  opinion  that  my  arguments  (though  I  have 
not  the  right  to  call  them  my  own)  are  worthy  of  a  wider  hearing. 

Since  you  so  kindly  wish  to  circulate  my  letter,  may  I  request  you 
to  send  it  to  your  nephew,  Mr.  Frank  Martineau,  in  Birmingham, 
to  whom  I  am  asked  by  Mrs.  Butler  and  Mr.  W.  Shaen  to  send  our 


I 


552 


MEMORIALS. 


papers  ?  In  all  my  future  efforts  I  shall  feel  that  your  recognition 
gives  me  new  faith  and  power. 

Believe  me,  dear  madam, 

Yours  faithfully, 

GEORGE  C.  WARR. 

Mrs.  Harriet  Martineau. 

During  these  years  of  painful,  difficult  decline,  she  aided  by 
word  and  deed,  by  pen  and  purse,  the  associated  effort  made 
in  Edinburgh  to  secure  complete  medical  education  for  women, 
after  the  persecution  to  which  the  lady  students  had  been  sub- 
jected there. 

The  following  letter  explains  itself. 

Ambleside,  November  18. 
Sir,  —  I  venture  to  trouble  you  with  a  post-office  order  for  £2  — 
payable  from  me  to  yourself  —  as  my  small  contribution  to  the  fund 
needed  by  the  general  committee  for  securing  a  complete  medical 
education  for  women  in  Edinburgh.  The  question  is  so  important, 
and  the  lady  students  have  manifested  so  fine  a  spirit  and  temper 
under  their  harassing  trials,  that  a  large  proportion  of  their  country- 
men will,  I  trust,  feel  the  obligation  of  sustaining  them  during  their 
conflict  with  jealousies  and  prejudices  which  will  scarcely  be  credited 
by  a  future  generation.  Permit  me  to  offer  you  my  thanks  for  the 
service  you  render  to  a  good  cause  by  managing  the  financial  concerns 
of  the  movement,  and  believe  me,  sir,  with  much  respect, 

Yours, 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU. 

W.  S.  Reed,  Esq.,  Hon.  Treasurer. 

On  the  8th  of  October,  1873,  in  reply  to  an  inquiry  about  her 
health  and  another  for  the  name  of  one  of  the  professors  of  Uni- 
versity College,  London,  she  says  :  — 

"  No  doubt  our  blessed  intercourse  of  so  many  years  is  now  draw- 
ing to  a  close  But  to  answer  your  question.    Croome  Robertson 

is  the  name  of  the  man  who  holds  the  chair  of  Philosophy  in  Univer- 
sity College,  and  he  confers  honour  on  all  who  had  any  share  in  the 
making  of  him." 

TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

January  25,  1876. 

My  dearest  Friend,  —  I  am  bent  on  writing  to  you  this  time  ; 
and  the  doubt  and  difficulty  so  rouse  my  self-will,  that  I  suppose  I 
shall  indulge  that  same  self-will  which  has  been  such  a  helper  to  me 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


553 


in  life.  I  did  not  dare  to  utter  it,  to  express  it  in  any  way  when  I 
was  a  child,  it  so  happening  that  our  mother  also  was  strong  on 
that  point,  —  of  self-will ;  but  in  my  silent  way  I  did  scores  of 
things  of  which  I  should  not  have  been  capable,  perhaps,  under  any 
other  impulse  or  by  any  other  strength.  The  very  latest  and  perhaps 
the  very  smallest  of  such  enterprises  is  that  now  under  my  hand,  — 
the  writing  of  this  letter.  You  divine  what  this  means  before  I 
explain  it,  —  for  when  do  you  fail  to  apprehend  by  sympathy  what 
lies  in  my  thought  ?  —  and  in  spite  of  myself  my  mind  is  occupied  in 
ways  which  make  writing  almost  impossible.  Dearest  friend,  I  feel 
and  am  very  ill.  I  will  leave  it  to  J  to  tell  you  necessary  par- 
ticulars ;  and  I  believe,  fully,  that  you  may  confide  in  her  sense  and 
judgment  as  to  how  I  really  am.  There  can  be  no  doubt  of  my  hav- 
ing become  more  rapidly  worse  within  a  fortnight  You  will 

understand  the  gravity  of  the  case  without  another  word,  so  I  will 
leave  it.  I  wonder  whether  I  am  stupid  or  narrow-minded  about  a 
thing  which  I  do  not  understand  ;  I  trust  not,  because  I  believe  you 
and  I  are  of  the  same  mind.  I  cannot  see  or  feel  what  people  mean 
by  their  imperative  desire  to  live,  or  in  death,  by  their  "  horror  of 
annihilation,"  their  pity  for  Mr.  Atkinson  and  me  in  the  absence 
of  the  " Christian  hope."  Mr.  Atkinson  says  " we  have  not  the  fear" 
and,  judging  by  what  we  hear  of  that,  we  may  well  be  content.  For 
my  part,  I  don't  wish  for  more  life,  nor  does  he,  I  believe.  Moreover, 
I  doubt  whether  I  know  any  body  that  does.  I  know  there  are 
many  who  do  not.  Often,  now,  when  so  ill  as  to  "  realize  "  vividly 
what  dying  is  like,  I  am  unaware  of  any  movement  of  a  wish  to  live 
longer,  —  either  little  or  much  longer.  I  am  glad  not  to  have  the 
choice  at  this  moment  ;  but  if  I  had,  I  fully  believe  I  should  go  to 
my  grave  at  once,  for  other  people's  sake  more  than  for  my  own, 
but  still  with  every  inclination  on  my  own  part. 

What  would  dear  Lady  Augusta  say,  if  she  knew  what  I  am  writ- 
ing to  you  ?  She  is  now  only  just  living,  if  alive.  Her  last  hours 
are  honoured  and  praised  as  few  can  be,  for  she  has  rare  strength  and 
sweetness  with  which  to  inspire  her  mourning  husband.  She  ani- 
mates him  for  his  work,  and  talks  it  over  with  him  (his  Eastern 
Church  Lectures),  and  gets  him  to  read  them  to  her  ;  and  this, 
while  she  is  in  a  condition  of  great  suffering,  from  restlessness  and 
helplessness.  It  is  very  beautiful,  and  an  immense  comfort  even 
already,  when  one  is  haunted  by  the  thought  of  Arthur's  widowed 
life  

How  good  of  Mr.  Eobinson  to  send  me  this  gift !    But  the  first 

VOL.  II. 


554 


MEMORIALS. 


thing  that  strikes  him  when  he  enjoys  anything,  is  how  he  can  admit 
somebody  else  to  it. 

Only  one  thing  more,  for  I  have  not  sight  or  strength  for  fur- 
ther writing  to-day.  I  am  glad  you  have  found  a  good  and  learned 
biographical  dictionary.  When  I  was  young,  Gorton's  was  the  estab- 
lished one  ;  then  the  "  Biographie,"  up  to  a  generation  ago.  Now  it 
is  the  "  Biographie"  from  the  "  Penny  Cyclopaedia,"  expanded,  corrected, 
and  completed  by  Professor  George  Lord  (South  Carolinian).  It  is  in 
six  volumes,  and  very  valuable.  But  you  seem  to  be  suited.  What  a 
legacy  you  are  giving  to  your  grandchildren  !  —  a  possession  for  life. 
Did  I  tell  you  we  think  your  "  Pierpont's-head  "  sonnet  quite  beauti- 
ful ?    We  feel  it  so. 

But  I  must  knit  diligently.  The  baby  has  come  (to  a  friend  of  my 
niece  Harriet)  before  the  blanket  for  the  bassinet  is  ready. 

My  dearest  friend,  my  best  love  to  you ! 

Ever  your 

H.  M. 

Though  so  long  unable  to  leave  her  two  rooms,  she  was  con- 
fined to  one  but  a  single  fortnight ;  and  rose  and  dressed,  though 
with  much  effort,  till  within  a  few  days  of  her  death.  She  kept 
her  household  books,  and  gave  directions  for  the  conduct  of  her 
household,  to  the  last;  and  they  who  were  then  with  her  tell 
me  that  she  preserved  through  her  latest  hours  the  infantine 
playfulness  that  was  so  attractive  in  her  earlier  time. 

The  young  friends  about  her,  amid  all  their  veneration, 
were  ever  encouraged  by  her  kindness  to  the  freest  communica- 
tion, and  never  found  her  fail  to  be  interested  in  their  little  jeux 
d1  esprit,  or  their  graver  undertakings ;  and  her  beloved  niece, 
Miss  Jane  Martineau,  tells  me  how  cheering  it  was  during  this 
long  tension  of  heart  undergone  for  her  sake,  that  she  was  always 
ready  to  be  cheered  by  their  efforts  to  bring  before  her  dying  eyes 
the  little  sights  of  domestic  life  she  had  so  much  loved.  Every 
thing  gratified  and  pleased  her,  from  the  woollen-lined  basket  of 
ducklings  brought  to  her  bedside  with  a  comic  quatrain  in  their 
bills,  to  the  preface  she  undertook  and  accomplished,  with  so  much 
difficulty  on  the  Easter  Sunday  before  her  death,  for  her  valued 
young  friend  and  companion,  Miss  Goodwin,  —  to  an  English 
translation  from  the  German  of  Dr.  Pauli's  "  Life  of  Simon  de 
Montfort."    This  was  her  last  effort.    She  wrote  nothing  after- 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


555 


wards  but  letters  to  her  friends  and  letters  of  introduction  to  her 
American  friends  for  Messrs.  Wilson  and  Gledstone,  the  dele- 
gates of  the  European  Federation  for  Social  Purity  and  Political 
Moral  Reform. 

All  this  while  the  newspapers  of  this  period  from  time  to  time 
chronicled  Mrs.  Martineau's  departing  life  ;  and  none  with  truer 
feeling  than  the  (London)  "Leader." 

"  There  is,  we  believe,  not  a  soul  in  this  country  that  would  not  be 
pierced  with  regret  at  hearing  that  the  condition  of  Harriet  Martineau 

is  such  as  to  leave  no  hope  that  her  life  can  last  much  longer  

The  end  may  come  at  any  moment.  There  is  no  indelicacy  in  mention- 
ing the  fact  thus  plainly,  because  no  one  is  more  conscious  of  it  than 
herself ;  and  of  the  number  that  will  be  concerned  there  is  not  one 
that  will  learn  it  with  such  equanimity.  She  has,  we  understand, 
busied  herself  unostentatiously  about  several  final  engagements  ;  has 
exhibited  the  most  thoughtful  consideration  for  even  the  slight  incon- 
veniences that  others  might  suffer  ;  and  awaits  the  event  with  calm- 
ness. The  number  who  regard  her  with  personal  attachment  is  the 
larger  since  her  writing  has  appealed  to  every  class  in  the  country. 
As  the  historian  of  England  during  the  lifetime  of  most  of  us,  she 
has  addressed  all  England ;  as  a  political  writer,  she  has  had  influence 
with  influential  classes  ;  and  children  love  her  as  a  second  Maria 
Edgeworth,  with  a  genius  of  a  larger  and  a  more  generous  kind.  She 
has  taught  her  readers  the  beautiful  science  of  bearing  infirmity  and 
suffering  without  losing  dignity  or  regard  for  the  peace  of  others  ;  and 
the  necessary  result  is,  that  the  solicitude  on  her  account  partakes, 
throughout  numerous  classes,  the  feeling  of  personal  affection." 

TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

Ambleside,  May  17,  1876. 
My  dearest  Friend,  —  I  must  try  to  keep  up  our  correspondence 
to  the  latest  moment,  however  painful  the  aspect  of  my  letter  may 
be  to  your  eyes.  J  tells  me  that  our  last  letter  will  have  pre- 
pared you  for  whatever  we  must  tell  you  now  of  my  condition.  I 
hope  she  is  right,  and  that  it  will  not  overtake  you  with  a  surprise 
if  I  find  myself  unable  to  pour  out  as  I  have  always  hitherto  done. 

Dearest  friend,  I  am  very  ill.    I  leave  it  to  J  to  show  you  how 

nearly  certain  it  is  that  the  end  of  my  long  illness  is  at  hand.  The 
difficulty  and  distress  to  me  are  the  state  of  the  head.  I  will  only 
add  that  the  condition  grows  daily  worse,  so  that  I  am  scarcely  able 


556 


MEMORIALS. 


to  converse  or  to  read,  and  the  cramp  in  the  hands  makes  writing 
difficult  or  impossible;  so  I  must  try  to  be  content  with  the  few 
lines  I  can  send,  till  the  few  days  become  none.  We  believe  that 
time  to  be  near  ;  and  we  shall  not  attempt  to  deceive  you  about  it 
My  brain  feels  imder  the  constant  sense  of  being  not  myself,  and  the 
introduction  of  this  new  fear  into  my  daily  life  makes  each  day  suffi- 
ciently trying  to  justify  the  longing  for  death  which  grows  upon  me 
more  and  more.  I  feel  sure  of  your  sympathy  about  this.  You  enter 
into  my  longing  for  rest,  I  am  certain  ;  and  when  you  hear,  some 
day  soon,  that  I  have  sunk  into  my  long  sleep,  you  will  feel  it  as  the 
removal  of  a  care,  and  as  a  relief  on  my  account. 

On  my  side  I  have  suffered  much  anxiety  on  your  account ;  and 
if  you  can  tell  me  that  you  are  no  longer  suffering  physically  under 
the  peculiar  feebleness  that  attends  bronchial  mischief,  you  will  make 
me  happier  than  any  thing  else  could  make  me.  Farewell  for  to-day, 
dearest  friend  !    While  I  live  I  am  your  grateful  and  loving 

H.  M. 

LAST  LETTER  OF  MRS.  MARTLNEAU  TO  MR.  ATKINSON. 

Ambleside,  May  19,  1876. 

Dear  Friend,  —  My  niece  J  and  also  my  sister  have  been 

observing  that  you  ought  to  be  hearing  from  us,  and  have  offered  to 
write  to  you.  You  will  see  at  once  what  this  means  ;  and  it  is  quite 
true  that  I  have  become  so  much  worse  lately  that  we  ought  to  guard 
against  your  being  surprised,  some  day  soon,  by  news  of  my  life 
being  closed.  I  feel  uncertain  about  how  long  I  may  live  in  my 
present  state.  I  can  only  follow  the  judgment  of  unprejudiced  ob- 
servers ;  and  I  see  that  my  household  believe  the  end  to  be  not  far 
off.  I  will  not  trouble  you  with  disagreeable  details.  It  is  enough 
to  say  that  I  am  in  no  respect  better,  while  all  the  ailments  are  on 
the  increase.  The  imperfect  heart-action  immediately  affects  the 
brain,  causing  the  suffering  which  is  worse  than  all  other  evils  to- 
gether,— the  horrid  sensation  of  not  being  quite  myself.  This  strange, 
dreamy  non-recognition  of  myself  comes  on  every  evening,  and  all 
else  is  a  trifle  in  comparison.  But  there  is  a  good  deal  more.  Cramps 
in  the  hands  prevent  writing,  and  most  other  employment,  except  at 
intervals.  Indications  of  dropsy  have  lately  appeared  :  and  after  this, 
I  need  not  again  tell  you  that  I  see  how  fully  my  household  believe 
that  the  end  is  not  far  off.  Meantime  I  have  no  cares  or  troubles 
beyond  the  bodily  uneasiness,  (which,  however,  I  don't  deny  to  be 
an  evil).    I  cannot  think  of  any  future  as  at  all  probable,  except  the 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


557 


"  annihilation  "  from  which  some  people  recoil  with  so  much  horror. 
I  find  myself  here  in  the  universe,  —  I  know  not  how,  whence,  or 
why.  I  see  every  thing  in  the  universe  go  out  and  disappear,  and  I 
see  no  reason  for  supposing  that  it  is  not  an  actual  and  entire  death. 
And  for  mij  part,  I  have  no  objection  to  such  an  extinction.  I  well 
remember  the  passion  with  which  W.  E.  Forster  said  to  me,  "  I  had 
rather  be  damned  than  annihilated."  If  he  once  felt  five  minutes', 
damnation,  he  would  be  thankful  for  extinction  in  preference.  The 
truth  is,  I  care  little  about  it  any  way.  Now  that  the  event  draws 
near,  and  that  I  see  how  fully  my  household  expect  my  death  pretty 
soon,  the  universe  opens  so  widely  before  my  view,  and  I  see  the  old 
notions  of  death  and  scenes  to  follow  to  be  so  merely  human,  —  so 
impossible  to  be  true,  when  one  glances  through  the  range  of  science, — 
that  I  see  nothing  to  be  done  but  to  wait,  without  fear  or  hope  or 
ignorant  prejudice,  for  the  expiration  of  life.  I  have  no  wish  for  fur- 
ther experience,  nor  have  I  any  fear  of  it.  Under  the  weariness  of 
illness  I  long  to  be  asleep  ;  but  I  have  not  set  my  mind  on  any  state. 
I  wonder  if  all  this  represents  your  notions  at  all.  I  should  think  it 
does,  while  yet  we  are  fully  aware  how  mere  a  glimpse  we  have  of 
the  universe  and  the  life  it  contains. 

Above  all  I  wish  to  escape  from  the  narrowness  of  taking  a  mere 
human  view  of  things,  from  the  absurdity  of  making  God  after  man's 
own  image,  &c. 

But  I  will  leave  this,  begging  your  pardon  for  what  may  be  so 
unworthy  to  be  dwelt  on.  However,  you  may  like  to  know  how 
the  case  looks  to  a  friend  under  the  clear  knowledge  of  death  being 
so  near  at  hand.    My  hands  are  cramped,  and  I  must  stop.  My 

sister  is  here  for  the  whole  of  May,  and  she  and  J         are  most 

happy  together.  Many  affectionate  relations  and  friends  are  willing 
to  come  if  needed  (the  Browns  among  others),  —  if  I  live  beyond  July. 
You  were  not  among  the  Boulogne  theological  petitioners,  I  suppose. 

I  don't  know  whether  you  can  use  there  ?    I  was  very 

thankful  for  your  last,  though  I  have  said  nothing  about  its  contents. 
If  I  began  that,  I  should  not  know  how  to  stop. 

So  good  by  for  to-day,  dear  friend  ! 

Yours  ever, 

H.  M. 

P.  S.  I  am  in  a  state  of  amazement  at  a  discovery  just  made  ;  I 
have  read  (after  half  a  lifetime)  Scott's  "Bride  of  Lammermoor,"  and 
am  utterly  disappointed  in  it.  The  change  in  my  taste  is  beyond 
accounting  for,  —  almost  beyond  belief. 


558 


MEMORIALS. 


HARRIET  MARTINEAU  TO  WM.  LLOYD  GARRISON. 

Ambleside,  May  30, 1876. 

My  dear  Friend,  —  When  you  kindly  sent  me  the  memorial 
card,  announcing  your  precious  wife's  departure  and  burial,  I  asked 
our  dear  Mrs.  Chapman  to  thank  you  on  my  behalf ;  and  her  latest 
letter  brings  me  your  response.  With  it  comes  the  Memoir,  —  the 
picture  of  her  beautiful  life  and  death.  I  wish  I  could  convey  to 
you  any  idea  of  the  emotion  excited  in  my  household  by  the  reading 
of  this  narrative  ;  but  I  have  strength  for  no  more  than  a  bare  ac- 
knowledgment of  your  valued  gift,  and  assurance  of  sympathy  under 
the  pain  of  your  bereavement.  What  a  woman  she  was  !  I  am 
thankful  to  have  been  in  Boston  at  the  crisis  which  proved  that  she 
was  worthy  of  the  honour  of  being  your  wife. 

I  can  say  no  more.  My  departure  is  near,  and  I  hold  the  pen  with 
difficulty. 

Accept  the  sympathy  and  reverent  blessing  of  your  old  friend, 

HARRIET  MARTI  XE  AIL 

Wm.  Lloyd  Garrison. 

LAST  LETTER  OF  MRS.  MARTINEAU  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

Ambleside,  June  14, 1876. 

Dearest  Friend,  —  We  have  heartily  enjoyed  your  couple  of 
letters,  and  I  enjoy  your  map  of  the  family  property,  and  am 
thankful  that  it  has  come  in  time  for  me  to  represent  you,  to  my 
mind's  eye,  in  your  home  locality.  It  is  pleasant  that  those  letters 
arrived  on  my  birthday,  June  12,  when  I  was  74. 

This  is  all  the  better  for  this  birthday  being  certainly  my  last. 

Yes,  my  best  friend!  our  long  and  loving  friendship  has,  as  to 
intercourse,  reached  its  term,  as  we  both  knew  it  must.  J   en- 
gages to  give  you  all  needful  details,  —  to  spare  me  ;  so  I  will  say  no 
more  about  health  matters  than  that,  after  a  constantly  accelerated 
weakness  since  we  wrote  to  you  last,  the  sinking  has  become  so 
shocking  a  sensation  as  to  leave  me,  at  least,  no  doubt  that  I  am 
dying.  But  I  believe  no  one  questions  the  fact.  Dearest  friend,  you 
will  not  let  this  distress  you  ? 

You  are  too  disinterested  not  to  feel  for  me  the  relief  of  the  cer- 
tainty of  rest,  after  the  weary  passage  of  the  actual  days.  You  ask 
about  Macaulay,  and  you  will  doubtless  see  the  "  Life."  Well  !  his 
diary  and  letters  describe  my  sensations  as  if  the  symptoms  were  a 
report  of  my  case  prepared  by  a  professional  man. 


WAITING  FOR  DEATH. 


559 


I  find  I  must  be  self-sufficing,  for  the  sake  of  all,  —  yourself,  J  , 

myself,  —  all  whom  my  life  nearly  concerns.  I  must  not  open  up  any 
springs  of  feeling.  Answering  your  questions  as  to  Macaulay,  —  only 
this  ;  Trevelyan  has  done  his  work  as  well  as  an  adoring  nephew, 
no  more  high-souled  or  deep-hearted  than  his  idol,  could  be  reason- 
ably expected  to  do  it.  Macaulay  was  a  kindly  natured  man,  gen- 
erous about  not  only  money  but  much  else,  and  of  a  less  vulgar 
ambition  than  many  supposed  ;  but  he  was  not  lofty  in  views,  or 
therefore  in  aims  ;  and  his  whole  conduct  in  the  matter  of  his  slander 
of  William  Penn  will  besmirch  his  fame  forever.  W.  E.  Forster 
exposed  it,  giving  absolute  proof  of  the  falsehood  of  the  charge. 
This  was  done  jn  a  pamphlet,  which  was  followed  by  others,  from 
other  hands.  Macaulay  gave  no  sort  of  answer,  took  no  sort  of 
notice  ;  and,  in  the  face  of  all  warning  even  from  deputations,  re- 
printed the  calumny  unaltered  in  his  second  and  third  editions  I  So 

it  was  who  raged  against  me  about  his  "  heart "  !    I  knew 

somebody  did,  but  not  who  it  was.  Lady  Charlotte  Clark  writes 
to  me  in  enthusiasm  about  the  beautiful  "  Life  of  Ticknor,"  begging 
me  to  read  it. 

You  see  I  cannot  write  :  I  will  leave  this  open  for  the  chance  of 
something  better  to-morrow.  •  0  my  friend,  I  must  not  sink  our 
hearts  by  words  of  farewell  to-day.  To  be  unconsciously  apart  is  an 
easy  matter,  quite  different  from  living  and  yearning  apart.  I  be- 
lieve in  the  first,  that  is,  in  not  living  at  all ;  and  I  am  glad  if  so 
it  is  to  be. 

Thursday,  June  15. 
I  am  glad  that  I  wrote  the  foregoing  while  I  could.  To-day  I  could 
not ;  but  you  shall  hear  from  one  of  us,  from  The  Knoll,  at  the  usual 
time.  No  duty  more  clear  and  urgent  than  reporting  to  you  your 
loving  friend's  condition.  Till  our  next  greeting,  then,  farewell !  I 
will  attempt  no  more,  for  you  know  how  entirely  I  am,  as  for  half  a 
lifetime, 

Your  devoted 

H.  M. 

"  The  last  finished  work,"  says  her  niece,  "  was  a  cot  blanket, 
knitted  for  a  neighbour's  baby,  born  on  the  23d  of  January. 
The  baby  was  brought  to  call  on  a  fine  sunny  day,  March  17, 
1876,  and  was  carried  into  the  drawing-room  to  be  seen  in  her 
beautiful  cloak  and  hood.  To  the  cape  was  pinned  an  envelope 
containing  a  bent  sixpence,  an  egg,  and  a  pinch  of  salt,  which 


5G0 


MEMORIALS. 


had  been  received  at  the  previous  call ;  the  custom  of  the  vil- 
lage is  for  the  baby  to  have  a  present  of  these  on  its  first  en- 
trance of  a  house,  as  a  greeting  and  token  it  shall  never  want. 
She  admired  the  little  sleepy  face  and  tiny  hand.  She  had  sent 
a  beautiful  note  to  the  mother  (which  will  always  be  treasured) 
which  called  forth  a  touching  and  excellent  reply." 

"  Miss  S.  Greg  called  on  Sunday,  June  4  (sister  to  W.  R  Greg), 
hardly  expecting  to  see  her,  but  most  anxious  to  make  inquiries, 
told  an  anecdote  which  she  thought  would  be  of  interest,  said 
she  was  staying  at  the  inn  just  opposite  to  Mr.  King's  (the  doc- 
tor's) house,  and  from  her  high  window  could  get  a  good  view 
of  the  nursery.  She  remarked,  1  If  I  were  going  to  stay  a  week 
longer,  I  must  have  had  an  introduction  to  that  charming,  fasci- 
nating baby.'  Mrs.  Martineau  told  Mr.  K.,  who  took  the  mes- 
sage home  to  his  wife :  and  in  this  way  her  desire  to  make 
all  she  saw  happy  never  failed.  Her  powers  of  graphic  de- 
scription she  retained  to  the  last.  Mr.  King,  who  was  present 
when  she  gave  an  account  of  the  little  swing  bridge  in  India, 
in  connection  with  Lord  Elgin,  and  the  picture  in  Lord  Mayo's 
Life  (one  of  the  last  books  she  touched),  said,  '  It  made  me  hot 
all  over  ! '    This  was  about  a  fortnight  before  her  death." 

On  Tuesday,  the  6th  of  June,  came  Mr.  W.  E.  Forster,  her 
friend  of  so  many  years  ;  and,  except  the  household  friends,  he 
was  the  last  who  saw  her  in  life. 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER 


"  This  one  thing  I  do,  forgetting  those  things  which  are  behind  and  reaching 
forth  unto  those  things  which  are  before."  —  Paul  to  the  Philippians. 

"  Year  after  year  beheld  the  silent  toil 

That  spread  his  lustrous  coil ; 

Still,  as  the  spiral  grew, 
He  left  the  past  year's  dwelling  for  the  new, 
Stole  with  soft  step  its  shining  archway  through, 

Built  up  its  idle  door, 
Stretched  in  his  last-found  home,  and  knew  the  old  no  more. 

Thanks  for  the  heavenly  message  brought  by  thee, 

Child  of  the  wandering  sea, 

Cast  from  her  lap,  forlorn  ! 
From  thy  dead  lips  a  clearer  note  is  born 
Than  ever  Triton  blew  from  wreathed  horn  ! 

While  on  mine  ear  it  rings, 
Through  the  deep  caves  of  thought  I  hear  a  voice  that  sings  :  — 

Build  thee  more  stately  mansions,  0  my  soul, 

As  the  swift  seasons  roll ! 

Leave  thy  low-vaulted  past ! 
Let  each  new  temple,  nobler  than  the  last, 
Shut  thee  from  heaven  with  a  dome  more  vast, 

Till  thou  at  length  art  free, 
Leaving  thine  outgrown  shell  by  life's  unresting  sea  !  " 

Oliver  Wendell  Holmes,  The  Chambered  Nautilus. 

Harriet  Martineau  wrote  as  many  as  fifty  biographical 
sketches  of  the  eminent  men  and  women  of  her  time,  which  at 
their  death  were  published  in  the  "  Daily  News,"  the  authorship 
being  never  divulged.  And  so,  I  doubt  not,  she  thought  her 
similar  sketch  of  herself  would  appear  anonymously.  But  so 
high  was  the  general  estimate  of  her  character  and  services  to 
the  world,  that  no  person  living  would  be  willing  to  assume  the 


562 


MEMORIALS. 


responsibility  of  such  an  estimate  of  the  illustrious  dead ;  and 
on  printing  it  in  the  number  of  the  29th  of  June,  two  days  after 
her  death,  the  editor  prefaces  it  thus  :  — 

AN  AUTOBIOGRAPHIC  MEMOIR. 

"We  regret  to  announce  the  death  of  Harriet  Martineau.  The 
following  memoir,  though  written  in  the  third  person,  was  from  her 
own  pen.  The  frankness  of  its  self-criticism  makes  it  necessary  to 
guard  the  reader  against  confounding  her  own  strict  and  sometimes 
disparaging  judgment  of  herself  with  the  impressions  made  by  her 
ivpon  others." 

Harriet  Martineau  was  born  in  1 802,  in  the  city  of  Norwich,  where 
the  first  of  the  name  settled  in  1688.  David  Martineau,  the  earliest 
of  whom  any  record  remains,  was  a  French  Protestant,  who  came 
over  on  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of  Nantes.  He  married  a  French 
lady,  whose  family  emigrated  in  the  same  shin,  and  pursued  his  pro- 
fession as  a  surgeon  in  Norwich,  where  a  succession  of  surgeons  of  the 
name  existed,  till  the  death  of  the  most  eminent  of  them,  Philip 
Meadows  Martineau  (the  uncle  of  Harriet),  in  1828.  He  was  con- 
sidered the  most  eminent  provincial  surgeon  of  his  day.  The  eldest 
brother  of  Harriet  —  a  man  of  qualifications  so  high  as  to  promise  to 
sustain  the  honour  of  his  name  and  profession  in  the  old  city  —  died 
before  the  age  of  thirty,  and  only  one  member  of  the  family  now 
remains  in  the  city  where  many  generations  grew  up.  Harriet  was 
the  third  daughter,  and  the  sixth  of  eight  children  of  Thomas  Marti- 
neau, who  was  a  manufacturer  of  the  Norwich  staples,  —  bombazine 
and  camlet.  His  acquaintance  with  Dr.  Parr  was  kept  up  and  sig- 
nalized by  the  gift  of  a  black  camlet  study-gown  every  year  or  so,  a 
piece  of  the  right  length  being  woven  expressly  for  the  doctor  and 
dyed  with  due  care. 

There  was  nothing  remarkable  about  the  childhood  and  youth  of 
any  of  Thomas  Martineau's  children,  unless  in  the  case  of  Thomas, 
the  eldest  son,  already  referred  to.  His  scholarship  was  of  a  high 
quality,  and  his  mind  was  altogether  of  the  rare  ripeness  and  richness 
which  comes  of  the  equable  cultivation  of  the  intellectual  and  moral 
nature.  The  remarkable  feature  of  the  family  story,  in  those  days, 
was  the  steady  self-denial,  and  clear,  inflexible  purpose  with  which 
the  parents  gave  their  children  the  best  education  which  they  could, 
by  all  honourable  means,  command.   In  those  times  of  war  and  middle- 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


5G3 


class  adversity,  the  parents  understood  their  position,  and  took  care 
that  their  children  should  understand  it,  telling  them  that  there  was 
no  chance  of  wealth  for  them,  and  about  an  equal  probability  of  a 
competence  or  of  poverty  ;  and  that  they  must,  therefore,  regard  their 
education  as  their  only  secure  portion.  Harriet  came  in  for  her  share 
of  this  advantage,  being  well  furnished  with  Latin  and  French  (to 
which  in  due  time  she  added  Italian  and  German),  and  exercised  in 
composition  as  well  as  reading  in  her  own  language  and  others.  The 
whole  family,  trained  by  parental  example,  were  steady  and  conscien- 
tious workers  ;  but  there  were  no  tokens  of  unusual  ability  in  Harriet 
during  any  part  of  her  childhood  or  youth.  Her  health  was  bad,  her 
tone  of  spirits  low,  her  habit  of  mind  anxious,  and  her  habits  of  life 
silent,  and  as  independent  as  they  could  be  under  the  old-fashioned 
family  rule  of  strictness  and  the  strong  hand.  At  her  entrance  upon 
womanhood  a  deafness,  unperceived  during  her  childhood  and  slight 
in  youth,  was  aggravated  by  a  kind  of  accident,  and  became  so  severe 
as  to  compel  (for  other  people's  accommodation  as  well  as  her  own)  the 
use  of  a  trumpet  for  the  rest  of  her  life.  This  misfortune,  no  doubt, 
strengthened  her  habits  of  study,  and  had  much  to  do  with  the  mark- 
ing out  of  her  career.  What  other  effects  it  produced  upon  her  she 
has  shown  in  her  "  Letter  to  the  Deaf." 

Her  first  appearance  in  print  was  before  she  was  out  of  her  teens, 
in  a  religious  periodical  ;  the  same  in  which  the  late  Judge  Talfourd 
had  made  his  early  attempts  not  very  long  before.  Not  only  her 
contributions  to  the  "  Monthly  Repository,"  but  her  first  books  were 
of  a  religious  character,  her  cast  of  mind  being  more  decidedly  of  the 
religious  order  than  any  other  during  the  whole  of  her  life,  whatever 
might  be  the  basis  and  scope  of  her  ultimate  opinions.  Her  latest 
opinions  were,  in  her  own  view,  the  most  religious,  —  the  most  con- 
genial with  the  emotional  as  well  as  the  rational  department  of  human 
nature.  In  her  youth  she  naturally  wrote  what  she  had  been  brought 
up  to  believe,  and  her  first  work,  "  Devotional  Exercises,"  was  thor- 
oughly Unitarian.  Of  this  class,  and  indeed  of  all  her  early  writings, 
the  only  one  worth  mention  is  the  little  volume  "  Traditions  of 
Palestine,"  which  first  fixed  attention  upon  her,  and  made  her  name 
known  in  the  reviews.  There  are  some  even  now  who  prefer  that 
little  volume  to  all  her  other  writings.  Before  it  was  out  its  writer 
had  formed  the  conception  of  the  very  different  kind  of  work  which 
at  once  and  completely  opened  her  career,  her  "  Illustrations  of  Politi- 
cal Economy."  Her  stimulus  in  all  she  wrote,  from  first  to  last,  was 
simply  the  need  of  utterance.    This  need  she  had  gratified  early  ;  and 


564 


MEMORIALS. 


those  -who  knew  her  best  were  always  aware  that  she  was  not  ambi- 
tious, though  she  enjoyed  success,  and  had  pride  enough  to  have 
suffered  keenly  under  failure.  When,  in  1829,  she  and  her  sisters 
lost  their  small  fortunes  by  the  failure  of  the  house  in  which  their 
money  was  placed,  Harriet  continued  to  write  as  she  had  written 
before,  though  under  the  new  liability  of  having  no  money  to  spend 
upon  ventures.  Without  capital,  without  any  literary  connections 
(except  the  editor  of  the  "  Monthly  Repository  "),  without  any  visible 
means  of  accomplishing  her  object,  she  resolved  to  bring  out  a  series 
of  "  Illustrations  of  Political  Economy,"  confident  that  the  work  was 
at  that  time  (1831)  very  much  needed  by  the  working-classes,  to  say 
nothing  of  other  persons  who  had  influence  in  the  community,  agitated 
as  it  then  was  by  the  Reform  struggle.  That  Reform  struggle  and  the 
approach  of  the  cholera  on  its  first  visit  made  the  booksellers  disinclined 
to  publish  any  thing.  Messrs.  Baldwin  and  Cradock  had  all  but  con- 
sented to  the  scheme,  and  had  in  fact  engaged  a  stitcher  for  the  monthly 
volumes,  when  they  took  fright  and  drew  back.  Harriet  Martineau's 
forthcoming  Autobiography  will  of  course  tell  the  story  of  the  struggle 
she  passed  through  to  get  her  work  published  in  any  manner  and  on  any 
terms.  Almost  every  considerable  publisher  had  refused  it ;  the  Diffu- 
sion Society  had  declined  it,  on  the  report  of  their  sub-committee  against 
it.  It  appeared,  however,  at  the  beginning  of  1832,  when  its  writer 
was  worn  out  with  anxiety  and  fatigue,  and  had  met  with  uniform 
discouragement,  except  in  her  own  home,  where  her  own  confidence 
that  the  book  would  succeed,  because  it  wras  wanted,  commanded  the 
sympathy  of  her  family.  In  a  fortnight  after  the  day  of  publication 
her  way  was  open  before  her  for  life.  The  work  reached  a  circulation 
of  about  ten  thousand  in  the  next  few  years.  The  difficulties  under 
which  it  appeared  prevented  her  being  enriched  by  it ;  and  her  own 
unalterable  view  of  what  it  could  and  what  it  could  not  effect  pre- 
vented her  expecting  too  much  from  it,  either  in  regard  to  its  social 
operation  or  its  influence  on  her  own  fame.  The  original  idea  of 
exhibiting  the  great  natural  laws  of  society  by  a  series  of  pictures 
of  selected  social  action  was  a  fortunate  one  ;  and  her  tales  initiated 
a  multitude  of  minds  into  the  conception  of  what  political  economy  is, 
and  of  how  it  concerns  every  body  living  in  society.  Beyond  this, 
there  is  no  merit  of  a  high  order  in  the  work.  It  did  not  pretend  to 
offer  discoveries,  or  new  applications  or  elucidations  of  prior  discov- 
eries. It  popularized,  in  a  fresh  form,  some  doctrines  and  many 
truths  long  before  made  public  by  others.  Those  M'ere  the  days  of 
her  success  in  narrative,  in  fiction.    In  about  ten  years  from  that  time 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


5G5 


she  had  nearly  ceased  to  write  fiction,  from  simple  inability  to  do  it 
well.  On  the  whole,  perhaps,  her  novel  of  "  Deerbrook  "  has  been 
the  most  popular  of  her  works  of  fiction,  though  some  prefer  her 
history  (in  the  form  of  a  romance)  of  Toussaint  L'Ouverture  ("  The 
Hour  and  the  Man  "),  and  others  again  her  story-book  for  children, 
written  in  illness,  —  "  The  Playfellow/'  But  none  of  her  novels  or 
tales  have,  or  ever  had,  in  the  eyes  of  good  judges  or  in  her  own,  any 
character  of  permanence.  The  artistic  aim  and  qualifications  were 
absent ;  she  had  no  power  of  dramatic  construction  ;  nor  the  poetic 
inspiration  on  the  one  hand,  nor  critical  cultivation  on  the  other, 
without  which  no  work  of  the  imagination  can  be  worthy  to  live. 
Two  or  three  of  her  Political  Economy  Tales,  are,  perhaps,  her  best 
achievement  in  fiction,  —  her  doctrine  furnishing  the  plot  which  she 
was  unable  to  create,  and  the  brevity  of  space  duly  restricting  the 
indulgence  in  detail  which  injured  her  longer  narratives,  and  at  last 
warned  her  to  leave  off  writing  them.  It  was  fortunate  for  her  that 
her  own  condemnation  anticipated  that  of  the  public.  To  the  end  of 
her  life  she  was  subject  to  solicitations  to  write  more  novels  and  more 
tales  ;  but  she  for  the  most  part  remained  steady  in  her  refusal.  Her 
three  volumes  of  *'  Forest  and  Game  Law  Tales"  and  a  few  stories  in 
"  Household  "Words,"  written  at  the  express  and  earnest  request  of 
Mr.  Dickens,  and  with  little  satisfaction  to  herself,  are  her  latest 
efforts  in  that  direction.* 

Her  popularity  was,  however,  something  extraordinary  during 
the  appearance  of  her  "  Illustrations  of  Political  Economy."  It  was 
presently  necessary  for  her  to  remove  to  London,  to  be  within  reach 
of  the  sources  of  information  rendered  indispensable  by  the  success 
of  her  scheme  and  the  extension  of  her  influence.  She  lived  in  a 
lodging  in  Conduit  Street  for  some  months,  till  her  mother  joined  her 
in  London.  Their  house  was  in  Fludyer  Street,  Westminster  ;  and 
there  they  lived  till  a  serious  and  long  illness  compelled  Harriet 
Martineau  to  leave  London,  to  which  she  never  returned  as  a  resi- 
dent. On  her  first  taking  up  her  abode  there  many  foolish  stories 
were  afloat  about  the  origin  of  her  series,  and  the  aid  she  received  in 
it  from  Lord  Brougham  and  others.  The  facts  were  that  the  enter- 
prise was  wholly  her  own,  and  the  execution  of  it  also  ;  and  that 
Lord  Brougham  in  particular  knew  nothing  whatever  about  her  or 

*  After  the  above  was  in  the  drawer  of  the  "  Daily  News  "  office,  she  wrote 
some  historical  fiction  for  "  Once  a  Week"  against  her  own  judgment,  and  only 
to  gratify  Mr.  Evans  and  Mr.  Lucas,  the  proprietor  and  editor  of  "Once  a 
Week." 


56G 


MEMORIALS. 


her  work  till  his  secretary  sent  him  the  first  five  numbers  half  a  year 
after  the  publication  began.  His  lordship's  first  thought  was  to 
engage  her  assistance  in  illustrating  the  evils  of  the  old  poor-law  and 
the  intended  provisions  of  the  new  ;  and  her  four  little  volumes  on 
the  poor-laws  appeared  during  the  publication  of  her  larger  work. 
The  two  years  which  followed  her  first  great  success  were  the  busiest 
of  a  busy  life.  All  advocates  of  all  schemes  applied  to  her  for  co- 
operation. She  was  plunged  at  once  into  such  a  social  whirl  that  she 
dined  out  every  day  but  Sundays.  New  material  for  her  work  was 
always  accumulating  on  her  hands  ;  and  besides  the  production  of 
one  number,  and  occasionally  two,  of  her  little  volumes  per  month, 
she  had  an  unmanageable  amount  of  correspondence  always  pressing 
upon  her.  It  was  at  that  time  that  she  formed  the  habit  which  she 
continued  for  the  rest  of  her  life,  —  of  sitting  up  late,  while  going  on 
to  rise  early.  She  took,  on  an  average,  five  hours  or  five  and  a  half 
of  sleep,  going  to  bed  at  one  in  the  morning,  and  being  at  her 
breakfast  at  half  past  seven,  to  save  the  precious  morning  hours  for 
her  most  serious  business.  Such  was  her  practice,  with  few  intervals, 
to  the  date  of  her  last  illness. 

Before  the  publication  of  her  work  was  completed  she  had  sailed 
for  America.  At  first  her  object  was  simply  to  travel  for  the  sake  of 
recreation  and  repose  ;  but,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  late  Lord  Henley, 
she  turned  her  face  in  the  direction  of  the  United  States,  in  order  to 
examine  some  points  of  social  policy  and  morals,  honourable  to  the 
Americans  and  worthy  of  our  emulation,  but  generally  overlooked 
by  European  travellers  who  go  to  amuse  themselves  and  return  to 
quiz.  She  hoped  to  learn  some  secrets  of  success  in  the  treatment 
of  criminals,  the  insane,  and  other  unhappy  classes,  and  in  the  diffu- 
sion of  education.  She  succeeded  in  her  aims  in  some  measure  ;  but 
the  interest  of  the  antislavery  question  just  at  that  time  absorbed 
every  other.  She  arrived  just  at  the  culmination  of  that  reign  of 
terror  which  she  described  after  her  return  in  the  "Westminster 
Review,"  in  the  narrative  entitled  "  The  Martyr  Age  of  the  United 
States,"  which  was  reprinted  as  a  pamphlet,  and  by  which  the  nature 
and  significance  of  the  antislavery  movement  in  America  (where  it 
involved  the  entire  political  and  personal  liberty  of  every  citizen) 
were  first  made  known  in  this  country.  Harriet  Martineau,  received 
with  unbounded  hospitality  and  unmeasured  flatteries,  though  known 
to  have  written  an  antislavery  story  in  her  series,  was  not  converted 
to  the  American  view,  as  had  been  hoped  and  expected.  Under 
circumstances  in  which  she  had  no  choice  but  to  speak  out  she  con- 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


567 


demned  slavery  and  its  political  consequences  as  before  ;  and,  for 
some  months  preceding  her  return,  she  was  subjected  to  insult  and 
injury,  and  was  even  for  some  weeks  in  danger  of  her  life  while 
travelling  where  the  tar-barrel,  the  cowhide,  and  the  pistol  were  the 
regimen  prescribed  for  and  applied  to  abolitionists,  and  threatened 
especially  in  her  case.  In  her  books  upon  America  she  said  little  or 
nothing  of  her  personal  share  in  the  critical  troubles  of  the  time, 
because  her  purpose  was,  not  to  interest  the  public  in  her  adven- 
tures, but  to  exhibit,  without  passion  or  prejudice,  the  actual  con- 
dition of  society  in  the  United  States.  Its  treatment  of  herself  is 
rather  a  topic  for  her  Autobiography,  and  there,  no  doubt,  it  will  be 
found. 

After  an  absence  of  two  years  she  returned  to  England  in  August, 
1836,  and  early  in  the  next  spring  she  published  "  Society  in  America." 
Her  own  opinion  of  that  work  changed  much  for  the  worse  before 
her  death.  It  was  written  while  she  was  in  the  full  flow  of  sympa- 
thy with  the  theoretical  American  statesmen  of  that  time,  who  were 
all  &  priori  political  philosophers  to  a  greater  or  less  degree,  like  the 
framers  of  the  Declaration  of  Independence.  Her  intercourse  with 
these  may  be  traced  in  the  structure  and  method  of  observation  of 
her  book,  and  her  companionship  with  the  adorers  of  Thomas  Car- 
lyle  in  her  style.  Some  constitutional  lawyers  of  the  United  States 
have  declared  that  there  is  no  error  in  her  account  of  the  political 
structure  and  relations  of  the  Federal  and  State  governments  of  that 
country  ;  and  the  book  contains  the  only  account  we  have  of  the 
condition  of  slavery,  and  of  the  country  under  it,  at  the  time  of  the 
rise  of  the  abolition  movement.  But,  on  the  whole,  the  book  is  not 
a  favourable  specimen  of  Harriet  Martineau's  writings,  either  in  re- 
gard to  moral  or  artistic  taste.  It  is  full  of  affectations  and  preach- 
ments, and  it  marks  the  highest  point  of  the  metaphysical  period  of 
her  mind.  Little  as  she  valued  the  second  work  on  America  — 
"  Retrospect  of  Western  Travel "  —  which  she  wrote  at  the  request  of 
her  publishers,  to  bring  into  use  her  lighter  observations  on  scenery 
and  manners,  it  was  more  creditable  to  her  mood,  and  perhaps  to  her 
powers,  than  the  more  ambitious  work.  The  American  abolitionists, 
then  in  the  early  days  of  their  action,  reprinted  as  a  pamphlet  the 
parts  of  these  two  works  which  relate  to  the  slave  institutions  of 
their  country,  and  sowed  it  broadcast  over  the  land.  The  virulence 
with  which  the  Southern  press  denounces  her  to  this  day,  in  com- 
pany with  Mrs.  Chapman  and  Mrs.  Stowe,  seems  to  show  that  her 
representations  were  not  lost  on  the  American  public.    If  they  are 


5G8 


MEMORIALS. 


operating  at  the  end  of  so  many  years,  there  must  be  truth  in  them. 
Though  the  customary  dispensers  of  hospitality  in  the  United  States 
passed  from  the  extreme  of  courtesy  to  that  of  rudeness  to  the  trav- 
eller, she  formed  valuable  friendships  in  that  country  which  lasted 
as  long  as  her  life.  Her  connection  with  the  interests  of  America 
remained  a  close  one,  and  its  political  course  was  a  subject  of  action 
to  a  late  period,  and  of  study  to  the  last. 

In  the  interval  between  her  return  from  America  and  her  leaving 
London  —  somewhat  less  than  three  years  —  she  wrote  "How  to 
Observe  Morals  and  Manners,"  a  volume  of  a  series  published  by 
Mr.  Knight,  of  which  Sir  Henry  Delabeche's  "  How  to  Observe 
Geology 9  was  the  opening  volume  ;  a  few  of  the  volumes  of  the 
"  Guide  to  Service,"  issued  also  by  Mr.  Knight ;  and  her  novel  "  Deer- 
brook."  The  "Guides  to  Service"  were  originated  by  the  Poor-law 
Commissioners,  with  the  object  chiefly  of  training  the  ideas  of  chil- 
dren, especially  in  the  workhouse  schools,  for  the  occupation  of  their 
lives.  Harriet  Martineau  agreed  to  write  the  model  number,  pro- 
vided she  might  take  the  "  Maid-of-all-Work  "  for  her  subject  ;  which 
she  did,  with  the  amusing  result  that  at  various  turns  of  her  life 
afterwards  she  was  met  by  the  popular  belief  that  she  had  herself 
been  a  maid-of-all-work  ;  a  mistake  which  she  regarded  with  some 
complacency  whenever  she  encountered  it.  The  other  volumes  of 
the  Series  written  by  her  are  the  "Dressmaker"  (in  which  she  had 
some  technical  assistance  from  a  professional  person),  the  "  House- 
maid," and  the  "  Lady's  Maid." 

On  the  publication  of  "  Deerbrook,"  in  April,  1839,  she  went  abroad 
with  a  party  of  friends,  partly  to  escort  an  invalid  cousin,  and  partly 
for  rest  and  refreshment  to  herself.  She  was  not  aware  of  the  extent 
of  her  own  illness  ;  and  she  was  brought  home  on  a  couch  from 
Venice  in  June,  in  a  state  of  health  so  hopeless  that  she  left  London 
and  settled  herself  at  Tynemouth,  on  the  Northumberland  coast, 
within  reach  of  family  care  and  tendance.  There  she  remained,  a 
prisoner  to  the  couch,  till  the  close  of  1844.  During  her  illness  she 
wrote  her  second  novel  ("  The  Hour  and  the  Man"),  the  four  volumes 
of  children's  tales  called  "  The  Playfellow,"  and  "  Life  in  the  Sick- 
Boom  ; "  originating  also,  in  concert  with  the  present  Countess  of 
Elgin  and  Mr.  Knight,  the  series  since  so  well  known  as  "The 
Weekly  Volume."  Of  her  recovery  the  public  heard  at  the  time 
much  ,  more  than  she  desired  and  approved.  At  the  instigation  of 
several  of  her  friends,  and  especially  of  her  medical  attendant,  she 
made  trial  of  mesmerism,  for  the  purpose  of  obtaining  some  release 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


569 


from  the  use  of  opiates.  To  her  own  surprise  and  that  of  others,  the 
treatment  procured  her  a  release  from  the  disease  itself,  from  which 
several  eminent  medical  men  had  declared  recovery  to  be  impossible. 
In  five  months  she  was  perfectly  well.  Meantime,  doctors  and 
strangers  in  various  parts  of  the  kingdom  had  rushed  into  print, 
without  her  countenance  or  her  knowledge ;  and  the  amount  of 
misrepresentation  and  mischief  soon  became  so  great  as  to  compel  her 
to  tell  the  story  as  it  really  happened.  The  commotion  was  just 
what  might  have  been  anticipated  from  the  usual  reception  of  new 
truths  in  science  and  the  medical  art,  That  she  recovered  when  she 
ought  to  have  died  was  an  unpardonable  offence.  According  to  the 
doctors  who  saw  her  enter  society  again  from  the  beginning  of  1845, 
she  was  in  a  state  of  infatuation,  and,  being  as  ill  as  ever  in  reality, 
would  sink  down  in  six  months.  When,  instead  of  so  sinking  down, 
she  rode  on  a  camel  to  Mount  Sinai  and  Petra,  and  on  horseback  to 
Damascus,  they  said  she  had  never  been  ill.  To  the  charge  that 
it  had  been  "  all  imagination,"  her  reply  was  that,  in  that  case,  it  was 
the  doctor's  imagination  and  not  hers  that  was  involved  ;  for  they 
had  told  her,  and  not  she  them,  what  and  how  serious  her  illness  was. 
To  the  friends  who  blamed  her  for  publishing  her  experience  before 
the  world  was  ripe  for  it,  her  reply  was,  first,  that  she  had  no  option  ; 
and  next,  that  it  is  hard  to  see  how  the  world  is  to  get  ripened 
if  experimenters  in  new  departments  of  natural  philosophy  conceal 
their  experience.  The  immediate  consequence  of  the  whole  busi- 
ness —  the  extension  of  the  practice  of  mesmerism  as  a  curative  agent, 
and  especially  the  restoration  of  several  cases  like  her  own  —  abun- 
dantly compensated  Harriet  Martineau  for  an  amount  of  insult  and 
ridicule  which  would  have  been  a  somewhat  unreasonable  penalty  on 
any  sin  or  folly  which  she  could  have  committed.  As  a  penalty  on 
simply  getting  well  when  she  was  expected  to  die,  the  infliction  was 
a  curious  sign  of  the  times. 

Being  free  to  choose  her  place  of  abode,  on  her  recovery,  her  friends 
universally  supposed  she  would  return  to  London  and  its  literary 
advantages  and  enjoyments.  But  literature,  though  a  precious  luxury, 
was  not,  and  never  had  been,  the  daily  bread  of  her  life.  She  felt 
that  she  could  not  be  happy,  or  in  the  best  way  useful,  if  the  de- 
clining years  of  her  life  were  spent  in  lodgings  in  the  morning  and 
drawing-rooms  in  the  evening.  A  quiet  home  of  her  own,  and  some 
few  dependent  on  her  for  their  domestic  welfare,  she  believed  to  be 
essential  to  every  true  woman's  peace  of  mind  ;  and  she  chose  her 
plan  of  life  accordingly.    Meaning  to  live  in  the  country,  she  chose 


570 


MEMORIALS. 


the  most  beautiful,  and  settled  at  the  Lakes.  She  bought  a  field 
near  Ambleside,  opposite  Fox  How,  and  about  a  mile  from  Rydal 
Mount.  She  built  a  house,  and  tried  her  hand  successfully  on  the 
smallest  of  farms,  —  a  farm  of  two  acres.  She  set  on  foot  some  reme- 
dial schemes  applicable  to  local  mischiefs  ;  and  by  degrees  found 
herself  pledged  to  a  practice  of  delivering  a  series  of  lectures  every 
winter  to  the  mechanics  of  the  little  town  and  their  families.  She 
and  they  were  so  well  acquainted,  that  there  was  nothing  odd  in 
this  in  their  view,  and  no  strangers  were  admitted,  nor  even  the 
gentry  of  the  place,  for  want  of  room.  Her  subjects  were  Sanitary 
Principles  and  Practice,  the  History  of  England,  the  History  of  North 
America,  and  the  Scenes  of  her  Eastern  Travel.  In  her  Ambleside 
home  she  lived  for  ten  years  of  health  and  of  happiness,  which,  as 
she  was  wont  to  say,  was  worth  all  the  rest  of  her  life. 

At  various  times  since  1832  she  had  been  sounded  about  accepting 
a  pension  on  the  Civil  List ;  and  she  had  repeatedly  replied  by 
objecting  to  receive  one.  Her  objections  remained  in  full  force  when 
Lord  Melbourne  made  an  express  offer  to  her  of  a  pension  of  £  150, 
to  be  increased  as  circumstances  permitted,  as  his  last  act  before  going 
out  of  power  in  1841.  Lord  Melbourne  was  aware  that  she  had 
invested  her  spare  earnings  in  a  deferred  annuity,  and  that  while 
hopelessly  ill  she  was  very  poor.  Her  objections,  however,  bore  no 
relation  to  this  class  of  considerations.  Her  letter  to  Lord  Melbourne 
found  its  way  into  the  newspapers  without  her  knowledge,  and  it 
speaks  for  itself.  Not  the  less  for  this  was  she  misunderstood. 
Nothing  was  further  from  her  thoughts  than  passing  condemnation 
on  the  literary  pensioners  of  the  time.  They  must  judge  for  them- 
selves, and  their  position  was  different.  It  was  a  matter  of  feeling 
with  her  quite  as  much  as  of  principle  ;  and  she  would  have  thank- 
fully received  any  acknowledgment  of  past  labours  which  might  have 
been  decreed,  otherwise  than  through  a  method  of  favouritism.  She 
felt  that,  once  under  pecuniary  obligation  to  the  sovereign  and  the 
minister,  she  could  never  again  feel  perfectly  free  on  political  ques- 
tions, though  Lord  Melbourne  generously  deprecated  any  such  con- 
clusion. As  it  happened,  she  did  very  well  without  the  money,  and 
she  wrote  the  "  History  of  the  Thirty  Years'  Peace,"  which  she  could 
hardly  have  done  while  in  receipt  of  a  pension. 

This,  the  bulkiest  of  her  works  and  the  most  laborious,  was  under- 
taken at  the  request  of  Mr.  Charles  Knight,  who  had  himself  written 
the  first  few  chapters,  then  deputed  the  work  to  another,  and  pres- 
ently found  it  at  a  stand.    Harriet  Martineau  had  no  idea  whatever 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


571 


whether  she  could  write  history  ;  but,  on  Mr.  Knight's  pressing  his 
request,  she  went  to  work  in  August,  1848,  and  completed  the  work 
(after  an  interval  of  a  few  weeks)  in  the  autumn  of  1849.  The  intro- 
ductory volume  was  written  in  1850,  also  at  Mr.  Knight's  solicitation. 
Without  taking  the  chronicle  form  this  history  could  not,  from  the 
nature  of  the  case,  be  cast  in  the  ultimate  form  of  perfected  history. 
All  that  can  be  done  with  contemporary  history  is  to  collect  and 
methodize  the  greatest  amount  of  reliable  facts  and  distinct  impres- 
sions, to  amass  sound  material  for  the  veritable  historian  of  a  future 
day,  —  so  consolidating,  assimilating,  and  vivifying  the  structure  as  to 
do  for  the  future  writer  precisely  that  which  the  lapse  of  time  and 
the  oblivion  which  creeps  over  all  transactions  must  prevent  his 
doing  for  himself.  This  auxiliary  usefulness  is  the  aim  of  Harriet 
Martineau's  history  ;  and  she  was  probably  not  mistaken  in  hoping 
for  that  much  result  from  her  labour.  It  rendered  her  a  personal  ser- 
vice which  she  had  not  anticipated.  There  was  an  impression  abroad 
of  her  being  a  sort  of  demagogue  or  dangerous  Radical,  though  it  is 
hard  to  say  which  of  her  writings  could  have  originated  such  an  im- 
pression. The  history  dispelled  it  thoroughly  ;  and  if  it  proved  that 
she  belonged  to  no  party,  it  showed  that  it  was  not  because  she  tran- 
scended the  extremes  of  all. 

The  work  which  she  published  on  her  return  from  her  Eastern 
travels,  which  she  enjoyed  as  the  guest  of  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Richard  V. 
Yates,  of  Liverpool,  had  shown  that  she  was  no  longer  a  Unitarian 
nor  a  believer  in  revelation  at  all.  "  Eastern  Life,  Present  and  Past," 
exhibits  the  history  and  generation  of  the  four  great  faiths  —  the 
Egyptian,  the  Jewish,  the  Christian,  and  the  Mohammedan — as  they 
appear  when  their  birthplaces  are  visited  in  succession.  She  had 
passed  from  the  Nile  to  Sinai ;  and  thence  to  Jerusalem,  Damascus, 
and  Lebanon.  The  work  in  which  she  gave  out  her  views  on  her 
return  ranks,  on  the  whole,  as  the  best  of  her  writings  ;  and  her  rep- 
utation assumed  a  new,  a  graver,  and  a  broader  character  after  its 
appearance.  It  was  followed  in  1851  by  a  volume  which,  though  not 
for  the  most  part  written  by  her,  was  of  her  procuring  and  devising. 
She  took  the  reponsibility  of  the  "  Letters  on  the  Laws  of  Man's 
Nature  and  Development,"  which  were  for  the  greater  part  written 
by  her  friend,  Mr.  Atkinson,  in  reply  to  the  short  letters  of  her  own 
which  occupy  a  small  proportion  of  the  book.  This  book  brought 
upon  its  writers,  as  was  inevitable,  the  imputation  of  atheism  from 
the  multitude  who  cannot  distinguish  between  the  popular  and  the 
philosophical  sense  of  the  word,  —  between  the  disbelief  in  the  popu- 


572 


MEMORIALS. 


lar  theology  which  has  caused  a  long  series  of  religious  men  to  be 
called  atheists,  and  the  disbelief  in  a  First  Cause,  —  a  disbelief  which 
is  expressly  disclaimed  in  the  book.  A  full  account  of  Harriet  Marti- 
neaus  faith  and  philosophy  will  of  course  be  found  in  her  forthcoming 
Autobiography,  where  it  is  more  in  place  than  here.  As  to  the  conse- 
quences of  such  an  expression  of  them,  they  were  somewhat  different 
from  what  might  have  been  expected.  The  reception  of  the  vol- 
ume disclosed  some  curious  social  facts,  revealing  to  its  authors  an 
altogether  unexpected  proportion  between  the  receivers  and  repu- 
diators  of  dogmatic  theology  in  this  country.  What  is  called  "the 
entire  periodical  press  "  condemned  the  book,  without,  however,  in 
any  one  case  meeting  its  argument  or  recognizing  its  main  subject  ; 
and  yet  was  it  excellently  received  and  widely  sympathized  with. 
Every  body  supposed  that  its  authors  would  be  ruined,  excluded  from 
society,  stopped  in  their  work,  and  so  forth.  But  the  actual  result 
was  that  this  open  avowal  of  heretical  opinion  made  all  the  relations 
of  life  sounder  than  they  had  ever  been.  As  Harriet  Martineau  de- 
clared, it  dissolved  all  false  relations  and  confirmed  all  true  ones. 
At  no  time  of  her  life  was  she  more  occupied,  more  prosperous,  so 
cheered  by  sympathy,  or  so  thoroughly  happy,  as  during  the  interval 
between  the  publication  of  that  book  and  the  close  of  her  labours. 

Besides  some  small  works,  such  as  "  Guides  to  the  Lakes,"  it  re- 
mained for  her  to  bring  out  two  of  more  general  importance,  —  her 
volume  on  "  Household  Education,"  which  is  more  popular  than 
almost  any  of  her  works,  and  her  condensation  of  Comte's  "  Positive 
Philosophy."  The  story  of  the  intention  and  achievement  of  that  work 
is  told  in  its  prefaces.  Begun  in  1852,  it  occupied  the  greater  part  of 
the  year  1853,  and  appeared  in  November  of  that  year.  It  was  her 
last  considerable  work  ;  and  there  is  no  other,  perhaps,  which  so  well 
manifests  the  real  character  of  her  ability  and  proper  direction  of  her 
influence,  —  as  far  as  each  went.  Her  original  power  was  nothing 
more  than  wras  due  to  earnestness  and  intellectual  clearness  within  a 
certain  range.  With  small  imaginative  and  suggestive  powers,  and 
therefore  nothing  approaching  to  genius,  she  could  see  clearly  what 
she  did  see,  and  give  a  clear  expression  to  what  she  had  to  say.  In 
short,  she  could  popularize,  while  she  could  neither  discover  nor  in- 
vent. She  could  sympathize  in  other  people's  views,  and  was  too 
facile  in  doing  so  ;  and  she  could  obtain  and  keep  a  firm  grasp  of  her 
own,  and,  moreover,  she  could  make  them  understood.  The  function 
of  her  life  was  to  do  this,  and,  in  as  far  as  it  was  done  diligently  and 
honestly,  her  life  was  of  use,  however  far  its  achievements  may  have 


SELF-ESTIMATE,  AND  OTHER. 


573 


fallen  short  of  expectations  less  moderate  than  her  own.  Her  duties 
and  her  business  were  sufficient  for  the  peace  and  the  desires  of  her 
mind.  She  saw  the  human  race,  as  she  believed,  advancing  under 
the  law  of  progress  ;  she  enjoyed  her  share  of  the  experience,  and  had 
no  ambition  for  a  larger  endowment,  or  reluctance  or  anxiety  about 
leaving  the  enjoyment  of  such  as  she  had. 

From  the  early  part  of  1852  she  had  contributed  largely  to  the 
"  Daily  News,"  and  her  "  Letters  from  Ireland  "  in  the  summer  of  that 
year  were  written  for  this  paper.  As  her  other  works  left  her  hands 
the  connection  with  the  paper  became  closer,  and  it  was  never  inter- 
rupted except  for  a  few  months  at  the  beginning  of  her  last  illness, 
when  all  her  strength  was  needed  for  her  Autobiography.  When  she 
had  finished  that  task  she  had  the  work  printed,  and  the  engravings 
prepared  for  it>  under  her  own  supervision,  partly  to  avoid  delay  in  its 
appearance  (because  any  good  that  it  could  do  would  be  best  done 
immediately  after  her  death),  but  chiefly  to  spare  her  executors  all 
responsibility  about  publishing  whatever  may  be  found  in  the  Me- 
moir. Her  last  illness  was  a  time  of  quiet  enjoyment  to  her,  soothed 
as  it  was  by  family  and  social  love,  and  care,  and  sympathy,  and, 
except  for  one  heart-grief,  —  the  loss  in  1864  of  her  niece  Maria,  who 
was  to  her  as  a  daughter,  —  free  from  anxiety  of  every  kind,  and 
amused  by  the  constant  interest  of  regarding  life  and  its  affairs  from 
the  verge  of  the  horizon  of  existence.  Her  disease  was  deterioration 
and  enlargement  of  the  heart,  the  fatal  character  of  which  was  discov- 
ered in  January,  1855.  She  declined  throughout  that  and  subsequent 
years,  and  died  — 

—  And  died  in  the  summer  sunset  of  her  home  amid  the 
Westmoreland  mountains,  on  the  27th  of  June,  1876,  after 
twenty-one  more  diligent,  devoted,  suffering,  joyful  years,  —  at- 
tended by  the  family  friends  she  most  loved,  and  in  possession 
of  all  her  mental  powers  up  to  the  last  expiring  day ;  aged 
seventy-four  years. 

If,  instead  of  dying  so  slowly,  she  had  died  as  she  could 
have  wished  and  thought  to  have  done,  without  delay,  what  a 
treasure  of  wise  counsels,  what  a  radiance  of  noble  deeds,  what  a 
spirit  of  love  and  of  power,  what  brave  victorious  battle  to  the 
latest  hour  for  all  things  good  and  true,  had  been  lost  to  poster- 
ity !  What  an  example  of  more  than  resignation,  of  that  ready, 
glad  acceptance  of  a  lingering  and  painful  death  which  made  the 


574 


MEMORIALS. 


sight  a  blessing  to  every  witness,  had  been  lost  to  the  surviving 
generation  ! 

During  all  the  last  one-and-twenty  years  death  was  the  idea 
most  familiar  and  most  welcome.  It  was  spoken  of  and  provided 
for  with  an  easy  freedom  that  I  never  saw  approached  in  any 
other  home,  yet  she  never  expressed  a  wish  respecting  a  place  of 
burial.  But  a  few  days  before  her  death,  when  asked  if  she 
would  be  laid  in  the  burial-place  of  her  family,  she  assented  ;  and 
she  lies  with  her  kindred,  in  the  old  cemetery  at  Birmingham. 

The  grave  bears  this  record  :  — 

ELIZABETH  MARTI NEAU 

WIDOW  Of  THE  LATE 

Mr  THOMAS  MARTINEAU 
of  Norwich 
Born  October  8th  1771 
Died  August  26th  1848 

ALSO  HER  GRAND-DAUGHTER 
MARIA  MARTINEAU 
Daughter  of  ROBERT  and  JANE  MARTINEAU 
Born  August  27th  1827 
Died  February  29th  1864 

ROBERT  MARTINEAU 
Born  at  Norwich  August  19th  1798 
Died  at  Edgbaston  June  17th  1870 
also 

JANE  MARTINEAU 

his  widow 
Born  June  6th  1793 
Died  March  20th  1874 

ALSO 

HARRIET  MARTINEAU 

DAUGHTER  OF 

THOMAS  and  ELIZABETH  MARTINEAU 
Born  at  Norwich  June  12tb  1802 
Died  at  Ambleside  June  27th  1876 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


"They  take  thee  for  their  mother; 
And  every  day  do  homage  to  thy  grave. " 

Shakespeare. 

Painful  as  blame  was  to  Harriet  Martineau,  eulogy  was  more 
distasteful  still.  Truth  will  not,  however,  allow  all  omission  of 
the  general  expression  of  high  estimation  which  found  utterance 
at  her  death.  Admiration  has  been  called  the  disease  of  biogra- 
phers ;  but  in  a  case  like  this,  where  the  disease  would  be  not  to 
admire,  it  is  of  happy  augury  to  find  a  healthful  appreciation  in 
the  world  at  large,  that  she  has  so  signally  served.  But  the 
first  place  belongs  to  the  personal  friends  by  whom  she  was  so 
reverenced  and  beloved. 

Mr.  Garrison  writes  as  follows  to  Mrs.  Chapman  :  — 

"  .  .  .  .  Yes,  since  you  desire  it,  make  any  use  of  my  letter  to  Miss 
Jane  Martineau  that  you  may  think  proper,  though  the  tribute  con- 
tained therein  to  her  aunt  is  all  too  brief,  and  wholly  inadequate.  I 
have  no  copy  of  what  I  wrote  ;  but  if  you  deem  it  right  and  fitting,  it 
will  give  me  pleasure  to  see  it  in  print,  whether  in  whole  or  in  part, 
in  connection  with  other  testimonies. 

"  Enclosed  is  my  last  letter  from  Harriet  Martineau.  You  will  see 
by  the  date  that  it  was  written  but  a  comparatively  few  days  before 
her  translation  ;  and  was  probably,  therefore,  one  of  her  very  latest 
efforts  at  writing.  How  serene  and  prophetic  is  the  sentence,  '  My 
departure  is  evidently  near ' !  How  kind  and  sympathetic  the  expres- 
sion of  her  feelings  in  view  of  my  own  bereavement !  This  letter  is  so 
exceptional  in  its  purport,  containing  nothing  she  would  object  to  any 
one  seeing  or  reading,  that  I  think  you  may  feel  entire  liberty  in  the 
use  of  it.  It  reveals  her  tender,  womanly  nature  to  the  last;  and 
shows  with  what  calmness  she  contemplated  her  speedy  dissolution. 
Nay,  what  had  she  to  apprehend  ? " 


570 


MEMORIALS. 


His  letter  to  Miss  Jane  Martineau,  which  Mr.  Garrison  gives 
permission  to  print,  is  as  follows  :  — 

Boston,  July  4,  1876. 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  On  returning  home  recently  from  a 
visit  to  our  great  Centennial  Exposition  at  Philadelphia,  I  found 
a  letter  from  your  estimable  aunt,  dated  May  30,  acknowledging  the 
receipt  of  a  little  memorial  volume  from  me,  pertaining  to  the  death 
of  my  dearly  beloved  wife,  and  expressing  the  tenderest  sympathy 
and  the  kindest  personal  regard,  and  concluding  as  follows  :  "  I 
can  say  no  more.  My  departure  is  evidently  near,  and  I  hold  the 
pen  with  difficulty.  Accept  the  reverent  blessing  of  your  old  friend, 
Harriet  Martineau."  Gratified  as  I  was  to  receive  that  last  precious 
token  of  her  affectionate  remembrance,  I  felt  to  regret  that  she  should 
have  made  the  effort  to  write  it,  as  I  had  long  been  aware  of  her  great 
physical  prostration,  and,  in  consequence,  neither  anticipated  nor  de- 
sired any  such  acknowledgment,  needing  no  assurance  of  her  heart- 
felt sympathy  in  my  stricken  condition.  But  though  she  referre  1  to 
the  time  of  her  own  departure  as  near  at  hand,  she  had  been  so  long 
apparently  "  hovering  on  the  brink,"  and  her  handwriting  was  so 
firm  and  legible,  I  did  not  feel  specially  apprehensive  in  regard  to 
her  case,  but  hoped  her  prophetic  impression  might  prove  erroneous. 
To  my  grief,  if  not  surprise,  just  as  I  was  preparing  to  send  her  my 
thanks  and  best  wishes,  a  telegraphic  announcement  of  her  decease 
appeared  in  our  daily  newspapers,  but  giving  no  particulars. 

As  was  said  of  old,  "  Know  ye  not  that  a  great  man  and  a  prince 
has  this  day  fallen  in  Israel  ? "  so  it  may  be  asked  with  equal  empha- 
sis in  her  case,  "  Know  ye  not  that  one  of  the  noblest  women  of  the 
earth  has  passed  away?"  Indeed,  the  civilized  world  will  need  no 
such  interrogation;  for  the  fame  of  her  literary  genius,  her  philo- 
sophic grasp  of  mind,  her  politico-economical  insight,  her  statesman- 
like sagacity,  her  solid  understanding  and  well-balanced  faculties,  her 
world-embracing  sympathy  with  suffering  humanity,  her  fearless  ad- 
vocacy of  the  right  against  popular  opinion,  her  comprehensive  and 
varied  knowledge,  her  untrammelled  utterance  of  her  honest  convic- 
tions however  deemed  or  denounced  as  heretical,  has  long  since  "  rung 
from  side  to  side."  Never  shall  I  cease  to  remember  with  gratitude 
and  admiration  the  sublime  exemplification  of  her  great  character 
when  she  was  in  this  country  in  the  year  1S35,  the  most  odious  and 
the  most  perilous  period  of  the  antislavery  struggle,  when  any  sym- 
pathy evinced  for  it,  no  matter  how  distinguished  the  sympathizer, 
was  sure  to  be  followed  by  social  ostracism  and  public  contempt. 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


577 


She  might  have  plausibly  pursued  a  non-committal  policy  on  the 
ground  that  she  was  a  transient  visitor  from  a  foreign  land,  and  it 
was  a  matter  that  was  so  interwoven  with  the  politics  and  religion 
of  the  country,  nay,  with  the  very  structure  of  the  American  Union 
itself,  that  it  did  not  become  her  to  meddle  therewith  ;  but  it  was 
impossible  for  a  soul  like  hers  to  resort  to  any  such  subterfuge.  She 
met  the  issue  modestly,  bravely,  uncompromisingly.  What  it  cost 
her  for  the  time  being  you  well  know.  But  the  service  she  rendered 
to  the  antislavery  cause  was  inestimable. 

I  am  under  the  deepest  obligations  to  her  for  the  steadfast  counte- 
nance she  gave  to  me  in  that  dark  hour,  and  the  unfaltering  friend- 
ship with  which  she  honoured  me  to  the  close  of  her  remarkable 
life. 

Yours  in  deepest  sympathy, 

WILLIAM  LLOYD  GARRISON. 

This  is  the  Centennial  Anniversary  of  American  Independence. 
Would  that  our  career  had  been  more  worthy  of  us! 

LETTER  FROM   MISS   NIGHTINGALE   TO  MISS  JANE  S. 
MARTINEAU. 

June  29,  1876. 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  The  shock  of  your  tidings  to  me  of 
course  was  great ;  but  0,  I  feel  how  delightful  the  surprise  to  her  ! 
How  much  she  must  know  now,  how  much  she  must  have  enjoyed 
already ! 

I  do  not  know  what  your  opinions  are  about  this  ;  I  know  what 
hers  were,  and  for  a  long  time  I  have  thought  how  great  will  be  the 
surprise  to  her,  —  a  glorious  surprise. 

She  served  the  Right,  that  is,  God,  all  her  life.  How  few  of 
those  who  cry  "Lord,  Lord,"  served  the  Lord  so  well  and  so  wisely !  — 
Joy  to  thee,  happy  soul !  She  served  the  truth  and  the  good,  and 
worshipped  them  !  —  now  they  bear  her  on  to  higher  and  better  fields. 
So  above  all  petty  calculations,  all  paltry  wranglings!  — now  she  is 
gone  on  her  way  to  infinite  purity. 

We  give  her  joy  :  it  is  our  loss,  not  hers.  She  is  gone  to  our  Lord 
and  her  Lord.  Made  ripe  for  her  and  our  Father's  house  :  our  tears 
are  her  joy.  She  bids  us  now  give  thanks  for  her.  She  is  in  another 
room  of  our  Father's  house. 

Think  of  that  Tuesday  night  when  she  rose  again  :  —  0,  who  could 
wish  her  back  1 

If  you  only  knew  how  much  I  feel  for  you  !  but  there  is  much  to 

VOL.  II. 


578 


MEMORIALS. 


comfort  you.  A  noble  woman.  Our  Father  arranged  her  life  and  her 
death.  Is  it  well  with  the  child  ?  It  is  well.  Thanks  for  her  mes- 
sage. Keep  the  little  paper  if  you  have  a  mind.  I  shall  like  to  think 
of  it  in  your  hands.*  I  was  writing,  if  it  ever  gets  done,  upon  the 
Zemindar  and  Ryot  question  in  India.  I  had  quoted  from  her.  I 
thought  with  pleasure  of  her  reading  my  tribute,  which  was  to  have 
been  finished  eighteen  months  ago.  It  was  impossible. 
But  I  do  not  grudge  her  to  God. 

Yours  in  deepest  sympathy  and  "  Aunt  Ellen's  °  too,  if  I  may. 

F.  NIGHTINGALE. 

I  have  thought  of  "The  Hour  and  the  Man  *  as  the  finest  historical 
romance  in  any  language.  You  would  wonder  if  you  knew  how  often 
I  have  read  it  over  and  over  again,  even  in  the  last  two  years. 

The  next  letter  is  from  Mrs.  Andrews  —  the  "  Martha  "  re- 
ferred to  under  the  preceding  head,  "  Home  and  Service  "  —  to 
Miss  Jane  S.  Martineau. 

My  dear,  dear  Miss  Jane,  —  It  is  with  deep  feeling  I  pen  these 

lines  to  you  I  feel  so  very  glad  you  were  there.    This  is  a  sad 

event  ;  for  though  the  desire  of  that  dear  one  was  to  be  freed  from 
suffering,  yet  it  is  sad  for  us  after  all.  Such  a  change  !  no  more  voice 
to  speak  to  us,  or  to  feel  that  she  enters  into  one's  trouble.  All  is 
over.    She  was  a  wonderful  woman.    With  all  her  suffering  she 

never  forgot  those  who  loved  her  and  needed  sympathy  I 

shall  hope  to  see  you  some  day.  There  is  a  kind  of  bond  that  seems 
to  bind  me  to  those  who  were  dear  to  Mrs.  Martineau,  you  and  Miss 
Susan  particularly  

Ever  gratefully  yours, 

MARTHA  ANDREWS. 

And  again  Mrs.  Andrews  says  :  — 

Many  thanks  for  sending  me  this  sad  news.  It  would  be  quite 
wrong  to  have  wished  this  dear  one  to  remain  here  in  suffering.  We 
cannot  but  rejoice  so  far  as  she  is  concerned.  Still  I  cannot  tell  you 
how  full  my  heart  is,  and  what  blank  I  feel  now  that  one  of  my  dear- 
est and  best  friends  is  no  more.  I  cannot  say  much,  —  I  do  feel  it 
very  much.  Though  I  was  looking  by  every  post  for  the  news,  yet 
when  it  did  come  I  felt  all  my  spirit  fail.    I  think  of  all  her  kind 

*  The  paper  here  alluded  to  Miss  Nightingale  had  sent  to  Harriet  Martineau, 
with  an  expression  of  reverential  feeling.  "  She  ought  not  to  have  said  tJwt," 
was  the  instinctive  utterance  on  receiving  it. 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


579 


love  for  me  and  my  family  ;  for  it  will  now  soon  be  twenty -nine 
years  since  I  first  saw  her.  The  gap  is  not  easily  filled  up.  But  I 
feel  so  comforted  and  glad  that  you  have  been  well  enough  to  be  there 
with  her  to  the  last.    I  have  thought  so  much  of  you,  knowing  your 

anxiety,  and  have  been  with  this  dear  one  in  spirit  

Ever  yours  most  gratefully, 

MARTHA  ANDREWS. 

Her  maid  at  the  time  of  her  death  wrote  the  annexed  note  to 
Miss  Susan  Martiueau,  her  niece. 

Ambleside,  July  2,  1876. 
My  dear  Miss  Susan,  —  I  wish  I  could  write  as  I  feel.  I 
do  feel  that  it  has  been  a  privilege  to  be  with  such  a  noble  woman, 
and  I  have  been  taught  many  lessons  which  I  trust  are  not  lost ;  but 
the  first  wish  and  feeling  is,  that  I  might  have  done  more  for  her, 
after  all  her  kindness  and  goodness  to  me.  I  shall  never  cease  to  be 
thankful  that  I  was  here  at  this  time.  Her  kindness  will  never  be 
forgotten. 

To-day  the  rooms  and  the  house  feel  very  strange,  and  I  find  my- 
self beginning  to  do  things  that  need  not  be  done  

I  am  ever  gratefully  and  respectfully  yours, 

MARIANNE  MATTHEWS. 

Marianne's  father  writes  :  — 

Dear  Madam,  —  A  short  time  before  the  receipt  of  your  kind  let- 
ter of  yesterday  I  was  startled  to  read  of  the  death  of  our  dear  Mrs. 
Martin eau,  in  our  local  paper  ;  and  now  that  her  sufferings  are  over, 
it  must  be  said  that  one  of  the  best  and  wisest  of  women  has  departed 
for  her  never-ending  rest. 

I  am  so  pleased  that  my  daughter  has  stayed  and  been  able  to  give 
satisfaction  to  her  late  mistress  and  her  household.  Your  kind  re- 
marks concerning  her  I  am  deeply  thankful  for,  and  shall  cherish 
them  in  my  memory  as  better  than  gold. 

I  hope  you  will  be  able  to  bear  your  great  loss  without  undue  in- 
jury to  your  health,  and  hope  you  may  live  as  long  and  useful  a  life 
as  your  dear  aunt  

In  conclusion,  I  have  but  to  offer  you  the  sincere  condolence  of  my 
wife  and  mvself. 

W.  MATTHEWS. 

In  reply  to  my  request  to  Lady  Strangford  that  she  would 
give  me  permission  to  print  a  letter  of  hers,  she  says  :  — 


580 


MEMORIALS. 


....  Your  letter  meets  me  on  my  way  to  Constantinople.  I  do 
not  in  the  least  remember  any  thing  that  I  said  in  the  one  you  allude 
to,  but  I  wrote  from  my  heart,  and  if  it  suits  your  wishes  to  pub- 
lish it,  you  are  welcome  to  do  so. 

Yours  in  great  haste, 

E.  STRANGFORD. 

Lady  Strangford  and  her  sister,  Miss  Beaufort,  daughters  of 
Admiral  Sir  Francis  Beaufort,  made  so  well  known  to  us  Ameri- 
cans in  "  The  Biographical  Sketches,"  write  thus  to  Miss  Jane 
Martineau  :  — 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  Only  one  line  —  not  to  intrude  upon 
your  great  sorrow,  but  to  express  my  own  deep  feeling  of  the  loss. 
Although  I  did  not  hope  ever  to  see  her  again,  yet  the  knowledge 
that  she  was  there  at  Ambleside,  still  with  us,  in  full  human  sympa- 
thy, with  the  ever-bright  feeling  and  the  ever- warm  heart,  was  a  reality 
which  took  the  place  of  seeing  her.  But  I  seem  now  to  have  lost  the 
last  bit  of  my  childhood  in  the  knowledge  that  she  too  is  gone.  I 
know  you  are  glad  that  the  weariness  and  suffering  are  over, — "peace 
after  battle,"  —  and  we  hope,  while  some  of  us  believe,  "  night  does 
end  in  day."  I  wish  I  could  have  seen  her  more,  but  the  feeling 
was  a  part  of  myself ;  and  I  do  not  suppose  I  ever  knew  the  day 
when  I  did  not  wish  to  resemble  her.  I  am  very  thankful  to  have 
had  her  ;  and  I  do  not  believe  the  like  of  her  comes  in  one,  or  indeed 
in  many  centuries.  The  world  may  not  historically  realize  what  she 
has  done  for  it,  but  her  work  is  not  the  less  for  that  ;  and  now  and 
then,  in  future  times,  historians  will  be  surprised  into  finding  the  root 
of  many  after-growths  in  her  hand. 

In  the  terrible  blank  to  you  I  feel  the  deepest  sympathy  and  com- 
passion. 

Yours  very  truly, 

E.  STRANGFORD. 
June  29,  1876. 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  Till  it  has  actually  occurred,  we  cannot 
realize  the  grief  or  the  final  separation  from  the  dear  friend  and  com- 
panion whose  love  and  whose  interest  have  made  life  what  it  is  to 
us  ;  and  the  utter  loneliness  of  the  remaining  years  makes  life  seem 
at  first  really  unbearable. 

What  a  wonderful  record  of  work  and  energy  and  talent  is  that 
which  appears  in  the  long  and  interesting  notice  of  the  "Times"  this 
morning  !  .  .  .  . 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


581 


I  am  expecting  my  dear  brother  Francis  and  his  wife,  after  thirty- 
nine  years  in  India  !  I  feel  sure  that  he  is  bringing  back  the  same 
sweet,  loving  disposition  as  of  old  ;  and  it  will  be  so  great  a  pleasure 
to  renew  acquaintance,  even  though  he  may  have  been  living  in  a 
very  different  groove  of  thought  and  feeling.  I  suppose  we  have 
grown  old  enough  and  wise  enough  to  allow  liberty  and  latitude  to 
each  other's  opinions.  It  is  only  the  youthfully  enthusiastic  or  the 
very  narrow  minded  who  imagine  the  truth  to  be  only  in  one  point 

or  on  one  line  

Believe  me,  with  much  sympathy, 

Affectionately  yours, 

ROSAMOND  E.  BEAUFORT. 

Miss  Nightingale's  letter  in  reply  to  my  request  that  she  would 
allow  the  publication  of  the  one  previously  given,  —  which  so 
nobly  indicates  the  way  to  harmonize  in  life  all  difference  of 
belief,  —  is  as  follows  :  — 

September  29,  1876. 

Dear  Madam,  —  I  was  glad  when  I  heard  that  you  were  to  com- 
plete Harriet  Martineau's  book.    Who  could  better  understand  her  ? 

She  was  born  to  be  a  destroyer  of  slavery,  in  whatever  form,  in 
whatever  place,  all  over  the  world,  wherever  she  saw  or  thought  she 
saw  it. 

The  thought  actually  inspired  her  :  whether  in  the  degraded  off- 
spring of  former  English  poor-law,  of  English  serfdom  forty  years 
ago,  —  in  any  shape  ;  whether  in  the  fruits  of  any  abuse,  —  social, 
legislative,  or  administrative,  —  or  in  actual  slavery  ;  or  be  it  in  Conta- 
gious Diseases  Acts,  or  no  matter  what,  she  rose  to  the  occasion. 

I  think,  contradictory  as  it  may  seem,  she  had  the  truest  and 
deepest  religious  feeling  I  have  ever  known.  How  this  comes  out, 
with  her  finest  expression,  in  "  Deerbrook  ; 9  in  "  The  Hour  and  the 
Man,"  which  one  can  scarce  refrain  from  thinking  the  greatest  of 
historical  romances  ;  the  central  figure  so  sustained  in  the  highest 
spirit,  from  first  to  last,  —  for  example,  Toussaint's  escape  from  the 
Spanish  camp,  and  the  shower  of  white  amaryllis  cast  over  him  by 
his  own  negroes  as  he  rides  away  ;  all  concerning  his  prison  and 
death  (chapters  "Almost  Free"  and  "Free"),  — that  grand  conception 
of  the  last  thoughts  of  a  dying  deliverer  reaching  its  highest  flight. 

Then  in  her  "  Eastern  Life,"  and  in  many  parts  of  her  Illustrations 
of  Political  Economy,  —  for  example,  the  death  of  a  poor  drinking- 
woman,  "  Mrs.  Kay,"  —  what  higher  religious  feeling  (or  one  should 


582 


MEMORIALS. 


rather  say  instinct)  could  there  be  1  To  the  last  her  religious  feel- 
ing,— in  the  sense  of  good  working  out  of  evil,  into  a  supreme  wisdom 
penetrating  and  moulding  the  whole  universe  ; — into  the  natural  sub- 
ordination of  intellect  and  intellectual  purposes  and  of  intellectual 
self  to  purposes  of  good,  even  were  these  merely  the  small  purposes 
of  social  or  domestic  life. 

All  this,  which  supposes  something  without  ourselves,  higher  and 
deeper  and  better  than  ourselves  and  more  permanent,  that  is,  eter- 
nal, was  so  strong  in  her,  —  so  strong  that  one  could  scarcely  explain 
her  (apparently  only)  losing  sight  of  that  supreme  Wisdom  and  Good- 
ness in  her  later  years. 

But  through  the  other  strong  spring  of  her  life,  her  abhorrence  of 
any  kind  of  bondage,  did  she  not  misinterpret  the  frequent  (undoubted) 
servitude  imposed  by  so-called  religion  on  so  many  noble  souls  as 
something  essential  to  it,  instead  of  finding  the  only  source  of  real 
freedom  in  a  truer  religion  ? 

Was  it  not  her  chivalry  which  led  her  to  say  what  she  knew  would 
bring  obloquy,  because  she  thought  no  one  else  would  say  it  1 

But  why  say  this  to  you,  —  you  who  knew  her  so  well ! 

0,  how  she  must  be  unfolding  now  in  the  presence  of  that  supreme 
Goodness  and  Wisdom  before  which  she  is  not  lt  ashamed,"  and  who 
must  welcome  her  as  one  of  his  truest  servants  ! 

I  thought  I  had  not  a  moment  of  time  when  I  began  to  answer 
your  letter,  and  now  I  must  ask  your  pardon  for  this  hasty  answer  to 
your  desire  ;  to  which  I  can  only  say,  that  I  do  not  remember  what 
I  wrote  to  Miss  Jane  Martineau.  Whatever  it  was,  I  am  sure  it  fell 
miserably  short  of  the  subject. 

I  have  a  great  dislike  to  private  letters  being  published  ;  at  the 
same  time  I  must  leave  it  to  your  judgment  ;  and  I  would  never  let 
my  poor  little  dislikes  interfere  with  any  thing  you  judged  likely, 
though  in  the  least  degree,  to  contribute  towards  throwing  light  on 
the  character  of  our  noble  friend  (or  the  hour  of  a  great  life's  ending), 
in  whose  name  I  am  proud  to  be, 

Yours  most  sincerely, 

FLORENCE  NIGHTINGALE. 

FROM  MISS  CONSTANCE  MARTINEAU  TO  HER  COUSIN. 

Dear  Jane,  —  I  must  write  once  more  before  you  sail,  to  thank 
you  for  your  kind  note,  and  wish  you  good-speed  on  your  voyage. 

You  ask  if  any  thing  particular  occurs  to  me  that  should  be  told 
to  Mrs.  Chapman  about  Cousin  Harriet's  last  days.    I  think  what 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


583 


struck  me  most  in  that  last  visit  was  her  strong  sense  of  duty,  and 
her  thoughtfulness  for  others  to  the  last.  It  was  that  which  made 
her  persevere  in  coming  down  stairs  after  it  had  become  a  painful 
effort.  She  thought  it  would  make  her  room  more  wholesome  for 
Marianne.  And  it  was  from  a  sense  of  duty  that  she  exerted  herself 
to  rise  to  have  her  bed  made  when  we  thought  she  was  too  weak  for 
it ;  and  she  was  always  so  anxious  lest  we  should  not  have  sufficient 
rest.  And  she  seemed  to  feel  it  such  a  comfort  that  there  would 
now,  after  her  death,  be  nothing  to  stand  in  the  way  of  Marianne's 
marriage. 

With  many  good  wishes  for  your  voyage, 
Believe  me,  dear  Jane, 

Your  affectionate  cousin, 

CONSTANCE  MARTINEAU. 

FROM  MRS.  SAMUEL  BROWN. 

Dear  Mrs.  Chapman,  —  I  wish  (but  it  would  require  a  readier 
pen  than  mine)  that  I  could  tell  you  all  that  Harriet  Martineau  was 
to  my  husband,  and  to  me  and  my  children  since  his  death.  Her 
loving  remembrance  of  him  remained  bright  and  unchanged  to  the 
last,  and  she  often  told  me  how  much  she  valued  his  letters.  I  need 
not  tell  you  of  our  unbroken  intercourse  during  the  last  twenty 
years.  She  was  more  than  a  sister  to  me  ;  —  sharing  all  my  cares 
and  anxieties,  and  encouraging  me  in  all  my  difficulties.  A  more 
generous-hearted  friend  never  lived.    You  know  all  this  and  more. 

Accept  the  assurance  of  my  most  loving  sympathy  and  respect. 

Ever  faithfully  yours, 

HELEN  BROWN. 

In  writing  to  her  niece,  her  early  and  beloved  friend,  Mrs. 
Ker,  whose  intimacy  forbade  free  mention  of  her  in  the  Auto- 
biography, calls  back  the  memory  of  "  her  girlish  figure,  when 
she  used  to  come  to  me  from  Conduit  Street  and  Fludyer  Street 
in  those  first  London  days,  ....  and  I  knew  her  before  she 
came  to  London." 

I  doubt  whether  any  one  then  knew  her  as  I  did,  or  could  enter 

into  all  her  tenderness  and  her  susceptible  feeling  I  doubt 

whether  she  ever  went  to  any  one  as  she  did  to  me,  weaiy  and  sad 
and  needing  to  be  comforted.  ..... 

I  doubt  whether  in  her  own  family  they  knew  how  merry  she 


584 


MEMORIALS. 


could  be  ;  how  well  she  told  laughable  stories,  and  how  much  she 
liked  to  hear  them. 

Mr.  Kogers  said  one  day  that  hers  was  "the  freshest  laugh  you 
could  hear  out  of  a  nursery."  .... 

I  used  to  admire,  always,  how  she  refrained  from  questioning, 
eager  as  she  was  to  learn  all  that  was  going  on  around  her.  When 
asked,  "  Why  do  you  not  inquire  what  was  said,"  she  always  replied, 
"  I  trust  to  be  told,  if  it  is  worth  repeating."  ....  I  only  remember 
once  her  asking  what  was  said,  and  it  was  so  surprising  to  me  that  I 
inquired  why  she  asked.  We  were  a  merry  party,  my  young  sisters 
and  myself,  sitting  round  the  table  after  dinner,  and  her  elastic  tube 
flying  about  rapidly  from  one  to  the  other.  "  Why,"  said  she,  "  your 
laugh  was  so  joyous,  and  Fanny's  face  so  full  of  fun  without  malice, 
that  it  was  irresistible." 

I  regret  infinitely  that  she  desired  all  her  letters  to  be  destroyed. 
I  had  so  large  a  boxful  that  it  took  some  time  to  read  and  burn 
them.  They  would  have  been  worth  much  to  you,  as  you  may  guess 
when  I  tell  you  that  on  reading  that  most  charming  of  all  her  pub- 
lications, "Life  in  the  Sick-Room,"  about  which  there  is  but  one 
opinion,  I  said,  "  0,  but  I  have  read  it  all  before  !  —  this  is  only 
my  burnt  letters!"    And  these  were  only  the  letters  from  Tyne- 

mouth.    I  had  abundance  of  others  I  see  her  before  me  in  so 

many  aspects,  I  could  go  on  long. 

Yours  always  affectionately, 

ELIZABETH  B.  KER. 

One  whom  Harriet  Martineau  had  known  early  in  his  life 
and  intimately,  James  Payn,  the  poet  and  novelist,  wrote  so  ap- 
preciative a  notice  at  her  death,  that  he  received  grateful  ac- 
knowledgment from  surviving  friends.  Subjoined  is  his  reply, 
addressed  to  her  niece. 

Dear  Miss  Martineau,  —  ....  I  have  known  all  the  famous 
women  of  our  own  time,  or  about  all,  and  I  think  that,  taking  her 
character  all  round,  your  aunt  ivas  the  greatest  among  them.  The 
side  of  her  character  which  I  wished  to  dwell  upon  as  having  been 
overlooked  in  the  notices  of  her  life  was  her  motherliness,  and  her 
keen  sense  of  fun  

The  extract  she  gives  in  the  Autobiography  of  the  description  of 
Ambleside  (out  of  "Chambers's  Journal")  was  written  by  me,  —  the 
first  article  I  ever  contributed  to  a  periodical.  She  introduced  me  to  the 
"  Westminster  lleview  "  at  once,  and,  I  being  a  poet  in  those  days,  gave 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


585 


me  "  the  Ballads  of  the  People  "  for  a  subject.  Alas,  how  many,  many- 
years  that  is  ago  !  I  have  still  the  letter  I  received  from  her  on  the 
appearance  of  "  Lost  Sir  Massingberd,"  a  criticism  that  I  value  beyond 

whole  sheaves  of  newspaper  reviews  

Believe  me  to  be 

Yours  faithfully, 

JAMES  PAYN. 

Again,  be  says,  — 

"  No  more  gentle,  kindly,  and,  if  I  may  say  so,  1  motherly  9  nature 
ever  existed  than  that  of  Harriet  Martineau.  She  delighted  in  chil- 
dren, and  in  the  friendship  of  good  wives  and  mothers  ;  one  of  her 
chief  virtues,  indeed,  was  a  simple  domesticity,  that  gave  her  a  won- 
derful charm  with  those  who  prefer  true  gentlewomen  to  literary 
lionesses." 

Her  old  and  long- tried  friend,  Mrs.  Knight,  —  the  widow  of 
that  Charles  Knight  of  whom  she  so  often  said,  "  Literature 
owes  him  a  statue," —  exclaims  in  a  brief  expression  of  sympathy 
to  her  niece,  Miss  Jane  Martineau,  — 

"What  a  wonderful,  noble  woman  you  have  had  the  honour  of 
calling  aunt,  and  I  friend  !  " 

Her  and  my  dear  friend,  Mrs.  Henry  Turner  of  Nottingham, 
says,  — 

"  How  truly  characteristic  is  the  autobiography  in  the  1  Daily 
News,'  —  in  that  conjidingness  with  which  she  so  often  addressed  the 
public  as  a  band  of  friends !  .  .  .  .  My  individual  loss  is  great. 
Every  word  of  hers  appeals  to  the  lifelong  interchange  of  thoughts 
which  have  quickened  and  animated  me  through  past  years. 

"The  Bev.  Mr.  Armstrong  preached  a  funeral  sermon  which  I  heard, 
and  I  learn  there  have  been  others  in  Norwich,  in  Hope  Street,  and  in 
Birmingham." 

Miss  Napier,  of  that  family  of  Paladins  whom  "  The  Biograph- 
ical Sketches  "  have  presented  to  the  world  as  when  they  lived, 
says,  — 

"  My  memory  wanders  over  the  fifteen  years  that  I  have  been  a 
resident  in  this  district,  and  the  A^arious  incidents  of  that  unbroken 
chain  of  kindly  intercourse  between  her  and  myself,  with  grateful  and 
tender  affection.    Whether  illness  or  infirmity  prevented  our  meeting, 


586 


MEMORIALS. 


it  made  no  difference,  and  I  cannot  accustom  myself  to  the  thought 
that  she  is  no  longer  in  that  well-known  room  and  chair.  I  miss  her 
from  the  valley  ;  and  I  shall  long  miss  the  interest  of  her  respected 
presence  and  the  kindly  affectionate  messages,  or  little  notes,  and  the 
cordial  sympathy  in  the  events  of  my  own  life,  which  never  failed. 

"  I  think  of  her  long,  benevolent  life  ;  the  noble  work  done  in  two 
hemispheres  ;  the  active  energy,  despite  of  suffering  ;  the  bright  in- 
tellect ;  the  unwearied  patience  and  consideration  for  others ;  the  warm 
and  devoted  affection  inspired  in  relations,  attendants,  and  friends  ;  — 
and  what  must  be  the  blank  to  you  all !  " 

To  Lady  Charlotte  Clarke,  to  whom  she  had  expressed  her 
dread  of  outliving  her  mental  vigour,  the  news  of  her  death  in 
full  use  of  all  her  faculties  till  the  last  day  came  with  a  sense  of 
consolation.  She  told  of  the  remarkably  excellent  appreciation 
of  that  well-known  life  by  the  "  Aberdeen  Free  Press,"  and  recog- 
nized every  trait  of  severe  impartiality  in  the  autobiographic 
memoir  (placed  in  the  preceding  pages  under  the  head  of  Self- 
Estimate).  "I  see  how  she  enjoyed  writing  of  H.  M.'s  short- 
comings, —  imagined  only  by  herself.  I  shall  never  forget  her, 
nor  all  the  kindness  she  showed  me  from  a  child." 

It  would  be  in  vain  to  try  to  note  all  those  who  say,  "  I  have 
lost  my  best  and  truest  friend  ;  "  their  name  is  legion. 

But  her  friend  Elizabeth  Pease  Xichol,  devoted  like  herself 
to  the  antislavery  cause  and  to  the  cause  of  national  purity, 
cannot  but  be  listened  to  with  grateful  love  while  she  speaks  to 
the  survivors  of  the  uniting  bond  of  a  common  sorrow. 

She  will  long  be  mourned,  not  merely  by  those  who  knew  her 
personally,  but  by  numbers  who  never  saw  her  face,  numbers  who 
knew  her  only  by  her  writings  and  the  savour  of  her  noble  spirit  ;  by 
those  —  and  they  are  not  a  few  —  who,  whilst  admiring  her  rare  in- 
tellectual gifts,  honoured  her  most  for  her  moral  heroism,  her  world- 
wide sympathies,  her  abhorrence  of  oppression  in  all  its  forms,  and  her 
fearless  sincerity  in  the  expression  of  opinions  and  convictions  which 
she  knew  would  detract  from  and  not  increase  her  popularity.  But 
how  true  to  herself  !  —  and  to  uphold  what  she  believed  to  be  the 
truth  far  outweighed  in  her  estimation  the  applause  of  the  world. 

And  not  least  is  the  loss  sustained  by  the  workers  in  the  several 
questions  of  the  day,  those  especially  bearing  on  her  own  sex,  to 
whom  the  aid  of  her  influence  and  of  her  pen,  as  long  as  she  was  able 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


587 


to  use  it,  were  so  fully  given,  while  her  interest  and  sympathy  cheered 
and  encouraged  them  in  their  up-hill  labour's. 

But  why  do  I  say  all  this  to  one  who  knows  it  all  1  Simply  because 
it  seems  impossible  to  withhold  the  thoughts  that  rise  in  the  contem- 
plation of  a  character  so  truly  noble. 

Though  my  aim  in  taking  the  pen  was  merely  to  tell  you  how  truly 
my  sympathy  is  yours,  yet  now  I  feel  how  great  a  privilege  I  esteem 
yours  to  have  been,  to  have  corresponded  with  our  departed  friend  in 
the  stirring  days  of  the  antislavery  struggle.  It  is  long  since  I  saw 
her,  but  I  have  regularly  heard  of  her  through  a  friend  of  us  both,  by 
whose  means  (in  relation  to  a  case  of  suffering  in  which  H.  M.  was 
interested)  there  was  a  renewal  of  our  correspondence.  How  I  treas- 
ure those  letters  now  ! 

Excuse  me  for  writing  at  such  length,  and  believe  me  always 
Sincerely  yours, 

ELIZABETH  PEASE  NICHOL. 

A  letter  from  the  Countess  of  Elgin,  her  so  highly  valued 
friend  of  thirty  years,  tells  me  of  their  long  friendship,  — 
one  inherited  from  her  parents,  originating  in  the  high  mutual 
respect  for  character  and  public  services  which  Lord  and  Lady 
Durham  and  Harriet  Martineau  entertained  for  each  other, 
which  she  continued  in  unremitting  sympathy  and  affection  to 
their  daughter,  when  Lord  and  Lady  Durham  died  :  "A  touch- 
ing example  of  the  affectionate,  true-hearted  side  of  her  high  mind 
and  character  which  added  so  great  a  charm  to  the  more  entirely 
intellectual  view  of  it." 

Lady  Elgin's  last  note  from  her  was  written  in  March,  1876, 
to  console  her  friend  after  the  death  of  the  lamented  Lady 
Augusta  Stanley. 

To  Dean  Stanley,  too,  she  was  a  friend  of  many  years,  and 
he  speaks  most  feelingly  of  his  ''faithful  and  tender  remem- 
brance of  her  kindness  to  him  always  increasing  in  these  later 
days." 

FROM  MR.  ATKINSON  TO  MRS.  CHAPMAN. 

Boulogne,  August  11,  1S76. 
My  dear  Mrs.  Chapman,  —  I  have  copied  the  last  letter  I  received 
from  our  friend,  about  a  month  before  she  died,  expressing  her  senti- 
ments and  feelings  in  respect  to  death  ;  and,  astonishing  to  say  that, 


588 


MEMORIALS. 


notwithstanding  the  cramp  in  the  hands,  the  writing  never  was  better, 
—  and  better  than  it  had  been  for  a  very  long  time ;  as  though  her 
great  desire  to  express  herself  clearly  had  for  the  time  revived  her 
strength  ;  and  I  think  you  will  like  to  insert  the  whole  letter,  to 
show  under  what  circumstances  it  was  written, —  that  is  to  say,  in  the 

certainty  that  death  was  close  at  hand  

That  supreme  common-sense  of  hers  was  manifest  in  all  she  said 
and  all  she  did. 

Proud,  I  think  she  was,  but  not  in  the  least  vain  ;  and  the  pride 
was  rather  the  consciousness  of  power,  and  the  unconscious  sense,  so 
to  speak,  of  absolute  rectitude  and  truthfulness,  and  in  the  love  of  truth 
before  all  things.  And  her  absolute  truthfulness  we  see  in  the  autobi- 
ographic article  in  the  "  Daily  News ; "  and  how  modestly  she  esti- 
mated her  own  abilities  and  position.  The  clear,  quick  apprehension 
of  the  nature  and  merits  of  a  question  was  her  strong  point,  and  she 
never  talked  or  wrote  of  what  she  did  not  understand,  and  saw  at 
once  how  to  make  a  difficult  matter  intelligible  to  others.  Hence  her 
clearness,  with  broad  daylight  over  all  she  wrote,  not  obscured  by  the 

coloured  glass  of  pantheistic  mysticism  Of  all  one  thinks,  of 

all  one  feels,  and  of  all  one  has,  how  little  is  permanent  and  impor- 
tant. No  doubt  a  discovery  is  something,  but  some  one  else  would 
have  found  it  out  in  due  course  ;  and  the  right  is  generally  disputed, 
and  being  first  is  no  more  merit  than  being  first  born.  There  is  only 
one  greatness,  —  the  sense  of  one's  own  littleness  ;  as  of  Socrates  pro- 
claiming his,  and  Newton  the  little  he  had  done,  with  the  vast  ocean 
of  truth  undiscovered  before  him. 

The  oracle  had  proclaimed  Socrates  to  be  the  wisest  of  men,  which 
he  could  only  understand  in  the  fact  that  all  men  were  ignorant  with- 
out knowing  it,  but  that  he,  also  being  ignorant,  knew  that  he 
was  so. 

You  wonder  to  what  present  purpose  this  tends  :  to  much,  —  the 
greatness  of  our  friend  in  the  low  estimate  of  her  abilities  and  position. 
It  was  not  modesty  nor  humility,  but  power  over  self,  —  supreme 
common-sense  

Though  she  apprehended  things  so  clearly,  and  wrote  so  clearly  on 
all  matters  she  had  given  her  attention  to,  and  though  to  observe,  ac- 
quire, demonstrate,  and  illustrate  was  her  very  special  ability,  she  had 
plenty  of  thoughts  of  her  own  and  a  rich  storehouse  and  treasury  of 
matured  judgment.  To  be  useful  was  her  great  aim.  She  never  re- 
ferred much  to  the  poets  nor  indulged  much  in  quotation  ;  not  like 
Basil  Montague,  who  used  continually  to  say,  "  I  will  tell  you,  Atkin- 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


589 


son,  who  has  said  that  best."  It  is  a  fine  thing  to  be  in  a  fog  and  see 

your  own  shadow  cast  before  you  ;  or  in  the  night,  imagining  some  fear, 
how  easily  is  a  bust  supposed  a  bear !    But  our  friend  knew  that  by 

truth  we  are  rid  of  fog  and  fear  

Believe  nie,  with  the  highest  estimation, 

Yours  truly, 
HENRY  G.  ATKINSON. 

EXTRACTS  FROM  LETTERS  OF  MR.  ATKINSON. 

August  22. 

Dear  Mrs.  Chapman,  —  A  lady  said  the  other  day  at  the  dinner 
here,  "I  always  heard  that  Miss  Martineau  was  insane,  and  her 
leaving  her  skull  and  brain  to  some  one  confirms  it."  I  replied, 
"  Madam,  it  was  a  noble  sacrifice  of  feeling  for  the  cause  of  science, 
—  which  means  the  good  of  mankind  ;  and  it  was  an  act  that  few 
are  equal  to,  and  an  ordinary  person  cannot  appreciate."  Silence. 

(By  the  way,  Democritus  was  supposed  insane  for  trying  to  dis- 
cover the  cause  of  insanity  in  dead  bodies  ;  now  every  one  does  it.) 

I  ought  to  say  that  this  bequest  was  her  own  thought,  in  conse- 
quence of  our  interest  in  phrenology,  and  my  discoveries  in  relation 
to  the  functions  of  the  brain  by  isolating  the  action  of  the  parts  in 
mesmeric  experiments.  It  was  also  to  see  if  the  brain  indicated  the 
fact  of  her  having  no  sense  of  taste  or  smell ;  as  also  in  regard  to  her 

deafness  I  went  with  Harriet  Martineau  to  consult  Mr.  Toin- 

bee,  the  great  man  for  ear-knowledge  ;  and  he  said,  in  reference  to 
her  deafness,  that  he  would  give  any  thing  to  be  able  to  examine  that 
ear.  "  Well,"  said  Harriet  Martineau,  "  I  shall  leave  my  skull  and 
brain  to  Mr.  Atkinson,  who  will,  I  am  sure,  give  you  the  opportu- 
nity." 

Mr.  Toinbee  is  long  since  dead,  with  the  others  who  would  have 
helped  me.  Alone,  and  living  at  so  great  a  distance,  what  could  I  do  ? 
Otherwise  I  should  have  acted  in  the  case.  But  all  these  changes 
showed  the  need  of  a  different  disposition,  and  at  my  request  she 

made  it.  The  example  remains  The  size  of  her  head  indicated 

nothing  remarkable,  if  Mr.  George  Combe's  theory  be  accepted  ;  for 
the  forehead  was  neither  broad  nor  high  ;  and  this  shows  how  much 
more  tone  and  quality  have  to  do  in  the  matter  than  quantity  

....  You  will  not,  I  suppose,  consider  these  abnormal  conditions 
[referring  to  the  mesmeric  treatment  by  Mrs.  ]  as  properly  a  sub- 
ject of  biography  ;  but  one  of  her  sayings  under  mesmeric  influence 
has  been  singularly  fulfilled  :  "  I  shall  become  an  apostle  of  pain." 


590 


MEMORIALS. 


And  such  she  has  been  during  those  long  years  of  suffering,  —  sig- 
nificant of  unexampled  fortitude  and  endurance. 

Mr.  Bray,  a  philosophical  writer  of  some  repute,  said  to  me,  "  Do 
you  think  Miss  Martineau  the  foremost  woman  of  her  time  ? "  "  Yes  ; 
decidedly.  She  has  done  more  to  spread  useful  truth  than  any  other 
woman  ever  did,  perhaps.  She  has  greatly  assisted  in  the  higher 
education  of  half  a  century.  She  was  always  a  little  in  advance  of 
the  public  opinion  of  the  day,  and  as  she  wrote  clearly,  the  public 
would  follow  her." 

There  is  a  sense  in  which  whoever  teaches  us  any  thing  may  be 
called  our  master.  If  any  one  in  this  sense  was  hers,  I  should  have 
said  it  was  Malthus.  But  she  was  herself  a  master  mind,  and  sat  at 
the  feet  of  no  one. 

The  European  press  was  unanimous  in  admiration  and  re- 
gret. "  Le  Bulletin  Continental "  and  the  "  Kolnische  Zeitung  " 
on  the  Continent,  and  in  England  the  "  Times  "  and  the  "  Daily 
News,"  and  innumerable  others,  alike  gave  full  and  appreciative 
accounts  of  her  life  and  writings. 

The  "  London  Leader "  and  the  "  Aberdeen  Journal "  were 
eminently  just  and  true.  The  "  Shield,"  an  organ  of  the  asso- 
ciation in  behalf  of  national  purity,  publishes  the  following 
article  :  — 

"  By  far  the  greater  number  of  the  women  who  commenced  the  pub- 
lic agitation  of  our  question  at  that  time  acted  less  from  deliberately 
reasoned  conviction  of  national  peril  than  from  a  sudden  impulse  of 
outraged  womanly  dignity,  or  of  Christian  mercy  ;  and  by  far  the 
greater  number  of  the  men  who  then  rallied  round  them  were  roused 
to  support  them  by  a  similar  impulse  of  outraged  justice,  or  by  a 
chivalrous  sympathy  with  the  brave  women  who  thus  sprang  to  the 
van  in  defence  of  their  helpless  and  suffering  sisters.  Very  few  of 
them  in  any  way  realized  the  tremendous  issues  involved  in  the 
question,  Shall  the  state  sanction  and  protect  prostitution  ?  —  or 
dreamed  that  in  agitating,  as  they  then  believed,  simply  for  the  repeal 
of  a  cruel  and  indecent  law,  they  were  bringing  to  a  crisis  the  whole 
question  of  the  enslavement  of  the  weak  to  the  lust  of  the  strong. 
Mrs.  Martineau,  however,  appears  to  have  fully  realized  the  gravity 
of  the  situation  from  the  very  beginning.  The  few  friends  who  had 
the  privilege  of  seeing  her  at  that  time,  and  the  larger  circle  with 
whom  she  corresponded,  well  know  how  intensely  she  felt  the  impor- 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


591 


tance  of  the  crisis,  and  with  what  eager  eloquence  she  tried  to  awaken 
all  her  friends  to  a  sense  of  the  danger.  She  startled  them  by  saying 
that  in  the  whole  history  of  our  country  no  such  moral  and  social 
crisis,  nor  any  thing  approaching  to  it,  had  been  gone  through.  She 
foresaw  that  victory  in  the  end  was  certain,  but  that  in  the  meantime 
the  battle  would  be  fierce.  She  did  not  wish  that  repeal  should 
come  quietly,  through  the  action  of  the  government,  for  she  regarded 
moral  and  political  grounds  as  the  only  sure  basis.  So  the  growth 
of  popular  interest  in  the  question  —  the  gradual  awakening  of  the 
national  conscience  —  gave  her  keen  pleasure.  She  foresaw  that  when 
the  question  was  understood  repeal  would  be  demanded  by  the 
healthy  moral  instincts  of  the  people.  But  in  the  meantime  anxiety 
about  what  she  used  to  call  the  gravest  crisis  which  ever  befell  the 
moral  life  of  England  preyed  upon  her.  The  horrors  of  the  subject 
aggravated  the  miseries  of  her  illness.  The  writing  and  thinking  and 
feeling  were  often  too  much  for  her. 

"  With  all  this  painful  effect  of  the  agitation  on  her,  it  is  pleasant  to 
be  able  to  mention  one  circumstance  which  was  a  source  of  unmixed 
gratification  to  her.  We  allude  to  her  friendship  with  Mrs.  Butler. 
Her  admiration  of  '  The  Constitution  Violated  '  was  unbounded  ;  she 
regarded  its  appearance  as  an  important  event,  not  merely  in  our 
agitation,  but  of  the  century.  The  two  illustrious  ladies  met  face  to 
face  only  for  a  short  time,  but  it  was  long  enough  to  invest  the  friend- 
ship, which  had  been  begun  by  correspondence,  with  the  tender  charm 
of  personal  affection. 

"  Her  interest  in  the  cause  never  flagged.  Her  nephew  informs  us 
that  the  last  periodicals  that  Harriet  Martineau  continued  reading  reg- 
ularly were  the  *  Nation'  (America),  the  'National  Education  League 
Paper,'  and  —  we  are  proud  to  add  —  the  1  Shield ' ;  and  even  after 
her  power  of  fully  keeping  up  with  the  literature  of  the  subject 
ceased,  she  was  always  deeply  interested  in  hearing  in  conversation 
the  progress  of  our  movement.  We  may  mention,  as  a  touching  illus- 
tration of  this  interest,  that  her  last  finished  piece  of  wool-work  (her 
great  relaxation)  was  the  top  of  an  ottoman,  which  is  being  made  up, 
and  is  promised  to  Mrs.  Butler  for  sale,  the  proceeds  to  go  to  the 
service  of  our  cause. 

"  Mrs.  Butler  writes  to  us  from  abroad,  saying  :  — 

" '  I  wish  I  were  at  home,  to  send  you  some  extracts  from  Harriet 
Martineau's  wonderfully  powerful  and  beautiful  letters  to  me  on  our 
question.  Surely  I  might  quote  them  now  !  I  have  only  one  with 
me,  —  the  last,  —  full  of  vigour  and  hope  about  our  cause,  and  of  sym- 


592 


MEMORIALS. 


pathy  with  the  men  and  women  who  are  working  in  it.  After  many 
shrewd  remarks  showing  her  characteristic  scorn  of  some  of  the 
miserable  arguments  used  to  support  the  evil  system,  she  suddenly 
breaks  off  with  these  touching  words,  —  the  last  she  wrote  to  me,  — 
"  But  it  is  getting  dark,  and  I  am  tired,  so  farewell,  beloved  friend. 
Yours  to  the  end,  Harriet  Martineau." ' 

"  To  the  end  !  Faithful  to  the  end  to  the  cause  of  liberty,  justice,  and 
purity,  faithful  to  the  end  to  the  cause  of  the  white  slaves  of  Europe 
as  she  had  been  faithful  to  the  cause  of  the  black  slaves  of  America, 
so  died  Harriet  Martineau,  full  of  hope  about  our  cause  and  of  sym- 
pathy with  the  men  and  women  who  are  working  in  it.  A  noble 
life  followed  by  a  noble  death  !  " 

"  The  Saturday  Review,"  in  a  good  obituary  notice,  names  the 
"  views  "  of  Mr.  Atkinson  and  herself  as  "  what  is  now  called 
Agnosticism  " ;  which  is,  being  interpreted,  the  truth  wherever 
one  finds  it. 

The  American  press  was  truly  appreciative. 

The  Boston  "  Daily  Advertiser  "  gave  a  column  to  "  this  illus- 
trious woman." 

The  "  Nation  "  says  :  — 

"  One  looks  in  vain,  indeed,  for  a  parallel  to  this  remarkable  woman 
as  a  moulder  of  public  opinion  through  the  press  and  through  printed 
works." 

In  the  Harpers'  publications  are  many  memorials. 

"  One  of  the  most  remarkable  women  that  this  [England]  or  any 

country  has  produced  She  did  things  that  have  never  been 

done  by  a  single  mind.  Whatever  she  touched  she  may  be  said  to 
have  more  or  less  adorned.  Devotional  books,  poetry,  fiction,  travels, 
metaphysics,  juvenile  tales,  philosophy,  history,  have  all  in  turn  oc- 
cupied her  mind  ;  and  she  thrice  refused  a  pension." 

From  the  "  Christian  Union,"  July  5,  1876  :  — 

"In  Harriet  Martineau,  whose  death  occurred  on  Tuesday  night,  the 
world  loses  one  of  the  most  conspicuous  intellects  of  the  time.  It  is 
unnecessary  to  say  that  she  was  pre-eminent  in  her  own  sex,  for  she 
had  but  few  peers  intellectually  in  the  world  around.  The  list  of  her 
literary  works  is  a  long  one,  extending  over  almost  the  whole  of  her 
long  life.    Her  first  work,  "  Devotional  Exercises  for  Young  Persons," 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


593 


was  published  in  1823,  and  until  1866,  or  thereabouts,  she  was  a  fre- 
quent contributor  to  the  current  literature  of  the  day  Miss 

Martineau's  religious  life  has  been  identified  with  the  Unitarian  de- 
nomination. Many  of  her* hymns  have,  however,  found  their  way 
into  the  Orthodox  collections,  and  her  religious  writings  are  full  of 
thought,  although  to  our  thinking  her  conclusions  were  in  many 
respects  unsound.  That  she  will  be  remembered  as  one  of  the  most 
vigourous  thinkers  of  her  generation  there  is  not  the  slightest  doubt." 

One  is  surprised  to  find  the  following  in  the  "  Spiritual  Maga- 
zine "  of  the  month  :  — 

ON  THE  DEATH  OF  HARRIET  MARTIN EAU. 

We  mourn  the  loss  of  her  whose  noblest  powers 

Were  all  devoted  to  the  common  good. 
Whether  at  Ambleside  in  quiet  hours, 

Amid  its  lakes  and  mountain  solitude  ; 
In  "  Eastern  Life,  its  Present  and  its  Past,"  — 

The  cradle  of  the  faiths  that  rule  the  world  ; 
Where  sphinx  and  pyramid,  and  desert  vast, 

Temples  and  cities,  long  to  ruin  hurled, 
Speak  of  the  mysteries  of  our  human  fate  ; 

The  mouldering  shrines  deserted  and  forgot, 
Hopes  which  still  cling  to  hearts  made  desolate, 

And  powers  whose  purposes  we  fathom  not ;  — 
Dear  was  the  truth,  gathered  in  any  clime, 

To  her,  the  foremost  woman  of  our  time. 

T.  S. 

There  was  a  similar  tribute  in  the  "  Secular  Chronicle,"  and 
thus  did  all,  even  parties  most  opposed,  concur  in  praise. 

The  day  seemed  darkened  to  the  village  of  Ambleside  the 
morning  after  her  death.  To  the  two  delicate  sisters,  the  Misses 
Backhouse,  with  beautiful  singing  voices,  who  used  to  come  to 
The  Knoll  to  see  "Caroline"  and  "Marianne"  on  Sundays  and 
New  Year's  days,  and  go  home  cheered  in  their  lonely  life ;  to 
the  four  widows  who  made  a  part  of  the  Christmas  party  she 
gave  for  her  domestics  every  year  ;  to  Saul,  the  coachman,  whom 
she  so  rejoiced  to  see  taking  the  pledge  and  giving  up  drink,  and 
who,  although  he  knew  she  could  not  hear,  used,  for  the  gratifi- 
cation of  his  own  reverential  feelings,  to  go  to  her  terrace  to  wish 


594 


MEMORIALS. 


her  a  happy  Xew  Year  to  the  sound  of  his  violin  ;  to  Mia  Saul, 
his  wife,  who  was  with  her  in  attendance  as  nurse  to  the  last,  — 
both  full  of  memories  of  her  helpfulness  to  them  in  the  bringing 
up  and  placing  of  their  family  in  life";  to  Messrs.  Stalker,  Bell, 
Mason,  Leighton,  Xewton,  Hawkrigg,  —  all  dwelling  with  affec- 
tionate respect  on  the  pleasure  they  had  as  young  men  in  helping 
to  build  and  furnish  her  house ;  to  the  inhabitants  of  her  cottages, 
one  of  whom  never  forgot  to  send  the  rare  pansies  he  cultivated, 
because  "she  and  Miss  Jane  loved  those  flowers;"  and  to  Miss 
Nicholson  and  Mrs.  Freeman,  who  retired  from  the  post-office 
five  years  ago,  but  still  kept  up  their  attachment  to  her  to  the 
last  day,  with  deepest  sympathy  and  many  an  offer  of  thoughtful 
kindness,  —  to  these  and  to  all  the  region  round  a  light  seemed  to 
have  gone  out  of  this  life.  And  to  all  the  surrounding  neigh- 
bourhood that  similarity  of  taste  and  education  and  the  wish  to 
do  good  had  drawn  into  her  society,  —  to  them  life  seemed  to 
have  less  to  offer  now  that  she  was  gone. 

During  that  last  night  that  she  lay  at  The  Knoll  before  being 
removed  for  her  funeral  at  Birmingham,  her  coffin  was  heaped 
with  flowers  by  unknown  hands,  even  as  she  had  filled  the  place 
with  multiplied  blessings. 

At  her  funeral  the  Eev.  Charles  Clarke  read  the  lessons  and 
prayers  contained  in  the  service-book  which  is  commonly  used 
by  English  Presbyterians,  and  between  the  lessons  and  prayers, 
addressing  the  mourners  and  friends  of  the  departed  who  were 
present,  he  said  :  — 

"  We  are  every  one  members  one  of  another.  No  one  can  tell  how 
great  is  our  dependence  upon,  how  much  we  receive  from,  and  — 
when  the  influence  is  for  our  good,  and  is  expressive  of  the  Divine 
will  —  how  much  we  are  benefited  by  one  another.  During  twenty 
years  and  more  it  has  been  known  to  most  of  us  that  there  was  a 
servant  of  God  and  of  righteousness,  whom  we  knew,  dwelling  in  the 
neighbourhood  of  the  Cumberland  Lakes,  whose  health  was  much  im- 
paired, and  who  might  at  any  moment  be  called  from  the  things  seen, 
which  are  temporal,  to  the  things  not  seen,  which  are  eternal.  We 
knew  that,  having  to  suffer,  and  to  be  in  a  state  of  weakness,  of 
waiting,  and  of  uncertaintj7,  and  looking  straight  at  the  wonder,  the 
mystery  of  death,  she  bore  herself  with  sweetness,  was  resigned  and 


SURVIVORSHIP. 


595 


cheerful ;  and  that  all  the  while,  to  the  utmost  measure  of  the  strength 
which  was  given  her,  she  worked,  and,  as  had  been  her  habit  in  the 
days  of  her  health,  filled  every  available  moment  with  the  signs  of 
her  love  of  her  fellow-beings,  and  of  her  concern  with  whatsoever 
might  ameliorate  their  lot,  and  give  higher  meanings  and  worth  to 
their  existence.  What  was  thus  known  of  her  manner  of  life  would 
have  inexpressible  value,  and  be  treasured  by  those  nearest  her,  as 
making  the  family  yet  more  rich  in  the  memories  and  things  for 
which  it  is  every  where  always  lawful  to  strive.  But  there  were 
many  of  her  fellow-beings  who,  if  they  had  any,  had  only  a  slight 
personal  acquaintance  with  her,  and  who  yet  were  helped  by  what 
they  heard  or  knew  of  her  nobleness,  her  fidelity  to  conscience,  her 
truth,  and  her  courage.  For  these  things  clear  the  air,  and  seem  to 
take  the  mist  from  men's  eyes,  and  open  a  way  before  them.  To 
many  the  days  bring  perplexity,  occasions  for  self-distrust  and  shame  ; 
to  resist  evil  is,  they  know,  not  easy ;  to  meet  the  claims  of  duty  is 
not  easy  ;  and  there  is  perhaps  no  resource  for  these  weaker  ones 
which  is  so  uplifting  and  so  real  as  the  conduct,  in  their  own  day  and 
time,  of  one  who  strives  to  be,  and  is,  through  long  seasons  of  trial, 
obedient,  responsive,  and  faithful,  to  what  to  her  is  highest  and  best. 
We  are  now,  at  the  call  of  God's  providence,  to  approach  the  grave 
which  is  to  receive  her  remains  ;  and  what  can  we  say  ?  What  do 
we  know  1  There  has  been  no  unveiling.  We  can  speak,  not  of  our 
actual  knowledge,  but  only  of  our  trusts.  The  grave  is  at  the  end  of 
much  ;  it  is,  we  believe,  at  the  beginning  of  more.  '  Our  light  afflic- 
tion, which  is  but  for  a  moment,  worketh  for  us  a  far  more  exceeding 
and  eternal  weight  of  glory.'  At  this  time  of  trial  we  rely  on  the  in- 
stincts of  our  nature,  on  what  our  hearts  do  assure  us  ;  and  further, 
we  rely  on  the  teachers  whom  God  has  commissioned  to  give  us 
words  of  comfort,  and  high  warrant  for  our  trust.  And  our  hope  is 
in  God.  He  is  not  unrighteous.  He  will  not  forget  the  toils  and 
sorrows  of  his  children.  And  seeing  that  great  matters  pertaining 
to  the  future  are  not  and  cannot  be  made  plain  to  the  capacities 
which  we  now  have,  what  is  most  to  be  desired  is  that  we  be  found, 
by  God's  help,  doing  the  things  which  are  right,  for  we  may  be  certain 
that  the  life  more  abundant — the  life  eternal — must  be  the  issue  and 
flower  of  the  life  which  we  now  live." 

Very  many  of  her  own  and  of  other  lands,  who  wished  that 
the  name  of  this  greatest  Englishwoman  might  give  an  added 
glory  to 

"  The  temple  where  the  dead 
Are  honored  by  the  nations," 


596 


MEMORIALS. 


checked  the  half-formed  expression  of  their  wish,  just  as  they 
forbear  to  plant  flowers  where  she  is  buried  ;  as  knowing  that  for 
herself  her  feelings  would  have  shunned  such  obsequies. 

She  lies  with  her  kindred,  and  only  the  north-wind  sheds 
rose-leaves  upon  her  grave. 

"  But  from  whomsoever  Persephone  accepteth  atonement  made  for  an  ancient 
woe,  their  souls  unto  the  light  she  sendeth  back.  And  from  those  souls  spring 
noble,  kings,  and  men  swift  and  strong,  and  in  wisdom  very  great ;  and  through 
the  after-time  such  souls  are  called  holy  heroes  among  men." 


THE  END. 


Cambridge  :  Electrotyped  and  Printed  by  Welch,  Bigelow,  &  Co. 


I 
: 


i 

•