Wage-Labour and Capital
Karl Marx (J. L. Joynes, trans.) (1886)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Karl Marx's Lohnarbeit und Kapital (lectures delivered December 1847; first published 1849) in J. L. Joynes's English translation, from the 1886 Modern Press edition (London). Scan via Wikimedia Commons; text extracted from the edition PDF. The Social-Democratic Federation programme matter and the Modern Press catalogue advertisements at the front and back have been trimmed. This 1886 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

WAGE-LABOUR AND CAPITAL.

What are wages, and how are they determined?
 ±* we were to ask the labourers, “ How much wages do you get ? ” one
 i
 would reply, “ I get a couple of shillings a day from my employer ; ”
 another, “I get half-a-crown,” and so on. According to the differen $
 trades to which they belong, they would name different sums of
 money which they receive from their particular employers, either for I
 working for a certain length of time, or for performing a certain i]
  piece of work ; for example, either for weaving an ell of cloth, or for setting up a
  certain amount of type, But in spite of this difference in their statements there
  is one point in which they would all agree : their wages are the amount of money
  which their employer pays them either for working a certain length of time, or
  for a certain amount of work done.
 Thus their employer buys their work formoney. For money they sell their
■ work to him. With the same sum for which the employer has bought their
  work, as for instance, with a couple of shillings, he might have bought four
  pounds of sugar, or a proportionate amount of any other wares, The two shil­
  lings with which he buys the four pounds of sugar, is the price of four pounds of
  sugar. The two shillings with which he buys labour for twelve hours, is the
  price of twelve hours’ work. Work is therefore as much a commodity as sugar,
  neither more nor less, only they measure the former by the clock, the latter by I
  the scales. I
 The labourersexchange their own commodity with their employers’—work for
  money ; and this exchange takes place according to a fixed proportion. So much
  money for so much work. For twelve hours’ weaving, two shillings. And do not
  these two shillings represent two shillings’ worth of all other commodities ? Thus
  the labourer has, in fact, exchanged his own commodity—work, with all kinds of
 I
  orher commodities, and that in a fixed proportion. His employer in giving him
  two shillings, has given him so much meat, so much clothing, so much fuel, light,
  and so on, in exchange for his day’s work. The two shillings, therefore, express
  the proportion in which his work is exchanged with other commodities—the
  exchange-value of his work; and the exchange-value of any commodity expressed
  in money is called its price. Wage is, therefore, only another name for the
  price of work—for the price of this peculiar piece of property which can have no
  local habitation at all except in human flesh and blood.
 Take the case of any workman, a weaver for instance. The employer supplies
  him with thread and loom. The weaver sets to work, and the thread is turned
  into cloth. The employer takes possession of the cloth and sells it, say for twenty
  shillings. Does the weaver receive as wages a share in the cloth—in the twenty
  shillings—in the product of his labour ? By no means. The weaver receives his
  wages long before the product is sold. The employer does not, therefore, pay his
  wages with the money he will get for the cloth, but with money previously pro­
  vided. Loom and thread are not the weaver’s produce, since they are supplied
  by the employer, and no more are the commodities which he receives in exchange
  fer his own commodity, or in other words, for his work, It is possible that the
  employer finds no purchaser for his cloth. It may be that by its sale he does not
  recover even the wages he has paid. It may be that in comparison with the
  weaver’s wages he made a great bargain by its sale. But all this has nothing
  whatever to do with the weaver. The employer purchases the weaver's labour
  with a part of his available property—of his capital—in exactly the same way as
  he has with another part of his property bought the raw material—the thread—
  and the instrument of labour—the loom. As soon as he has made these pur­
  chases—and he reckons among them the purchase of the labour necessary to the
 4
production of the cloth—he proceeds to produce it by means of the raw material
and the instruments which belong to him. Among these last is, of course,
reckoned our worthy weaver, who has as little share in the product, or in the
price of the product, as the loom itself.
 Wages, therefore, are not the worker’s share of the commodities which he has
produced. Wages are the share of commodities previously produced, with
which the employer purchases a certain amount of productive labour.
 Labour is, therefore, a commodity which its owner the wage worker sells to
capital. Why does he sell it ? In order to live.
 But labour is the peculiar expression of the energy of the labourer’s life.
And this energy he sells to another party, in order to secure for himself the
means of living. For him, therefore, his energy is nothing but a means of ensur­
ing his own existence. He works to live. He does not count the work itself as a
part of his life, rather is it a sacrifice of his life. It is a commodity which he has
made over to another party. Neither is its product the aim of his activity. What
he produces for himself is not the silk he weaves, nor the place that he builds, nor
the gold that ne digs from out the mine. What he produces for himself is his
wage ; and silk, gold, and palaces are transformed for him into a certain quantity
of means of existence—a cotton shirt, some copper coins, and a lodging in a
cellar. And what of the labourer, who for twelve hours weaves, spins, bores,
turns, builds, shovels, breaks stones, carries loads, and so on ? Does his twelve
hours’ weaving, spinning, boring, turning, building, shovelling, and stone-breaking
represent the active expression of his life? On the contrary. Life begins for
him exactly where this activity of his ceases—at his meals, on the public-house
bench, in his bed. His twelve hours’ work has no meaning for him as weaving,
spinning, boring, etc., but only as earnings whereby he may obtain his meals, his
seat in the public-house, his bed. If the silkworm’s object in spinning were to
prolong its existence as a caterpillar, it would be a perfect example of a wage­
worker.
 Labour was not always a commodity. Labour was not always wage-work, that
is, a marketable commodity. The slave does not sell his labour to the slave­
owner. The slave along with his labour is sold once for all to his owner. He
is a commodity which can pass from the hand of one owner to that of another.
He himself is a commodity, but his labour is not his commodity. The serf sells
only a portion of his labour. He does not receive his wages from the owner of
the soil; rather the owner of the soil receives a tribute from him. The serf be­
longs to the soil, and to the lord of the soil he brings its fruits. The free labourer,
on the other hand, sells himself, and that by fractions. From day to day he sells
by auction eight, ten, twelve, fifteen hours of his life to the highest bidder—to
the owner of the raw material, the instruments of work, and the means of life;
that is, to the employer. The labourer himself belongs neither to an owner nor
to the soil : but eight, ten, twelve, fifteen hours of his daily life belong to the man
who buys them. The labourer leaves the employer to whom he has hired him­
self whenever he pleases; and the employer discharges him whenever he thinks
fit; either as soon as he ceases to make a profit out of him, or fails to get so
high a profit as he requires. But the labourer, whose only source of earning is
the sale of his labour, cannot leave the whole class of his purchasers, that is, the
capitalist class, without renouncing his own existence. He does not belong to
this or that particular employer, but he does belong to the employing class;
and more than that, it is his business to find an employer ; that is, among this
employing class it is his business to discover his own particular purchaser.
 Before going more closely into the relations between capital and wage-work, it
will be well to give a brief survey of those general relations which are taken into
consideration in determining the amount of wages.
 As we have seen, wages are the price of a certain commodity—labour. Wages
are thus determined by the same law which regulates the'price of any other
commodity.
 Thereupon the question arises, how is the price of a commodity determined ?
 By what means is the price of a commodity determined ?
 By means of competition between buyers and sellers, and the relation between
supply and demand—offer and desire. And this competition by which the price
of an article is fixed, is three-fold.
 The same commodity is offered in the market by various sellers. Whoever
offers the greatest advantage to purchasers is certain to drive the other sellers off
the field, and secure for himself the greatest sale. The sellers, therefore, fight for
the sale and the market among themselves. Everyone of them wants to sell,
and does his best to sell much, and if possible to become the only seller. There­
 5
 fore each outbids the other in cheapness, and a competition takes place among
 the sellers which lowers the price of the goods they offer.
 But a competition also goes on among the purchasers, which on their side
 raises the price of the goods offered.
 Finally there arises a competition between buyers and sellers; the one set
 want to buy as cheap as possible, the other to sell as dear as possible. The result
 of this competition between buyers and sellers will depend upon the relations of
 the two previous aspects of the competition ; that is, upon whether the compe­
 tition in the ranks of the buyers or that in those of the sellers is the keener.
 Business thus leads two opposing armies into the field, and each of them again
 presents the aspect of a battle in its own ranks between its own soldiers. That
 army whose troops are least mauled by one another carries off the victory over
 the opposing host. .
 Let us suppose that there are a hundred bales of cotton in the market, and at
 the same time buyers in -want of a thousand bales. In this case the demand is
 greater than the supply. The competition between the buyers will therefore be
 intense • each of them will do his best to get hold of all the hundred bales of
 cotton ’ This example is no arbitrary supposition. In the history of the trade
 we have experienced periods of failure of the cotton plant, when particular com­
 panies of capitalists have endeavoured to purchase, not only a hundred bales of
 cotton but the whole stock of cotton in the world. Therefore, in the case sup­
 posed ’ each buyer will try to beat the others out of the field by offering a pro­
 portionately higher price for the cotton. The cotton-sellers, perceiving the troops
 of the hostile host in violent combat with one another, and being perfectly secure
 as to the sale of all their hundred bales, will take very good care not to begin
 squabbling among themselves in order to depress the price at the very moment
 when their adversaries are emulating each other ;in the process of screwing it
 higher up. Peace is therefore suddenly proclaimed in the army of the sellers.
 They present a united front to the purchaser, and fold their arms in philosophic
 content ■ and their claims would be absolutely boundless if it were not that the
 offers of even the most pressing and eager of the buyers must always have some
 definite limit.
 Thus if the supply of a commodity is not so great as the demand tor it, the
 competition between the buyers waxes. Result; A more or less important rise
 in the price of goods. .
 As a rule the converse case is of commoner occurrence, producing an opposite
 result. Large excess of supply over demand ; desperate competition among the
 sellers; dearth of purchasers ; forced sale of goods dirt cheap.
 But what is the meaning of the rise and fall in price ? What is the meaning
 of higher price or lower price ? A grain of sand is high when examined through
 a microscope, and a tower is low when compared with a mountain. And if price
 is determined by the relation between supply and demand, how is the relation
 between supply and demand itself determined ? . .
 Let us turn to the first worthy citizen we meet. . He will not take an instant
 to consider but like a second Alexander the Great will cut the metaphysical knot
 by the help of his multiplication table. “ If the production of the goods which
 I sell” he will tell us, “has cost me /ioo, and I get pro by their sale—within
 the year you understand—that’s what I call a sound, honest, reasonable profit.
 But if I make £120 or £130 by the sale, that is a higher profit; and if I were to
 get a good Z200, that would be an exceptional, an enormous profit.” What is it
 then that serves our citizen as to the measure of his profit ? The cost of pro­
 duction of his goods. If he receives in exchange for them an amount of other
 goods whose production has cost less, he has lost by his bargain. If he receives
 an amount whose production has cost more, he has gained. And he reckons the
 rise and fall of his profit by the number of degrees at which it stands with refer­
 ence to his zero—the cost of production. _ H
 We have now seen how the changing proportion between supply and demaud
 Ji produces the rise and fall of prices, making them at one time high at another
 low. If through failure in the supply, or exceptional increase in the demand,
 an important rise in the price of a commodity takes place, then the price of
 another commodity must have fallen ; for,, of course, the price of a commodity
 only expresses in money the proportion in which other commodities can be
 exchanged with it. For instance, if the price of a yard of silk rises from five |to
$ six shillings, the price of silver has fallen in comparison with silk ; and in the
 same way the price of all other commodities which remain at their old prices has
 fallen if compared with silk. We have to give a larger quantity of them m
 exchange in order to obtain the same quantity of silk. Aud what is the result ot
 6
a rise in the price of a commodity ? A mass of capital is thrown into that flourish­
ing branch of business, and the immigration of capital into the province of the
privileged business will last until the ordinary level of profits is attained; or
rather, until the price of the products sinks through overproduction.
 Conversely, if the price of a commodity falls below the cost of its production,
capital will be withdrawn from the production of this commodity. Except in
the case of a branch of industry which has become obsolete and is therefore
doomed to disappear, the result of this flight of capital will be that the production
cf this commodity, and therefore its supply, will continually dwindle until it
corresponds to the demand; and thus its price rises again to the level of the cost
of its production ; or rather, until the supply has fallen below the demand ; that
is, until its price has again risen above its cost of production ; for the price of
any commodity is always either above or below its cost of production.
 We see then how it is that capital is always immigrating and emigrating, from
the province of one industry into that of another. It is high prices that bring
about an excessive immigration, and low prices an excess of emigration.
 We might show from another point of view how not only the supply, but
also the demand is determined by the cost of production ; _but this would lead us
too far from our present subject.
 We have just seen how the fluctuations of supply and demand always reduce
the price of a commodity to its cost of production. It is true that the precise
price of a commodity is always either above or below its cost of production;
but the rise and fall reciprocally balance each other, so within a certain period,
if the ebb and flow of the business are reckoned up together, commodities are
exchanged with one another in accordance with their cost of production ; and
thus their cost of production determines their price.
 The determination of price by cost of production is not to be understood
in the sense of the economists. The economists declare that the average price
of commodities is equal to the cost of production ; this, according to them, is a
law. The anarchical movements in which the rise is compensated by the fall,
and the fall by the rise, they ascribe to chance. With just as good a right as
this, which the other economists assume, we might consider the fluctuations as
the law, and ascribe the fixing of price by cost of production to chance. But if
we look closely, we see that it is precisely these fluctuations, although they bring
the most terrible desolation in their train and shake the fabric of bourgeois
society like earthquakes, it is precisely these fluctuations which in their course
determine price by cost of production. In the totality of this disorderly move­
ment is to be found its order. Throughout these alternating movements, in the
course of this industrial anarchy, competition, as it were, cancels one excess by
means of another.
 We gather, therefore, that the price of a commodity is determined by its
cost of production, in such manner that the periods in which the price of this
commodity rises above its cost of production are compensated by the periods in
which it sinks below this cost, and conversely. Of course this does not hold
good for one single particular product of an industry, but only for that entire
branch of industry. So also it does not hold good for a particular manufacturer,
but only for the entire industrial class.
 The determination of price by cost of production is the same thing as its
 determination by the duration of the labour which is required for the manu­
facture of a commodity; for cost of production may be divided into (i) raw
material and implements, that is, products of industry whose manufacture has
cost a certain number of days’ work, and which therefore represents a certain
duration of labour, and (2) actual labour, which is measured by its duration.
 Now the same general laws, which universally regulate the price of com­
modities, regulate, of course, wages, the price of labour.
 Wages will rise and fall in accordance with the proportion between demand
and supply, that is, in accordance with the conditions of the competition between
capitalists as buyers, and labourers as sellers of labour. The fluctuations of
wages correspond in general with the fluctuations in the price of commodities.
Within these fluctuations the price of labour is regulated by its cost of production,
that is, by the duration of labour which is required in order to produce this
commodity, labour.
 Now what is the cost of production of labour itself?
 It is the cost required for the production of a labourer and for,his maintenance
as a labourer.
 The shorter the time requisite for instruction in any labour, the less is the
labourer's cost of production, and the lower are his wages, the price of his work
 7
  In those branches of industry which scarcely require any oeriod of apprenticeship,
  and where the mere bodily existence of the labourer is sufficient, the requisite
  cost of his production and maintenance are almost limited to the cost of the
  commodities which are requisite to keep him alive, The price of his labour is
  therefore determined by the price of the bare necessaries of his existence.
 Here, however, another consideration comes in. The manufacturer, who
 reckons up his expenses of production and determines accordingly the price of
  the product, takes into account the wear and tear of the machinery. If a
  machine costs him /ioo and wears itself out in ten years, he adds £10 a-year to
  the price of his goods, in order to replace the worn-out machine by a new one
 when the ten years are up. In the same way we must reckon in the cost of pro­
 duction of simple labour the cost of its propagation ; so that the race of labourers
 may be put in a position to multiply and to replace the worn-out workers by new
 ones. Thus the wear and tear of the labourer must be taken into account just
 as much as the wear and tear of the machine.
 Thus the cost of the production of simple labour amounts to cost of the
 labourer’s subsistence and propagation, and the price of this cost determines his
 wages. When we speak of wages we mean the minimum of wages. This mini­
 mum of wages holds good, just as does the determination by the cost of pro­
 duction of the price of commodities in general, not for the particular individual,
but for the species. Individual labourers, indeed millions of them, do not
receive enough to enable them to subsist and propagate; but the wages of the
 whole working class with all their fluctuations are nicely adjusted to this minimum.
 Now that we are grounded on these general laws which govern wages just as
much as the price of any other commodity, we can examine our subject more
exactly,
 “Capital consists of raw material, implements of labour, and all kinds of
means of subsistence, which are used for the production of new implements and
new means of subsistence. All these factors of capital are created by labour,
are products of labour, are stored-up labour. Stored-up labour which serves as
the means of new production is capital.”
 So say the economists.
 What is a negro slave ? A human creature of the black race. The one
definition is just as valuable as the other.
 A negro is a negro. In certain conditions he is transformed into a slave.
A spinning-jenny is a machine for spinning cotton. Only in certain conditions is
it transformed into capital. When torn away from these conditions, it is just as
little capital as gold is money in the abstract, or sugar the price of sugar. In
the work of production men do not stand in relation to nature alone. They
only produce when they work together in a certain way, and mutually exchange
their different kinds of energy. In order to produce, they mutually enter upon
certain relations and conditions, and it is only by means of these relations and
conditions that .their relation to nature is defined, and production becomes
possible.
 These social relations upon which the producers mutnally enter, the terms
upon which they exchange their energies and take their share in the collective
act of production, will of course differ according to the character of the means
of production. With the invention of firearms as implements of warfare the
whole organisation of the army was of necessity altered ; and with the alteration
in the relations through which individuals form an army, and are enabled to
work together as an army, there was a simultaneous alteration in the relations of
armies to one another.
 Thus with the change in the social relations by means of which individuals,
produce, that is, in the social relations of production, and with the alteration and
development of the material means of production, the powers of production are-
also transformed, The relations of production collectively form those social
relations which we call a society, and a society with definite degrees of historical
development, a society with an appropriate and distinctive character. Ancient
society, feudal society, bourgeois society, are instances of this collective result of
the relations of production, each of which marks out an important step in the
historical development of mankind.
 Now capital also is a social condition of production. It is a bourgeois condition
of production, a condition of the production of a bourgeois society. Are not the
means of subsistence, the implements of labour, and the raw material, of which
capital consists, the results of definite social relations ; were they not produced
and stored up under certain social conditions ? Will they not be used for further
production under certain social conditions ? And is it not just this definite social
 8
character which transforms into capital that product which serves for further
production ?
 Capital does not consist of means of subsistence, implements of labour, and
raw material alone, nor only of material products; it consists just as much of
■exchange-values. All the products of which it consists are commodities. Thus
capital is not merely the sum of material products ; it is a sum of commodities,
of exchange-values, of social quantities.
 Capital remains unchanged if we substitute cotton for wool, rice for corn,
and steamers for railways; provided only that the cotton, the rice, the steamers
—the bodily form of capital—have the same exchange value, the same price, as
the wool, the corn, the railways, in which it formerly embodied itself, The
bodily form of capital may change continually, while the capital itself undergoes
not the slightest alteration.
 But though all capital is a sum of commodities, that is, of exchange-values,
it is not every sum of commodities, of exchange-values, that is capital.
 Every sum of exchange-values is an exchange-value. For instance, a house
worth a thousand pounds is an exchange-value of a thousand pounds. A penny­
worth of paper is the sum of the exchange-values of a hundred-hundreths of a
penny. Products which may be mutually exchanged are commodities. The
definite proportion in which they are exchangeable forms their exchange-value,
or, expressed in money, their price. The amount of these products can do
nothing to alter their definition as being commodities, or as representing an
■exchange-value, or as having a certain price. Whether a tree is large or small, it
remains a tree. Whether we exchange iron for other wares in ounces or in
hundredweights, that makes no difference in its character as a commodity
possessing exchange-value. According to its amount it is a commodity of more
■or less worth, with a higher or lower price.
 How then can a sum of commodities, of exchange-values, become capital ?
 By maintaining and multiplying itself as an independent social power, that
is, as the power of a portion of society, by means of its exchange for direct, living
labour. Capital necessarily pre-supposes the existence of a class which possesses
nothing but labour-force.
 It is the lordship of past, stored-up, realised labour over actual, living labour
that transforms the stored-up labour into capital.
 Capital does not consist in the fact that stored-up labour is used by living labour
as a means to further production. It consists in the fact that living labours serves
as the means whereby stored-up labour may maintain and multiply its own
■exchange-value.
 What is it that takes place in the exchange between capital and wage-work ?
 The labourer receives in exchange for his labour the means of subsistence ;
but the capitalist receives in exchange for the means of subsistence labour, the
 productive energy of the labourer, the creative force whereby the labourer not
 only replaces what he consumes, but also gives to the stored-up labour a greater
value than it had before. The labourer receives from the capitalist a share of
 the previously provided means of subsistence. To what use does he put
 these means of subsistence ? He uses them for immediate consump­
 tion. But as soon as I consume my means of subsistence, they disappear
 and are irrecoverably lost to me; it therefore becomes necessary that I should
 employ the time during which these means keep me alive in order to produce
new means of subsistence ; so that during their consumption I may provide by
 my labour new value in the place of that which thus disappears. But it is just
 this grand reproductive power which the labourer has to bargain away to capital
 in exchange for the means of subsistence which he receives. To him therefore it
 is entirely lost.
 Let us take an example. A farmer gives his day-labourer two shillings a
 day. For this two shillings he works throughout the day on the farmer’s field,
 and so secures him a return of four shillings. The farmer does not merely get
 the value which he had advanced to the day-labourer replaced ; he doubles it.
  He has thus spent or consumed the two shillings which he gave to the day-
 labourer in a fruitful and productive fashion. He has bought for his two shil­
 lings just that labour and force of the day-labourer which produces fruits of the
 earth of twice the value, and turns two shillings into four. The day-labourer on
 the other hand receives in place of his productive force, which he has just bar­
 gained away to the farmer, two shillings: and these he exchanges for means of
 subsistence ; which means of subsistence he proceeds with more or less speed to
 consume. The two shillings have thus been consumed in double fashion ; pro­
 ductively for capital, since they have been exchanged for the labour-force which
 produced the four shillings; unproductively for the labourer, since they have
 been exchanged for means of subsistence which have disappeared for ever,
and whose value he can only recover by repeating the same bargain with tha
 farmer. Thus capital presupposes wage-labour, and wage-labour presupposes
 capital. They condition one another ; and each brings the other into play.
 Does a labourer in a cotton factory produce merely cotton ? No, he produces
 capital. He produces value which serves afresh to command his own labour,
 and to create new value by its means.
 Capital can only increase when it is exchanged for labour, when it calls
 wage-labour into existence. Wage-labour can only be exchanged for capital
by augmenting capital and strengthening the power whose slave it is. An
 increase of capital is therefore an increase of the proletariat, that is, of the
labouring class.
 The interests of the capitalist and the labourer are therefore identical, assert
the bourgeoisie and their economists, And, in fact, so they are ! The labourer
perishes if capital does not employ him. Capital perishes if it does not exploit
labour ; and in order to exploit it, it must buy it. The faster the capital devoted
to production—the productive capital—increases, and the more successfully the
industry is carried on, the richer do the bourgeoisie become, the better does
business go, the more labourers does the capitalist require, and the dearer does
the labourer sell himself.
 Thus the indispensable condition of the labourer’s securing a tolerable posi­
tion is the speediest possible growth of productive capital.
 But what is the meaning of the increase of productive capital ? The increase
of the power of stored-up labour over living labour. The increase of the dominion
of the bourgeoisie over the labouring class. As fast as wage-labour creates its
own antagonist and its own master in the dominating power of capital, the
means of employment, that is, of subsistence, flow back to it from its antagonist;
but only on the condition that it is itself transformed afresh into a portion of
capital, and becomes the lever whereby the increase of capital may be again
hugely accelerated.
 Thus the statement that the interests of capital and labour are identical comes
to mean merely this : capital and wage-labour are the two terms of one and the
same proportion. The one conditions the other, just in the same way that the
usurer and the borrower condition each other mutually.
 So long as the wage-labourer remains a wage-labourer, his lot in life is
dependent upon capital. That is the exact meaning of the famous community of
interests between capital and labour.
 The increase of capital is attended by an increase in the amount of wage­
labour and in the number of wage-labourers; or, in other words, the dominion of
capital is spread over a larger number of individuals. And, to give the most
fortunate event possible, with the increase of productive capital there is an
increase in the demand for labour. And thus wages, the price of labour, will rise.
 A house may be large or small: but as long as the surrounding houses are
equally small, it satisfies all social expectations as a dwelling place. But let a
palace arise by the side of this small house, and it shrinks from a house into a
hut. The smallness of the house now gives it to be understood that its occupant
has either very small pretentions or none at all; and however high it may shoot
up with the progress of civilisation, if the neighbouring palace shoots up also in
the same or in greater proportion, the occupant of the comparatively small house
will always find himself more uncomfortable, more discontented, more confined
within his four walls.
 A notable advance in the amount paid as wages brings about a rapid increase
of productive capital. The rapid increase of productive capital calls forth just as
rapid an increase in wealth, luxury, social wants, and social comforts. Therefore,
although the comforts of the labourer have risen, the social satisfaction which
they give has fallen in comparison'jwith^these'augmented comforts of the capitalist
which are unattainable for the labourer, and in comparison with the general
development of comforts. Our wants and their satisfaction have their origin
in society; we therefore measure them in their relation to society, and not in
relation to the objects which satisfy them. Since their nature is social, it is
therefore relative.
 As a rule then, wages are not determined merely by the amount of commo­
dities for which they may be exchanged. They depend upon various relations.
 What the labourer immediately receives for his labour is a certain sum
of money. Are wages determined merely by this money price ?
 In the sixteenth century the gold and silver in circulation in Europe was
 IO

augmented in consequence of the discovery of America. The value of gold and
silver fell, therefore, in proportion to other commodities. The labourers received
for their labour the same amount of silver coin as before. The money price of
their labour remained the same, and yet their wages had fallen, for in exchange
for the same sum of silver they obtained a smaller quantity of other commo­
dities. This was one of the circumstances which furthered the increase of
capital and the rise of the bourgeoisie in the sixteenth century.
 Let us take another case. In the winter of 1847, in consequence of a failure
in the crops, there was an important increase in the price of the indispensable
means of subsistence, corn, meat, butter, cheese, and so on, We will suppose
that the labourers still received the same sum of money for their labour as
before. Had not their wages fallen then ? Of course they had. For the same
amount of money they received in exchange less bread, meat, etc. ; and their
wages had fallen, not because the value of silver had diminished, but because the
value of the means of subsistence had increased.
 Let us finally suppose that the money price of labour remains the same,
while in consequence of the employment of new machinery, or on account of a
good season, or for some similar reason, there is a fall in the price of all agri­
cultural and manufactured goods. For the same amount of money the labourers
can now buy more commodities of all kinds. Their wages have therefore risen,
just because their money price has not changed.
 The money price of labour, the nominal amount of wages, does not there­
fore fall together with the real wages, that is, with the amount of commodities
that may practically be obtained in exchange for the wages. Therefore if we
speak of the rise and fall of wages, the money price of labour, or the nominal
wage, is not the only thing which we must keep in view.
 But neither the nominal wages, that is, the amount of money for which the
labourer sells himself to the employer, nor yet the real wages, that is, the amount
of commodities which he can buy for this money, exhaust the relations which are
comprehended in the term wages.
 For the meaning of the word is chiefly determined by its relation to the gain
or profit of the employer—it is a proportionate and relative expression.
 The real wage expresses the price of labour in relation to the price of other
commodities; the relative wage, on the contrary, expresses the price of direct
 labour in relation to that of stored-up labour, the relative value of wage-labour
 and capital, the proportionate value of capitalist and labourer.
 Real wages may remain the same, or they may even rise, and yet the relative
 wages may none the less have fallen. Let us assume, for example, that the price
 of all the means of subsistence has fallen by two-thirds, while a day’s wages have
 only fallen one-third, as for instance, from three shillings to two. Although the
 labourer has a larger amount of commodities at his disposal for two shillings
 than he had before for three, yet his wages are nevertheless diminished in pro­
 portion to the capitalist’s gain. The capitalist’s profit—the manufacturer's, for
 instance—has been augmented by a shilling, since for the smaller sum of exchange­
 value which he pays to the labourer, the labourer has to produce a larger sum of
 exchange-value than he did before. The value of capital is raised in proportion
 to the value of labour. The division of social wealth between capital and labour
 has become more disproportionate. The capitalist commands a larger amount
 of labour with the same amount of capital. The power of the capitalist class
 over the labouring class is increased; the social position of the labourer has
 deteriorated, and is depressed another degree below that of the capitalist.
 What then is the general law which determines the rise and fall of wages and
 profit in their reciprocal relation ?
 They stand in inverse proportion to one another. Capital's exchange-value,
 profit, rises in the same proportion in which the exchange-value of labour, wages,
 sinks; and conversely. The rise in profit is exactly measured by the fall in
 wages, and the fall in profit by the rise in wages.
 The objection may perhaps be made that the capitalist may have gained a
 profit by advantageous exchange of his products with other capitalists, or by a
 rise in the demand for his goods, whether in consequence of the opening of new
 markets, or of a greater demand in the old markets; that the profit of the capi­
 talist may thus increase by means of over-reaching another capitalist, indepen­
 dently of the rise and fall of wages and the exchange-value of labour ; or that rhe
 profit of the capitalist may also rise through an improvement in the implements
 of labour, a new application of natural forces, and so on.
 But it must nevertheless be admitted that the result remains the same,
 although it is brought about in a different way. The capitalist has acquired a
 11

larger amount of exchange-value with the same amount of labour, without having
had to pay a higher price for the labour on that account; that is to say, a lower
price has been paid for the labour in proportion to the nett profit which it yields
to the capitalist.
 Besides we must remember that in spite of the fluctuations in the price of com­
modities, the average price of each commodity—the proportion in. which it
exchanges for other commodities—is determined by its cost of production. The
over-reaching and tricks that go on within the capitalist class therefore neces­
sarily cancel one another. Improvements in machinery, and new applications of
natural forces to the service of production, enable them to turn out in a given
time with the same amount of labour and capital a larger quantity of products,
but by no means a larger quantity of exchange-value. If by the application of
the spinning-jenny I han turn out twice as much thread in an hour as I could
before its invention, for instance, a hundred pounds instead of fifty, that is
because the cost of production has been halved, or because at the same cost I
can turn out double the amount of products.
 Finally in whatsoever proportion the capitalist classes—the bourgeoisie—
whether of one country or of the market of the whole world—-share among them­
selves the nett profits of production, the total amount of these nett profits always
consists merely of the amount by which, taking all in all, direct labour has been
increased by means of stored-up labour. This sum total increases, therefore, in
the proportion in which labour augments capital; that is, in the proportion in
which profit rises as compared with wages.
 Thus we see that even if we confine ourselves to the relation between capital
and wage-labour, the interests of capital are in direct antagonism to the interests
of wage-labour.
 A rapid increase of capital is equal to a rapid increase of profits. Profits
can only make a rapid increase, if the exchange-value of labour—the relative
wage—makes an equally rapid decline. The relative wage may decline, although
the actual wage rises along with the nominal wage, or money price of labour; if
only it does not rise in the same proportion as profit. For instance, if when trade
is good, wages rise five per cent., and profits on the other hand thirty per cent.,
then the proportional or relative wage has not increased but declined.
 Thus if the receipts of the labourer increase with the rapid advance of
capital, yet at the same time there is a widening of the social gulf which separates
the labourer from the capitalist, and also an increase in the power of capital
over labour and in the dependence of labour upon capital.
 The meaning of the statement that the labourer has an interest in the rapid
increase of capital is merely this; the faster the labourer increases his master s
dominion, the richer will be the crumbs that he will get from his table; and the
greater the number of labourers that can be employed and called into existence,
the greater will be the number of slaves of which capital will be the owner.
 We have thus seen that even the most fortunate event for the working class,
the speediest possible increase of capital, however much it may improve the
material condition of the labourer, cannot abolish the opposition between his
interests and those of the bourgeois or capitalist class. Profit and wages remain
just as much as ever in inverse proportion.
 When capital is increasing fast, wages may rise, but the profits of capita
will rise much faster. The actual position of the labourer has improved, but. it
is at the expense of his social position. The social gulf which separates him
from the capitalist has widened.
 Finally, the meaning of fortunate conditions for wage-labour, and of the
quickest possible increase of productive capital, is merely this; the faster the
working classes enlarge and extend the hostile power that dominates over them,
the better will be the conditions under which they will be allowed to labour for
the further increase of bourgeois dominion and for the wider extension of the
power of capital, and thus contentedly to forge for themselves the golden chains
by which the bourgeois drags them in its train.
 But are the increase of productive capital and the rise of wages so indis­
solubly connected as the bourgeois economists assert? We can hardly believe
that the fatter capital becomes, the more will its slave be pampered. The
bourgeoisie is too much enlightened, and keeps its accounts much too carefully,
to care for that privilege of the feudal nobility, the ostentation of splendour in
its retinue. The very conditions of bourgeois existence compel it to keep careful
accounts.
 We must therefore enquire more closely into the effect which the increase
of productive capital has upon wages.
 12

 With the general increase of the productive capital of a bourgeois society a
manifold accumulation of labour-force takes place. The capitalists increase in
number and in power. The increase in the number of capitalists increases the
competition between capitalists. Their increased power gives them the means
of leading into the industrial battle-field mightier armies of labourers furnished
with gigantic implements of war.
 The one capitalist can only succeed in driving the other off the field and
taking possession of his capital by selling his wares at a cheaper rate. In order
to sell more cheaply without ruining himself, he must produce more cheaply, that
is, he must heighten as much as possible the productiveness of labour, But the
most effective way of making labour more productive is by means of a more
complete division of labour, or by the more extended use and continual improve­
ment of machinery. The more numerous the departments into which labour is
divided, and the more gigantic the scale in which machinery is introduced, in so
much the greater proportion does the cost of production decline, and so much
the more fruitful is the labour. Thus arises a manifold rivalry among capitalists
 with the object of increasing the subdivision of labour and machinery, and
keeping up the utmost possible progressive rate of exploitation.
 Now if by means of a greater subdivision of labour, by the employment and
 improvement of new machines, or by the more skilful and profitable use of the
 forces of nature, a capitalist has discovered the means of producing a larger
 amount of commodities than his competitors with the same amount of labour ;
 whether it be stored-up labour or direct—if he can, for instance, spin a com­
 plete yard of cotton in the same time that his competitors take to spin half-a-
 yard—how will this capitalist proceed to act ?
 He might go on selling half-a-yard at its former market price.; but that
 would not have the effect of driving his opponents out.of the field and increasing
 his own sale. But the need of increasing his sale has increased in the same pro­
  portion as his production. The more effective and more expensive means of pro­
  duction which he has called into existence enable him, of course, to sell his wares
 cheaper, but they also compel him to sell more wares and to secure a much
 larger market for them. Our capitalist will therefore proceed to sell his half-a-
  yard of cotton cheaper than his competitors.
 The capitalist will not, however, sell his complete yard so cheaply as his
  competitors sell the half, although its entire production does not cost him more
  than the production of half costs the others. For in that case he would gain
  nothing, but would only get back the cost of its productioa. The contingent
  increase in his receipts would result from his having set in motion a larger
  capital, but not from having made his capital more profitable than that of the
  others. Besides he gains the end he is aiming at, if he prices his goods a slight
  percentage lower than his competitors. He drives them off the field, and wrests
  from them at any rate a portion of their sale, if only he undersells them. And
  finally we must remember that the price current always stands either above or
  below the cost of production, according as the sale of a commodity is transacted
  at a favourable or unfavourable period of business. According as the.market
  price of a yard of cloth is above or below its former cost of production, the
 percentage will alter in which the capitalist who has employed the new and
  profitable means of production exceeds in its sale the actual cost of its production
 to him. . . .
 But our capitalist does not find his privilege very lasting. Other rival
 capitalists introduce with more or less rapidity the same machines and the same
 subdivision of labour; and this introduction becomes general, until the price of
 the yard of cloth is reduced not only below its old, but below its new cost of
 production. . . . ,
 Thus the capitalists find themselves relatively m the same position in which
 they stood before the introduction, of the new means of production ; and if they
 are by these means enabled to offer twice the product for the same price, they
 now find themselves compelled to offer the doubled amount for less than the old
 price. From the standpoint of these new means of production the old game
 begins anew There is greater subdivision of labour, more machinery, and a
 more rapid progress in the exploitation of both. Whereupon competition brings
 about the same reaction against this result. .
 Thus we see how the manner and means of production are . continually
 renewed and revolutionised ; and how the division of labour necessarily brings in
 its train a greater division of labour ; the introduction of machinery, a still larger
 introduction; and the rapidity of progress in the efficiency of labour, a still
 greater rapidity of progress.
 I3
 'Khat is the law which continually drives bourgeois paaduction out of its old
track, and compels capital to intensify the productive powers of labour for the
very reason that it has already intensified them—the law that allows it no rest,
but for ever whispers in its ear the words, “ Quick March ! ”
 This is no other law than that which, cancelling the priodical fluctuations of
business, necessarily identifies the price of a commodity with its cost of pro­
duction.
 However powerful are the means of production which a particular capitalist
may bring into the field, competition will make their adoption general; and the
moment it becomes general, the sole result of the greater fruitfulness of his
capital is that he must now for the same price offer ten, twenty, a hundred times
as much as before. But as he must dispose of perhaps a thousand times as
much, in order to outweigh the decrease in the selling price by the larger pro­
portion of products sold; since a larger sale has now become necessary, not
only to gain a large profit, but also to replace the cost of production ; and the
implements of production, as we have seen get more expensive ; and since this
 larger sale has become a vital question, not only for him, but also for his rivals,
 the old strife continues with all the greater violence, in proportion as the pre­
 viously discovered means of production are more fruitful. Thus the subdivision
 of labour and the employment of new machinery, take a fresh start, and proceed
 with still greater rapidity.
 And thus, whatever be the power of the means or production employed,
 competition does its best to rob capital of the golden fruit which it produces, by
 reducing the price of commodities to their cost of production ; and as fast as
 their production is cheapened, compelling by a despotic law the larger supply of
 cheaper products to be offered at the former price. Thus the capitalist will have
 won nothing by his exertions beyond the obligation to produce faster than before,
 and an enhancement of the difficulty of employing his capital to advantage.
  While competition continually persecutes him with its law of the cost of pro­
  duction, and turns against himself every weapon which he forges against his
  rivals, the capitalist continually tries, to cheat competition by incessantly intro­
  ducing further division of labour, and replacing the old machines by new ones,
  which, though more expensive, produce more cheaply ; instead of waiting till
  competition has rendered them obsolete.
 Let us now look at this feverish agitation as it affects the market of the whole
  world, and we shall understand how the increase, accumulation, and concentra­
  tion of capital bring in their train an uninterrupted and extreme subdivision of
  labour, always advancing with gigantic strides of progress, and a continual em­
  ployment of new machinery together with improvement of the old.
 But how do these circumstances, inseparable as they are from the increase
  of productive capital, affect the determination of the amount of wages ?
 The greater division of labour enables one labourer to do the work of five,
  ten, twenty : it therefore multiplies the competition among labourers five, ten or
  twenty times. The labourers do not only compete when one sells himself
  cheaper than another ; they also compete when one does the work of five, ten, or
 twenty ; and the division of labour which capital introduces and continually in­
 creases, compels the labourers to enter into this kind of competition with one
 another. . . . .
 Further \ in the same proportion in which the division of labour is increased)
 the labour itself is simplified. The special skill of the labourer becomes worthless.
 It is changed into a monotonous and uniform power production, which can give
 play neither to bodily nor to intellectual elasticity. Its labour becomes acccessible
 to everybody. Competitors therefore throng into it from all sides; and besides
 we must remember that the more simple and easily learnt the labour is, and the
 less it costs a man to make himself master of it, so much the lower must its
 wages sink ; since they are determined, like the price of every other commodity,
 by its cost of production.
 Therefore exactly as the labour becomes more unsatisfactory and unpleasant,,
 in that verv proportion competition iucreases and wages decline. The labourer
 does his best to maintain the rate of his wages by performing more labour,
 whether by working for a greater number of hours, or by working harder in the
 same-time. Thus, driven by necessity, he himself increases the evil ot the
 subdivision of labour. So the result is this : the more he labours, the less reward
 he receives for it; and that for this simple reason—that he competes against his.
 fellow-workmen, and thus compels them to compete against him, and to offer
 their labour on as wretched conditions as he does; and that he thus in the last
 result competes against himself as a member of the working class.
 *4
 Machinery has th^same effect, but in a much greater degree. It supplants
 skilled labourers by unskilled, men by women, adults by children ; where it is
 newly introduced, it throws the hand-labourers upon the streets in crowds ; and
 where it is perfected or replaced by later improvements and more inventions, dis­
 cards them by slightly slower degrees. We have sketched above in hasty outlines
 the industrial war of capitalists with one another; and this war has this pecu­
 liarity, that its battles are won less by means of enlisting than of discharging its
 industrial recruits, The generals or capitalists vie with one another as to who can dis­
pense with the greatest number of his soldiers.
 The economists repeatedly assure us that the labourers who are rendered
superfluous by the machines find new branches of employment.
 They have not the hardihood directly to assert that the labourers who are
 discharged enter upon the new branches of labour. The facts cry out too loud
 against such a lie as this. They only declare that for other divisions of the
 labouring class, as for instance, for the rising generation of labourers who were
just ready to enter upon the defunct branch of industry, new means of employ­
 ment will open out. Of course that is a great satisfaction for the dismissed
labourers. The worshipful capitalists will not find their fresh supply of exploit­
able flesh and blood run short, and will let the dead bury their dead. This is
indeed a consolation with which the bourgeois comfort themselves rather than the
labourers. If the whole class of wage-labourers were annihilated by the
machines, how shocking that would be for capital, which without wage-labour
 ceases to act as capital at all.
 But let us suppose that those who are directly driven out of their employment
by machinery, and also all those of the rising generation who were expecting
employment in the same line, find some new employment. Does any one imagine
that this will be as highly paid as that which they have lost ? Such an idea would
be in direct contradiction to all the laws of economy. We have already seen that
the modern form of industry always tends to the displacement of the more complex
and the higher kinds of employment, by those which are more simple and
 subordinate.
 How then could a crowd of labourers, who are thrown out of one branch of
industry by machinery, find refuge in another, without having to content them­
selves with a lower position and worse pay ?
 The labourers who are employed in the manufacture of machinery itself have
been instanced as an exception. As soon as a desire arises and a demand begins
in an industry for more machinery, it is said that there must necessarily be an
increase in the number of machines, and therefore in the manufacture of machines,
and therefore in the employment of labourers in this manufacture; and the
labourers who are employed in this branch of industry will be skilled, and indeed
even educated labourers.
 Ever since the year 1840 this contention, which even before that time was
only half true, has lost all its specious colour. For the machines which are em­
ployed in the manufacture of machinery have been quite as numerous as those
used in the manufacture of cotton ; and the labourers who are employed in pro­
ducing machines, instead of being highly educated, have only been able toplay
the part of utterly unskilled machines themselves.
 But in the place of the man who has been dismissed by the machine perhaps
three children and one woman are employed to work it, And was it not neces­
sary before that the man’s wages should suffice for the support of his wife and
his children ? Was not the minimum of wages necessarily sufficient for the
maintenance and propagation of the race of labourers ? There is no difference,
except that now the lives of four times as many labourers as before are used up in
order to secure the support of one labourer’s family.
 To repeat our deductions; the faster productive capital increases, the more
does the division of labour and the employment of machinery extend. The more
the division of labour and the employment of machinery extend, so much the
more does competition increase among the labourers, and so much the more do
 their average wages dwindle.
 And, besides, the labouring class is recruited from the higher strata of
society ; or else there falls headlong into it a crowd of small manufacturers and
small proprietors, who thenceforth have nothing better to do than to stretch out
their arms by the side of those of the labourers. And thus the forest of arms
outstretched by those who are entreating for work becomes ever denser and the
arms themselves grow ever leaner.
 That the small manufacturer cannot survive in a contest, whose first condi­
tion is production on a continually increasing scale, that is, that he cannot be at
once both a large and a small manufacturer, is self-evident.
 That the interest on capital declines in the same promotion as the amount
 of capital increases and extends, and that therefore the small capitalist can no
* longer live on bis interest, but must join th# ranks of the workers andjincrease
 the number oftfce proletariat,—all this requires no further exemplificatlpn.
 Finally, in the projWtion in which the capitalists are compelledby the causes
 here sketched out to exploit on an even increasing scale yet more giga^ftic
 means of production, and with that object to set in motion all the iMfrisprin^s
 of credit, in the same proportion is there an increase of those earthquakes
 wherein the business world can only secure its own existence by the sajMyficaof ap
 portion of its wealth, its products, and even its powers of production to the gods
 of the world below—in a word, crises increase. They become at once more
 frequent and more violent; because in the same proportion in which the amount
 of production, and therefore the demand for an extension of the market, increases,
 the market of the world continually contracts, and ever fewer markets remain to
 be exploited; since every previous crisis has added to the commerce of the world
 a market which was not known before, or had before been only superficially ex­
 ploited by commerce. But capital not only lives upon labour. Like a lord, at
 once distinguished and barbarous, it drags with it to the grave the corpses of its
 slaves and whole hecatombs of labourers who perish in the crisis. Thus we see
 that if capital increases fast, competition among the labourers increases still
 faster, that is, the means of employment and subsistence decline in proportion at
 a Stillmore rapid rate; and yet, none the less the most fortunate conditions for
 wage labour lie in the speedy increase of capital


