The Civil War in France
Karl Marx (1871)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Karl Marx's 'The Civil War in France: Address of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association' (1871), written by Marx in English. Sourced from the International Publishers (New York) reprint edition (scan via Internet Archive / Digital Library of India); only Marx's 1871 Address is reproduced here — the edition's introduction and appendices are omitted. The 1871 text is in the public domain.

========================================================================

ADDRESS  OF  THE  GENERAL  COUNCIL  OF
THE  INTERNATIONAL  WORKING  MEN’S
ASSOCIATION

To  All  The  Members  of  the  Assocsation  in  Europe  and  in
THE  United  States.


I

On  September  4th,  1870,  when  the  working  men  of  Paris  pro-
claimed the  Rqmblic,  which  was  almost  instantaneously  ac-
claimed throughout  Prance,  without  a single  voice  of  dissent,  a
cabal  of  place-hunting  barristers,  with  Thiers  for  their  statesman
and  Trochu  for  their  general,  took  hold  of  the  Hotel  de  Ville.
At  that  time  they  were  imbu^  with  so  &natical  a iaith  in  the
mission  of  Paris  to  rqiresent  France  in  aU  epochs  of  historical
crisis,  tha^  to  legitimatise  their  usurped  titles  as  Governors  of
France,  they  thought  it  quite  sufficient  to  produce  their  lapsed
mandates  as  representatives  of  PRris.  In  our  second  address  on
the  late  war,  five  days  after  the  rise  of  these  men,  we  told  you  who
they  were.  Yet,  in  ffie  turmoil  of  surprise,  with  the  real  leaders  of
the  working  class  still  shut  up  in  Bonapartist  .prisons  and  the
Prussians  already  marching  upon  PRris,  Paris  bore  with  their
assumption  of  power,  on  the  express  condition  that  it  was  to  be
widd^  for  the  single  puipose  ^ national  defence.  Paris,  how-
ever, was  not  to  be  drfended  without  arming  its  working  dass,
organising  them  into  an  effective  force,  and  training  their  ranks
by  the  war  itsdf.  But  Paris  armed  was  the  Revolution  armed.  A
victory  of  Paris  over  the  Prussian  aggressor  would  have  been  a
victory  of  the  French  workman  over  the  French  capitalist  and  his
State  parasites.  In  this  conflict  between  national  duty  and  dass
interest,  the  Government  of  National  Defence  did'  not  hesitate
one  moment  to  turn  into  a Government  of  National  Defection.

The  first  stqp  they  took  was  to  send  Thiers  on  a roving  tour  to  all

n


22


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

file  Courts  of  Europe  there  to  beg  mediation  by  offering  the
barter  of  the  Republic  for  a king.  Four  months  after  the  com-
mencement of  the  siege,  when  they  thought  the  opportune  mo-
ment come  for  breaking  the  first  word  of  capitulation,  Trochu,
in  the  presence  of  Jules  Favre  and  others  of  his  colleagues,
addressed  the  assembled  mayors  of  Paris  in  these  terms:

“ The  first  question  put  to  me  by  my  colleagues  on  the  very
evening  of  Sqitember  4th  was  this:  Paris,  can  it,  with  any  chance
of  success  stand  a siege  by  the  Prussian  army  ? I did  not  hesitate
to  answer  in  the  negative.  Some  of  my  colleagues  here  present
will  warrant  the  truth  of  my  words  and  the  persistence  of  my
opinion.  I told  them,  in  these  very  terms,  that,  under  the  existing
state  of  things,  the  attempt  of  Paris  to  hold  out  a siege  by  the
Prussian  army  would  be  a folly.  Without  doubt,  I added,  it
would  be  an  heroic  folly;  but  that  would  be  all. . . . The  events
(managed  by  himsdf)  luive  not  given  the  lie  to  my  prevision.”
This  nice  little  speech  of  Trodiu  was  afterwards  published  by
M.  Corbon,  one  of  the  mayors  present.

Thtis,  on  the  very  evening  of  the  prodamation  of  the  Republic,
Trochu’s  “ plan  ” was  known  to  his  colleagues  to  be  the  capitula-
tion of  Paris.  If  national  defence  had  been  more  than  a pretext
for  the  personal  government  of  Thiers,  Favre  and  Co.,  the  up-
starts of  September  4th  would  have  abdicated  on  the  5th — would
have  initiated  the  Paris  people  into  Trodiu’s  ” plan,”  and  called
upon  them  to  surrender  at  once,  or  to  take  their  own  fate  into
their  own  hands.  Instead  of  this,  the  infamous  impostors  resolved
upon  cturing  the  heroic  folly  of  Paris  by  a regimen  of  famine  and
broken  heads,  and  to  dupe  her  in  the  meanwhile  by  ranting
manifestoes,  holding  forth  that  Trochu,  ” the  Governor  of  Paris,
win  never  capitulate,”  and  Jules  Favre,  the  Foreign  Minister,  will
“ not  cede  an  inch  of  om:  territory,  nor  a stone  of  our  fortresses.”
In  a letter  to  Gambetta,  that  very  same  Jules  Favre  avows  that
what  they  were  “ defending  ” against  were  not  the  Prussian
soldiers,  but  the  working  men  of  Paris.  During  the  whole  con-
tinuance of  the  siege  the  Bonapardst  cut-throats,  whom  Trochu
had  wisdy  intrusted  with  the  command  of  the  Paris  army,  ex-
changed, in  thdr  intimate  correspondence,  ribald  jokes  at  the
well-understood  mockery  of  defence  (see,  for  instance,  the  corre-
spondence of  Alphonse  Simon  Guiod,  supreme  commander  of  the
artillery  of  the  Army  of  Defence  of  Paris  and  Grand  Cross  of  the


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  aS

Lc^on  of  Honour,  to  Suzanne,  general  of  division  of  artillery,  a
correspondence  published  by  die  JiBuma/  offiAA  of  the  Commune).
The  mask  of  imposture  ivas  at  last  dropped  on  January  aSth,
1871.  With  the  true  heroism  of  utter  self-debasement,  the
Government  of  National  Defence,  in  thdr  capitulation,  came  out
as  the  Government  of  France  by  Bismarck’s  permission— a part
so  base  that  Louis  Bonaparte  himself  had,  at  Sedan,  shrunk  from
accqiting  it.  After  the  events  of  March  i8th,  on  their  wild  flight
to  Versailles,  the  eapitulards  left  in  the  hands  of  Paris  the  docu-
mentary evidence  of  their  treason,  to  destroy  which,  as  the  Com-
mune says  in  its  manifesto  to  the  provinces,  “ those  men  would
not  recoil  from  a sea  of  blood.”

To  be  eagerly  bent  upon  such  a consummation,  some  of  the
leading  members  of  the  Government  of  Defence  had,  betides,
most  peculiar  reasons  of  their  own.

Shortly  after  the  conclusion  of  the  armistice,  M.  Millidre,  one  of
the  representatives  of  Paris  to  the  National  Assembly,  now  shot
by  express  order  of  Jules  Favre,  published  a series  of  authentic
legal  documents  in  proof  that  Jules  Favre,  living  in  concubinage
with  the  wife  of  a drunken  resident  at  ^e^ers,  had,  by  a most
daring  concoction  of  forgeries,  spread  over  many  years,  contrived
to  grasp  in  the  name  of  the  children  of  his  adultery,  a large  suc-
cession, which  made  him  a rich  man,  and  that,  in  a lawsmt
undertaken  by  the  legitimate  heirs,  he  only  escaped  exposure  by
the  connivance  of  the  Bonapartist  tribunals.  As  these  dry  legsd
documents  were  not  to  be  got  rid  of  by  any  amount  of  rhetorical
horse-power,  Jules  Favre,  for  the  first  time  in  his  life,  held  his
tongue,  quietly  awaiting  the  outbreak  of  the  civil  war,  in  order,
then,  fiantically  to  denounce  the  people  of  Paris  as  a band  of
escaped  convicts  in  utter  revolt  against  family,  reifi^on,  order,
and  property.  This  same  forger  had  hardly  gpt  into  power,  after
Septem^r  4th,  when  he  sympathetically  let  loose  upon  sodety
^c  and  Taillefer,  convicted,  even  under  Ae  Empire  of  forgery,  in
the  scandalous  affair  of  the  “ Etendard.”  One  of  these  men,
Taillefer,  having  dared  to  return  to  Paris  under  the  Commune,
was  at  once  rdnstated  in  prison ; and  then  Jules  Favre  exclaimed
from  the  tribune  of  the  National  Assembly  that  Paris  was  setting
free  all  her  jailbirds  I

Ernest  Picard,  the  Joe  hfiller  of  the  Government  of  National
Defence,  who  appointed  himself  Home  Minister  of  the  Republic


24  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

after  having  in  vain  striven  to  become  Home  Minister  of  the
Empire,  is  the  brother  of  one  Arthur  Picard,  an  individual  cx-
pdled  fiom  the  Paris  Bourse  as  a blackleg  (see  report  of  the
Prefecture  of  Police,  dated  July  13th,  1867),  and  convicted,  on  his
own  confession,  of  a theft  of  300,000  francs,  while  manager  of  one
of  ihe  brandies  of  the  SoeiM  Giniralet  rue  Palestro,  No.  5 (see  re-
port of  the  Prefecture  of  Police,  December  nth,  1868).  This
Arthur  Picard  was  made  by  Ernest  Picard  the  editor  of  his  paper,
VEUeteur  Libre.  While  the  common  run  of  stockjobbers  were  led
astray  by  the  offidal  lies  of  the  Home  Office  paper,  Arthur  was
running  backwards  and  forwards  between  the  Home  Office
and  the  Bourse,  there  to  discoimt  the  disasters  of  the  Frendi
army.  The  whole  financial  correspondence  of  that  worthy  pair
of  brothers  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Commune.

Jules  Ferry,  a penniless  barrister  before  Sqitember  4th,  con-
trived, as  Mayor  of  Paris  during  the  siege,  to  job  a fortune  out  of
famine.  The  day  on  which  he  would  have  to  give  an  account  of
his  maladministration  would  be  the  day  of  his  conviction.

These  men,  then,  could  find,  in  the  ruins  of  Paris  only,  their
tickets-of-leave:  they  were  the  very  men  Bismarck  wanted.  With
the  help  of  some  shuffiing  of  cards,  Thiers,  hitherto  the  secret
prompter  of  the  Government,  now  appeared  at  its  head,  with  the
tidket-of-leave  men  for  his  Muiisters.

Thiers,  that  monstrous  gnome,  has  charmed  the  French  bour-
geoisie for  almost  half  a century,  because  he  is  die  most  consum-
mate intellectual  expression  of'  their  own  class-corruption.
Before  he  became  a statesman  he  had  already  proved  his  lying
powers  as  an  historisui.  The  chronicle  of  his  public  life  is  the
record  of  misfortunes  of  France.  Banded,  before  1830,  with  the
Republicans,  he  dipped  into  office  under  Louis  Philippe  by
betraying  his  protector  Laffite,  ingratiating  himsdf  with  ffie  king
by  exciting  mob  riots  against  the  clergy,  during  which  the  church
of  Saint  Germain  I’Auxerrois  and  the  Archbishop’s  palace  were
plundered,  and  by  acting  the  minister-spy  upon,  and  the  jail-
accoucheur  of  the  Duchess  de  Beni.  The  massacre  of  the
Republicans  in  the  Rue  Transnonain,  and  the  subsequent  in-
famous laws  of  September  against  the  Press  and  the  right  of
association,  were  1^  work.  Reappearing  as  the  ctiipf  of  the
Cabinet  in  March  184x1,  he  astonidied  France  with  his  plan
fortifying  Paris.  To  the  R^ublicans,  who  denounced  this  plan


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  25

as  a sinister  plot  against  the  liberty  of  Paris,  he  replied  from  the
tribune  of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies:

“ What!  to  fancy  that  any  works  of  fortification  could  ever
endanger  liberty!  And  first  of  all  you  calumniate  any  posable
Government  in  supposing  that  it  could  some  day  attempt  to
maintain  itself  by  bombarding  the  capital  . . . but  that  Govern-
ment would  be  a hundred  times  more  impossible  after  its  victory
than  before.”  Indeed,  no  Government  would  ever  have  dared  to
bombard  Paris  from  the  forts  but  that  Government  whidi  had
previously  surrendered  these  forts  to  the  Prussians.

When  H^ng  Bomba  tried  his  hand  at  Palermo,  in  January,  1848,
Thiers,  then  long  since  out  of  office,  again  rose  in  the  Chamber  of
Deputies : “ You  know,  gentlemen,  what  is  happening  at  Palermo.
You,  all  of  you,  shake  with  horror  (in  the  parliamentary  sense)  on
hearing  that  during  forty-right  hours  a large  town  has  been
bombarded — ^by  whom  ? Was  it  by  a foreign  enemy  exerriring
the  right  of  war  ? No,  gentlemen,  it  was  by  its  own  dovernment.
And  why  ? Because  the  unfortunate  town  demanded  its  rights.
Well,  then,  for  the  demand  of  its  rights  it  has  got  forty-right  hours
of  bomba^ment.  . . . Allow  me  to  appeal  to  the  opinion  of
Europe.  It  is  doing  a service  to  mankind  to  arise,  and  to  make
reverberate,  from  what  is  perhaps  the  greatest  tribune  in  Europe,
some  words  (indeed  words)  of  indignation  against  such  acts. . . .
When  the  Regent  Espartero,  who  had  rendered  services  in  his
country  (whi^  M.  Thiers  never  did)  intended  bombarding
Barcelona,  in  order  to  suppress  its  insurrection,  there  arose  from
all  parts  of  the  world  a general  outcry  of  indignation.”

Eighteen  months  a^rwards,  M.  Thiers  was  amongst  the
fiercest  defenders  of  the  bombardment  of  Rome  by  a French
anuy.  In  fact  the  fault  of  King  Bomba  seems  to  have  consisted
of  this  only,  that  he  limited  his  bombardment  to  finrty-right  hours.

A few  days  before  the  Revolution  of  February,  fretting  at  the
long  exile  &om  place  and  pelf  to  which  Guizot  had  condemned
him  and  sniffing  in  the  air  the  scent  of  an  approariung  popular
commotion,  Thiers,  in  that  pseudo-heroic  style  which  won  him
the  nick-name  of  MirabeaU’mouche,  declared  to  the  Chamber  of
Duputies:  “ I am  of  the  party  of  Revolution,  not  only  in  France,
but  in  Europe.  I wish  the  Government  of  the  Revolution  to  re-
main in  the  hands  of  moderate  men  . . . but  if  the  Government
should  fall  into  the  hands  of  ardent  minds,  even  into  those  of


26  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

Radicals,  I shall,  for  all  that,  not  desert  my  cause.  I shall  always
be  of  the  party  of  the  Revolution.**  The  Revolution  of  February
rame.  Instead  of  displacing  the  Guizot  Cabinet  by  the  Thiers
Cabinet,  as  the  little  man  had  dreamt,  it  superseded  Louis
Philippe  by  the  Republic.  On  the  first  day  of  the  popular  victory
he  carefully  hid  himself,  forgetting  that  the  contempt  of  the
working  men  screened  him  from  their  hatred.  Still  with  his
legendary  courage,  he  continued  to  shy  the  public  stage,  until  the
June  massacres  had  cleared  it  for  his  sort  of  action.  Then  he
became  the  leading  mind  of  the  **  Party  of  Order  *’  and  its
Parliamentary  Republic,  that  anonymous  interregmnn,  in  which
all  the  rival  factions  of  the  ruling  class  conspired  together  to  crush
the  people,  and  conspired  against  each  other  to  restore  each  of
them  its  own  monar^y.  Then^  as  now,  Thiers  denounced  the
Republicans  as  the  only  obstacle  to  the  consolidation  of  the
Republic;  then,  as  now,  he  spoke  to  the  Republic  as  the  hang-
man spoke  to  Don  Carlos:  “ I shall  assassinate  thee,  but  for
thy  own  good.”  Now,  as  then,  he  wiU  have  to  exclaim  on  the  day
after  his  victory:  U Empire  estfaU — ^the  empire  is  consummated.
Despite  his  hypiocritical  homilies  about  necessary  liberties  and  his
personal  grudge  against  Louis  Bonaparte,  who  had  made  a dupe
of  him,  and  kicked  out  parliamentarism — ^and  outside  of  its
factitious  atmosphere  the  little  man  is  conscious  of  withering  into
nothingness — ^he  had  a hand  in  all  the  infamies  of  the  Second
Empire,  from  the  occupation  of  Rome  by  French  troops  to  the  war
with  Prussia,  which  he  incited  by  his  fierce  invective  against
German  unity — not  as  a cloak  of  Prussian  despotism  but  as  an
encroachment  upon  the  vested  right  of  France  in  German  dis-
union. Fond  of  brandishing,  with  his  dwarfish  arms  in  the  face
of  Europe  the  sword  of  the  first  Napoleon  whose  historical  shoe-
black he  had  become,  his  foreign  policy  always  culminated  in  the
utter  humiliation  of  France  from  the  London  convention  of  1841
to  the  Paris  capitulation  of  1871  and  the  present  civil  war,  where
he  hounds  on  the  prisoners  of  Sedan  and  Metz  against  Paris  by
special  permission  of  Bismarck.  Despite  his  versatility  of  talent
and  shiftiness  of  purpose,  this  man  has  his  whole  lifetime  been
wedded  to  the  most  fossil  routine.  It  is  self-evident  that  to  birn
the  deeper  undercurrents  of  modem  society  remained  forever
hidden;  but  even  the  most  palpable  changes  on  its  surface  were
abhorrent  to  a brain  all  the  vitality  of  which  had  fled  to  the


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  vj

tongue.  Thus  he  never  tired  of  denoundng  as  a sacrilege  any
deviation  from  the  old  French  protective  system.  When  a minister
of  Louis  Philippe,  he  railed  at  railways  as  a wild  chimera;  anrf
when  in  opposition  under  Louis  Bonaparte,  he  branded  as  a
profanation  every  attempt  to  reform  &e  rotten  French  army
system.  Never  in  his  long  political  career  has  he  been  guilty  of  a
single — even  the  smallest— measure  of  any  practical  use.  Thiers
was  consistent  only  in  his  greed  for  wealth  and  his  hatred  of  the
men  that  produce  it.  Having  entered  his  first  ministry  under
Louis  Philippe  poor  as  Job,  he  left  it  a millionaire.  His  last  min-
istry under  the  same  king  (of  March  ist,  1840)  exposed  him  to
public  taunts  of  peculation  in  the  Chamber  of  Deputies,  to  which
he  was  content  to  reply  by  tears — a commodity  he  deals  in  as
freely  as  Jules  Favre,  or  any  other  crocodile.  At  Bordeaux  his
first  measure  for  saving  France  from  impending  financial  ruin
was  to  endow  himself  with  three  millions  a year,  the  first  and  the
last  word  of  the  “ Economical  Republic,”  the  vista  of  which  he
had  opened  to  his  Paris  dectors  in  1869.  One  of  his  former  col-
leagues of  the  Chamber  of  Deputies  of  1830,  himsdf  a capitalist
and  nevertheless  a devoted  member  of  the  Paris  Commune,
M.  Beslay,  latdy  addressed  Huers  thus  in  a public  placard:
” The  enslavement  of  labour  by  capital  has  always  been  the
corner-stone  of  your  policy,  and  from  the  very  day  you  saw  the
Republic  of  Labour  install^  at  the  Hotel  de  Ville,  you  have  never
ceased  to  cry  out  to  France:  ' These  are  criminalsl  ’ ” A master
in  small  state  roguery,  a virtuoso  in  penury  and  treason,  a crafts-
man in  all  the  pretty  stratagems,  cunning  devices  and  base
perfidies  of  Parliamentary  party-warfare;  never  scrupling,  when
out  of  officcj  to  fan  a revolution,  and  to  stifle  it  in  bl(^  when  at
the  hdm  of  the  State;  with  dass  prejudices  standing  him  in  the
place  of  ideas,  and  vanity  in  the  place  of  a heart;  his  private  life
as.  infamous  as  his  public  life  is  odious — even  now,  when  playing
the  part  of  a French  Sulla,  he  caimot  hdp  setting  off  the  abomina-
tion of  his  deeds  by  the  ridicule  of  his  ostentation.

The  capitulation  of  Paris  by  surrendering  to  Prussia,  not  only
Paris,  but  all  France,  dosed  the  long-continued  intrigues  or
treason  with  the  enemy,  which  the  usurpers  of  September  4th
began,  as  Trochu  hims^  said,  on  that  very  same  day.  On  the
other  hand,  it  initiated  the  civil  war  they  were  now  to  wage  with
the  assistance  of  Prussia,  against  the  Republic  and  Paris.  The


28


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

trap  was  laid  in  the  very  terms  of  the  capitulation.  At  that  time
above  one-third  of  the  territory  was  in  die  hands  of  the  enemy,
the  capital  was  cut  off  &om  the  provinces,  all  communications
were  disorganised.  To  elect  under  such  circumstances  a real
representation  of  France  was  impossible  unless  ample  time  were
given  for  preparation.  In  view  of  this  the  capitulation  stipulated
that  a National  Assembly  must  be  elected  within  eight  days;  so
that  in  many  parts  of  France  the  news  of  the  impending  dection
arrived  on  its  eve  only.  This  assembly,  moreover,  was,  by  an
express  clause  of  the  capitulation,  to  be  dected  for  the  sole  pur-
pose of  dedding  on  peace  or  war,  and,  eventually,  to  condude
a treaty  of  peace.  The  population  could  not  but  fed  that  the
terms  of  the  armistice  rendered  the  continuation  of  the  war  im-
possible, and  that  for  sanctioning  the  peace  imposed  by  Bismarck,
the  worst  men  in  France  were  the  best.  But  not  content  with
these  precautions,  Thiers,  even  before  the  secret  of  the  armistice
had  been  broached  to  Paris,  set  out  for  an  dectioneering  tour
through  the  provinces,  there  to  galvanise  back  into  life  the  Legiti-
mist party,  which  now,  along  with  the  Orleanists,  had  to  take
the  place  of  the  then  impossible  Bonapartists.  He  was  not  afraid
of  them.  Impossible  as  a government  of  modem  France,  and
therefore,  contemptible  as  rivals,  what  party  were  more  e^ble
as  tools  of  counter-revolution  than  the  party  whose  action,  in  the
words  of  Thiers  himself  (Chamber  of  Deputies,  January  5th,
i&33)»  “had  always  been  confined  to  the  three  resources  of
fordgn  invasion,  d^^  war,  and  anarchy  ” ? They  verily  bdieved
in  the  advent  of  thdr  long-expected  retrospective  m^ennium.
There  were  the  heels  of  fordgn  invasion  trampling  upon  France;
there  was  the  downfall  of  an  Empire,  and  the  captivity  of  a Bona-
parte; and  there  they  were  tiiemsdves..  The  whed  of  history  has
evidently  rolled  back  to  stop  at  the  “ Chambre  introuvable  ”
of  1816.  In  the  assemblies  of  the  R^ublic,  1848  to  ’51,  they  had
been  r^resented  by  their  educated  and  trdned  Parliamentary
champions;  it  was  the  rank-and-file  of  the  party  which  now
rushed  in — all  the  Pourceaugnacs  of. France.

As  soon  as  this  assembly  of  " Rui^  " had  met  at  Bordeaux,
Thiers  made  it  dear  to  them  that  the  peace  preliminaries  must,
be  assented  to  at  once,  without  even  the  honours  of  a Parlia-
mentary debate,  as  the  only  condition  on  which  Prussia  would
permit  them  to  open  the  war  against  the  R^ublic  and  Paris,


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  29

its  stronghold.  The  counter-revolution  had,  in  fact,  no  time  to
lose.  The  Second  Empire  had  more  than  doubled  the  national
debt,  and  plunged  all  the  laige  towns  into  heavy  municipal  debts.
The  war  had  fearfully  swelled  the  liabilides,  and  mercilessly
ravaged  the  resources  of  the  nadon.  To  complete  the  ruin,  the
Prussian  Shylock  was  there  with  his  bond  for  the  keep  of  half  a
million  of  his  soldiers  on  French  soil,  his  indemnity  of  five  milliards
and  interest  at  5 per  cent,  on  the  unpaid  instalments  thereof.
Who  was  to  pay  the  bill  ? It  was  only  by  the  violent  overthrow
of  the  Republic  that  the  appropriators  of  wealth  could  hope  to
shift  on  to  the  shoulders  of  its  producers  the  cost  of  a war  which
they,  the  appropriators,  had  themsdves  originated.  Thus,  the
immense  ruin  of  France  spurred  on  these  patriodc  representatives
of  land  and  capital,  under  the  very  eyes  and  patronage  of  the
invader,  to  gr^  upon  the  foreign  war  a cii^  war— a slave-
holders’ rebellion.

There  stood  in  the  way  of  this  conspiracy  one  great  obstacle —
Paris.  To  disarm  Paris  was  the  first  condition  of  success.  Paris
was  therefore  surrunoned  by  Thiers  to  sturender  its  arms.  Then
Paris  was  exasperated  by  the  frantic  anti-republican  demonstra-
tions of  the  " Rural  ” Assembly  and  by  Thters’s  own  equivoca-
tions about  the  legal  status  of  the  Republic;  by  the  threat  to
decapitate  and  decapitalise  Paris  the  appointment  of  Orleanist
ambassadors;  Du&ure’s  laws  on  over-due  commercial  bills  and
house  rents,  inflicting  ruin  on  the  commerce  and  industry  of
Paris;  Pouyer-Q,uertier’s  tax  of  two  centimes  upon  every  copy  of
every  imaginable  publication;  the  sentences  of  death  against
Blanqui  and  Flourens;  the  suppression  of  the  Republican
journals;  the  transfer  the  National  Assembly  to  Versailles;
the  renewal  of  the  state  of  siege  declared  by  Palikao,  and  expired
on  September  4th;  the  appointment  of  Vinoy,  the  Dkmbriseur,
as  governor  of  Paris — of  Valentin,  the  Imperialist  gendarme,  as
its  prefect  of  police — and  of  D’AuieUes  de  Paladine,  the  Jesuit
general,  as  the  conunander-in-chief  of  its  National  Guard.

And  now  we  have  to  address  a question  to  M.  Thiers  and  the
men  of  national  defence,  his  under-strappers.  It  is  known  that,
through  the  agency  of  M.  Pouyer-Qpertier,  his  finance  minister,
Thiers  had  contracted  a loan  two  rrrilliar^,  to  be  paid  down  at
once.  Now,  is  it  true  or  not —

I.  That  the  business  was  so  managed  that  a consideration  of


30  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

several  hundred  millions  vras  secured  for  the  private  benefit  of
Thiers,  Jules  Favre,  Ernest  Picard,  Pouyer-Q,uertier,  and  Jules
Simon  ? and —

s.  That  no  money  was  to  be  paid  down  until  after  the  “ paci-
fication” of  Paris  ?

At  all  events,  there  must  have  been  something  very  pressing  in
the  matter,  for  Thiers  and  Jules  Favre,  in  the  name  of  the  majority
of  the  Bordeaux  Assembly,  unblushingly  solicited  the  immediate
occupation  of  Paris  by  P^sian  troops.  Such,  however,  was  not
the  game  of  Bismarck,  as  he  sneeringly,  and  in  public,  told  the
admiring  Frankfort  Philistines  on  his  return  to  Germany.

n

Armed  Paris  was  the  only  seripus  obstacle  in  the  way  of  counter-
revolutionary conspiracy.  Paris  was,  therefore,  to  be  disarmed.
On  this  point  the  Bordeaux  Assembly  was  sincerity  itsdf.  If  the
roaring  rant  of  its  Rurals  had  not  been  audible  enough,  the
siurender  of  Paris  by  Thiers  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  trium-
virate of  Vinoy  the  DScembriseur,  Valentin  the  Bonapartist  gen-
damUt  and  Aurelles  de  Paladine  the  Jesuit  general,  would  have
cut  off  even  the  last  subterfuge  of  doubt.  But  while  insultingly
exhibiting  the  true  purpose  of  the  disarmament  of  Paris,  the  con-
spirators asked  her  to  lay  down  her  arms  on  a pre^text  which  was
the  most  glaring,  the  most  barefaced  of  lies.  The  artillery  of  the
Paris  National  Guard,  said  Thiccs,  belonged  to  the  State,  and  to
the  State  it  must  be  returned.  The  feet  is  this:  From  &e  very
day  of  the  capitulation,  by  which  Bismarck’s  prisoners  had  signed
the  surrender  of  France,  but  reserved  to  themsdves  a numerous
bodyguard  for  the  express  purpose  of  cowing  Paris,  Paris  stood
on  the  watch.  The  National  Guard  reorganised  themselves  and
intrusted  their  supreme  control  to  a Central  Committee  dected
by  their  whole  body,  save  some  fiagments  of  the  old  Bonapartist
formation.  On  the  eve  of  the  entrance  of  the  Prussians  into  Paris,
the  Central  Committee  took  measures  for  the  removal  to  Mont-
martre, Belleville,  and  La  Villette  of  the  ranrinn  and  mitrailleuses
treacherously  abandoned  by  .the  capitidards  in  and  about  the  very
quarters  the  Prussians  were  to  occupy.  That  artillery  had  been
furnished  by  the  subscriptions  of  the  National  Guard.  As  their
private  property,  it  was  officially  recognised  in  the  capitulation


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


3»

orjantinr>*  sSth,  and  on  that  vcr>*  tide  exempted  from  the  general
surrender,  into  the  hands  of  tlie  conqueror,  of  anns  belonging  to
Uic  Government.  And  Tliicrs  was  so  utterly  destitute  ofex'en  the
flimsiest  pretext  for  initiating  the  war  against  Paris,  that  he  had  to
resort  to  the  flagrant  lie  of  the  artiiler}'  of  the  National  Guard
being  State  property!

The  seizure  of  Iter  artillcr)*  was  cxidently  but  to  serve  as  the  pre-
liminary* to  the  general  disarmament  of  Paris,  and,  therefore,  of  the
Revolution  orthc.]th  September.  But  that  Rex'ohitionhad  become
the  legal  status  of  France.  The  Republic,  its  work,  was  recognised
by  the  conqueror  in  tlie  terms  of  tlie  capitulation.  After  die
cipitulation,  it  was  acknowledged  by  all  the  foreign  Powers,  and
in  its  name  the  National  Assembly  had  been  summoned.  The
Paris  working-men's  revolution  of  September  .}th  was  the  only
leg.*!!  title  of  the  National  Assembly  seated  at  Bordeaux,  and  of
its  executive.  Without  it,  the  National  Assembly  would  at  once
have  to  give  way  to  tlie  Corfis  Lcgislatif,  elected  in  i86g  by
universal  suffrage  under  French,  not  under  Prussian,  rule,  and
forcibly  dispersed  by  the  arm  of  the  Revolution.  Tlticrs  and  his
tickct-of-Icavc  men  would  have  had  to  capitulate  for  safe  con-
ducts signed  by  Louis  Bonaparte,  to  save  them  from  a vopgc  to
C.iycnnc.  The  National  Assembly,  with  its  power  of  attorney  to
settle  the  terms  of  peace  with  Prussia,  was  but  an  incident  of  that
Revolution,  die  tnie  embodiment  of  which  was  still  armed  Paris,
which  had  initiated  it,  undergone  for  it  a five-months’  siege,  widi
its  horrors  of  famine,  and  made  her  prolonged  resistance,  despite
Trochu’s  plan,  die  basis  of  an  obstinate  war  oT  defence  in  the
provinces.  And  Paris  was  now  either  to  lay  down  her  arms  at  the
insulting  behest  of  the  rebellious  slaveholders  of  Bordeaux,  and
acknowledge  that  her  Revolution  of  Scjitcmbcr  4th  meant  nodi-
ing  but  a simple  transfer  of  power  from  I.Auis  Bonaparte  to  his
Royal  rivals;  or  she  liad  to  stand  forward  ns  die  sclf-si’icrificing
champion  of  France,  whose  salvadon  from  ruin,  and  whose
regeneration  w’crc  impossible,  widiout  the  rcN'oIuUonary  over-
throw of  the  polidcal  and  social  conditions  that  had  engendered
the  second  Empire,  and,  under  its  fostering  care,  matured  into
utter  rottenness.  Paris,  emaciated  by  a flvc-montlis’  famine,  did
not  hesitate  one  moment.  She  heroically  resolved  to  run  all  the
hazards  of  a resistance  against  the  French  conspirators,  even  with
Prussian  cannon  frowning  upon  her  from  her  own  forts.  SUll,  in


32  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

its  abhorrence  of  the  civil  war  into  which  Paris  was  to  be  goaded,
the  Central  Coimnittee  continued  to  persist  in  a merely  defensive
attitude,  despite  the  provocations  of  the  Assembly,  the  usurpa-
tions of  the  Executive,  and  the  menacing  concentration  of  troops
in  and  around  Paris.

Thiers  opened  the  civil  war  by  sending  Vinoy,  at  the  head  of  a
multitude  of  sergents-de-ville  and  some  regiments  of  the  line,  upon
a nocturnal  expedition  against  Montmartre,  there  to  seize,  by
surprise,  the  artillery  of  the  National  Guard.  It  is  well  known
how  this  attempt  broke  down  before  the  resistance  of  the  National
Guard  and  the  fraternisation  of  the  line  with  the  people.  Aurelles
de  Paladine  had  printed  beforehand  his  bulletin  of  victory,  and
Thiers  hdd  ready  the  placards  announcing  his  meastnres  of  coi^
d^itat.  Now  these  had  to  be  replaced  by  Thiers’  appeals,  impart-
ing his  magnanimous  resolve  to  leave  ^e  National  Guard  in  the
possession  of  their  arms,  with  which,  he  said,  he  felt  sure  they
would  raUy  round  the  Government  against  ^e  rebels.  Out  o£
300,000  National  Guards  only  300  responded  to  this  summons  to
rally  rotmd  litde  Thiers  against  themselves.  The  glorious  working-
men’s Revolution  of  March  z8th  took  tmdisputed  sway  of  Paris.
The  Central  Conunittee  was  its  provisional  Government.  Eurqpe
seemed,  for  a moment,  to  doubt  whether  its  recent  sensatioiial
performances  of  state  and  war  had  any  reality  in  them  or  whether
they  were  the  dreams  of  a long  bygone  past.

IVom  the  i8th  of  March  to  ^e  entrance  of  the  Versailles  troops
into  Paris,  the  proletarian  revolution  remained  so  free  from  the  acts
of  violence  in  which  the  revolutions,  and  still  more  the  counter-
revolutions, of  the  “ better  classes  ” abound,  that  no  facts  were
left  to  its  opponents  to  cry  out  about,  but  the  execution  of  Generals
Lecomte  and  Clement' Thomas,  and  the  afrair  of  the  Place
Vendome.

One  of  the  Bonapartist  officers  engaged  in  the  nocturnal
attempt  against  Montmartre,  General  Lecomte,  had  four  times
ordered  the  8ist  line  regiment  to  fire  at  an  unarmed  gathering  in
the  Place  Pigalle,  and  on  their  refusal  fiercely  insulted  them.
Instead  of  shooting  women  and  children,  his  own  men  shot  him.
The  inveterate  habits  acquired  by  the  soldiery  under  the  training
of  the  enemies  of  the  working  class  are,  of  course,  not  likely  to
change  the  very  moment  these  soldiers  change  sides.  The  same
men  executed  Clement  Thomas.


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


33

“ General  " Clement  Thomas,  a maleontent  ex-quartermaster-
sei:geant,  had,  in  the  latter  times  of  Louis  Philippe’s  reign,  en-
listed at  the  oflicc  of  the  Republiean  newspaper  Lt  national^  there
to  scr\‘e  in  the  double  capacity  of  responsible  man-of-straw
{g/rant  responsahle)  and  of  duelling  bully  to  that  very  combative
journal.  After  the  revolution  of  February,  tlic  men  of  tlic  A'is/ional
having  got  into  power,  they  metamorphosed  this  old  quartcr-
mastcr-setgeant  into  a general  on  the  eve  of  tlic  butchery  of  June,
of  which  he,  like  Jules  Favre,  was  one  of  die  sinister  plotters,  and
became  one  of  the  most  dastardly  exccutionen.  Then  he  and  his
generalship  disappeared  for  a long  time,  to  again  rise  to  the  sur-
ihcc  on  November  ist,  1870.  I1ie  day  before  the  Government  of
Defence,  caught  at  the  Hotel  de  Villc,  had  solemnly  pledged  their
parole  to  Ulanqui,  Ftourens,  and  other  representatives  of  the
working  class,  to  alxlicate  their  usurped  power  into  die  hands  of
a commune  to  be  freely  elected  by  Paris.  Instead  of  keeping  dicir
word,  they  let  loose  on  Paris  the  Bretons  of  Trochu,  who  now  re-
placed the  Corsicans  of  Bonaparte.  General  Tamisicr  alone,
refusing  to  sully  his  name  by  such  a breach  of  faidi,  resigned  die
commandcrship-in-cliicf  of  the  Nadonal  Guard,  and  in  his  place
Clement  Thomas  for  once  became  again  a general.  During  the
whole  of  his  tenure  of  command,  he  made  war,  not  upon  die
Prussians,  but  upon  die  Paris  Nadonal  Guard.  He  prevented
their  general  annament,  pitted  the  bourgeois  battalions  against
die  working-men’s  battalions,  weeded  out  die  oilicers  hostile  to
Trochu’s  “ plan,”  and  disbanded,  under  die  sdgma  of  cowardice,
the  very  same  proletarian  battalions  whose  heroism  has  now
astonished  their  most  inveterate  enemies.  Clement  Thomas  felt
quite  proud  of  having  reconquered  his  June  pre-eminences  as  the
personal  enemy  of  die  working  class  of  Paris.  Only  a few  days
before  March  18th  he  laid  before  die  War  Minister,  Lcn6,  a plan
of  his  own  for  “ iiiiishing  off  tajine  Jleur  (die  cream)  of  the  Paris
canaille."  After  Vinoy’s  rout,  he  must  needs  appear  upon  the
scene  of  action  in  the  quality  of  an  amateur  spy.  The  Central
Committee  and  the  Paris  working  men  were  as  much  responsible
for  the  killing  of  Clement  Thomas  and  Lccomte  as  die  Princess  of
Wales  for  die  fate  of  die  people  crushed  to  death  on  the  day  of  her
entrance  into  London.

The  massacre  of  unarmed  citizens  in  die  Place  Vendome  is  a
myth  which  M.  Thiers  and  die  Rurak  persistendy  ignored  in  the

C


34  the  civil  war  IN  FRANCE

Assembly,  entrusting  its  propagation  exclusively  to  the  servants’
hall  of  European  journalism.  " The  men  of  order,”  the  reaction-
ists of  Paris,  trembled  at  the  victory  of  March  i8th.  To  them  it
was  the  signal  of  popular  retribution  at  last  arriving.  The
ghosts  of  the  victims  assassinated  at  thdr  hands  from  the  days  of
June  1848,  down  to  January  aznd,  1871,  arose  before  their  faces.
Their  panic  was  their  only  punishment.  Even  the  sei^eants-de-
ville,  instead  of  being  disarmed  and  locked  up,  as  ought  to  have
been  done,  had  the  gates  of  Paris  flung  wide  open  for  their  safe
retreat  to  Versailles.  The  men  of  order  were  left  not  only  im-
harmed,  but  allowed  to  rally  and  quietly  to  seize  more  than  one
stronghold  in  the  very  centre  of  Paris.  This  indulgence  of  the
Central  Committee — ^this  magnanimity  of  the  armed  working
men — so  strangdy  at  variance  with  the  habits  of  the  “ party  of
order,”  the  latter  misinterpreted  as  mere  symptoms  of  conscious
weakness.  Hence  their  silly  plan  to  try,  under  the  cloak  of  an
unarmed  demonstration,  what  Vinoy  had  failed  to  perform  with
his  cannon  and  mitrailleuses.  On  March  22nd  a riotous  mob  of
swells  started  from  the  quarters  of  luxury,  all  the  petits  creois  in
their  ranks,  and  at  their  head  the  notorious  fainiliars  of  the
Empire — ^the  Heeckeren,  Coetlogon,  Henri  de  Pfene,  etc.  Under
the  cowardly  pretence  of  a pacific  demonstration,  tins  rabble,
secretly  armed  with  the  weapons  of  the  bravo,  fell  into  marching
order,  ill  treated  and  disarmed  the  detached  patrols  and  sentries
of  the  National  Guard  they  met  with  on  their  progress,  and,  on
debouching  from  the  Rue  de  la  Paix,  with  the  cry  of  ” Down  with
the  Central  Committee  1 Down  with  the  assassins!  The  National
Assembly  for  ever!  ” attempted  to  break  through  the  line  drawn
up  there,  and  thus  to  carry  by  a surprise  the  headquarters  of  the
National  Guard  in  the  Place  V^dome.  In  reply  to  their  pistol-
shots,  the  regular  sommations  (the  French  equivalent  of  the  English
Riot  Act)  were  made,  and,  proving  ineffective,  fire  was  com-
manded by  the  genersd  of  the  National  Guard.  One  volley  dis-
persed into  wild  flight  the  silly  coxcombs,  who  expected  that  the
mere  exhibition  of  their  “ respectability  ” would  have  the  same
effect  upon  the  Revolution  of  Paris  as  Joshua’s  trumpets  upon  the
walls  of  Jericho.  The  runaways  left  behind  them  two  National
Guards  killed,  nine  severely  wounded  (among  them  a member  of
the  Central  Committee),  and  the  whole  scene  of  their  exploit
strewn  with  revolvers,  daggers,  and  sword-canes,  in  evidence  of


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  35

the  “unanned”  character  of  thdr  “pacific”  demonstration.
When,  on  June  13th,  1849,  the  National  Guard  made  a reaUy
pacific  demonstration  in  protest  against  the  felonious  assault  ^
French  troops  upon  Rome,  Changamier,  then  general  of  the
party  of  order,  was  acclaimed  by  the  National  Assembly,  and
espedally  by  M.  Thiers,  as  the  saviour  of  society,  for  having
launched  his  troops  from  all  sides  upon  these  unarmed  men,  to
shoot  and  sabre  Aem  down,  and  to  trample  them  under  their
horses’  feet.  Paris,  then,  was  placed  in  a state  of  siege.  Duiaure
hurried  through  the  Assembly  new  laws  of  repression.  New
arrests,  new  proscriptions — a new  reign  of  terror  set  in.  But  the
lower  orders  manage  these  things  otherwise.  The  Central  Com-
mittee of  1871  simply  ignored  the  heroes  of  the  “ pacific  demon-
stration so  much  so,  that  only  two  days  later  they  were  en-
abled to  muster  tmder  Admiral  Saisset,  for  that  armed  demonstra-
tion', crowned  by  the  famous  stampede  to  Versailles.  In  their
reluctance  to  continue  the  civil  war  opened  by  Thiers’  burglarious
attempt  on  Montmartre,  the  Cent^  Committee  made  them-
sdves,  this  time,  guilty  of  a decisive  mistake  in  not  at  once  march-
ing upon  Versailles,  then  completely  helpless,  and  thus  putting  an
end  to  the  conspiracies  of  Thiers  and  his  Rurals.  Inst^d  of  this,
the  party  of  ortier  was  again  allowed  to  try  its  strength  at  the
ballot-box,  on  the  36th  of  March,  the  day  of  the  dection  of  the
Commune.  Then,  in  the  mairies  of  Paris,  they  exchanged  bland
words  of  conciliation  with  their  too  generous  conquerors,  mutter-
ing in  thdr  hearts  solemn  vows  to  exterminate  them  in  due  time.

Now,  look  at  the  reverse  of  the  medal.  Thiers  opened  his  second
campaign  agtunst  Paris  in  the  begiiming  of  April.  The  first  batch
of  Parisian  prisoners  brought  into  Versailles  was  subjected  to
revolting  atrocities,  while  Ernest  Picard,  with  his  hands  in  his
trousers  pockets,  strolled  about  jeering  them,  and  while  Mesdames
Thiers  and  Favre,  in  the  midst  ^ thdr  ladies  of  honour  applauded,
bom  the  balcony,  the  outrages  of  the  Versailles  mob.  The  cap-
tured soldiers  of  the  line  were  massacred  in  cold  blood;  our  brave
friend.  General  Duval,  the  ironfounder,  was  shot  without  any
form  of  trial.  Gallifet,  the  kq)t  man  of  his  wife,  so  notorious  for
her  shamdess  exhibitions  at  the  orgies  of  the  Second  Empire,
boasted  in  a proclamation  of  having  conunanded  the  murder  of  a
small  troop  cf  National  Guards,  with  their  captain  aiul  lieutenant,
surprised  and  disarmed  by  his  Chasseurs.  Vinoy,  the  runaway.


36  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

was  appointed  Grand  Cross  of  the  Legion  of  Honour  by  Thiers,
for  his  general  order  to  shoot  down  every  soldier  of  the  line  taken
in  the  ranks  of  the  Federals.  Desmaret,  the  gendarme,  was  decor-
ated for  the  treacherous  butcher-like  chopping  in  pieces  of  the
high-souled  and  chivalrous  Flourens,  who  had  saved  the  heads  of
the  Government  of  Defence  on  the  31st  of  October,  1870.  “ The
encouraging  particulars  ” of  his  assassination  were  triumphandy
expatiated  upon  by  Thiers  in  the  National  Assembly.  With  the
elevated  vanity  of  a parliamentary  Tom  Thumb,  permitted  to
play  the  part  of  a Tamerlane,  he  denied  the  rebels  against  his
Htdeness  every  right  of  civilised  warfare,  up  to  the  right  of  neutral-
ity for  ambulances.  Nothing  more  ^rrid  than  that  monkey
allowed  for  a time  to  give  fidl  fling  to  his  tigerish  instincts,  as
foreseen  by  Voltaire.

After  the  decree  of  the  Commune  of  7th  April  ordering  reprisals
and  declaring  it  to  be  its  duty  to  protect  Paris  against  the  canni-
bal exploits  of  the  Versailles  banditti,  and  to  demand  an  eye  for
an  eye,  a tooth  for  a tooth,*’  Thiers  did  not  stop  the  barbarous
treatment  of  prisoners,  moreover  insulting  them  in  his  bulletins
as  follows:  “Never  have  more  degraded  countenances  of  a
degraded  democracy  met  the  afSicted  gaze  of  honest  men,” —
honest,  like  Thiers  himself  and  his  ministerial  tidket-(^-leave  men.
Still  the  shooting  of  prisoners  was  suspended  for  a time.  Hardly,
however,  had  Thiers  and  his  Decembrist  generals  become  aware
that  the  Commimal  decree  of  reprisals  was  but  an  empty  threat,
that  even  their  gendarme  spies  caught  in  Paris  under  the  disguise
of  National  Guards,  that  even  sergeants-de-ville  taken  with
incendiary  shells  upon  them,  were  ^ared— when  the  wholesale
shooting  ^ prisoners  was  resumed  and  carried  on  uninterruptedly
to  the  end.  Houses  to  which  National  Guards  had  fled  were  sur-
rounded by  gendarmes,  inundated  with  petroleum  (which  here
occurs  for  the  first  time  in  this  war),  and  then  set  fire  to,  the
charred  corpses  being  afterwards  brought  out  by  the  ambulance
of  the  Press  at  the  Temes.  Four  National  Guards  having  sur-
rendered to  a troop  of  mounted  Chasseurs  at  Bdle  Epine,  on  the
asth  of  April,  were  afterwards  shot  down,  one  after  another,  by  the
captain,  a worthy  man  of  Gallifot’s.  One  of  his  four  victims,  left
for  dead,  Schefier,  crawled  back  to  the  Parisian  outposts,  and
d^osed  to  this  fact  before  a commisrion  of  the  Goirunune.  When
Tolain  interpolated  the  War  Minister  upon  the  r^ort  of  this


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


37

commission,  the  Rurals  dro\vned  his  voice  and  forbade  Lefl6  to
answer.  It  would  be  an  insult  to  their  “ glorious  ” army  to  speak
of  its  deeds.  The  flippant  tone  in  which  Thiers’  bulletins  an-
nounced the  bayoneting  of  the  Fcderals  surprised  asleep  at
Moulin  Saquet,  and  the  wholesale  fusillades  at  Clamart  shocked
the  nerves  even  of  the  not  over-sensitive  London  Times,  But  it
^vould  be  ludicrous  to-day  to  attempt  recounting  the  merdy  pre-
liminary atrocities  committed  by  the  bombarders  of  Paris  and  the
fbmenters  of  a slaveholders’  rebellion  protected  by  foreign  in-
vasion. Amidst  all  these  horrors  Thiers,  forgetful  of  his  parlia-
mentary laments  on  the  terrible  responsibility  weighing  down  his
dwarfish  shoulders,  boasts  in  his  bulletins  that  VAssemhlie  siige
paiablement  (the  Assembly  continues  meeting  in  peace),  and  proves
by  his  constant  carousals,  now  \rith  Decembrist  generals,  now
with  German  princes,  that  his  digestion  is  not  troubled  in  the  least,
not  even  by  the  ghosts  of  Lecomte  and  Clement  Thomas.

m

On  the  dawn  of  the  i8th  of  March,  Paris  arose  to  the  thunder-
burst  of  “ Vive  la  Gonunune!  ” What  is  the  Commune,  that
sphinx  so  tantalising  to  the  boux:gcois  mind  ?

“ The  proletarians  of  Paris,”  said  the  Central  Gonunittee  in  its
manifesto  of  the  i8th  March,  ” amidst  the  failures  and  treasons
of  the  ruling  classes,  have  understood  that  the  hour  has  struck  for
them  to  save  the  situation  by  taking  into  their  own  hands  the
direction  of  public  affairs.  . . . They  have  understood  that  it  is
their  imperious  duty  and  thdr  absolute  right  to  render  themselves
masters  of  their  own  destinies,  by  sdzing  upon  the  governmental
power.”  But  the  worldng  class  cannot  simply  lay  hold  of  the
ready-made  State  rrrachincry,  and  wield  it  for  its  own  purposes.

The  centralised  State  power,  with  its  ubiquitous  organs  of
standing  army,  police,  bureaucracy,  clergy,  and  judicature —
organs  wrought  after  the  plan  of  a systematic  and  hierarcliic
division  of  labour — originates  from  the  days  of  absolute  monarchy,
serving  nascent  middle-class  society  as  a mighty  weapon  in  its
struggles  against  feudalism.  Still,  its  devdopment  remained
clogged  by  all  maimer  of  medueval  rubbish,  sdgnorial  rights,
local  privileges,  munidpal  and  guild  monopdies  and  provincial
constitutions.  The  gigantic  broom  .of  the  French  Revolution  of


38  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

the  eighteenth  century  swept  away  all  these  relics  of  bygone
times,  thus  clearing  simultaneously  the  social  soil  of  its  last
hindrances  to  the  superstructure  of  the  modem  State  edifice
raised  under  the  First  Empire,  itself  the  offspring  of  the  coalition
wars  of  old  semi-feudal  Europe  agmnst  modem  France.  During
the  subsequent  rigimes  the  Government,  placed  under  parlia-
mentary control — ^that  is,  under  the  direct  control  of  the  proper-
tied classes — ^became  not  only  a hotbed  of  huge  national  debts
and  cmshing  taxes;  with  its  irresistible  allurements  of  place,  pelf,
and  patronage,  it  became  not  only  the  bone  of  contention  be-
tween the  rival  factions  and  adventurers  of  the  ruling  classes;  but
its  political  character  changed  simultaneously  with  the  economic
changes  of  society.  At  the  same  pace  at  which  the  progress  of
modem  industry  developed,  widened,  intensified  the  class
antagonism  between  capital  and  labour,  ^e  State  power  assumed
more  and  more  the  character  of  the  national  power  of  capital
over  labour,  of  a public  force  organised  for  social  enslavement,  of
an  engine  of  class  despotism.  After  every  revolution  marking  a
progressive  phase  in  the  class  stmggle,  the  purely  repressive
character  of  the  State  power  stands  out  in  bolder  and  bolder
relief.  The  revolution  of  1830,  resulting  in  the  transfer  of  Govern-
ment from  the  landlords  to  the  capitalists  transferred  it  from  the
more  remote  to  the  more  direct  antagonists  of  the  working  men.
The  bourgeois  Republicans,  who,  in  the  name  of  the  Revolution
of  Febmary,  took  the  State  power,  used  it  for  the  June  massacres,
in  order  to  convince  the  working  class  that  social " republic
meant  the  republic  ensuring  thdr  social  subjection,  and  in  order
to  convince  ^e  royalist  bulk  of  the  bourgeois  and  landlord  class
that  they  might  safdy  leave  the  cares  and  emoluments  of  govern-
ment to  the  bourgeois  **  Republicans.”  However,  after  their  one
heroic  exploit  of  June,  the  bourgeois  Republicans  had,  from  the
front,  to  fall  back  to  the  rear  of  the  " Party  of  Order  ” — a com-
bination formed  by  all  the  rival  fractions  and  factions  of  the
appropriating  class  in  their  now  openly  declared  antagonism  to
the  producing  classes.  The  proper  form  of  their  joint  stock
Government  was  the  ParUamentary  Republic^  with  Louis  Bonaparte
for  its  President.  Theirs  was  a ri^me  of  avowed  class  terrorism
and  deliberate  insult  towards  the  “ vile  multitude.”  If  the
Parliamentary  Republic,  as  M.  Thiers  said,  “ divided  them  (the
different  fractions  of  the  ruling  class)  least,”  it  opened  an  abyss


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


39

between  that  class  and  the  whole  body  of  society  outside  their
spare  ranks.  The  restraints  by  which  their  own  divisions  had
under  former  rigimes  still  chedced  the  State  power,  were  removed
by  their  union;  and  in  view  of  the  threatening  upheaval  of  the
proletariat,  they  now  used  that  State  power  mercilessly  and
ostentatiously  as  the  national  war  engine  of  capital  against
labour.  In  their  uninterrupted  crusade  against  the  producing
masses  they  were,  however,  bound  not  only  to  invest  the  execu-
tive with  continually  increased  powers  of  repression,  but  at
the  same  time  to  divest  their  own  parliamentary  stronghold —
the  National  Assembly — one  by  one,  of  all  its  own  means  of  de-
fence against  the  Executive.  The  Executive,  in  the  person  of
Louis  Bonaparte,  turned  them  out.  The  natural  offipring  of  the
“ Party-of-Order  ” Republic  was  the  Second  Empire.

The  Empire,  with  Ae  coup  d’itat  for  its  certificate  of  birth,
universal  suffrage  for  its  sanction,  and  the  sword  for  its  sceptre,
professed  to  rest  upon  the  peasantry,  the  large  mass  of  producers
not  directly  involved  in  the  struggle  of  capital  and  labour.  It
professed  to  save  the  working  class  by  breaking  down  Parliament-
arism, and,  with  it,  the  undisguised  subserviency  of  Govenunent
to  the  propertied  classes.  It  professed  to  save  the  propertied
classes  by  upholding  thdr  economic  supremacy  over  the  working
dass;  and,  finally,  it  professed  to  unite  all  classes  by  reviving  for
all  the  chimera  of  national  glory.  In  reality,  it  was  the  only  form
of  govenunent  possible  at  a time  when  the  bourgeoisie  had
alr^dy  lost,  and  the  working  dass  had  not  yet  required  the  faculty
of  ruling  the  nation.  It  was  acchdmed  throughout  the  world  as
the  saviour  of  sodety.  Under  its  sway,  bourgeois  sodety,  freed
from  political  cares,  attained  a devdopment  unexpected  even
by  itself.  Its  industry  and  commerce  expanded  to  colossal
dimensions;  financial  swindling  cdebrated  cosmopolitan  orgies;
the  misery  of  the  masses  was  set  off  by  a shamdess  display  of
gorgeous,  meretridous,  and  debased  luxury.  The  State  power,
apparentiy  soaring  high  above  sodety,  was  at  the  same  time  itsdf
the  greatest  scanc^  of  that  sodety  and  the  very  hotbed  of  all  its
corruptions.  Its  own  rottenness,  and  the  rottenness  of  the  sodety
it  had  saved,  were  laid  bare  by  the  bayonet  of  Prussia,  hers^
eagerly  bent  upon  transferring  the  supreme  seat  of  that  riffme  fiom
Paris  to  BerlLa.  Imperialism  is,  at  the  same  time,  the  most
prostitute  and  the  ultimate  form  of  the  State  power  which  nascent


40  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

I

middle-dass  society  had  commenced  to  daborate  as  a means  of
its  own  emandpation  from  feudalism,  and  which  full-grown
bourgeois  sodety  had  finally  transformed  into  a means  for  the
enslavement  of  labour  by  capital.

The  direct  antithesis  to  the  Empire  was  the  Commune.  The
cry  of"  Sodal  Republic,”  with  which  the  revolution  of  February
was  ushered  in  by  the  Paris  proletariat,  did  but  express  a vague
aspiration  after  a Republic  that  was  not  only  to  supersede  the
monardiial  form  of  dass-rule,  but  dass-rule  itself.  The  Com-
mune was  the  positive  form  of  that  Republic.

Paris,  the  central  seat  of  the  old  governmental  power,  and,  at
the  same  time,  the  sodal  stronghold  of  the  Frendi  working  dass,
had  risen  in  arms  against  the  attempt  of  Thiers  and  the  Rurals
to  restore  and  perpetuate  that  old  governmental  power  be-
queathed to  them  by  the  Empire.  Paris  could  resist  only  because,
in  consequence  of  the  siege,  it  had  got  rid  of  the  army,  and  re-
pl2u:ed  it  by  a National  Guard,  the  bulk  of  whidi  contisted  of
working  men.  This  frict  was  now  to  be  transformed  into  an
institution.  The  first  decree  of  the  Commtme,  therefore,  was  the
suppression  of  the  standing  army,  and  the  substitution  for  it  of
the  armed  people.

The  Commune  was  formed  of  the  munidpal  coundllors,  chosen
by  universal  suffrage  in  various  wards  of  the  town,  responsible
and  revocable  at  short  teims.  Hie  majority  of  its  members  were
naturally  working  men,  or  acknowledged  representatives  of  the
working  dass.  The  Commune  was  to  be  a working,  not  a parlia-
mentary body,  executive  and  legislative  at  the  same  time.  Instead
of  continuing  to  be  the  agent  of  the  Central  Government,  the
police  was  at  once  stripped  of  its  political  attributes,  and  turned
into  the  responsible  and  at  all  times  revocable  agent  of  the
Commune.  So  were  the  officials  of  all  other  branches  of  the
Administration.  From  the  members  of  the  Commune  downwards,
the  public  service  had  to  be  done  at  uwrhnm’s  wages.  The  vested
interests  and  the  representation  allowances  of  the  high  digni-
taries of  State  disappeared  along  with  the  high  dignitaries  them-
sdves.  Public  functions  ceased  to  be  the  private  property  of  the
tools  of  the  Central  Government.  Not  only  munidpal  admini-
stration, but  the  whole  initiative  hitherto  ex'ercised  by  the  State
was  laid  into  the  hands  of  the  Commune.

Having  once  got  rid  of  the  standing  army  and  the  police,  the


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


41

physical  force  dements  of  the  old  Government,  the  Commune  was
anxious  to  break  the  spiritual  force  of  repression,  the  “ parson-
power,”  by  the  disestablishment  and  disendowment  of  all
churches  as  proprietary  bodies.  The  priests  were  sent  back  to  the
recess  of  private  life,  there  to  feed  upon  the  alms  of  the  fsuthful
in  imitation  of  their  predecessors,  the  Apostles.  The  whole  of  the
educational  institutions  were  opened  to  the  people  gratuitously,
and  at  the  same  time  cleared  of  all  interference  of  Church  and
State.  Thus,  not  only  \vas  education  made  accessible  to  all,  but
science  itsdf  freed  from  the  fetters  which  dass  prejudice  and
governmental  force  had  imposed  upon  it.

The  judidal  functionaries  were  to  be  divested  of  that  sham
independence  which  had  but  served  to  mask  thdr  abject  sub-
serviency to  all  succeeding  governments,  to  which  in  turn  they
had  taken,  and  broken,  the  oaths  of  allegiance.  Like  the  rest  of
public  servants,  magistrates  and  judges  were  to  be  dective,  re-
sponsible and  revocable.

The  Paris  Commune  ivas,  of  course,  to  serve  as  a model  to  all
the  great  industrial  centres  of  France.  The  communal  ri^m
once  established  in  Paris  and  the  secondary  centres,  the  old
centralised  Government  would  in  the  provinces,  too,  have  to  give
way  to  the  self-government  of  the  producers.  In  a rough  sketch
of  national  organisation  which  the  Commune  had  no  time  to
develop,  it  states  clearly  that  the  Commune  was  to  be  the  political
form  of  even  the  smallest  country  hamlet,  and  that  in  the  rural
districts  the  standing  army  was  to  be  replaced  by  a national
militia,  with  an  extremely  short  term  of  service.  The  rural  com-
munes of  every  district  were  to  administer  thdr  conunon  affairs
by  an  assembly  of  ddegates  in  the  central  town,  and  these  district
assemblies  were  again  to  send  deputies  to  the  National  Delega-
tion in  Paris,  each  delegate  to  be  at  any  time  revocable  and  bound
by  the  mandal  imperat^  (formal  instructions)  of  his  constituents.
Ibe  few  but  important  functions  which  still  would  remain  for  a
central  government  were  not  to  be  suppressed,  as  has  been
intentionally  misstated,  but  were  to  be  disehaiged  by  Communal
and,  therefore,  strictly  responsible  agents.  The  unity  of  the  nation
was  not  to  be  broken;  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  be  organised  by
the  Conununal  constitution,  and  to  become  a reality  by  the
destruction  of  the  State  power  which  daimed  to  be  the  embodi-
ment of  that  unity  independent  of,  and  superior  to,  the  nation


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


42

itsdf,  from  which  it  was  but  a parasitic  excrescence.  While  the
merely  repressive  organs  of  the  old  governmental  power  were  to
be  amputated,  its  legitimate  functions  were  to  be  wrested  from  an
authority  usurping  pre-eminence  over  society  itself,  and  restored
to  the  responsible  agents  of  society.  Instead  of  deciding  once  in
three  or  six  years  whidi  member  of  the  ruling  dass  was  to  repre-
sent the  people  in  Parliament,  universal  sufirage  was  to  serve  the
people,  constituted  in  Communes,  as  individual  suffrage  serves
every  other  employer  in  the  search  for  the  workmen  and  managers
in  his  business,  ^d  it  is  wdl  known  that  companies,  like  indi-
viduals, in  matters  of  real  business  generally  know  how  to  put  the
right  man  in  the  right  place,  and,  if  they  for  once  make  a mistake,
to  redress  it  promptly.  On  the  other  hand,  nothing  could  be
more  foreign  to  the  spirit  of  the  Commune  than  to  supersede
universal  suffrage  by  hierarchic  investiture.

It  is  generally  the  fate  of  completdy  new  historical  creations  to
be  mistaken  for  the  counterpart  of  older  and  even  defunct  forms
of  social  life,  to  which  they  may  bear  a certain  likeness.  Thus,
this  new  Commune,  which  breaks  the  modem  State  power,  has
been  mistaken  for  a reproduction  of  the  mediseval  Communes,
which  first  preceded,  and  afterwards  became  the  substratum  of,
that  very  State  power.  The  communal  constitution  has  been
mistaken  for  an  attempt  to  break  up  into  a federation  of  small
States,  as  dreamt  of  by  Montesquieu  and  the  Girondins,  that
unity  of  great  nations  which,  if  originally  brought  about  by
political  force,  has  now  become  a powerful  coeffident  of  sodal
production.  The  antagonism  of  the  Commune  against  the  State
power  has  been  mistaken  for  an  exaggerated  form  of  the  andent
stmggle  against  over-centralisation.  Peculiar  historical  dreum-
stances  may  have  prevented  the  dassical  devdopment,  as  in
France,  of  the  bourgeois  form  of  government,  and  may  have
allowed,  as  in  England,  to  complete  the  great  central  State  organs
by  corrupt  vestries,  jobbing  coimdllors,  and  ferodous  poor-law
g^rdians  in  the  towns,  and,  virtually  hereditary  magistrates  in
the  counties.  The  Communal  Constitution  would  have  restored
to  the  sodal  body  all  the  forces  hitherto  absorbed  by  the  State
parasite  feeding  upon,  and  dogging  the  free  movement  of,  sodety.
By  this  one  act  it  would  have  initiated  the  regeneration  of  France.
The  provindal  French  middle-dass  saw  in  the  Commune  an
attempt  to  restore  the  sway  thdr  order  had  hdd  over  the  country


THE  CIVIL- WAR  IN  FRANCE


43

under  Louis  Philippe,  and  which,  under  Louis  Napoleon,  was
supplanted  by  the  pretended  rule  of  the  country  over  the  towns.
In  reality,  the  Communal  Constitution  brought  the  rural  pro-
ducers under  the  intellectual  lead  of  the  central  towns  of  their
districts,  and  there  secured  to  them,  in  the  working  man,  the
natural  trustees  of  their  interests.  The  very  existence  of  the  Com-
mune involved,  as  a matter  of  course,  local  municipal  liberty,
but  no  longer  as  a check  upon  the  now  superseded  State  power.
It  could  only  enter  into  the  head  of  a Bismarck,  who,  when  not
engaged  on  his  intrigues  of  blood  and  iron,  always  likes  to  resume
his  old  trade,  so  batting  his  mental  calibre,  of  contributor  to
Kladderadalseh  (the  Berlin  Paneh)^  it  could  only  enter  in  such  a
head,  to  ascribe  to  the  Paris  Commune  aspirations  after  the
caricature  of  the  old  French  municipal  organisation  of  1791,  the
Prussian  municipal  constitution  which  degrades  the  town  govern-
ments to  mere  secondary  wheels  in  the  police  machinery  of  the
Prussian  State.  The  Conunune  made  that  catchword  of  bourgeois
revolutions,  cheap  government,  a reality  by  destroying  the  two
greatest  somces  of  expenditure — the  standing  army  and  State
functionalism.  Its  very  existence  presupposed  the  non-existence
of  monarchy,  which,  in  Emcpe  at  least,  is  the  normal  incum-
brance and  indispensable  of  dass-rule.  It  supplied  the
Republic  with  the  basis  of  really  democratic  institutions.  But
ndther  cheap  government  nor  the  true  Republic  ” was  its
ultimate  aim;  they  were  its  mere  concomitants.

The  multiplidty  of  inteipretations  to  which  the  Commune  has
been  subjected,  and  the  mutiplidty  of  interests  which  construed
it  in  their  favour,  show  that  it  was  a thoroughly  expansive  political
form,  while  all  previous  forms  of  government  had  been  emphati-
cally repressive.  Its  true  secret  was  this.  It  was  essentially  a
working-dass  government,  the  produce  of  the  struggle  of  the
producing  ^;ainst  the  appropriating  class,  the  political  form  at
last  discovered  under  which  to  work  out  the  economical
emandpation  of  Labour.

Except  on  this  last  condition,  the  Communal  Constitution
would  have  been  an  impossibility  and  a ddusion.  The  political
rule  of  the  producer  cannot  co-exist  with  the  perpetuation  of  his
sodal  slavery.  The  Commune  was,  therefore,  to  serve  as  a lever
for  uprooting  the  economical  foundations  upon  which  rests  the
existence  of  dasses,  and  therefore  of  class  rule.  With  labour


44  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

emancipated,  every  man  becomes  a working  man,  and  productive
labour  ceases  to  be  a dass  attribute.

It  is  a strange  fact.  In  spite  of  all  the  tall  talk  and  all  the  im-
mense literature,  for  the  l^t  sixty  years,  about  Emancipation  of
Labour,  no  sooner  do  the  working  men  anywhere  take  the  sub-
ject into  their  own  hands  with  a will,  than  uprises  at  once  all  the
apologetic  phraseology  of  the  mouthpieces  of  present  society  with
its  two  poles  of  Capi^  and  Wage-slavery  (the  landlord  now  is
but  the  sleeping  partner  of  the  capitalist),  as  if  capitalist  society
was  still  in  its  purest  state  of  virgin  innocence,  with  its  antagon-
isms still  undeveloped,  with  its  delusions  still  unexploded,  widi
its  prostitute  realities  not  yet  laid  bare.  The  Conunune,  they
exclaim,  intends  to  abolish  property,  the  basis  of  all  civilisation!
Yes,  gentlemen,  the  Commune  intended  to  abolish  that  class-
property  which  makes  the  labour  of  the  many  the  wealth  of  the
few.  It  aimed  at  the  expropriation  of  the  expropriators.  It
wanted  to  make  individual  property  a truth  by  transforming  the
means  of  production,  land  and  capital,  now  chiefly  the  means  of
enslaving  and  exploiting  labour,  into  mere  instruments  of  free  and
associated  laborur.  But  this  is  Communism,  impossible  ”
Communism!  Why,  those  members  of  the  ruling  classes  who  are
intelligent  enough  to  perceive  the  impossibility  of  continuing  the
present  system — and  they  are  many — have  become  the  obtrusive
and  fullmouthed  apostles  of  co-operative  production.  If  co-
operative production  is  not  to  remain  a sham  and  a snare;  if  it  is
to  supersede  the  Capitalist  system;  if  united  co-operative  societies
are  to  regulate  national  production  upon  a common  plan,  thus
taking  it  under  their  own  control,  and  putting  an  end  to  the  con-
stant anarchy  and  periodical  convulsions  which  are  the  fatality  of
capitalist  production — what  else,  gentlemen,  would  it  be  but
Communism,  “ possible  ” Communism  ?

The  working  class  did  not  expect  miracles  firom  the  Conunune.
They  have  no  ready-made  utopias  to  introduce  par  deeret  du
peuple.  They  know  that  in  order  to  work  out  their  own  emancipa-
tion, and  along  with  it  that  higher  form  to  which  present  society
is  irresistibly  tending,  by  its  own  economical  agencies,  they  will
have  to  pass  through  long  struggles,  through  a series  of  historic
process^,  transforming  circumstances  and  men.  They  have  no
ideals  to  realise,  but  to  set  free  the  elements  of  the  new  society
with  which  old  collapsing  bourgeois  society  itself  is  pregnant.


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  45

In  the  iiill  consciousness  of  their  historic  mission,  and  with  the
heroic  resolve  to  act  up  to  it,  the  working  elaM  can  afford  to  smilt*
at  the  coarse  invective  of  the  g^tlemen’s  gentlemen  with  the
pen  and  inkhom,  and  at  the  didactic  patronage  of  well-wishing
boui;geois-doctrinaires,  pouring  forth  thdr  ignorant  platitudes
and  sectarian  crotchets  in  the  oracular  tone  of scientific  infallibility.

When  the  Paris  Commune  took  the  management  of  the  revolu-
tion in  its  own  hands;  when  plain  working  men  fiir  the  first
time  dared  to  infiinge  upon  the  Governmental  privilege  of  their
“ natural  superiors,”  and,  under  circumstances  of  unexampled
difiSculty,  perform^  their  work  modesdy,  conscientiously,  and
eflidendy— performed  it  at  salaries  the  highest  of  which  barely
amounted  to  one-fifth  of  what,  according  to  high  scientific
authority,  is  the  minimum  required  for  a secretary  to  a certain
metropolitan  school  board — ^the  old  world  writhed  in  convulsions
of  rage  at  the  sight  of  the  Red  Flag,  the  symbol  of  the  Republic
of  Labour,  floating  over  the  Hotd  de  Ville.

And  yet,  this  was  the  first  revolution  in  which  the  working  class
was  openly  acknowledged  as  the  only  class  capable  of  social
initiative,  even  by  the  great  bulk  of  the  Paris  middle-class —
shop-keepers,  tradesmen,  merchants — ^the  wealthy  capitalist
alone  excepted.  The  Conunune  had  saved  them  by  a sagacious
settlement  of  that  ever  recurring  cause  of  dispute  among  the
middle-class  themsdves — ^the  debtor  and  creditor  accounts.  The
same  portion  of  the  middle-class,  after  they  had  assisted  in  put-
ting down  the  working-men’s  insurrection  cf  June  1848,  had  been
at  once  unceremoniously  sacrificed  to  thdr  creditors  by  the  then
Constituent  Assembly.  But  this  was  not  thdr  only  motive  for
now  rallying  round  foe  working-dass.  They  fdt  there  was  but
one  alternative — ^foe  Commune,  or  foe  Empire — ^under  whatever
name  it  might  reappear.  The  Empire  had  ruined  them  econo-
mically by  foe  havoc  it  made  of  public  wealth,  by  foe  wholesale
financial  swindling  it  fostered,  by  foe  props  it  lent  to  foe  arti-
ficially accderated  centralisation  of  capital,  and  foe  concomitant
expropriation  of  their  own  ranks.  It  had  suppressed  them
politically,  it  had  shocked  them  morally  by  its  orgies,  it  had  in-
sulted their  Voltairianism  by  handing  over  foe  education  of  thdr
children  to  foe  frires  Ignorantins,  it  had  revolted  their  national
feeling  as  Frenchmen  by  predpimfoig  them  headlong  into  a war
which  left  only  one  equivalent  for  foe  ruins  it  made — ^foe  dis-


46  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

appearance  of  the  Empire.  In  &ct,  after  the  exodus  from  Paris
of  the  high  Bonapartist  and  capitalist  Bohime,  the  true  middle-
class  Party  of  Order  came  out  in  the  shape  of  the  “ Union  Re-
publicaine,”  enrolling  themselves  under  the  colours  of  the  Com-
mime  and  defending  it  against  the  wilful  misconstruction  of
Thiers.  Whether  the  gratitude  of  this  great  body  of  the  middle-
class  will  stand  the  present  severe  trial,  time  must  show.

The  Commune  was  perfectly  right  in  telling  the  peasants  that
“ its  victory  was  their  only  hope.”  Of  all  ^e  lies  hatched  at
Versailles  and  re-echoed  by  the  glorious  European  peimy-a-
liner,  one  of  the  most  tremendous  was  that  the  Rurals  represented
the  French  peasantry.  Think  only  of  the  love  of  the  French
peasant  for  the  men  to  whom,  after  1815,  he  had  to  pay  the
milliard  of  indemnity!  In  the  eyes  of  the  French  peasant,  the
very  existence  of  a great  landed  proprietary  is  in  itself  an  en-
croachment on  his  conquests  of  1789.  The  bourgeoisie,  in  1848,
had  burdened  his  plot  of  land  with  the  additional  tax  of  forty-
five  cents,  in  the  franc;  but  then  he  did  so  in  the  name  of  the
revolution;  while  now  he  had  fomented  a civil  war  against  the
revolution,  to  shifi:  on  the  peasant’s  shoulders  the  chief  load  of  the
five  milliards  of  indemnity  to  be  paid  to  the  Prussians.  The  Com-
mune, on  the  other  hand,  in  one  of  its  first  proclamations,  de-
clared that  the  true  originators  of  the  war  woiild  be  made  to  pay
its  cost.  The  Commune  would  have  delivered  the  peasant  of  the
blood  tax,  would  have  given  him  a cheap  government,  trans-
formed his  present  blood-suckers,  the  notary,  advocate,  executor,
and  other  judicial  vampires,  into  salaried  communal  agents,
elected  by,  and  responsible  to  himself.  It  would  have  freed  him  of
the  tyranny  of  the  garde  champitrey  the  gendarme,  and  the  prefect;
would  have  put  enlightenment  by  the  schoolmaster  in  the  place
of  stultification  by  the  priest.  And  the  French  peasant  is,  above
all,  a man  of  reckoning.  He  would  find  it  extremely  reasonable
that  the  pay  of  the  priest,  instead  of  being  extorted  by  the  tax-
gatherer,  should  only  dqpend  upon  the  spontaneous  action  of  the
parishioners’  religious  instincts.  Such  were  the  great  inunediate
boons  which  the  rule  of  the  Commune — anti  that  rule  alone —
held  out  to  the  French  peasantry.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  super-
fiuous  here  to  expatiate  upon  the  more  complicated  but  vital
problems  which  the  Commune  alone  was  able,  and  at  the  same
time  compelled,  to  solve  in  favour  of  the  peasant,  viz.,  the  hypo-


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  47

thecary  debt,  lying  like  an  incubus  upon  his  parcel  of  soil,  the
proletariat  fonder  (the  rural  proletariat),  daily  growing  upon  it,  and
his  expropriation  from  it  enforced,  at  a more  rapid  rate,  by  the
very  development  of  modem  agriculture  and  the  competition  of
capitalist  farming.

The  French  peasant  had  elected  Louis  Bonaparte,  president  of
the  Republic;  but  the  Party  of  Order  created  the  Empire.
What  the  French  peasant  really  wants  he  commenced  to  show  in
1849  and  1850,  by  opposing  his  maire  to  the  Government’s
prefect,  his  schoolmaster  to  the  Government’s  priest,  and  himself
to  the  Government’s  gendarme.  All  the  lava's  made  by  the  party
of  order  in  January  and  February  1850,  were  avowed  measures
of  repression  against  the  peasant.  The  peasant  was  a Bonapartist,
because  the  great  Revolution,  with  all  its  benefits  to  him,  was,
in  his  eyes,  personified  in  Napoleon.  This  delusion,  rapidly
breaking  down  under  the  Second  Empire  (and  in  its  very  nature
hostile  to  the  Rurals),  this  prejudice  of  the  past,  how  could  it  have
withstood  the  appeal  of  the  Commune  to  the  Uving  interests  and
urgent  wants  of  the  peasantry  ?

The' Rurals— this  was,  in  fact,  their  chief  apprehension— knew
that  three  months’  free  communication  of  Communal  Paris  with
the  provinces  would  bring  about  a general  rising  of  the  peasants,
and  hence  their  anxiety  to  establish  a police  blockade  around
Paris,  so  as  to  stop  the  spread  of  the  rinderpest.

If  the  Commune  was  thus  the  true  representative  of  all  the
healthy  dements  of  French  sodety,  and  therefore  the  truly
national  Government,  it  was,  at  the  same  time,  a working  men’s
Government,  as  the  bold  champion  of  the  emandpation  of  labour,
emphatically  international.  Within  sight  of  the  Prussian  army,
that  had  annexed  to  Germany  two  French  provinces,  the  Com-
mune annexed  to  France  the  working  people  all  over  the  world.

The  second  Empire  had  been  the  jubilee  of  cosmopolitan  black-
legism,  the  rakes  of  all  countries  rushing  in  at  its  for  a share
in  its  orgies  and  in  the  plunder  of  the  French  people.  Even  at
this  moment  the  right  hand  of  Thiers  is  Ganesco,  the  foul
Wallachian,  and  his  left  hand  is  Markowski,  the  Russian  spy.
The  Commune  admitted  all  fordgners  to  the  honour  of  dying  for
the  immortal  cause.  Between  the  fordgn  war  lost  by  thdr  treason,
and  the  dvil  war  fomented  by  thdr  conspiracy  with  the  fordgn
invader,  the  bourgeoisie  had  found  the  time  to  display  thdr


48  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

patriotism  by  organising  police-hunts  upon  the  Germans  in
France.  The  Commune  made  a German  working  man  its  Mini-
ster of  Labour.  Thiers,  the  bom^eoisie,  the  Second  Empire,  had
continually  dduded  Poland  by  loud  professions  of  sympathy,
while  in  reality  betraying  her  to,  and  doing  the  dirty  work  of
Russia.  The  Commune  honoured  the  heroic  sons  of  Poland  by
placing  them  at  the  head  of  the  defenders  of  Paris.  And,  to
broadly  mark  the  new  era  of  history,  it  was  conscious  of  initiating,
under  the  eyes  of  the  conquering  Prussians  on  the  one  side  and  of
the  Bonapartist  army,  led  by  Bonapartist  generals,  on  the  other,
the  Commune  pulled  down  that  colossal  symbol  of  martial  glory,
the  Venddme  column.

The  great  social  measure  of  the  Commune  was  its  own  working
existence.  Its  special  measures  could  but  betoken  the  tendency  of
a govenunent  of  the  people  by  the  people.  Such  were  the
abolition  of  the  nightwork  of  journeyman  bakers;  the  prohibi-
tion, under  penalty,  of  the  employers*  practice  to  reduce  wages
by  levying  upon  their  workpeople  fines  under  manifold  pretexts
— a.  process  in  which  the  employer  combines  in  his  own  person
the  parts  of  legislator,  judge,  and  executioner,  and  filches  the
money  to  boot.  Another  measure  of  this  class  was  the  surrender,
to  associations  of  workmen,  under  reserve  of  compensation,  of  all
closed  workshops  and  factories,  no  matter  whether  the  respective
capitalists  had  absconded  or  preferred  to  strike  work.

The  financial  meastues  of  the  Commune,  remarkable  for  their
sagacity  and  moderation,  could  only  be  su(^  as  were  compatible
with  the  state  of  a besieged  town.  Considering  the  colossal
robberies  committed  upon  the  City  of  Paris  by  the  great  financial
companies  and  contractors,  under  the  protection  of  Haussmann,
the  Commune  would  have  had  an  incomparably  better  title  to
confiscate  their  property  than  Louis  Napoleon  had  against  the
Orleans  fiunily.  The  HohenzoUem  and  the  English  oligarchs,
who  both  have  derived  a good  deal  of  thdr  estates  from  Church
plunder,  were,  of  course,  greatly  shocked  at  the  Commune  clear-
ing but  8,ooof  out  of  secularisation.

While  tire  Versailles  Government,  as  soon  as  it  had  recovered
some  spirit  and  strength,  used  the  most  violent  means  against  the
Commune;  while  it  put  down  the  firee  expression  of  opinion  all
over  France,  even  to  the  forbidding  of  meetings  of  delegates  fiium
the  large  towns;  while  it  subjected  Versailles  and  the  rest  of


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  49

France  to  an  espionage  far  surpassing  that  of  the  Second  Empire;
while  it  burned  by  its  gendarme  inquisitors  all  papers  at  Paris,
and  sifted  all  correspondence  from  and  to  Paris;  while  in  the
National  Assembly  die  most  timid  attempts  to  put  in  a word  for
Paris  were  howled  down  in  a maimer  unknown  even  to  the
Chambre  intmaable  of  i8r6;  with  the  savage  war&re  of  Versailles
outside,  and  its  attempts  at  corruption  and  conspiracy  inside
Paris — would  the  Commune  not  have  shamefully  betrayed  its
trust  by  affecting  to  keep  up  all  the  decencies  and  appearances  of
liberalism  as  in  a time  of  profound  peace  ? Had  the  Government
of  the  Commune  been  akin  to  that  of  M.  Thiers,  there  would  have
been  no  more  occasion  to  suppress  Party-of-Order  papers  at
Paris  than  there  was  to  suppress  Communal  papers  at  Versailles.

It  was  irritating,  indeed,  to  the  Rurals  that  at  the  very  same
time  they  declared  the  return  to  the  Church  to  be  the  only  means
of  salvation  for  France,  the  infidel  Commune  unearthed  the  pecu-
liar mysteries  of  the  Picpus  nuimery  and  of  the  Church  of  St.
Laurent.  It  was  a satire  upon  M.  Thiers  that,  while  he  showered
grand  crosses  upon  the  Bonapartist  generals,  in  acknowledgment
of  their  mastery  in  losing  battles,  signing  capitulations,  and
turning  cigarettes  at  Wilhelmshobe,  the  Commune  dismissed  and
arrest^  its  generals  whenever  they  were  suspected  of  neglecting
thdr  duties.  The  expulsion  from,  and  arrest  by,  the  Commune  of
one  of  its  members  who  had  slipped  in  under  a false  name,  and
had  undergone  at  Lyons  six  days’  imprisonment  for  simple  bank-
ruptcy, was  it  not  a deliberate  insult  hurled  at  the  foiger,  Jules
Favre,  then  still  the  Foreign  Minister  of  France,  still  selling  France
to  Bismarck,  and  still  dictating  his  orders  to  that  paragon  Govern-
ment of  Belgium  ? But,  indeed,  the  Commune  did  not  pretend
to  infallibility,  the  invariable  attribute  of  all  governments  of  the
old  stamp.  It  published  its  doings  and  sayings,  it  initiated  tiie
public  into  all  its  shortcomings.

In  every  revolution  there  intrude,  at  the  side  of  its  true  agents,
men  of  a different  stamp;  some  of  them  survivors  of  and  devotees
to  past  revolutions,  wiAout  insight  into  the  present  movement,
but  preserving  popular  influence  by  their  known  honesty  and
courage,  or  by  the  sheer  force  of  tradition;  others  mere  brawlers,
who  by  dint  of  repeating  year  after  year  the  same  set  of  stereo-
typed declamation  against  the  Government  of  the  day,  have
sneaked  into  the  rq)utation  of  revolutionists  of  tiie  first  water.


D


50  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

After  March  i8th,  some  such  men  did  also  turn  up,  and  in  some
cases  contrived  to  play  pre-eminent  parts.  As  far  as  thdr  power
went,  they  hamper^  the  real  action  of  the  working  class,  exactly
as  men  of  that  sort  have  hampered  the  full  development  of  every
previous  revolution.  They  are  an  unavoidable  evil;  with  time
they  are  shaken  off;  but  time  was  not  allowed  to  the  Commune.

Wonderful,  indeed,  was  the  change  the  Commune  had  wrought
in  Paris!  No  longer  any  trace  of  the  meretricious  Paris  of  the
Second  Empire.  No  longer  vras  Paris  the  rendezvous  of  British
landlords,  Irish  absentees,  American  ex-slaveholders  and  shoddy
men,  Russian  ex-serfowners,  and  Wallachian  boyards.  No  more
corpses  at  the  Moi^e,  no  nocturnal  burglaries,  scarely  any
robberies;  in  &ct,  for  the  first  dme  since  the  days  of  February
1848,  the  streets  of  Paris  were  safe,  and  that  without  any  police
of  any  kind.  “ We,”  said  a member  of  the  Commune,  hear  no
longer  of  assassination,  theft,  and  personal  assault;  it  seesoas,
indeed,  as  if  the  police  had  draped  along  with  it  to  Versailles  all
its  Conservative  friends.”  The  coeottes  Imd  refound  the  scent  of
their  protectors — ^the  absconding  men  of  family,  religion,  and,
above  all,  of  property.  In  their  stead,  the  real  women  of  Paris
showed  again  at  the  surface^heroic,  noble,  and  devoted,  like
the  women  of  antiquity.  Working,  dunking,  fighting,  bleeding
Paris — almost  forgetful,  in  its  incubation  of  a new  society,  of  the
cannibals  at  its  gates— radiant  in  the  enthusiasm  of  its  historic
initiative!

Opposed  to  this  new  world  at  Paris,  behold  tire  old  world  at
Versailles — that  assembly  of  the  ghouls  of  all  defunct  rigjmest
Legitimists  and  Orleanists,  eager  to  feed  upon  the  carcass  of  the
nation— with  a tail  of  antediluvian  Republicans,  sanctioning,  by
their  presence  in  the  Assembly,  the  slaveholders*  rebellion,  rely-
ing for  the  maintenance  of  thdr  Parliamentary  Republic  upon
the  vanity  of  the  senile  mountebank  at  its  head,  and  caricaturing
1 789  by  holding  their  ghastly  meetings  in  the  Jeu  de  Pm^.  There
it  was,  this  Assembly,  the  representative  of  everything  dead  in
France,  propped  up  by  the  semblance  of  life  by  nothing  but  the
swords  of  tire  generals  of  Louis  Bonaparte.  Paris  all  truth,
Versailles  all  he;  and  that  He  vented  through  the  mouth  of
Thiers.

Thiers  tells  a deputation  of  the  mayors  of  the  Seine-et-Oise —
“ You  may  rdy  upon  my  word,  which  I have  nsm  broken!  ” He


THE  Givn  ?2M1  51

Assembly  itself  tha  scted  and

assslbst  liberal  Assembly  France  ever  possessed  he  tdls  his  motley

soldiery  that  it  was  **  the  admiration  of  the  world,  and  the  finest
army  France  ever  possessed”;  he  tells  the  provinces  that  the
bombardment  of  Paris  by  him  was  a myth:  “ If  some  cannon-
shots  have  been  fired,  it  is  not  the  deed  of  the  army  of  Verseiilles,
but  of  some  insui:gents  trying  to  make  believe  that  they  are  fight-
ing, while  they  dare  not  show  their  &ccs.”  He  again  tells  the
provinces  that  ” the  artillery  of  Versailles  does  not  btmbard  Paris,
but  only  cannonades  it.”  He  tells  the  Archbishop  of  Paris,  that
the  pretended  executions  and  reprisals  (!)  attributed  to  the
Versailles  troops  were  all  moonshine.  He  tdls  Paris  that  he  was
only  anxious  to  “ free  it  from  the  hideous  tyrants  who  oppress  it,”
and  that,  in  fact,  the  Paris  of  the  Commune  was  “ but  a handfiil
of  criminals.”

The  Paris  of  M.  Thiers  was  not  the  real  Paris  of  the  ” vile


multitude,”  but  a phantom  Paris,  the  Paris  of  the  Jrancs'fileurs,  the
Paris  of  the  Boulevards,  male  and  female — the  ridi,  the  capitalist,
the  gilded,  tire  idle  Paris  now  thronging  with  its  lat^eys,  its  black-
legs, its  literary  hohitme^  and  its  eocottes  at  Versailles,  Saint-Denis,
Ru^,  and  Saint-Germain;  considering  the  civil  war  but  an
agreeable  diversion,  eyeing  the  battle  going  on  through  teles-
scopes,  counting  the  rounds  of  carmon,  and  swearing  by  their  own
honour  and  that  of  their  prostitutes,  that  the  performance  was  far
better  got  up  than  it  used  to  be  at  the  Porte  St.  Martin.  The  men
who  ivene  really  dead;  the  cries  of  the  wounded  were  cries  in
good  earnest;  and,  besides,  the  whole  thing  was  so  intensely
historical.


This  is  the  Paris  of  M.  Thiers,  as  the  Emigration  of  Coblentz
was  the  France  of  M.  de  Calonne.


IV

The  first  attempt  of  the  slaveholders’  conspiracy  to  put  down
Paris  by  getting  the  Prussians  to  occupy  it,  was  fimtrated  by
Bismarck’s  reHisal.  The  second  attempt,  that  of  March  iBth,
ended  in  the  rout  of  the  army  and  the  flight  to  Versailles  of  the
Government,  which  ordered  the  whole  administration  to  break
up  and  foUow  in  its  track.  By  the  semblance  of  peace  negotiations
with  Paris,  Thiers  found  the  time  to  prepare  for  war  against  it.


52  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

But  where  to  find  an  army  ? Hie  remnants  of  the  line  regiments
were  weak  in  number  and  unsafe  in  character.  His  urgent  appeal
to  the  provinces  to  succour  Versailles  by  their  National  Guards
and  volunteers,  met  with  a fiat  refusal.  Brittany  alone  furnished
a handful  of  Chouans  fighting  under  a white  flag,  every  one  of  them
wearing  on  bis  breast  the  heart  of  Jesus  in  white  doth,  and
shouting  '*  Vive  le  Rd!  ” (Long  live  the  King!}.  Thiers  was,
therefore,  compelled  to  collect,  in  hot  haste,  a modey  crew,  com-
posed of  sailors,  marines.  Pontifical  Zouaves,  Valentin’s  gend-
armes, and  Pietii’s  sergents  de  mUe  and  mouchards.  This  army,  how-
ever, would  have  been  ridiculously  ineffective  without  the  instal-
ments of  imperialist  war-prisoners,  which  Bismarck  granted  in
numbers  just  suifident  to  keep  the  dvil  war  agoing,  and  keqi  the
Versailles  Government  in  abject  dqiendence  on  Prussia.  During
the  war  itself,  the  Versailles  police  had  to  look  after  the  Versailles
army,  while  the  gendarmes  had  to  drag  it  on  by  exposing  them-
sdves  at  aU.  posts  of  danger.  The  forts  which  f<^  were  not  taken
but  bought.  The  heroism  of  the  Federals  convinced  Thiers  that
the  resistance  of  Paris  was  not  to  be  broken  by  his  own  strategic
genius  and  the  bayonets  at  his  di^osal.

Meanwhile,  his  relations  with  the  provinces  became  more  and
more  difficult.  Not  one  single  address  of  approval  came  in  to
gladden  Thiers  and  his  Rurals.  Qpite  the  contrary.  Deputations
and  addresses  demanding,  in  a tone  anything  but  respectful,
conciliation  with  Paris  on  the  basis  of  the  unequivocal  recog-
nition of  the  Republic,  the  acknowledgment  of  the  Gommund
liberties,  and  the  dissdution  of  the  National  Assembly,  whose
mandate  was  extinct,  poured  in  from  all  sides,  and  in  such
numbers  that  Dufaure,  Thiers’s  Minister  of  Justice,  in  his
circular  of  April  23rd  to  the  public  prosecutors,  commanded
them  to  treat  “ the  cry  of  conciliation  ” as  a crime.  In  regard,
however,  of  the  hopdess  prospect  hdd  out  by  his  campaign,
Thiers  resolved  to  shift  1^  tactics  by  ordering,  all  over  the
country,  munidpal  dections  to  take  place  on  April  30th,  on  the
basis  of  the  new  munidpal  law  dictated  by  himsdf  to  the  National
Assembly.  What  with  the  intrigues  of  his  prefects,  what  with
police  intimidation,  he  fdt  quite  sanguine  of  imparting,  by  the
verdict  of  the  provinces,  to  the  National  Assembly  that  moral
power  it  had  never  possessed,  and  of  getting  at  last  fix>m  the
provinces  the  physicd  force  i^equired  for  the  conquest  of  Paris.


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


53

His  banditti-waifare  against  Paris,  exalted  in  his  own  bulletins,
and  the  attempts  of  his  ministers  at  die  establishment,  throughout
France,  of  a reign  of  terror,  Thiers  was  from  the  beginning
anxious  to  accompany  with  a little  by-play  of  conciliation,  which
had  to  serve  more  than  one  purpose.  It  was  to  dupe  the  provinces,
to  inveigle  the  middle-class  element  in  Paris,  and,  above  all,  to
afford  the  professed  Republicans  in  the  National  Assembly  the
opportunity  of  hiding  Aeir  treason  against  Paris  behind  their
faith  in  Thiers.  On  the  2 ist  of  March,  when  still  without  an  army,
he  had  declared  to  the  Assembly:  “ Come  what  may,  I will  not
send  an  army  to  Paris.”  On  the  27th  ofMarch  he  rose  again:  “I
have  found  the  Republic  an  accomplished  fact,  and  I am  firmly
resolved  to  maintain  it.”  In  reality,  he  put  down  the  revolution
at  Lyons  and  Marseilles  in  the  name  of  the  Republic,  while  the
roars  of  his  Rurals  drowned  the  very  mention  of  its  name  at
Versailles.  After  this  explmt,  he  toned  down  the  ” accomplished
fact  ” into  an  hypothetical  fact.  The  Orleans  princes,  whom  he
had  cautioxuly  warned  off  Bordeaux,  were  now,  in  flagrant
breach  of  the  law,  permitted  to  intrigue  at  Dreux.  The  conces-
sions held  out  by  l^iers  in  his  interminable  interviews  with  the
delegates  from  Paris  and  the  provinces,  although  constantly
varied  in  tone  and  colour,  accor^g  to  time  and  circumstances,
did  in  fact  never  come  to  more  than  the  prospective  restriction  of
revenge  to  the  **  handful  of  criminals  implicated  in  the  murder  of
Lecomte  and  Clement  Thomas,”  on  the  well-understood  premiss
that  Paris  and  France  were  unreservedly  to  accept  M.  Louis
Philippe.  Even  these  concessions  he  not  only  took  care  to  render
doubtful  by  the  official  comments  put  upon  diem  in  the  Assembly
through  his  Ministers.  He  had  his  Dufaure  to  act.  Dufaure,  this
old  Orleanist  lawyer,  had  always  been  the  justiciary  of  the  state
of  siege  as  now  in  1871  under  Thiers,  so  in  1839  under  Louis
Philippe,  and  in  1849  under  Louis  Bonaparte’s  presidency.
While  out  of  office  he  made  a fortune  by  pleading  for  the  Paris
capitalists,  and  made  political  capital  by  pleading  against  the
laws  he  Imd  himself  originated.  He  now  hurried  through  the
National  Assembly  not  only  a set  of  repressive  laws  which  were
after  the  fall  of  Paris,  to  extirpate  the  last  remnants  of  Republican
liberty  in  France;  he  foreshadowed  the  fate  of  Paris  by  abridging
the,  for  him,  too  slow  procedure  of  courts-martial,  and  by  a new-
fangled, Draconic  code  of  deportation.  The  Revolution  of  1848,


54  the  civil  war  IN  FRANCE

abolishing  the  penalty  of  death  for  political  crimes,  had  replaced
it  by  deportation.  Louis  Bonaparte  did  not  dare,  at  least  not  in
theory,  to  re-establish  the  regime  of  the  guillotine.  The  Rural
Assembly,  not  yet  bold  enough  even  to  Idnt  that  the  Parisians
were  not  rebds,  but  assassins,  had  therefore  to  confine  its  pros-
pective vengeance  against  Paris  to  Dufaure’s  new  code  of  deporta-
tion. Under  all  these  circumstances  Thiers  himsdf  could  not  have
gone  on  with  his  comedy  of  conciliation,  had  it  not,  as  he  intended
it  to  do,  drawn  forth  shrieks  of  rage  from  die  Rurals,  whose
ruminating  mind  did  neither  understand  the  play,  nor  its
necessities  of  hypocrisy,  tei^versation,  and  procrastination.

In  sight  of  the  impending  munidpal  elections  of  the  30th  of  April,
Thiers  enacted  one  of  his  great  conciliation  scenes  on  the  27^  of
April.  Amidst  a flood  of  sentimental  rhetoric,  he  exclaimed  firom
the  tribune  of  the  Assembly:  “ There  exists  no  conspiracy  against
the  Republic  but  that  of  Paris,  which  compels  us  to  shed  French
blood.  I repeat  it  again  and  again.  Let  tbose  impious  arms  &11
fix)m  the  hands  which  hold  them,  and  chastisement  will  be
arrested  at  once  by  an  act  of  peace  excluding  only  the  small
number  of  criminals.”  To  the  violent  interruption  of  the  Rurals
he  replied!  ” Gentlemen,  tell  me,  I implore  you,  am  I wrong  ?
Do  you  really  regret  that  I could  have  stated  the  truth  that  the
criminals  are  only  a handful  ? Is  it  not  fortunate  in  the  midst
of  our  misfortunes  that  those  who  have  been  capable  to  shed  the
blood  of  Clement  Thomas  and  General  Lecomte  are  but  rare
exceptions  ? ”

France,  however,  turned  a deaf  ear  to  what  Thiers  flattered
himsdf  to  be  a parliamentary  siren’s  song.  Out  of  700,000
municipal  councillors  returned  by  the  35,000  commimes  still  left
to  France,  the  united  Legitimists,  Orleanists,  and  Bonapartists
did  not  cany  8,000.  The  supplementary  dections  which  followed
were  still  more  deddedly  hostile.  Thus,  instead  of  getting  fiiem
the  provinces  the  badly-needed  physical  force,  the  National
Assembly  lost  even  its  Isist  claim  of  moral  force,  that  of  being  the
expression  of  the  universal  sufirage  of  the  country.  To  complete
the  discomfiture,  the  newly-chosen  municipal  councils  of  all  the
cities  of  France  openly  threatened  the  usuiping  Assembly  at
Versailles  with  a counter  Assembly  at  Bordeaux.

Then  the  long-expected  moment  of  decisive  action  had  at  last
come  for  Bismarck.  He  peremptorily  summoned  Thiers  to  send


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  55

to  Fraxikfort  plenipotentiaries  for  the  definite  settlement  of  peace.
In  humble  obedience  to  the  call  of  his  master,  Thiers  hajitenpd  to
despatch  his  trusty  Jules  Favre,  backed  by  Pouyer-Qpertier.
Pouyer-Qjuertier,  an  “eminent”  Rouen  cotton-spinner,  a
fervent  and  even  servile  partisan  of  the  Second  Empire,  had  never
ibund  any  fault  with  it  save  its  commercial  treaty  with  England,
prejudidid  to  his  own  shop-interests.  Hardly  installed  at  Bor-
deaux as  Thiers’  Minister  of  Finance,  he  denounced  that  “ un-
holy ” treaty,  hinted  at  its  near  abrogation,  and  had  even  the
effiontery  to  try,  although  in  vain  (having  counted  without
Bismarck),  the  immediate  enforcement  of  the  old  protective
duties  against  Alsace,  where,  he  said,  no  previous  international
treaties  stood  in  the  way.  This  man,  who  considered  counter-
revolution as  a means  to  put  down  wages  at  Rouen,  and  the
surrender  of  French  provinces  as  a means  to  bring  up  the  price
of  his  wares  in  France,  was  he  not  the  one  predestined  to  be  picked
out  by  Thiers  as  the  hdpmate  of  Jtiles  Favre  in  his  last  and  crown-
ing treason  ?

On  the  arrival  at  Frankfort  of  tiiis  exquisite  pair  of  plenipo-
tentiaries, bully  Bismarck  at  once  met  them  with  the  imperious
alternative.  Either  the  restoration  of  the  Empire,  or  the  uncon-
ditional acceptance  of  my  own  peace  terms!  These  terms
included  a shortening  of  the  intervals  in  which  the  war  indemnity
was  to  be  paid,  and  the  continued  occupation  of  the  Paris  forts
by  Prussian  troops  until  Bismarck  should  feel  satisfied  with  the
state  of  things  in  France;  Prussia  thus  being  recognised  as  the
supreme  arbiter  in  internal  French  politics  I In  return  for  this  he
offered  to  let  loose,  for  the  extermination  of  Paris,  the  captive
Bonapartist  army,  and  to  lend  them  the  direct  assistance  of
Emperor  William’s  troops.  He  pledged  his  good  faith  by  making
payment  of  the  first  instalment  of  the  indemnity  dependent  on
the  “ pacification  ” of  Paris.  Such  a bait  was,  of  course,  eagerly
swallowed  by  Thiers  and  his  plenipotentiaries.  They  signed  the
treaty  of  peace  on  May  roth,  and  had  it  endorsed  by  the  Versailles
Assembly  on  the  i8th.

In  the  interval  between  the  conclusion  of  peace  and  the  arrival
of  the  Bonapartist  prisoners,  Thiers  felt  more  bound  to  resume  his
comedy  of  conciliation  as  his  Republican  tools  stood  in  sore  need
of  a pretext  for  blinking  theu*  eyes  at  the  pr^arations  for  the
carnage  of  Paris.  As  late  as  May  i8th  he  replied  to  a deputation


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


56

of  middle-dass  conciliators — “Whenever  the  insurgents  will
make  up  their  minds  for  capitulation,  the  gates  of  Paris  shall  be
flung  wide  open  during  a week  for  all  except  the  murderers  of
Generals  Clement  Thomas  and  Lecomte.*’

A few  days  aflerwards,  when  violently  interpellated  on  these
promises  by  the  Rurals,  he  refused  to  enter  into  any  explana-
tions; not,  however,  wi&out  giving  them  this  significant  hint: —
“ I tdl  you  there  are  impatient  men  amongst  you,  men  who  are
in  too  great  a hurry.  They  must  have  another  eight  days;  at
the  end  of  these  eight  days  there  will  be  no  more  danger,  and  the
task  will  be  proportionate  to  thdr  courage  and  to  their  capaci-
ties.” As  soon  as  MadV^dion  was  able  to  assure  him  that  he
could  shortly  enter  Paris,  Thiers  declared  to  the  Assembly  that
“ he  would  enter  Paris,  with  the  lam  in  his  hands,  and  demand
a full  expiation  from  the  wretches  who  had  sacrificed  the  lives  of
soldiers  and  destroyed  public  monuments.”  As  the  moment  of
decision  drew  near  he  said — to  the  Assembly:  “ I shall  be
pitiless  1 ” — to  Paris,  that  it  was  doomed;  and  to  his  Bonapartist
banditti,  that  they  had  State  licence  to  wreak  vengeance  upon
Paris  to  their  heart’s  content  At  last,  when  treachery  had
opened  the  gates  of  Paris  to  General  Douai,  on  May  sist,  Thiers,
on  the  ssnd,  revealed  to  the  Rurals  the  “ goal  ” of  his  concilia-
tion comedy,  which  they  had  so  obstinately  persisted  in  not
understanding.  “ I told  you  a few  days  ago  that  we  were
approaching  our  goal : to-day  I came  to  tell  you  the  goal  is
reached.  The  victory  of  order,  justice,  and  civilisation  is  at  last
woni  ”

So  it  was.  The  civilisation  and  justice  of  bourgeois  order  comes
out  in  its  lurid  light  whenever  the  slaves  and  drudges  of  that  order
rise  against  their  masters.  Then  this  civilisation  and  justice  stand
forth  as  undisguised  savagery  and  lawless  revenge.  Each  new
crisis  in  the  class  struggle  between  the  appropriator  and  the
producer  brings  out  this  fact  more  glaringly.  Even  the  atrocities
of  the  bomgeois  in  June  1848,  vanish  before  the  ineffable  infamy
of  1871.  The  self-sacrificing  heroism  with  which  the  population
of  Paris — ^men,  women,  and  children — fought  for  eight  days  after
tiie  entrance  of  the  Versaillese,  reflects  as  mudi  the  grandeur  of
their  cause  as  the  infernal  deeds  of  the  soldiery  reflect  the  innate
spirit  of  that  civilisation  of  which  they  are  the  mercenary  vindi-
cators. A glorious  civilisation,  inde^,  the  great  problem  of


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


57

which  is  how  to  get  rid  of  the  heaps  of  corpses  it  made  after  the
battle  was  over!

To  find  a parallel  for  the  conduct  of  Thiers  and  his  blood-
hounds we  must  go  back  to  the  times  of  SuUa  and  the  two
Triumvirates  of  Rome.  The  same  wholesale  slaughter  in  cold
blood;  the  same  disregard,  in  massacre,  of  age  and  sex,  the
same  system  of  torturing  prisoners;  the  same  proscriptions,  but
this  time  of  a whole  class;  the  same  savage  hunt  after  conc^ed
leaders,  lest  one  might  escape;  the  same  denunciations  of
politick  and  private  enemies;  the  same  indifference  for  the
butchery  of  entire  strangers  to  the  feud.  There  is  but  this
difference,  that  the  Romans  had  no  mirailleuses  for  the  despatch,
in  the  lump,  of  the  proscribed,  and  that  they  had  not  “ the  law
in  thdr  hands,”  nor  on  their  lips  the  cry  of  “ civilisation.”

And  after  those  horrors,  look  upon  the  other,  still  more  hideous,
face  of  that  bourgeois  dvilisadon  as  described  by  its  own  press!

“ With  stray  shots,”  writes  the  Paris  correspondent  of  a London
Tory  paper,  “ still  ringing  in  the  distance,  and  untended  wounded
wretches  dying  amid  the  tombstones  of  Fire  la  Chaise — with
6,000  terror-stricken  insurgents  wandering  in  an  agony  of
despair  in  the  labyrinth  of  the  catacombs,  and  wretches  hurried
through  the  streets  to  be  shot  down  in  scores  by  the  mitrailleuse —
it  is  revolting  to  see  the  cafis  filled  with  the  votaries  of  absinthe,
billiards,  and  dominoes;  female  profiigacy  perambulating  the
boulevards,  and  the  sound  of  revdry  disturbing  the  night  from
the  cabinets  partiadiers  of  fashionable  restaurants.”  M.  Edouard
Herv6  writes  in  iha  Journal  dePariSf  a Versaillist  journal  suppressed
by  the  Gormnune:  ” The  way  in  which  the  population  of  Paris
(1)  manifested  its  satisfaction  yesterday  was  rather  more  than
Mvolous,  and  we  fear  it  will  grow  worse  as  time  progresses.  Paris
has  now  a fite  day  appearance,  which  is  sadly  out  of  place;  and,
unless  we  are  to  be  called  the  Parisiens  de  la  dicadence,  this  sort  of
thing  must  come  to  an  end.”  And  then  he  quotes  the  passage
&om  Tacitus:  ” Yet,  on  the  morrow  of  that  horrible  struggle —
began  once  more  to  wallow  in  the  voluptuous  slough  which  was
destroying  its  body  and  polluting  its  soul — ali  praUa  et  mdnera,
alibi  balnea  pqpinague — (here  fights  and  woxmds,  there  baths  and
restaurants).”  M.  Herve  only  forgets  to  say  that  the  “ population
of  Paris  ” he  speaks  of  is  but  the  population  of  the  Paris  of  M.
Thiers — ^the  franesJUeurs  returning  in  throngs  from  Versailles,


58  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

Saint  Denis,  Rudl,  and  Saint  Germain — ^ Paris  of  the  *'  De«
cline.”

In  all  its  bloody  triumphs  over  the  sdf-sacrificing  champions  of
a new  and  better  society,  that  nefarious  civilisation,  based  upon
the  enslavement  of  labour,  drowns  the  moans  of  its  victims  in  a
hue-and-cry  of  calumny,  reverberated  by  a world-wide  echo.
The  serene  working-men*s  Paris  of  the  Gonunune  is  suddenly
changed  into  a pandemonium  by  the  bloodhounds  of  “ order.”
And  what  does  this  tremendous  change  prove  to  the  bourgeois
mind  of  all  countries  ? Why,  that  the  Gommime  has  conspired
against  civilisation!  The  Paris  people  die  enthusiastically  for  the
Commune  in  numbers  unequalled  in  any  battle  known  to  history.
What  does  that  prove  ? Why,  that  the  Commune  was  not  the
people’s  own  government,  but  the  usurpation  of  a handful  of
criminals  1 The  women  of  Paris  joyfully  give  up  their  lives  at  the
barricades  and  on  the  place  of  execution.  What  does  this  prove?
Why,  that  the  demon  of  the  Commune  has  changed  them  into
Megseras  and  Hecates  1 The  moderation  of  the  Commune  during
two  months  of  undisputed  sway  is  equalled  only  by  the  heroism
of  its  defence.  What  does  that  prove?  Why,  that  for  months  the
Commune  carefully  hid,  tmder  a mask  of  moderation  and
humanity,  the  bloodthirstiness  of  its  fiendish  instincts,  to  be  let
loose  in  the  hour  of  its  agony!

The  working-men’s  Ptois,  in  the  act  of  its  heroic  self-holocaust,
involved  in  its  flames  buildings  and  monuments.  While  tearing
to  pieces  the  living  body  of  the  proletariat,  its  rulers  must  no
longer  expect  to  return  triumphantly  into  the  intact  architecture
of  their  abodes.  The  Govermnent  of  Versailles  cries:  “Incendiar-
ism ! ” and  whispers  this  cue  to  all  its  agents,  down  to  the  remotest
hamlet,  to  hunt  up  its  enemies  everywhere  as  suspect  of  profes-
sional incendiarism.  The  bourgeoisie  of  the  whole  world,  which
looks  complacently  upon  the  wholesale  massacre  after  the
battle,  is  convulsed  by  horror  at  the  desecration  of  brick  and
mortar!

When  governments  give  state-licences  to  their  navies  to  “ kill,
burnt  &nd  destroy,”  is  that  a licence  for  incendiarism  ? When  the
British  troops  wantonly  set  Are  to  the  Capitol  at  Washington  and
to  the  summer  palace  of  the  Chinese  Emperor,  was  that  incen-
diarism ? When  the  Prussians,  not  for  military  reasons,  but  out
of  the  mere  spite  of  revenge,  burned  down,  by  the  help  of  petro-


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  PRANCE


59

leum,  towns  like  Chateaudun  and  innumerable  villages,  was  that
incendiarism  ? When  Thiers,  during  six  weeks,  bombarded
Paris,  under  the  pretext  that  he  wanted  to  set  iSre  to  those  houses
only  in  which  there  were  people,  was  that  incendiarism  ? In  war,
fire  is  an  arm  as  legitimate  as  any.  Buildings  held  by  the  enemy
are  shelled  to  set  them  on  fire.  IT  their  defenders  have  to  retire,
they  themselves  light  the  flames  to  prevent  the  attack  from
making  use  of  the  buildings.  To  be  burned  down  has  always
been  the  inevitable  fate  of  all  buildings  situated  in  die  front  of
batde  of  all  the  regular  armies  of  the  world.  But  in  the  war  of
the  enslaved  against  their  enslavers,  the  only  justifiable  war  in
history,  this  is  by  no  means  to  hold  good!  The  Commune  used
fire  stricdy  as  a means  of  defence.  They  used  it  to  stop  up  to  the
Versailles  trocqis  those  long,  straight  avenues  which  ibussmann
had  expressly  opened  to  artillery  fire;  they  used  it  to  cover  their
retreat,  in  the  same  way  as  the  Versaillese,  in  their  advance,  used
their  shdls,  which  destroyed  at  least  as  many  buildings  as  the  fire
of  the  Commune.  It  is  a matter  of  dispute,  even  now,  which
buildings  were  set  fire  to  by  the  defence  and  which  by  the  attack.
And  the  defence  resorted  to  fire  only  then,  when  the  Versaillese
troops  had  already  commenced  their  wholesale  murdering  of
prisoners.  Besides,  the  Commune  had,  long  before,  given  full
public  notice  that,  if  driven  to  extremities,  they  would  bury
themselves  under  the  ruins  of  Paris,  and  make  Paris  a second
Moscow,  as  the  Government  of  Defence,  but  only  as  a doak  for
its  treason,  had  promised  to  do.  For  this  purpose  Trodm  had
found  tiiem  the  petroleum.  The  Commune  knew  that  its
opponents  cared  nothing  for  the  lives  of  the  Paris  people,  but
ca^  much  for  their  own  Paris  buildings.  And  Thiers,  on  the
other  hand,  had  given  them  notice  that  he  would  be  implacable
in  his  vengeance.  No  sooner  had  he  got  his  army  ready  on  one
side,  and  &e  Prussians  shutting  up  the  trap  on  the  other,  than  he
prodaimed:  “ I shall  be  pitileral  The  expiation  will  be  com-
plete, and  justice  will  be  stem!  ” If  the  acts  of  the  Paris  working
men  were  vandalism,  it  was  the  vandalism  of  defence  in  despair,
not  the  vandalism  triumph,  like  that  which  the  Christians
perpetrated  upon  the  really  pricdess  art  treasures  of  heathen
antiquity;  and  even  tiiat  vandalism  has  been  justified  by  the
historian  as  an  unavoidable  and  comparativdy  trifling  con-
comitant to  the  titanic  struggle  between  a new  sodety  arising


6o


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE


and  an  <dd  one  breaking  down.  It  was  still  less  the  vandalism  of
Haussmann,  razing  historic  Paris  to  make  place  for  the  Paris  of
the  sightseer!

But  the  execution  by  the  Commune  of  the  sixty-four  hostages,
with  the  Archbishop  of  Paris  at  thdr  head!  Tbie  bourgeoisie
and  its  army  in  June,  1848,  re-established  a custom  which  had
long  disappeared  from  the  practice  of  war — the  shooting  of  their
defencdess  prisoners.  This  brutal  custom  has  since  been  more
or  less  strictly  adhered  to  by  the  suppressors  of  all  popular  com-
motions in  Europe  and  India;  thus  proving  that  it  constitutes  a
real  “ progress  of  civilisation  ” ! On  the  other  hand,  the  Prussians,
in  Fraime,  had  re-established  the  practice  of  taking  hostages —
izmocent  men,  who,  vdth  their  Uves,  were  to  answer  to  them  for
die  acts  of  others.  When  Thiers,  as  we  have  seen,  from  the  very
beginning  of  the  conflict,  enforced  the  humane  practice  of
shooting  down  the  Communal  prisoners,  the  Commune,  to
protect  their  lives,  was  obliged  to  resort  to  the  Prussians*  practice
of  securing  hostages.  The  lives  of  the  hostages  had  been  forfeited
over  and  over  again  by  the  continued  shooting  of  prisoners  on  the
part  of  the  Versaillese.  How  could  they  be  spared  any  longer
after  the  carnage  with.which  MacMahon’s  prsctorians  celebrated
thdr  entrance  into  Paris  ? Was  even  the  last  check  upon  the
unscrupulous  ferocity  of  bourgeois  governments — ^the  taking  of
hostages — to  be  made  a mere  sham  of?  The  real  murderer  of
Archbishop  Darboy  is  Thiers.  The  Commune  again  and  again
had  offered  to  excl^ge  the  archbishop,  and  ever  so  many  priests
in  the  bargain,  against  the  single  Blanqui,  then  in  the  hands  of
Thiers.  Thiers  obstinately  ref^ed.  He  knew  that  with  Blanqui
he  would  give  to  the  Commune  a head:  while  the  archbishop
would  serve  his  purpose  best  in  the  shape  of  a corpse.  Thiers
acted  upon  the  precedent  of  Cavaignac.  How,  in  June,  1848,  did
not  Cavaignac  and  his  men  of  order  raise  shouts  of  horror  by
stigmatising  the  insurgents  as  tiie  assassins  of  Archbishop  Afire!
They  knew  perfectly  wdl  that  the  archbishop  had  been  shot  by
the  soldiers  of  order.  M.  Jacquemet,  the  archbishop’s  vicar-
general,  present  on  the  spot,  had  immediately  afterward  handed
them  in  his  evidence  to  that  effect.

All  this  chorus  of  calumny,  which  the  party  of  order  never  fail,
in  their  orgies  of  blood,  to  raise  against  their  victims,  only  proves
that  the  bourgeois  of  om  days  contiders  himself  the  legitimate


THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  6i

successor  to  the  baron  of  old,  who  thought  every  weapon  in  his
own  hand  fair  against  the  plebdan,  w]^e  in  the  hands  of  the
plebeian  a weapon  of  any  Idnd  constituted  in  itself  a crime.

The  conspiracy  of  the  nding  class  to  break  down  the  Revolution
by  a civil  war  carried  on  under  the  patronage  of  the  foreign
inv^er — a conspiracy  which  we  have  traced  fiom  the  very
September  4th  down  to  the  entrance  of  MacMahon's  prsetorians
through  the  gate  of  St.  Cloud — culminated  in  the  carnage  of
Paris.  Bismardc  gloats  over  the  ruins  of  Paris,  in  which  he  saw
perhaps  the  first  instalment  of  that  general  destruction  of  great
cities  he  had  prayed  for  when  still  a simple  Rural  in  the  Prussian
Chambre  introuoabh  of  1849.  He  gloats  over  the  cadavres  of  the
Paris  proletariate.  For  1^  this  is  not  only  the  extermination  of
revolution,  but  the  extinction  of  France,  now  decapitated  in
reality,  and  by  the  French  Government  itself.  With  the  shallow-
ness characteristic  of  all  successful  statesmen,  he  sees  but  the
surface  of  this  tremendous  historic  event.  Whenever  before  has
history  exhibited  the  spectacle  of  a conqueror  crowning  his
victory  by  turning  into,  not  only  the  gendarme,  but  the  hired
bravo  of  the  conquered  Government  ? There  existed  no  war
between  Prussia  and  the  Commune  of  Paris.  On  the  contrary,  the
Conumme  had  accepted  the  peace  preliminaries,  and  Pnissia
had  announced  her  neutrality.  Prussia  was,  therefore,  no
belligerent.  She  acted  the  part  of  a bravo,  a cowardly  bravo,
because  incurring  no  danger;  a hired  bravo,  because  stipulating
beforehand  the  payment  of  her  blood-money  of  500  millions  on
the  fidl  of  Paris.  And  thus,  at  last,  p-amt*  out  the  true  character
of  the  war,  ordained  by  Providence  as  a chastisement  of  godless
and  debauched  France  by  pious  and  moral  Germany  1 And  this
unparallded  breach  of  the  law  of  nations,  even  as  understood  by
old-world  lawyers,  instead  of  arousing  the  “ civilised  ” Govern-
ments of  Europe  to  declare  the  felonious  Prussian  Government,
the  mere  tool  of  the  St.  Petersburg  Cabinet,  an  outlaw  amongst
nations,  only  incites  them  to  consider  whether  the  few  victiim
who  escape  the  double  cordon  around  Paris  are  not  to  be  given
up  to  the  hangman  at  Versailles!

That  after  the  most  tremendous  war  of  modem  times,  the
conquering  and  the  conquered  hosts  should  fraternise  for  the
common  massacre  of  the  proletariate — ^this  unparallded  event
does  indicate,  not,  as  Bisrriarck  thinks,  the  final  repression  of  a


62  THE  CIVIL  WAR  IN  FRANCE

new  society  upheaving,  but  the  crumbling  into  dust  of  bourgeois
society.  The  highest  heroic  effort  of  which  old  society  is  still
capable  is  national  war;  and  this  is  now  proved  to  be  a mere
governmental  humbug,  intended  to  defer  the  struggle  of  the-
classes,  and  to  be  thrown  aside  as  soon  as  that  class  struggle
bursts  out  in  civil  war.  Class  rule  is  no  longer  able  to  disguise
itself  in  a national  uniform;  the  national  Governments  are  one
as  against  the  proletariate!

After  Whit-Sunday,  1871,  there  can  be  neither  peace  nor  truce
possible  between  the  working  men  of  France  and  the  appropria-
tors  of  their  produce.  The  iron  hand  of  a mercenary  soldiery  may
keep  for  a time  both  classes  tied  down  in  common  oppression.
But  the  battle  must  break  out  again  and  again  in  ever-growing
dimensions,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  as  to  who  will  be  the
victor  in  the  end — ^the  appropriating  few,  or  the  immense  working
majority.  And  the  French  working  class  is  only  the  advanced
guard  of  the  modem  proletariate.

While  the  European  Governments  thus  testify,  before  Paris,  to
the  international  character  of  class  rule,  they  cry  down  the
International  Working  Men’s  Assodation — ^the  international
coimter-otganisation  of  labour  against  the  cosmopolitan  of
capital — as  the  head  fountain  of  all  these  disasters.  Thiers
denounced  it  as  the  despot  of  labour,  pretending  to  be  its  libera-
tor. Picard  ordered  that  aU  communications  between  the
French  Internationals  and  those  abroad  should  be  cut  off;
Gormt  Jaubet,  Thiers’s  mummified  accomplice  of  1835,  declares
it  the  great  problem  of  all  dvilised  governments  to  weed  it  out.
The  Rurals  roar  against  it,  and  the  whole  European  press  joins
the  chorus.  An  honourable  French  writer,  completdy  fordgn  to
our  Association,  speaks  as  follows:  The  members  of  the  Central
Committee  of  the  National  Guard,  as  wdl  as  the  greater  part  of
the  members  of  the  Gommime,  are  the  most  active,  intelligent,
and  energetic  minds  of  the  International  Working  Men’s  Associa-
tion . . . men  who  are  thoroughly  honest,  sincere,  intelligent,
devoted,  pure,  and  fanatical  in  the  good  sense  of  the  word.”  The
police-tinged  bourgeois  mind  naturally  figures  to  itsdf  the
International  Working  Men’s  Assodation  as  acting  in  the
maimer  of  a secret  conspiracy,  its  central  body  ordering,  from
time  to  time,  explosions  in  different  countries.  Our  Assodation  is,
in  fact,  nothing  but  the  international  bond  between  the  most


THE  dVTL  WAR  IN  FRANCE  63

advanced  working  men  in  the  various  countries  of  the  civilised
world.  Wherever,  in  whatever  shape,  and  tmder  whatever
conditions  the  cla»  struggle  obtains  any  consistency,  it  is  but
natural  that  members  our  assodadon  should  stand  in  the
foreground.  The  soil  out  of  which  it  grows  is  modem  society
itself.  It  caimot  be  stamped  out  by  any  amount  of  carnage.  To
stamp  it  out,  the  Government  would  have  to  stamp  out  the
despotism  of  capital  over  labour — the  condition  of  their  own
pararitical  existence.

Working-men’s  Paris,  with  its  Commune,  will  be  for  ever
edebrated  as  the  glorious  harbinger  of  a new  society.  Its  martyrs
are  enshrined  in  the  great  heart  of  the  working  class.  Its  exter-
minators history  has  already  nailed  to  that  eternal  pillory  from
which  all  the  prayers  of  their  priest  will  not  avail  to  r^eem  them.


THE  GENERAL  COUNCIL

M.  J.  Boon,  Fred.  Bradnick,  G.  H.  Buttery,  Caihil,  Wm.  Hales,
Kolb,  Lessner,  B.  Lucrafr,  Geoirge  Milner,  'libomas  Mottershead,
Charles  Murray,  George  Odger,  PfUnder,  Roach,  Ruhl,  Sadler,
Gowdl  Stepney,  Alf.  Taylor,  Wm.  Townshend.


CORKESFONDING  SECRETARIES


Eugene  Dupont,  for  France
Karl  Marx,  for  Germany  and
Holland.

FhED.  Engels,  for  Belgiiun  and
SpaiiL

Hermann  Juno,  for  Switzer-
land.


P.  Giovacchini,  for  Italy.
Zevy  Maurice,  for  Hungary.
Anton  Zabicki,  for  Poland.
James  Cohen,  for  Denmark.
J.  G.  Eccarius,  for  the  United
States.


Hermann  Jung,  Chairman.

John  Weston,  Treasurer.

George  Harris,  Financial  Secretary
John  Hales,  Gmeral  Secretary.


256  High  Hdbom,  London,  W.G.,  May  30th,  1871.


NOTES


“ The  column  of  prisoners  halted  in  the  Avenue  Uhrich,  and
was  drawn  up,  four  or  five  deep,  on  the  footway  &dng  to  the
road.  General  Marquis  de  Gallifet  and  his  staff  (fismounted  and
commenced  an  inspection  fix>m  the  left  of  the  line.  Walking
down  slowly  and  eyeing  the  ranks,  the  General  stopped  here
and  there,  tapping  a man  on  the  shoulder  or  beckoning  him  out
of  the  rear  ranks.  In  most  cases,  without  further  parley,  the
individual  thus  selected  was  marched  out  into  the  centre  of  the
road,  where  a small  supplementary  column  was  thus  soon
formed.  . . . It  was  evident  that  there  was  considerable  room  for
error.  A mounted  officer  pointed  out  to  General  Gallifet  a man
and  woman  for  some  particular  offence.  The  woman,  rushing
out  of  the  ranks,  threw  herself  on  her  knees,  and,  with  out-
stretched arms,  protested  her  innocence  in  passionate  terms.  The
general  waited  for  a pause,  and  then  with  most  impassible  face
and  unmoved  demeanour,  said:  * Madame,  I have  visited  every
theatre  in  Paris,  your  acting  will  have  no  effect  on  me  ’ (ce  n’est
paslapeinedejouerlacomedie).  . . . It  was  not  a good  thing  on
that  day  to  be  noticeably  taller,  dirtier,  cleaner,  older,  or  uglier
than  one’s  neighbours.  One  individual  in  particular  struck  me
as  probably  owing  his  speedy  release  from  the  ills  of  this  world
to  his  having  a broken  nose.  . . . Over  a hundred  being  thus
chosen,  a firing  party  told  off,  and  the  column  resumed  its  march,
leaving  them  behind.  A few  minutes  afterwards  a dropping
fire  in  our  rear  commenced,  and  continued  for  over  a quarter  of
an  hour.  It  was  the  execution  of  these  summarily-convicted
wretches.” — ^Paris  Gorkesponoent  Daily  NewSf  June  8th. — ^This
Gallifet,  **  the  kq}t  man  of  his  wife,  so  notorious  for  her  shameless
exhibitions  at  the  orgies  of  the  Second  Empire,”  went,  during  the
war,  by  the  name  of  the  French  " Ensign  Pistol.”

“ The  Temps,  which  is  a careful  journal,  and  not  given  to
sensation,  tdls  a dreadful  story  of  people  imperfectly  shot  and
buried  b^ore  life  was  extinct.  A great  number  were  buried  in  the

64


NOTES


65

Square  round  St.  Jaques>la-Bouduere;  some  of  them  very
superficially.  In  the  daytime  the  roar  the  busy  streets  pre-
vented any  notice  being  taken;  but  in  the  stillness  of  the  night
the  inhabitants  of  the  houses  in  the  ndghbourhood  were  aroused
by  distant  moans,  and  in  the  morning  a clenched  hand  was  seen
protruding  through  the  soil.  In  consequence  of  this,  exhumations
were  ordered  to  take  place.  . . . Tliat  many  wounded  have
been  buried  alive  I have  not  the  slightest  doubt.  One  case  I can
vouch  for.  When  Brunei  was  shot  with  his  mistress  on  the  24th
ult.  in  the  courtyard  of  a house  in  the  Place  Vendome,  the  bodies
lay  there  until  the  afternoon  of  the  27th.  When  the  burial  party
came  to  remove  the  corpses,  they  found  the  woman  living  still,
and  took  her  to  an  ambulance.  Though  she  had  received  four
bullets  she  is  now  out  of  danger.’* — ^Pabis  Correspondent
Emmig  Standard,  June  8th.


