Capital, Volume III: The Process of Capitalist Production as a Whole (Karl Marx (Ernest Untermann, trans.; Friedrich Engels, ed.), 1909)
========================================================================================================================================
Marx's Capital, Vol. 3: The Process of Capitalist Production as a Whole. Completes the 3-volume set. Public domain. Internet Archive.

Se 

WokkKERS OF ALLCOUNTRILES, UNITE 

KARL MARX 

CAPITA 

A CRITIQUE OF POLITICAL 
ECONOMY 

Volume III 

Book I1I The Process 
of Capitalist Production 
as a Whole 

Edited by F. Engels 

FOREIGN LANGUAGES PUBLISHING HOUSE 
Moscow 1959 

PUBLISHERS' NOTE 

The third volume of Capital was prepared for the printer 
and published by Frederick Engels in 1894, alter the death of 
Karl Marx. 

The present English edition follows the German 1894 edition 
carefully checked with Marx's original manuscript, now pre- 
served ‘t the Institute of Marxism-Leninism under the C.C., 
C.P.S.U. The misprints and errors in figures and bibliograph. 
ical data discovered in the 1894 edition have been corrected, 
All quotations from English and American authors have been 
checked with the original sources. 

Extensive use has been made of the English translation of 
the third volume of Capifal, published by Charles H. Kerr 
& Co., Chicago, 1909. 

The book includes Engels’ Preface to the third volume of 
Capital. Engels' “Supplement to Capital, Volume Three” is giv- 
en in the appendix. The book is provided with a name index, an 
index of authorities and a subject index. 

All quotations from the English text of the first and second 
volumes of Capital refer to the publications: Karl Marx, Capital, 
Vol. I, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1954, and 
Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 11, Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, Moscow, 1957. 

[VII 

CONTENTS 

Preface 

BOOK Il 

THE PROCESS OF CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 
AS A WHOLE 

I 

PART I 

THE CONVERSION OF SURPILUS-YALUE INTO PROFIT 
AND OF THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO THE RATE OF PROFIT 

CHAPTER |. Cost-Price and Profit. . 2... ite ee om Sr igetaa ae iest ve. 25 
CHAPTER ff. The Rate of Profit 2... 1 ee el 4} 

CHAPTER #1i. The Relation of the Rate of Profit to the Rate of Surplus-Value 49 
CHAPTER IV. The Elfcct of the Turnover on the Rate of Profit .. - 70 
CHAPTER Y. Economy in ihe Employment of Constant Capital... . 77 
Lb feeGeneral aso. 4 ka ee GO ee RR 7 

{!.. Savings in Labour Conditious at the Expeuse of the Labourers. 
Coal Mines. Neglect of Indispensable Outlays... .--. +++ 87 

Vul CONTENTS 

Ill. Economy in the Generation and Transmission of Power, and in 

Buthdings: acco es ied ce ee le RPE So en ay Re NS en AS 8 DS. 96 

IV. Utilization of the Excretions of Production . 6... 00 ee - 100 

V, Economy Through Inventions ....... Bota, folie hace, eed - 103 

CHAPTER VI. The Effect of Price Fluctuations... 2... eee ee 104 
1. Fluctuations in the Price of Raw Materials, and Their Direct Effects 

on the Rate of Profit 2... eee «+ 104 

Il. Appreciation, Depreciation, Release, and Tie-up of Capital . . . . 109 

Ul. General Illustration. The Cotton Crisis of 1861-65 ....... 122 

CHAPTER VII, Supplementary Remarks»... 2... eee ee 136 

PART U 

CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

CHAPTER VE... Different Compositions of Capitals in Different Branches 
of Production and Resulling Differences in Rates of Prout ..... . 140 

CHAPTER IX. Formation of a General Rate of Profit (Average Rate of 
Profit) and Transformation of the Values of Commodities into Prices of 

Production: 3.20 2. pie isn. Wed SE Bags Wwe ele ag ook: BD 

CHAPTER X. Equalization of the General Rate of Profit Through Compe- 
tition. Market-Prices and Market-Values, Surplus-Proftt. .. 2... 170 
CHAPTER XI, Effects of General Wage Fluctuations on Prices of Production 196 
CHAPTER XII. Supplementury Remarks .. 2... 0. 2... 201 
I. Causes Implying a Change in the Price of Production. ... . . 201 

IL. Price of Production of Commodities of Average Composition . . 202 
Ill. The Capitalist's Grounds for Compensating .... 2... . . 204 

PART Il 

THE LAW OF THE TENDENCY OF THE RATE OF PROFIT 

TO FALL 
CHAPTER XII. The Law as Such .. 2... , Cane ike oe eee «~ 207 
CHAPTER XIV. Counteracting Influences... . 2... 227 
I. Increasing Intensity of Exploitation ©... Ld, » 227 
Il Depression of Wages Below the Value of Labour-Power + » 230 
Ill. Cheapening of Elements of Constant Capital 2... + + 230 

CONTENTS 1X 

CHAPTER XY. t.xposition of the (Internal Contradictions of the Law . . 236 

KeGeneral: oy 8 2 aot edie Se aS - 236 
Il. Conflict Between Expansion of Production and Production of Sur- 
plag-Value. of" as, She Ae a ee es 242 
Ml]. Excess Capital and Excess Population... 2 2, 245 
IV. Supplementary Remarks . 2... ee ee ee eee 254 

PART IV 

CONVERSION OF COMMODITY-CAPITAL AND MONEY-CAPITAL 
INTO COMMERCIAL CAPITAL AND MONEY-DEALING CAPITAL 
(MERCHANT'S CAPITAL) 

CHAPTER XV1i, Commercial Capital . 2. 2. ee ee 262 
CHAPTER XVH. Commercial Profit. 2... 2 ee 276 
CHAPTER XV#l!. The Turnover of Merchant’s Capital. Prices . . .. . 297 
CHAPTER XIX. Money-Dealing Capital boa @ idiegihts. 2% 310 
CHAPTER XX. Historica! Facts about Merchant's Capital . 2...) 318 
PART V 
DEVISION OF PROFIT INTO INTEREST AND PROFIT 
OF ENTERPRISE. INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 

CHAPTER XX1, \nterest-Bearing Capital . . 6. 2-1 es - . 332 
CHAPTER XXI1. Division of Profit. Rate of Interest. Natural Rate of 
Slmterést; 3 ee we) eA a oe a a is 351 
CHAPTER XXiIlI/. Interest and Profit of Enterprise... -.- +--+: - 363 
CHAPTER XXIV. Externalization of the Relations of Capital in the Form 

of Interest-Bearing Capital... ...... sirlatine ere the Seok, Sa 1g 383 
CHAPTER XXV. Credit and Fictitious Capital 2. 6 6 - ee ee ee 392 
CHAPTER XXVI. Accumulation of Money-Capital, Its Influence on the 

Interest Rate 6 Ac eo eR SE 405 
CHAPTER XXVII. The Role of Credit in Capitalist Production =. . + - 426 
CHAPTER XXVIII. Medium of Circulation and Capital: Views of Tooke 

and Fullarton . 2 2 ec ee ee eee ee ee ee 433 

HW —2757 

x CONTENTS 

i] 

CHAPTER XXIX. Component Parts of Bank Capital . 2 2 2 2 2 ee 453 
CHAPTER XXX. Mouey-Capital and Real Capital. |. 2 2. eee 465 
CHAPTER XXX. Money-Capital and Real Capital. Ul. (Continued) . . . 483 
1. Transformation of Money into Loan Capital. 2. 2.) 2... 483 

2. Transformation of Capital or Revenue into Moucy that is Trans- 
formed into Loan Capital. 2 2. 2. eee 490 
CHAPTER XXX//. Money-Capital aud Real Capital. II. (Concluded) . — . 493 

CHAPTER XXXIi1. The Mediun of Circulation in the Credit System =. 508 
CHAPTER XXXIV. The Currency Principle and the English Bank Legis - 

HSUG OD TB4G sce ics Vig ale ek wow er Sty ° Maes oe alge eg ox 534 
CHAPTER XXXV. Previous Metal and Rate of Exchange 2... 0... . 552 
|. Movement of the Gold Reserve... ......0...00, 552 

Il. The Rate of Exchange 2... ee 561 
Rate of Exchange with Asia. 2. 2... DL, >. . . 568 
England's Balance of Trade . 2... 2... 577 
CHAPTER XXXVI. Pre-Capitalist Relationships... 2... 580 
{uteresi in the Middle AGes 67 3) ake Ei, gdh OO bees a 596 

Advantages Derived by the Church from. the Prohibition of Interest 599 

PART VI 
TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

CHAPTER XXXVII. Introduction», 2... eee ee eee. B00 
CHAPTER XXXVIIt. Differential Reut: Genera) Remarks .. 2... 625 
CHAPTER XX XIX. Fitst Form of Differential Rent (Differential Rent [) . 634 
CHAPTER XL. Second Form of Differential Rent (Differential Rent Il) . 658 

CHAPTER XLI. Differential Rent [I.— First Case: Constant Price of Pro- 
HUE HON: | Span ire A Gs iota ge tegedealnes bag ee A 669 

CHAPTER XLil. Differentia) Rent II.— Second Case: Falling Price ol 
Production 

CHAPTER XLi11. Differential Rent {1— Third Case: Rising Price of Pro- 
duction 

Pes (Se ye apetiatht peat ins aR Se ap hele Be ees PEAS e, 694 
CHAPTER XLIV. Difierential Rent Also on the Worst Cultivated Soil 721 
CHAPTER XLV. Absolute Ground-Rent 2 730 

CHAPTER XLVI. Building Site Rent. Rent in Mining. Price of Land . . 754 

CONTENTS Xt 

CHAPTER XLVH. Genesis of Capitalist Ground-Rent 

sed oe ee 168 
|. Introductory Remarks 2. 2. ee ee 763 
IW. Labour Rent). 2260 Sleds ek eee Ease, Sw as ek a es 770 
UL Rent in Kind - 2... - Bay arent Se ieee ae ea CAA A 714 
IV. Monéy-Rent : 9s. G22 ao hho wd od BLA ER QO baw aS 777 
V. Métayage and Peasant Proprietorship of Land Parcels . . .. . 782 
PART Vi 
REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 
CHAPTER XLVI. The Trinity Formula -.-.-. - oie, erate Ere an 94 

CHAPTER XLIX. Concerning the Analysis of the Process of Branca sil 

CHAPTER L, Illusions Created by Competition . . . « ee ee 
CHAPTER LI. Distribution Relations and Production Relations h erate’ ¢ 855 
CHAPTER Lil. Classes . - - 2 ee ee ee ee . » 862 
F. ENGELS. SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 
1. Law of Value and Rate of Prott. - - «+ - pe ee eae 868 
I. The Stock Exchange ..- +. - +> ey ee ee ere | 
INDEXES 
WAME ANDER <6 6d Rae ee EE RE RLS SS Fe ae 987 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME {if 892 
SSUBIECT. INDEX x30 6-08. ote ete eM a ROLE ce ei tet inte 902 

PREFACE 

At last I have the privilege of making public this third book 
of Marx’s main work, the conclusion of the theoretical part. When 
I published the second volume, in 1885, 1 thought that except for 
a few, certainly very important, sections the third volume would 
probably offer only technical difficulties. This was indeed the case. 
But I had no idea at the time that these sections, the most impor- 
tant parts of the entire work, would give me as much trouble as they 
did, just as I did not anticipate the other obstacles, which were 
to retard completion of the work to such an extent. 

Next and most important of all, it was my eye weakness which 
for years restricted my writing time to a minimum, and which, 
even now, permits me to write by artificial light only in exception- 
al cases. Furthermore, there were other pressing labours which 
could not be turned down, such as new editions and translations 
of Marx’s and my own earlier works, hence reviews, prefaces, 
and supplements, often impossible without fresh study, etc. Above 
all, there was the English edition of the first volume of this work, 
for whose text I am ultimately responsible and which consequently 
consumed much of my time. Whoever has in any way followed 
the colossal’ growth of international socialist literature during 
the last ten years, particularly the great number of translations of 
Marx's and my own earlier works, will agree with me that I have 
been lucky that the number of languages in which I could be of help 
to the translators, and therefore could not refuse in all conscience 
to review their work, is very limited. But the growth of literature 
was merely indicative of a corresponding growth of the interna- 
tional working-class movement itself. And this imposed new 
obligations upon me. From the first days of our public activity 
it was Marx and I who shouldered the main burden of the work 
as go-betweens for the national movements of Socialists and workers 
in the various countries. This work expanded in proportion to 
the expansion of the movement as a whole. Up to the time of his 

PREFACE 

x lad borne the brunt of the burden in this as well. 
Sefer Hie death the ever-increasing bulk of work had to be 
done by myself alone, Since then it has become the rule for the 
various national workers’ parties to establish direct contacts, and 
this is fortunately ever more the case. Yet requests for my assist- 
ance are still far more frequent than | would wish in view of my 
theoretical work. But if a man has been active in the movement 
for more than filty years, as I have been, he regards the work 
connected with it as a bounden duty that brooks no delay. In our 
eventiul time, just as in the 16th century, pure theorists on social 
afiairs are found only on the side of reaction and for this reason 
they are not even theorists in the full sense of the word, but simply 
apologists of reaction. ; 

In view of the fact that I live in London my party contacts 
are limited to correspondence in winter, while in summer they 
are largely personal. This fact, and the necessity of following 
the movement in a steadily growing number of countries and 
a still more rapidly growing number of press organs, have com- 
pelled me to reserve matters which permit no interruption for 
completion during the winter months, and primarily the first 
three months of the year. When a man is past seventy his Meynert’s 
association fibres of the brain function with annoying prudence. 
He no longer surmounts interruptions in difficult theoretical 
problems as easily and quickly as before. It came about therefore 
that the work of one winter, if it was not completed, had to be 
largely begun anew the following winter. This was the case with 
the most difficult filth part. 

As the reader will observe from the following, the work of editing 
the third volume was essentially different from that of editing 
the second. In the case of the third volume there was nothing 
to go by outside a first extremely incomplete dralt.The beginnings 
of the various parts were, as a rule, pretty carefully done and 
even stylistically polished. But the farther one went, the more 
sketchy and incomplete was the manuscript, the more excursions 
it contained into arising side-issues whose proper place in the 
argument was left for later decision, and the longer and more 
complex the sentences, in which thoughts were recorded in statu 
nascendi. In some places handwriting and presentation betrayed 
all too clearly the outbreak and gradual progress of the attacks 
of ill health, caused by overwork, which at the outset rendered 
the author's work increasingly difficult and finally compelled 
him periodically to stop work altogether. And no wonder. Be- 
tween 1863 and 1867, Marx not only completed the first dralt of 

PREFACE 3 

the two last volumes of Capital and prepared the first volume for 
the printer, but also performed the enormous work connected with 
the founding and expansion of the International Workingmen's 
Association. As a result, already in 1864.and 1865 ominous signs 
of ill health appeared which prevented Marx from personally 
putting the finishing touches to the second and third volumes, 

I began my work by dictating into readable copy the entire 
manuscript, which was often hard to decipher even for me. This 
alone required considerable time. It was only then that I could 
start on the actual editing. I limited this to the essential. 
I tried my best to preserve the character of the first dralt 
wherever it was sufficiently clear. I did not even eliminate 
repetitions, wherever they, as was Marx's custom, viewed the 
subject from another standpoint or at least expressed the same 
thought in different words. Wherever my alterations or additions 
exceeded the bounds of editing, or where I had to apply Marx’s 
factual material to independent conclusions of my own, if even 
as laithfu] as possible to the spirit of Marx, I have enclosed the 
entire passage in brackets and alfixed my initials. Some of my 
footnotes are not enclosed in brackets; but wherever I have initialled 
them ] am responsible for the entire note. 

As is only to be expected in a first draft, there are numerous 
allusions in the manuscript to points which were lo have been 
expanded upon later, without these promises always having been 
kept. I have left them, because they reveal the author's intentions 
telative to future elaboration. 

Now as to details. 

As regards the first part, the main manuscript was serviceable 
only with substantial limitations. The entire mathematical cal- 
culation of the relation between the rate of surplus-value and the 
rate of profit (which makes up our Chapter III) is introduced in 
the very beginning, while the subject treated in our Chapter I 
is considered later and as the occasion arises. Two attempts at 
revising, each of them eight pages in folio, were useful here. But 
even these did not possess the desired continuity throughout. They 
furnished the substance for what is now Chapter I. Chapter II 
is taken from the main manuscript. There was a series of uncom- 
pleted mathematical calculations for Chapter III, as well as a whole, 
almost complete, note-book dating [rom the seventies, which 
presents the relation of the rate of surplus-value to the rate of 
profit in the form of equations. My [riend Samuel Moore, who has 
also translated the greater portion of the first volume into Eng- 
lish, undertook to edit this note-book for me, a work for which 

1* 

4 PREFACE 

he was far better equipped, being an old Cambridge mathema- 
tician. It was from his summary, with occasional use of the main 
manuscript, that 1 then compiled Chapter Ih. Nothing but the 
title was available for Chapter IV. But since its subject-matter, 
the influence of turnover on the rate of profit, is of vital impor- 
tance, I have written it myself, for which reason the whole chap- 
ter has been placed in brackets. It developed in the course of this 
work that the formula for the rate of profit given in Chapter III 
required modification to be generally valid. Beginning with Chap- 
ter V, the main manuscript is the sole source for the remainder 
of the part, although many transpositions and supplements were 
also essential. . 

As for the following three parts, aside from stylistic editing 
I was able to follow the original manuscript almost throughout. 
A few passages dealing mostly with the influence of turnover 
had to be brought into agreement with Chapter IV, which I had 
inserted, and are likewise placed in brackets and followed by my 
initials. 

The greatest difficulty was presented by Part V which dealt 
with the most complicated subject in the entire volume. And it 
was just at this point that Marx was overtaken by one of the above- 
mentioned serious attacks of illness. Here, then, was no finished 
draft, not even a scheme whose outlines might have been filled 
out, but only the beginning of an elaboration —olten just 
a disorderly mass of notes, comments and extracts. I tried at 
first to complete this part, as I had done to a certain extent 
with the first one, by filling in the gaps and expanding upon 
passages that were only indicated, so that it would at least approx- 
imately contain everything the author had intended. I tried 
this no less than three times, but failed in every attempt, and 
the time lost in this is one of the chief causes that held up this 
volume. At last I realized that I was on the wrong track. I should 
have had to go through the entire voluminous literature in this 
field, and would in the end have produced something that would 
nevertheless not have been a book by Marx. I had no other choice 
but to more or less cut the Gordian knot by confining myself 
to as orderly an arrangement of available matter as possible, 
and to making only the most indispensable additions. And so it 
was that I succeeded in completing the principal labours for this 
part in the spring of 1893. 

As lor the various chapters, Chapters XXI to XXIV were, in the 
main, complete. Chapters XXV and XXVI required a sifting of the 
references and an interpolation ol material Jound elsewhere. Chap- 

Das Kapital. 

Kritik der politischen Oekonomie. 

Von 

Karl Marx. 

-Dritter Band, erster Theil. 
Such Il: 

Der Gesammtprocess der kapitalistilschen Produktion. 
Kapitel I bis XXVIII. 

Herausgegeben von F'riedrich Engels. 

Das Recht dor Vehersetzung ist vorhehalten. 

Hamburg 
Verlag von Otto Meissner. 
1994. 

Title page of the first German edition of Vol. LIL, 1, of Capitat 

(Reduced) 

6 PREFACE 

tars XXVI and XXIX could be taken almost completely from 
the original manuscript, but Chapter X XVIII had to be re-arranged 
in places. The real difficulty, however, began with Chapter XXX. 
From here on it was not only a matter of properly arranging the 
references, but of putting the train of thought into proper order, 
interrupted as it was at every point by intervening clauses and 
deviations, etc., and resumed elsewhere, often just casually. Thus, 
Chapter XXX was put together by means of transpositions and 
excisions which were utilized, however, in other places. Chapter 
XXXI, again, possessed greater continuity. But then follows 
a long section in the manuscript, entitled “The Coniusion,” con-_ 
taining nothing but extracts from parliamentary reports on the 
crises of 1848 and 1857, in which are compiled statements of twenty- 
three businessmen and economists, largely on money and capital, 
gold drain, over-speculation, etc., and supplied here and there 
with short facetious comments. Practically all the then current 
views concerning the relation of money to capital are represented 
therein, either in the answers or in the questions, and it was the 
“confusion” revealed in identifying money and capital in the 
money-market that Marx meant to treat with criticism and sarcasm. 
After many attempts I convinced myself that this chapter could 
not be put into shape. Its material, particularly that supplied 
with Marx’s comments, was used wherever I found an opportune 
place for it. 

Next, in tolerable order, comes what I placed in Chapter XXXII. 
But this is immediately followed by a new batch of extracts [rom 
parliamentary reports on every conceivable thing pertinent to 
this part, intermingled with the author's comments. Toward 
the end these extracts and comments are focussed more and more 
on the movement of monetary metals and on exchange rates, and 
close with all kinds of miscellaneous remarks. On the other hand, 
ne “Pre-capitalist” chapter (Chap. XXXVI) was quite com- 
plete. M 

Of all this material beginning with the “Confusion,” save that 
which had been previously inserted, I made up Chapters XX XIII 
to XXXV. This could not, of course, be done without considerable 
interpolations on my part for the sake of continuity. Unless they 
are merely formal in nature, the interpolations are expressly 
indicated as belonging to me. In this way I have finally succeeded 
in working into the text all the author's relevant statements 
Nothing has been left out but a small portion of the extracts, 
which either repeated what had already been said, or touched 
on points which the manuscript did not treat any further. 

PREFACE 7 

The part on ground-rent was much more fully treated, although 
by no means properly arranged, if only for the fact that Marx 
found it necessary to recapitulate the plan of the entire part 
in Chapter XLIII (the last portion of the part on rent in the 
mariuscript). This was all the more desirable, since the manu- 
script opens with Chapter XXXVII, followed by Chapters XLV 
to XLVII, and only thereafter chapters XXXVIII to XLIV. The 
tables for the differential rent II involved the greatest amount 
of work and so did the discovery that the third case of this class 
of rent had not at all been analysed in Chapter XLIII, where 
il belonged. 

In the seventies Marx engaged in entirely new special stud- 
ies for this part on ground-rent. For years he had studied 
the Russian originals of statistical reports inevitable after the 
“reform” of 1861 in Russia and other publications on landowner- 
ship, had taken extracts from these originals, placed at his dis- 
posal in admirably complete form by his Russian friends, and 
had intended to use them for a new version of this part. Owing 
to the variety of forms both of landownership and of exploitation 
of agricultural producers in Russia, this country was to play 
the same role in the part dealing with ground-rent that England 
played in Book I in connection with industrial wage-labour. He 
was unfortunately denied the opportunity of carrying out this 
plan. 

Lastly, the seventh part was available complete, but only as 
a first draft, whose endlessly involved periods had first to be 
dissected to be made printable. There exists only the beginning 
of the final chapter. It was to treat of the three major classes of 
developed capitalist society—the landowners, capitalists and 
wage-labourers—corresponding to the three great forms of rev- 
enue, ground-rent, profit and wages, and the class struggle, an 
inevitable concomitant of their existence, as the actual conse- 
quence of the capitalist period. Marx used to leave such concluding 
summaries until the final editing, just before going to press, when 
the latest historical developments furnished him with unfailing 
regularity with proofs of the most laudable timeliness for his Lhe- 
oretical propositions, : 

Citations and proofs illustrating his statements are, as in_ the 
second volume, considerably less numerous than in the first. 
Quotations from Book | refer to pages in the 2nd and 8rd editions. 
Wherever the manuscript refers to theoretical statements of ear- 
lier economists, the name alone is given as a tule, and the quota- 
tions were to be added during the final ediling. Of course, | had 

8 PREFACE 

to leave this as it was. There are only four parliamentary reports, 
but these are abundantly used. They are the following: 

1) Reports from Committees (of the Lower House), Volume 
VIII, Commercia! Distress, Volume I], Part I. 1847-48. Minutes 
of Evidence.—Quoted as Commercial Distress 1847-48. ; 

2) Secret Committee of the House of Lords on Commercial 
Distress 1847. Report printed in 1848. Evidence printed in 1857 
(because considered too compromising in 1848).— Quoted as 
C. D. 1848.57. ; 

3) Report: Bank Acts, 1857.—Ditto, 1858.—Reports of the 
Committee of the Lower House on the Effect of the Bank Acts 
of 1844 and 1845. With evidence.—Quoted as: B. A. (also as 
B. C.) 1857 or 1858. ; 

I am going to start on the fourth volume—the history of the 
theory of surplus-value—as soon as it is in any way possible. 

In the preface to the second volume of Capital 1 had to square 
accounts with the gentlemen who raised a hue and cry at the time 
because they fancied to have discovered “in Rodbertus the secret 
source and superior predecessor of Marx.” I offered them an 
opportunity to show “what the economics of a Rodbertus can 
accomplish”; I defied them to show “in which way an equal aver- 
age rate of profit can and must come about, not only without a 
violation of the law of value, but on the very basis of it.” These 
same gentlemen who [or either subjective or objective, but as a rule 
anything but scientific reasons were then lionizing the brave 
Rodbertus as an economic star of the first magnitude, have without 
exception failed to [furnish an answer. However, other people 
have thought it worth their while to occupy themselves with the 
problem. 

In his critique of the second volume (Conrads Jahrbiicher, 
XI, 1885, S. 452-65), Professor Lexis took up the question, 
although he did not care to offer a direct solution. He says: “The 
solution of the contradiction” (between the Ricardo-Marxian law 
of value and an equal average rate of profit) “is impossible if the 
various Classes of commodities are considered individually and if 
their value is to be equal to their exchange-value, and the latter 
equal or proportional to their price.” According to him, the solu- 
tion is only possible if “we cease measuring the value of individ- 
ual commodities according to labour, and consider only the pro- 
duction of commodities as a whole and their distribution among 
the aggregate classes of capitalists and workers.... The working 

PREFACE 9 

class receives but a certain portion of the total product, ... the 
other portion, which falls to the share of the capitalist class, 
represents the surplus-product in the Marxian sense, and accord- 
ingly... the surplus-value. Then the members of the capitalist 
class divide this total surplus-value among themselves pod in 
accordance with the number of workers employed by them, but 
in proportion to the capital invested by each, the land also being 
accounted for as capital-value.” The Marxian ideal values deter. 
mined by units of labour incorporated in the commodities do not 
correspond to prices, but may be “regarded as points of departure 
of a shift which ieads to the actual prices. The latter depend on 
the fact that equal sums of capital demand equal profits.” For 
this reason some capitalists will secure prices higher than the 
ideal values for their commodities, and others will secure lower 
prices. “But since the losses and gains of surplus-value balance 
one another within the capitalist class, the total amount of the 
surplus-value is the same as it would be if all prices were pro- 
portional to the ideal values.” 

It is evident that the problem has not in any way been solved 
here, but has, though somewhat loosely and shallowly, been 
on the whole correctly formulated. And this is, indeed, more 
than we could have expected [rom a man who, like the ahove 
author, takes a certain pride in being a “vulgar economist.” It 
is really surprising when compared with the handiwork of other 
vulgar economists, which we shall later discuss. Lexis’s vulgar 
economy is, anyhow, in a class of its own. He says that capital 
gains might, at any rate, be derived inthe way indicated by Marx, 
but that nothing compels one to accept this view. On the contrary. 
Vulgar economy, he says, has at least a more plausible explanation, 
namely: “The capitalist sellers, such as the producer of raw ma- 
terials, the manufacturer, the wholesale dealer, and the retail 
dealer, all make a gain on their transactions by selling at a price 
higher than the purchase price, thus adding a certain percentage 
to the price they themselves pay for the commodity. The worker 
alone is unahle to obtain a similar additional value for his com- 
modity; he is compelled by reason of his unfavourable condition 
vis-a-vis the capitalist to sell his labour at the price it costs him, 
that is to say, for the essential means of his subsistence.... Thus, 
these additions to prices retain their full impact with regard to 
the buying worker, and cause the transfer of a part of the value 
of the total product to the capitalist class.” : 

One need not strain his thinking powers to see that this expla- 
nation for the profits of capital, as advanced by “vulgar economy, 

10 PREFACE 

amounts in practice to the same thing as the Marxian theory of 
surplus-value; that the workers are in just the same unfavourable 
condition” according to Lexis as according to Marx, that they 
are just as much the victims of swindle because every non-worker 
can sell commodities above price, while the worker cannot do 
so: and that it is just as easy to build up an at least equally plau- 
sible vulgar socialism on the basis of this theory, as that built 
in England on the foundation of Jevons’s and Menger’s theory 
of use-value and marginal utility. I even suspect that if Mr. 
George Bernard Shaw had been familiar with this theory of profit, 
he would have likely fallen to with both hands, discarding Jevons 
and Kart Menger, to build anew the Fabian church of the future 
upon this rock. ; 

In reality, however, this theory is merely a paraphrase of the 
Marxian. What defrays al] the price additions? It is the workers’ 
“total product.” And this is due to the fact that the commodity 
“labour,” or, as Marx has it, labour-power, has to be sold below its 
price. For if it is a common property of all commodities to be 
sold at a price higher than their cost of production, with 
labour being the sole exception since it is always sold at 
the cost of production, then labour is simply sold below the 
price that rules in this world of vulgar economy. Hence the 
resultant extra profit accruing to the capitalist, or capitalist class, 
arises, and can only arise, in the last analysis, from the fact that 
the worker, after reproducing the equivalent for the price of his 
labour-power, must produce an additional product for which 
he is not paid—i. e., a surplus-product, a product of unpaid la- 
bour, or surplus-value, Lexis is an extremely cautious man in the 
choice of his terms. He does not say anywhere outright that the above 
is his own conception. But if it is, it is plain as day that we are 
not dealing with one of those ordinary vulgar economists, of whom 
he says himself that every one of them is “at best only a hopeless 
idiot” in Marx's eyes, but with a Marxist disguised as a vulgar 
economist. Whether this disguise has occurred consciously or 
unconsciously is a psychological question which does not interest 
us at this point. Whoever would care to investigate this, right 
also probe how a man as shrewd as Lexis undoubtedly is, could 
at one time defend such nonsense as bimetallism. 

The first to really attempt an answer to the question was Dr. 
Conrad Schmidt in his pamphlet entitled Die Durchschnittsprofit- 
rate auf Grundlage des Marx’schen Werthgesetzes, Stuttgart, 
Dietz, 1889. Schmidt seeks to reconcile the details of the formation 
of market-prices with both the law of value and with the average 

RATMTAIS 

KPHTMKA NOJUTMYECKOH SKOHOMIM 

COUHHEHIE 

KAPJIA MAPKCA 

HaggHHoe Mond pemakulet HpHapHxa DHremeca 

Tlepenogb cb Htmeykaro 

TOMD TPETIL 

Kuura lit 

TIPOWECCH KATUTANMCTHYECKATO MPOHSBORCTBA 
B3ATHA Bb ISIOMD. 

C.METEPBYPTS 
1836 

Tille page of the first Russian editian of Vol. Ul, 1, of Capitas 

(Reduces a) 

12 PREFACE 

rate of profit. The industrial capitalist receives in his product, 
first, an equivalent of the capital he has advanced, and, second, a 
surplus-product for which he has paid nothing. But to obtain a 
surplus-product he must advance capital to production. That is, 
he must apply a certain quantity of materialized labour to be able 
to appropriate this surplus-product. For the capitalist, therefore, 
the capital he advances represents the quantity of materialized la- 
bour socially necessary for him to obtain this surplus-product. This 
applies to every industrial capitalist. Now, since commodities 
are mutually exchanged, according to the law of value, in propor- 
tion to the labour socially necessary for their production, and 
since, as far as the capitalist is concerned, the labour necessary for 
the manulacture of the surplus-product happens to be past labour 
accumulated in his capital, it follows that surplus-products are 
exchanged in proportion to the sums of capital required for their 
production, and not in proportion to the labour actually incorpo- 
rated in them. Hence the share of each unit of capital is equal to 
the sum of all produced surplus-values divided by the sum of the 
capitals expended in production. Accordingly, equal sums of capi- 
tal yield equal profits in equal time spans, and this is accomplished 
by adding the cost-price of the surplus-product so calculated, i.e., 
the average profit, to the cost-price of the paid product and by sell- 
ing both the paid and unpaid product at this increased price. The 
average rate of profit takes shape in spite of average commodity- 
prices being determined, as Schmidt holds, by the law of 
value. 

The construction is extremely ingenious. It is completely pat- 
terned alter the Hegelian model, but like the majority of Hege- 
lian constructions it is not correct. Surplus-product or paid prod- 
uct, makes no difference. If the law of value is also to be directly 
valid for the average prices, both of them must be sold at prices 
proportionate to the socially necessary labour required and expended 
in producing them. The law of value is aimed from the first against 
the idea derived [rom the capitalist mode of thought that accu- 
mulated labour of the past, which comprises capital, is not merely 
a certain sum of finished value, but that, because a factor in pro- 
duction and the formation of profit, it also produces value and is 
hence a source of more value than it has itself; it establishes that 
living labour alone possesses this faculty. It is well known that 
capitalists expect equal profits proportionate to their cap- 
itals and regard their advances of capita! as a sort of cost-price 
of their profits. But if Schmidt utilizes this conception as a means 
of reconciling prices based on the average rate ol profit with the 

PREVACE 13 

law of value, he repudiates the law of value itself by attributing 
to it as one of its co-determinative factors a conception with which 
the law is wholly at variance. 

Either accumulated labour creates value the same as living 
labour. In that case the law of value does not apply. 

Or, it does not create value. In that case Schmidt’s demonstra- 
tion is incompatible with the law of value. 

Schmidt strayed into this bypath when quite close to the solu- 
tion, because he believed that he needed nothing short of a mathe- 
matical formula to demonstrate the conformance of the average 
price of every individual commodity with the law of value. But 
while on the wrong track in this instance, in the immediate prox- 
imity of the goal, the rest of his booklet is evidence of the under- 
standing with which he drew further conclusions from the first 
two volumes of Capital. His is the honour of independently finding 
the correct explanation developed by Marx in the third part of 
the third volume for the hitherto inexplicable sinking tendency 
of the rate of profit, and, similarly, of explaining the derivation 
of commercial profit out of industrial surplus-value, and of making 
a great number of observations concerning interest and ground- 
rent, in which he anticipates ideas developed by Marx in the fourth 
and fifth parts of the third volume. 

In a subsequent article (Neue Zeit, 1892-93, Nos. 3 and 4), 
Schmidt takes a different tack in his effort to solve the problem. 
He contends thal it is competition which produces the average 
rate of profit by causing the transfer of capital irom branches 
of production with under-average profit to branches with above- 
average profit. It is not a revelation that competition is the great 
equalizer of profits. But now Schmidt tries to prove that this 
levelling of profits is identical with a reduction of the selling price 
of commodities in excess supply to a magnitude of value which 
society can pay for them according to the law of value. Marx's 
analyses in the book itself are ample evidence why this way, too, 
could not lead to the goal. 

Alter Schmidt P. Fireman tackled the problem (Conrads Jahr- 
biicher, dritte Folge, III, S. 793). 1 shall not go into his remarks 
on other aspects of the Marxian analysis. They rest upon the false 
assumption that Marx wishes to define where he only investigates, 
and that in general one might expect fixed, cut-to-measure, once 
and for all applicable definitions in Marx’s works. It is self-evident 
that where things and their interrelations are conceived, not as 
fixed, but as changing, their mental images, the ideas, are like- 
wise subject tochange and transformation, and they are not encapsu- 

14 PREFACE 

lated in rigid definitions, but are developed in their historical or 
logical process of formation. This makes clear, of course, why 
in the beginning oi his first book Marx proceeds from the simple 
production of commodities as the historical premise, ultimately 
to arrive from this basis to capital—why he proceeds from the 
simple commodity instead of a logically and historically secondary 
form—irom an already capitalistically modified commodity. 
To be sure, Fireman positively fails to see this. These and other 
side-issues, which could give rise to still other diverse objections, 
are better left by the wayside, while we go on forthwith to the gist 
of the matter. While theory teaches Fireman that at a given rate 
of surplus-value the latter is proportional to the labour-power 
employed, he learns from experience that at a given average rate 
of profit, profit is proportional to the total capital employed. 
He explains this by saying that profit is merely a conventional 
phenomenon (which means in his language that it belongs to 
a definite social formation with which it stands and falls). Its 
existence is simply tied up with capital. The latter, provided 
it is strong enough to secure a profit for itself, is compelled by 
competition also to secure for itself a rate of profit equal for all 
sums of capital. Capitalist production is simply impossible with- 
out an equal rate of profit. Given this mode of production, the 
quantity of profit for the individual capitalist can, at a certain 
rate of profit, depend only on the magnitude of his capital. On 
the other hand, profit consists of surplus-value, of unpaid labour. 
But how is surplus-value, whose magnitude hinges upon the degree 
of labour exploitation, transformed into profit, whose magnitude 
depends upon the amount of the capital employed? “Simply by 
selling commodities above their value in all branches of produc- 
tion in which the ratio between ... constant and variable capital 
is greatest; but this also implies that commodities are sold below 
their value in those branches of production in which the ratio 
between constant and variable capital=c ; v is smallest, and that 
commodities are sold at their true value only in branches in which 
the ratio of c: v represents a certain mean figure.... Is this dis- 
crepancy between individual prices and their respective values 
a refutation of the value principle? By no means. For since the 
prices of some commodities rise above their value as much as 
the prices of others fall below it, the total sum of prices remains 
equal to the total sum of values... in the end this incongruily 
disappears.” This incongruity is a “disturbance”; “however, in 
the exact sciences it is not customary to regard a predictable dis- 
turbance as a refutation of a law.” 

PREFACE is 

On comparing the relevant passages in Chapter 1X with the 
above, it will be seen that Fireman has indeed placed his finger 
on the salient point. But the undeservedly cool reception of his 
able article shows how many interconnecting Jinks would still 
be needed even after this discovery to enable Fireman to work 
out a full and comprehensive solution. Although many were in- 
terested in this problem, they were all still fearful of getting their 
fingers burnt. And this is explained not only by the incomplete 
form in which Fireman left his discovery, but also by the un- 
deniable faultiness of both his conception of the Marxian analysis 
and of his own general critique of the latter, based as it was on 
his misconception. 

Whenever there is achance of making a fool of himself over some 
difficult matter, Herr Professor Judius Wolf, of Zurich, never fails 
to do so. He tells us (Conrads Jahrbticher, 1891, dritte Folge, II, 
S. 352 and following) that the entire problem is resolved in rel- 
ative surplus-value. The production of relative surplus-value rests 
on the increase of constant capital vis-a-vis variable capital. “A 
plus in constant capital presupposes a plus in the productive 
power of the labourers. Since this plus in productive power (by 
way of lowering the worker's cost of living) produces a plus in 
surplus-value, a direct relation is established between the in- 
creasing surplus-value and the increasing share of constant capital 
in total capital. A plus in constant capital indicates a plus in the 
productive power of labour. With variable capital remaining 
the same and constant capital increasing, surplus-value must 
therefore, in accordance with Marx, increase as well. This was 
the problem presented to us.” 

True, Marx says the very opposite in a hundred places in the 
first book; true, the assertion that, according to Marx, when var- 
iable capital shrinks, relative surplus-value increases in propor- 
tion to the increase in constant capital, is so astounding that it 
puts to shame all parliamentary declamation; true, Herr Julius 
Wolf demonstrates in his every line that he does not in the least 
understand, be it relatively or absolutely, the concepts of relative 
or absolute surplus-value; to be sure he says himself that “at first 
glance one seems really to be in a nest of incongruities,” which, 
by the way, is the only true statement in his entire article. But 
what does all that matter? Herr Julius Wolf is so proud of his 
brilliant discovery that he cannot refrain from bestowing posthu- 
mous praise on Marx for it and from extolling his own lathomless 
nonsense as a “new proof of the keen and far-sighted way his (Marx’s) 
system of criticism of capitalist economy is set forth.” 

16 PREFACE. 

But now comes the choicest bit of all. Herr Wolf says: “Ricardo 
has likewise claimed that an equal investment ol capital yielded 
equal surplus-value (profit), just as the same expenditure of la- 
bour created the same surplus-value (as regards its quantity). 
And the question now was how the one agreed with the 
other. But Marx has refused to accept this way of putting the 
problem. He has proved beyond a doubt (in the third volume) that 
the second statement was not necessarily a consequence of the law 
of value, that it even contradicted his law of value and should 
therefore ... be forthwith repudiated.” And thereupon Wolf probes 
who of us two, Marx or I, had made a mistake. It does not oceur 
to him, naturally, that it is he who is groping in the dark. 

1 should offend my readers and fail to see the humour of the sit- 
uation if I] were to waste a single word on this choice morsel. 1 
shall only add that his audacity in using the opportunity to report 
the ostensible gossip among professors that Conrad Schmidt’s 
above-named work was “directly inspired by Engels” matches the 
audacity with which he dared to say at one time what “Marx has 
proved beyond a doubt in the third volume.” Herr Julius Wolf! 
it may be customary in the world in which you live and strive for 
the man who publicly poses a problem to others to acquaint his 
close friends on the sly with its solution. I am quite prepared to 
believe that you are capable of this sort of thing. But that a man 
need not stoop to such shabby tricks in my world is proved by the 
present preface. 

No sooner had Marx died than Mr. Achille Loria hastened to 
publish an article about him in the Nuova Antologia (April 1883). 
To begin with, a biography brimming with misinformation, fol- 
lowed by a critique of public, political and literary work. He 
falsifies Marx’s materialist conception of history and distorts it 
with an assurance that bespeaks a great purpose. And this purpose 
was eventually carried out. In 1886, the same Mr. Loria published 
a book, La feoria economica della constituzione politica, in which 
he announced to his astounded contemporaries that Marx’s con- 
ception of history, so completely and purposefully misrepresented 
by him in 1883, was his own discovery, To be sure, the Marxian 
theory is reduced in this book to a rather Philistine level, and the 
historical illustrations and proofs abound in blunders which would 
never be tolerated ina fourth-form boy. But what does that matter? 
The discovery that political conditions and events are everywhere 
invariably explained by corresponding economic conditions was 
as is herewith demonstrated, not made by Marx in 1845, but by 
Mr. Loria in 1886. At least he has happily convinced his coun- 

PREFACE 17 

trymen of this, and, after his book appeared in French, also some 
Frenchmen, and can now pose in Italy as the author of a new 
epoch-making theory of history until the Italian Socialists find 
time to strip the illustrious Loria of his stolen peacock feathers, 
But this is just a sample of Mr. Loria’s style. He assures us that 
all Marx’s theories rest on conscious sophistry (wn consaputo so- 
fisma),; that Marx did noi stop at paralogisms even when he knew 
them to be paralogisms (sapendoli tali), etc. And a{ter thus impress- 
ing the necessary upon his readers with a series of similar contempt- 
ible insinuations, so that they should regard Marx as an unprin- 
cipled upstart 4 la Loria who achieves his little effects by the same 
wretched humbug as our professor from Padua, he reveals an impor- 
tant secret to them, and thereby takes us back to the rate of profit. 
Mr. Loria says: According to Marx, the amount of surplus-value 
(which Mr. Loria here identifies with profit) produced in a capitalist 
industrial establishment should depend on the variable capital 
employed in it, since constant capital does not yield profit. But 
this is contrary to fact. For in practice profit does not depend on 
variabie, but on total capital. And Marx himself recognizes 
this (Buch I, Kap. XI)* and admits that on the surface facts ap- 
pear to contradict his theory. But how does he get around this 
contradiction? He refers his readers to an as yet unpublished sub- 
sequent volume. Loria has already told A/s readers about this 
volume that he did not believe Marx had ever entertained the 
thought of writing it, and now exclaims triumphantly: “I have 
not been wrong in contending that this second volume, which 
Marx always flings at his adversaries without it ever appearing, 
might very well have been a shrewd expedient applied by Marx 
whenever scientific arguments failed him (un fngegnoso spediente 
ideato dat Marx a sostituzione degli argomenti scientifici).” And 
whosoever is not convinced after this that Marx slands in the same 
class ol scientific swindlers as /’/llustre Loria, is past all redemption. 
We have at least learned this much: According to Mr. Loria, 
the Marxian theory of surplus-value is absolutely incompatible 
with the existence of a general equal rate of profit. Then, there 
appeared the second volume and therewith my public cha!lenge 
precisely on this very point. If Mr. Loria had been one of us dil- 
fident Germans, he would have experienced a certain degree of 
embarrassment. But he is a cocky southerner, coming from a hot 
climate, where, as he can testify, cool nerve is a natural require- 
ment. The question of the rate of profit lias been publicly put. 

* English edition: Karl Marx, Cap:tal, Vol. 1, Ch. X11], Moscow, 1954.—£d. 

18 PREFACE 

Mr. Loria has publicly declared it insoluble. And for this very 
reason he is now going to outdo himself by publicly solving it. 

This miracle is accomplished in Conrads Jahrbdcher, neue Folge, 
Buch. XX, S. 272 and following, in an article dealing with Conrad 
Schmidt’s already cited pamphlet. After Loria learned from Schmidt 
how commercial profit was made, he suddenly saw daylight. 
“Since determining value by means of labour-time is to the advan- 
tage of those capitalists who invest agreater portion of their cap- 
ital in wages, the unproductive” (read commercial) “capital 
can derive a higher interest” (read profit) “from these privileged 
capitalists and thus bring about an equalization between the in- 
dividual industrial capitalists... For instance, if each of the in- 
dustrial capitalists A, B, C uses 100 working-days and 0, 100, 200 
constant capital respectively in production, and if the wages for 
100 working-days amount to 50 working-days, then each receives 
a surplus-value of 50 working-days, and the rate of profit is 100° 
for the first, 33.3% for the second, and 20% for the third capital- 
ist. But if a fourth capitalist D accumulates an unproductive 
capital of 300, which claims an interest” (profit) “equal in value 
to 40 working-days from A, and an interest of 20 working-days 
from B, then the rate of profit of capitalists A and B will sink 
to 20%, just as that of C, while D with his capital of 300 receives 
profit of 60, or a rate of profit of 20%, the same as the other cap- 
italists.” 

With such astonishing dexterity, (illustre Loria solves by 
sleight of hand the question which he had declared insoluble ten 
years previously. Unfortunately, he did not let us into the secret 
wherefrom the “unproductive capital” obtained the power to squeeze 
out of the industrialists their extra profit in excess of the average 
tate of profit, and to retain it in its own pocket, just as the land- 
owner pockets the tenant’s surplus profit as ground-rent. Indeed, 
according to him it would be the merchants who would raise a 
tribute analogous to ground-rent from the industrialists, and 
would thereby bring about an average rate of profit. Commercial 
capital is indeed a very essential factor in producing the general 
rate of profit, as nearly everybody knows. But only a literary ad- 
venturer who in his heart sneezes at political economy, can ven- 
ture the assertion that it has the magic power to absorb all surplus- 
value in excess of the general rate of profit even before this general 
Tate has taken shape, and to convert it into ground-rent for itself 
without, moreover, even having need to do with any real estate. 
No less astonishing is the assertion that commercial capital man- 
ages to discover the particular industrialists, whose sur>lus- 

PREFACE 19 

value just covers the average rate of profit, and that it considers 
it a privilege to mitigate the lot of these luckless victims of the 
Marxian law of value to a certain extent by selling their products 
gratis for them, without asking as much as a commission for it. 
What a mountebank one must be to imagine that Marx had need 
to resort to such miserable tricks! 

But it is not until we compare him with his northern compet- 
itors, for instance with Herr Julius Wolf, who was not born yes- 
terday either, that the illustrious Loria shines in his full glory. 
What a yelping pup Herr Wolf appears even in his big volume 
on Sozialismus und kapitalistische Gesellschaftsordnung, alongside 
the Italian! How awkward, I am almost tempted to say modest, 
he appears beside the rare confidence of the maestro who takes 
it for granted that Marx, neither more nor less than other people, 
was as much a sophist, paralogist, humbug and mountebank as 
Mr. Loria himself—that Marx took in the public with the prom- 
ise of rounding out his theory in a subsequent volume whenever 
he was in a difficult position, knowing full well that he neither 
could nor ever would write it. Boundless nerve coupled with a 
flair for slipping like an eel through impossible situations, a he- 
roic contempi lor pummellings received, hasty plaggiarism of 
other people’s accomplishments, importunate and fanfaronading 
advertising, spreading his fame by means of a chorus of friends— 
who can equal him in all this? 

Italy is the land of classicism. Ever since the great era when 
the dawn of modern times rose there, it has produced magnificent 
characters of unequalled classic perfection, from Dante to Gari- 
baldi. But the period of its degradation and foreign domination 
also bequeathed it classic character-masks, among them 
two particularly clear-cut types, that of Sganarelle and Dulca- 
mara. The classic unity of both is embodied in our éllustre 
Loria. 

In conclusion [ must take my readers across the Atlantic. Dr. 
(Med.) George C. Stiebeling, of New York, has also found a solu- 
tion to the problem, and a very simple one. So simple, indeed, 
that no one either here, or there, took him seriously. This aroused 
his ire, and he complained bitterly about the injustice of it in 
an endless stream of pamphlets and newspaper articles appearing 
on both sides of the great water. He was told in the Neue Zeit 
that his entire solution rested on a mathematical error. But this 
could scarcely disturb him. Marx had also made mathematical 
errors, and was yet right in many things. Let us then take a look 
at Dr. Stiebeling’s solution. 

Q* 

20 PREFACE 

“T take two factories working with equal capitals for an equal 
length of time, but with a different ratio of constant and variable 
capitals. I make the total capital (c+v)=y, and the difference 
in the ratio of the constant and variable capital=x. For facto- 
ry I, v=cty, for factory II, y=(c—x)+(v-+x). Therefore the 
rate of surplus-value [or factory I=s, and for factory ay . 
Profit (p) is what I call the total surplus-value (s) by which the 
total capital y, or e+v, is augmented in the given time; thus, 

p=s. Hence, the rate of profit for factory coe or ww and for 

« age _ § 
i.e., it is also=ezy- The... 

factory J] it is also Por a at 

y (c—x)T(V7X) : 
problem thus resolves itself in such a way that, on the basis of 
the law of value, with equal capital and equal time, but unequal 
quantities of living labour, a change in the rate of surplus-value 
causes the equalization of an average rate ol profit.” (G. C. Stie- 
beling, Das Werthgesetz und die Profitrate, New York, John Hein- 
tich, 

Hecke: pretty and revealing the above calculation may be, 
we are compelled to ask Dr. Stiebeling one question: How does 
he know that the sum of surplus-value produced by factory I is 
exactly equal to the sum of the surplus-value produced by fac- 
tory Il? He states explicitly that c, v, y and x, that is, all the 
other factors in the calculation, are the same for both factories, 
but makes no mention of s. It does not by any means follow from 
the fact that he designated both of the above-mentioned quanti- 
ties of surplus-value algebraically with s. Rather, it is just the 
thing that has to be proved, since Mr. Stiebeling without further 
ado also identifies profit p with the surplus-value. Now there are 
just two possible alternatives. Either the two s’s are equal, both 
factories produce equa! quantities of surplus-value, and therefore 
also equal quantities of profit, since both capitals are equal. 
In that case Mr. Stiebeling has from the start taken for granted 
what he was really called upon to prove. Or, one factory produces 
more surplus-value than the other, in which case his entire cal- 
culation tumbles about his ears. 

Mr. Stiebeling spared neither pains nor money to build moun- 
tains of calculations upon this mathematical error, and to exhibit 
them to the public. I can assure him, for his own peace of mind, 
that they are nearly all equally wrong, and that in the exceptional 
cases when this is not so, they prove something entirely different 
from what he set out to prove. He proves, for instance, by com- 
paring U.S. census figures for 1870 and 1880 that the rate of profit 

PREFACE 2} 

has actually fallen, but interprets it wrongly and assumes that 
Marx’s theory of a constantly stable rate of profit should be cor- 
rected on the basis of experience. Yel it follows from the third 
part of the present third book that this Marxian “stable rate of 
profit” is purely a figment of Mr. Stiebeling’s imagination, and 
that the tendency for the rate of profit to fall is due to circumstances 
which are just the reverse of those indicated by Dr. Stiebeling. 
No doubt Dr. Stiebeling has the best intentions, but when a man 
wants to deal with scientific questions he should above all learn 
to read the works he wishes to use just as the author had written 
them, and above all without reading anything into them that 
they do not contain. 

The outcome of the entire investigation shows again with ref- 
erence to this question as well that it is the Marxian school alone 
which has accomplished something. If Fireman and Conrad Schmidt 
read this third book, each one, for his part, may well be satisfied 
with his own work. 

Frederick Engels 
London, October 4, 1894 

Book It 
THE PROCESS 
OF CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 
AS A WHOLE 

I 

eres 

PART I 

THE CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE 
INTO PROFIT 
AND OF THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 
INTO THE RATE OF PROFIT 

CHAPTER 1 
COST-PRICE AND PROFIT 

In Book I we analysed the phenomena which constitute the 
process of capitalist production as such, as the immediate pro- 
ductive process, with no regard for any of the secondary effects 
of outside influences. But this immediate process of production 
does not exhaust the life span of capital. It is supplemented in 
the actual world by the process of circuladion, which was the ob- 
ject of study in Book II. In the latter, namely in Part III, which 
treated the process of circulation as a medium for the process 
of social reproduction, it developed that the capitalist process 
of production taken as a whole represents a synthesis of the proc- 
esses of production and circulation. Considering what this third 
book treats, it cannot confine itself to general reflection relative 
to this synthesis. On the contrary, it must locate and describe 
the concrete forms which grow out of the movements of capital 
as a whole. In their actual movement capitals confront each other 
in such concrete shape, for which the form oi capital in the im- 
mediate process of production, just as its form in the process of 
circulation, appear only as special instances. The various forms 
of capital, as evolved in this book, thus approach step by step 
the form which they assume on the surface of society, in the action 
of different capitals upon one another, in competition, and in 
the ordinary consciousness of the agents of production themselves. 

_ The value of every commodity produced in the capitalist way 
is represented in the formula: C=c+v-+s. If we subtract surplus- 
value s from this value of the product there remains a bare equiv- 

6G CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALURE INTO PROFIT 

alent or a substitute value in goods, for the capital-value c+v 
expended in the elements of production. ‘ ; . 

For example, if the production of a certain article requires 
a capital outlay of £500, of which £20 are for the wear and tear 
of instruments of production, £380 for the materials of production, 
and £100 for labour-power, and if the rate of surplus-value is 
100%, then the value of the product=400,+100,+-100,=£600. 

After deducting the surplus-value of £100, {here remains a com- 
moditv-value of £500 which only replaces the expended capital 
of £500. This portion of the value of the commodity, which re- 
places the price of the consumed means of production and labour- 
power, only replaces what the commodity costs the capitalist him- 
self. For him it, therefore, represents the cost-price of the com- 
modity. 

What the commodity costs the capitalist and its actual pro- 
duction cost are two quite different magnitudes. That portion 
of the commodity-value making up the surplus-value does not 
cost the capitalist anything simply because it costs the labourer 
unpaid labour. Yet, on the basis of capitalist production, after 
the labourer enters the production process he himself constitutes 
an ingredient of operating productive capital, which belongs 
to the capitalist. Therefore, the capitalist is the actual producer 
of the commodity. For this reason the cost-price of the commodity 
necessarily appears to the capitalist as the actual cost of the com- 
modity. If we take k to be the cost-price, the formula C=c+v+s 
turns into the formula C=k-+s, that is, the commodity-value= 
=cost -price+surplus-value. 

The grouping of the various value portions of a commodity 
which only replace the value of the capital expended in its pro- 
duction under the head of cost-price expresses, on the one hand, 
the specific character of capitalist production. The capitalist cost 
of the commodity is measured by the expenditure of capital, while 
the actual cost of the commodity is measured by the expenditure 
of labour. Thus, the capitalist cost-price of the commodity differs 
in quantity from its value, or Its actual cost-price. It is smaller 
than the value of the commodity, because, with C=k-+s, it is 
evident that k=C—s. On the other hand, the cost-price of a com- 
modity is by no means simply acategory which exists only in cap- 
italist book-keeping. The individualization of this portion of 
value is continually manifest in practice in the actual production 
of the commodity, because it has ever to be reconverted from 
its commodity-form by way of the process of circulation into the 
form of productive capital, so that the cost-price of the commodity 

Eo 
Bau Ly. DLO Pte 5 ene 
a Lae. 

Al tot . > Conta, 
fei aeration eo ae 

eee (as Loe) camps aad Haye Mog Gos, Leal Tress. Stirs 
ee WGAS my Geyptltd, bp bee oem Pepe seagate Unk 
Bat = frente Deana Pee SR A hehe bite 7 

; ee actin | Ent VA Eatsatn Pym nd lon ee 
sah 2a $A A a hdey AM UIA ahem ee” AL fe OAL 

dete ete DA ah a) aire Se foe 
a THR Gs 2 OH RE 
Cncoery Aural ap GAT na ore el bare 
S ae 
Letey 2S aap epee ee cepa TES ae att gene ot 

cy! 
PN STEN SoA wile Sse SAE mein Opa a 
een get car ve > ha ae 
4 Ge Rag Be we Eg a LO ts TF ons 
A EYON raat tere et ee: 2 ie ai EY, 
wen Ndi en 5 asa ae ete 
» TAG ate Tete RS ak 
Facsimile of the manuscript of page I, Vol. If] 
(Reduced) 

+ Of Capital 

8 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

always must repurchase the elements of production consumed in 
its manuiacture. : ; 

The category of cost-price, on the other hand, has nothing to do 
with the formation of cammodity-value, or with the process of 
seli-expansion of capital. When I know that of the value of a 
commodity worth £600, five-sixths, or £500, represent no more 
than an equivalent of the capital of £500 consumed in its produc- 
tion and that it can therefore suffice only to repurchase the mate- 
rial elements of this capital, | know nothing as yet either of the 
way in which these five-sixths of the value of the commodity, 
which represent its cost-price, are produced, or about the way 
in which the last sixth, which constitutes its surplus-value, was 
produced. The investigation will show, however, that in capital- 
ist economics the cost-price assumes the false appearance of a 
category of value production itself. 

To return to our example. Suppose the value produced by one 
labourer during an average social working-day is represented by 
a money sum of 6s.= 6M. Then the advanced capital of £500= 
=400,+100, represents a value produced in 1,6667/, ten-hour 
working-days, of which 1,333'/, working-days are crystallized 
in the value of the means of production=400,, and 333'/, working- 
days are crystallized in the value of labour-power==100,. Having 
assumed a rate of surplus-value of 100%, the production of the 
commodity to be newly formed entails a labour expenditure= 
==100,+100,=6667/, ten-hour working-days. 

We know, then (see Buch I, Kap. VII, S. 201/193),* that the val- 
ue of the newly created product of £600 is composed of 1) the reap- 
pearing value of the constant capital of £400 expended for means 
of production, and 2) a newly produced value of £200. The cost- 
price of the commodity=£500 comprises the reappearing 400, 
and one half of the newly produced value of £200 (=100,), that 
is, two elements of the commodity-value which are of entirely 
diflerent origin. 

Owing to the purposive nature of the labour expended during 
666"), ten-hour working-days, the value of the consumed means 
of production amounting to £400 is transferred from these means 
of production to the product, This previously existing value thus 
Teappears as a component part of the value of the product, but 
is not created in the process of production of ¢his commodity. It 
exists as a component of the value of the commodity only because 
it previously. existed as an element of the invested capital. The 

* English edition: Ch. [X, p, 212,—Ed. 

COST-PRICE AND PROFIT 29 

expended constant capital is therefore teplaced by that portion of 
the value of the commodity which this capital itself adds to that 
value. This element of the cost-price, therefore, has a double mean- 
ing. On the one hand, it goes into the cost-price of the commodity, 
because it is part of the commodity-value which replaces consumed 
capital. And on the other hand, it forms an element of the commod- 
ity-value only because it is the value of expended capital, or be- 
cause the means of production cost so and so much. 

It is quite the reverse in the case of the other element of the cost- 
price. The 666*/, working-days expended in the production of the 
commodity create a new value of £200. One portion of this new val- 
ue merely replaces the advanced variable capital of £100, or the 
price of the labour-power employed. But this advanced capital- 
value does not in any way go into the creation of the new value. 
So far as the advance of capital is concerned, labour-power counts 
as a value. But in the process of production it acts as the creator 
of value. The place of the value of the labour-power that obtains 
within the advanced capital is taken in the actually functioning 
productive capital by living value-creating labour-power itself. 

The difference between these various elements of the commodity- 
value, which together make up the cost-price, leaps 1o the eye 
whenever a change takes place in the size of the value of either the 
expended constant, or the expended variable, part of the capital. 
Let the price of the same means of production, or of the constant 
part of capital, rise [rom £400 to £600, or, conversely, let it fall 
to £200. Inthe first case it is not only the cost-price of the commod- 
ity which rises from £500 to 600.4+100,=2%700, but also the 
value of the commodity which rises Irom £600 to 600.+100,+ 
+100,==£800. In the second case, it is not only the cost-price which 
falls from £500 to 200,+100,=£300, but also the value of the 
commodity which falls from £600 to 200, + 100,+-100,=£400. Since 
the expended constant capital transfers its own value to the prod- 
uct, the value of the product rises or falls with tle absolute mag- 
nitude of that capital-value, other conditions remaining equal. 
Assume, on the other hand, that, other circumstances remaining 
unchanged, the price of the same amount of labour-power rises 
from £100 to £150, or, conversely, that it falls from £100 to £50. 
In the first case, the cost-price rises [rom £500 to 400,<-150,= 
== £550, and falls in the second case [rom £500 to 400,+-50,=£450. 
But in either case the commodity-value remains unchanged = £600, 
one time it is 400,+150,+50,, and the other time, 400.+-50,-+ 
-+150,. The advanced variable capital does not add its own value 
to the product. The place of its value is taken in the product rath- 

a0 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

er by a new value created by labour. Therefore, a change in the 
absolute magnitude of the variable capital, so far as it expresses 
merely a change in the price of labour-power, does not in the least 
alter the absolute magnitude of the commodity-value, because it 
does not alter anything in the absolute magnitudeof the new value 
created by living labour-power. Such a change rather affects only 
the relative proportion of the two component parts of the new value, 
of which one forms surplus-value and the other makes good the 
variable capital and therefore passes into the cost-price of the com- 
modity. 

The (we elements of the cost-price, in the present case 400,-- 
-+100,, have only this in common that they are both parts of the 
commodity-value that replace advanced capital. 

But this true state of affairs necessarily appears reversed from 
the standpoint of capitalist production. 

The capitalist mode of production differs from the mode of 
production based on slavery, among other things, by the fact 
that in it the value, and accordingly the price, of labour-power 
appears as the value, or price, of labour itself, or as wages (Buch I, 
Kap. XVII).* The variable part of the advanced capital, therefore, 
appears as capital expended in wages, as a capital-value which 
pays for the value, and accordingly the price, of all the labour 
expended in production. Let us assume, for instance, that an aver- 
age ten-hour social working-day is incorporated in a sum of mon- 
ey amounting to 6 shillings. In that case the advance of a variable 
capital of £100 represents the money expression of a value pro- 
duced in 333'/, ten-hour working-days. But this value, repre- 
senting purchased labour-power in the capital advanced does not, 
however, form a part of the actually functioning productive capi- 
tal. Its place in the process of production is taken by living la- 
bour-power. If, as in our illustration, the degree of exploitation 
of the latter is 100%, then it is expended during 666°/, ten-hour 
working-days, and thereby adds to the product a new value of £200. 
But in the capital advanced the variable capital of £100 figures 
as capital invested in wages, or as the price of labour performed 
during 666°, ten-hour days. The sum of £100 divided by 6667), 
gives us 3 shillings as the price of a ten-hour working-day, which 
is equal in value to the product of five hours’ labour. 

Now, if we compare the capital advanced on the one hand with 
the commodity-value on the other, we find: 

* English edition: Ch. XIX.—Ed. 

: Cita Langman Mtfin Fito ti hme ‘ 

PPE eee APs ape, a i ed ae Chm prteir hs, An 
HY aby hifi dpi Cpr thm ert. fh te Popelibsy fertihlonn fprveryZ 

iris J Sg 

- 
ss 
ve 
i 

i 
bp 

= 
PRES 
au 

= 
tf 
Bh 

A page of Vol. III of Capital, copied by a secrelary, with allerations 
by Engels. The insertion at the top of the page is by Engels 
(Reduced) 

32 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 
= —____—_—_—_ 

I. Capital advanced £500= £400 of capital expended In means 
of production (price of means ol production)+#100 of cap- 
ital expended in labour (price of 666°/, working-days, or 
wages for same). ; 

Il. Value of commodities £600=#£500 representing the cost- 
price (£400 price of expended means of production+£100 
price of expended 666° , working-days)+ £100 surplus-value. 

In this formula, the portion of capital invested in labour-power 
diflers Irom that invested in means of production, such as cotton 
or coal, only by serving as payment for a materially different 
element of production, but not by any means because it serves 
a iunctionally different purpose in the process of creating commod- 
itv-value, and thereby also in the process of the sell-expansion 
of capital. The price of the means of production reappears in the 
cost-price of the commodities, just as it figured in the capi- 
{al advanced, and it does so because these means of produc- 
tion have been purposively consumed. The price, or wages, for 
the 6667 , working-days consumed in the production of these com- 
modities likewise reappears in the cost-price of the commodities 
just as it has figured in the capital advanced, and also because 
this amount of labour has been purposively expended. We see 
only finished and existing values—the portions of the value 
of the advanced capital which go into the making of the value 
of the product—but not the element creating new values. The 
distinction between constant and variable capital has disappeared. 
The entire cost-price of £500 now has the double meaning that, 
first, it is that portion of the commodity-value of £600 which 
replaces the capital of £500 expended in the production of the 
commodity: and that, secondly, this component of the commodity- 
value exists only because it existed previously as the cost-price 
of the elements of production employed, namely means of pro- 
duction and labour, i.e., as advanced capital. The capital-value 
reappears as the cost-price of a commodity because, and in so far 
as, if has been expended as a capital-value. 

The fact that the various components of the value of the advanced 
capital have been expended for materially different elements of 
production, namely for instruments of labour, raw materials, auxil- 
iary materiajs, and labour, requires only that the cost-price of the 
commodity must buy back these materially different elements of 
production. So far as the formation of the cost-price is concerned, 
however, only one distinction is appreciable, namely that between 
fixed and circulating capital. In our example we have set down 
£20 for wear and tear of instruments of labour (400, =£20 for de- 

COST-PRICE AND PROFIT 33 

preciation of instruments of labour-+ £380 lor materials of produe- 
tion). Before the productive process the value of these instruments 
of labour was, say, £1,200. Alter the commodities have been pro- 
duced it exists in two forms, the £20 as part of the value of the com- 
modity, and 1,200—20, or £1,180, as the remaining value of the 
instruments of labour which, as before, are in the possession of 
the capitalist; in other words, as an element of his productive, not 
of his commodity-capital. Materials of production and wages, as 
distinct from means of labour, are entirely consumed in the pro- 
duction of the commodity and thus their entire value goes into 
that of the produced commodity. We have seen how these various 
components of the advanced capital assume the forms of fixed and 
circulating capital in relation to the turnover. 

Accordingly, the capital advanced=£1,680: fixed capital= 
=£1,200+circulating capital=£480 (£380 in materials of pro- 
duction plus £100 in wages). 

But the cost-price of the commodity only=£500 (£20 for the 
wear and tear of the fixed capital, and £480 for circulating capital). 

This diflerence between the cost-price of the commodity and the 
capital advanced merely proves, however, that the cost-price of 
the commodity is formed exclusively by the capital actually con- 
sumed in its production. 

Means of production valued at £1,200 are employed in produc- 
ing the commodity, but only £20 of this advanced capital-value 
are lost in production. Thus, the employed fixed capital goes only 
partially into the cost-price of the commodity, because it is only 
partially consumed in its production. The employed circulating 
capital goes entirely into the cost-price of the commodity, because 
it is entirely consumed in production. But does not this only 
prove that the consumed portions of the fixed and circulating 
capital pass uniformly, pro rata to the magnitude of their 
values, into the cost-price of the commodity and that this compo- 
nent of the value of the commodity originates solely with the 
capital expended in its production? If this were not so, it would 
be inexplicable why the advanced fixed capital of £1,200 should 
not, aside from the £20 which it loses in the productive process, 
also contribute the other £1,180 which it does not lose. 

This difference between fixed and circulating capital with ref- 
erence to the calculation of the cost-price, therefore. only con- 
firms the seeming origination of the cost-price [rom the expended: 
capital-value, or the price paid by the capitalist himself for the 
expended elements of production, including labour. On the other 
hand, so far as the formation of value is concerned, the variable 

3 —2757 

34 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

portion of capital invested in labour-power is here emphatically 
identified under the head of circulating capital with constant 
capital (that part of capital which consists of materials of pro- 
duction), and this completes the mystification of the sel f-expansion 
process of capital.? 

So far we have considered just one element of the value of com- 
modities, namely the cost-price. We must now turn also to the 
other component of the value of commodities, namely the excess 
over the cost-price, or the surplus-value. In the first place, then, 
surplus-value is the excess value of a commodity over and above 
its cost-price. But since the cost-price equals the value of the con- 
sumed capital, into whose material elements it is continually 
reconverted, this excess value is an accretion in the value of 
the capital expended in the production of the commodity and 
returning by way of its circulation. 

We have already seen earlier that, though s, the surplus-value, 
springs merely fromachange inthe value of the variable capital v 
and is, therefore, originally but an increment of variable capital, 
after the process of production is over it nevertheless also forms 
an increment of ctv, the expended total capital. The formula 
c+(v-+s), which indicates that s is produced through the conver- 
sion of a definite capital-value v advanced for labour-power into 
a fluctuating magnitude, i.e., of a constant magnitude into a 
variable one, may also be represented as (c+v)+s. Before produc- 
tion took place we had a capital of £500. After production is 
completed we have the capital of £500 plus a value increment 
of £100.? 

However, surplus-value forms an increment not only of the 
portion of the advanced capital which goes into the self-expansion 
process, but also of the portion which does not go into it. In other 
words, it is an accretion not only to the consumed capital made 
good out of the cost-price of the commodity, but to all the cap- 
ital invested in production. Before the production process we had 

‘In Book I (Kap. VII, 3, S. 216/206 ff.) (English edition: Ch. IX, 3, p. 225 
f!.—Ed.] we have given the example of N. W. Senior to show what confusion this 
may create in the mind of the economist. 

* “From what has gone before, we know that surplus-value is purely the re- 
sult of a variation in the value of v, of that portion of the capital which is trans- 
formed into labour-power; consequently, v-+s=v-+ Av (or v plus an increment 
of v). But the fact that it is v alone that varies, and the conditions of that vari- 
ation, are obscured by the circumstance that in consequence of the increase 
in ihe Chee com even gee capital, there is also an increase in the sum 

‘a! ol the advanced capital. It was originally 500, and becomes £590.” (Buch 
1, Kap. VII, 1, S. 203/195.) [English elton Ge 1X, 1, p. tn Edy ; 

COST-PRICE AND PROFIT 35 

a capital valued at £1,680, namely £1,200 of fixed capital invested 
in means of production, only £20 of which go into the value of 
the commodity for wear and tear, plus £480 of circulating capital 
in materials of production and wages. Alter the production process 
we have £1,180 as the constituent element of the value of the 
productive capital plus a commodity-capital of £600. By adding 
these two sums of value we find that the capitalist now has a val- 
ue of £1,780. After deducting his advanced total capital of £1,680 
there remains a value increment of £100. The £100 of surplus-value 
thus form as much of an increment in relation to the invested £1,680 
as to its fraction of £500 expended during production. 

It is now clear to the capitalist that this increment of value 
springs from the productive processes undertaken with the capi- 
tal, that it therefore springs from the capital itself, because it 
is there after the production process, while it is not there before 
it. As for the capital consumed in production, the surplus-value 
seems to spring equally [rom all its diflerent elements of value con- 
sisting of means of production and labour. For all these elements 
contribute equally to the formation of the cost-price. All of them 
add their values, obtaining as advanced capital, to the value of 
the product, and are not dillerentiated as constant and variable 
magnitudes of value. This becomes obvious if we assume lor a mo- 
ment that all the expended capital consisted either exclusively 
of wages, or exclusively of the value of the means of production. 
In the first case, we should then have the commodity-value of 500,+ 
+100, instead of the commodity-value of 400.+100,+100,. 
The capital of £500 laid out in wages represents the value of all 
the labour expended in the production of the commodity-value 
of £600. and for just this reason forms the cost-price of the entire 
product. But the formation of this cost-price, whereby the value 
of the expended capital is reproduced as a constituent part of 
the value of the product, is the only process in the formation of 
this commodity-value that is known to us. We do not know how 
its surplus-value portion of £100 is formed. The same is true in 
the second case, in which the commodity-value=500,+ 100,, 
We know in both cases that surplus-value is derived from a given 
value, because this value was advanced in the form of productive 
capital, be it in the form of labour or of means of production. 
On the other hand, this advanced capital-value cannot form sur- 
plus-value for the reason that it has been expended and therefore 
constitutes the cost-price of the commodity. Precisely because” 
it forms the cost-price of the commodity, it does not form any 
surplus-value, but merely an equivalent, a value replacing the. 

q* 

36 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

d capital. So far, therefore, as it forms surplus-value, 
ae not in its specific capacity as expended, but rather as 
advanced, and hence utilized, capital. For this reason, the sur- 
plus-value arises as much out of the portion of the advanced cap- 
ital which goes into the cost-price of the commodity as aut of 
the portion which does not. In short, it arises equally out of the 
fixed and the circulating components of the utilized capital. The 
aggregate capital serves materially as the creator of products, 
the means of labour as well as the materials of production, and 
the labour. The total capital materially enters into the actual 
labour-pracess, even though only a portion of it enters the 
process of self-expansion, This is, perhaps, the very reason why 
it contributes only in part to the formation of the cost-price, 
but totally to the formation of surplus-value. However that may 
be, the outcome is that surplus-value springs simultaneously from 
all portions of the invested capital. This deduction may be sub- 
stantially abbreviated, by saying pointedly and concisely in 
the words of Malthus: “The capitalist... expects an equal profit up- 
on all the parts of the capital which he advances.” # 

In its assumed capacity of offspring of the aggregate advanced 
capital, surplus-value takes the converted form of profit. Hence, 
a certain value is capital when it is invested with a view to produc- 
ing profit,* or, there is profit because a certain value was employed 
as capital. Suppose profit is p. Then the formula C=c+v+s= 
=k-+s turns into the formula C=k-+p, or the value of a commodi- 
ty=cost-price+-profit. 

The profit, such as it is represented here, is thus the same as 
surplus-value, only in a mystified form that is nonetheless a neces- 
sary outgrowth of the capitalist mode of production. The genesis 
of the mutation of values that occurs in the course of the production 
process, must be transferred from the variable portion of the capital 
to the total capital, because there is no apparent distinction between 
constant and variable capital in the assumed formation of the cost- 
price. Because at one pole the price of labour-power assumes the 
transmuted form of wages, surplus-value appears at the opposite 
pole in the transmuted form of profit. 

We have seen that the cost-price of a commodity is smaller than 
its value. Since C=k+s, it follows that k=C—s. The formula 
C=k-+s reduces itself to C=k, or commodity-value = commodity 

i Malthus, Principles of Political Economy, 2nd ed., London, 1836, p. 268. 
, * “Capital is that which is expended with a view to profit.” Malthus, Definé- 
tions in Political Economy, London, 1827, p. 86. 

COST-PRICE AND PROFIT 37 

cost-price only if s=C, a case which never occurs on the basis of 
capitalist production, although peculiar market conditions may re- 
duce the selling price of commodities to the level of, or even below, 
their cost-price. 

Hence, if a commodity is sold at its value, a profit is realized 
which is equal to the excess of its value over its cost-price, and there- 
fore equal to the entire surplus-value incorporated in the value of 
the commodity. But the capitalist may sell a commodity at a profit 
even when he sells it below its value. So long as its selling price is 
higher than its cost-price, though it may be lower than its value, a 
portion of the surplus-value incorporated init is always realized, thus 
always yielding a profit. In our illustration the value of the commod- 
ity is £600, and the cost-price £500. If the commodity is sold at 
£510, 520, 530, 560 or 590, it is sold respectively £90, 80, 70, 40, or 
10 below its value. Yet a profit of £10, 20, 30, 60, or 90 respectively 
is realized in its sale. There is obviously an indefinite number of sell- 
ing prices possible between the value of a commodity and its cost- 
price. The greater the surplus-value element of the value of a commod- 
ity, the greater the practical range of these intermediate prices. 

This explains more than just the everyday phenomena of compe- 
tition, such as certain cases of underselling, abnormally low commod- 
ity-prices in certain lines of industry,® etc. The fundamental law 
of capitalist competition, which political economy had not hitherto 
grasped, the law which regulates the general rate of profit and the 
so-called prices of production determined by it, rests, as we shall 
Jater see, on this difference between the value and the cost-price of 
commodities, and on the resulting possibility of selling a commodity 
at a profit under its value. 

The minimal limit of the selling price of acommodity is its cost- 
price. If it is sold under its cost-price, the expended constituent 
elements of productive capital cannot be fully replaced out of the 
selling price. If this process continues, the value of the advanced 
capital disappears. From this point of view alone, the capitalist 
is inclined to regard the cost-price as the true énner value of the 
commodity, because it is the price required for the bare conservation 
of his capital. But there is also this, that the cost-price of acommodi- 
ty is the purchase price paid by the capitalist himself for its 
production, therefore the purchase price determined by the produc- 
tion process itself. For this reason, the excess value, or the surplus- 
value, realized in the sale of a commodity appears to the capitalist 

°Cf. Buch I, Kap. XVIII, 1, S. 571/561 (f [English edition: Ch. XX, 1, 
p. S49 I. —Eu.] 

38 COXVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

as an excess of its selling price over its value, instead of an excess 
of its value over its cost-price, so that accordingly the surplus- 
value incorporated in a commodity is not realized through its sale, 
but springs out of the sale itsell. We have given this illusion closer 
consideration in Book I (Kap. IV, 2*) (“Contradictions in the Gen- 
eral Formula of Capital”), but revert here for a moment to the form 
in which it was reaffirmed by Torrens, among otliers, as an advance 
oi political economy beyond Ricardo. : 

“The natural price, consisting of thecost of production, or, in oth- 
er words, of the capital expended in raising or fabricating commod- 
ities, cannot include the profit.... The farmer, we will suppose, 
expends one hundred quarters of corn in cultivating his fields, and 
obtains in return one hundred and twenty quarters. In this case, 
twenty quarters, being the excess of produce above expenditure, 
constitt:te the farmer’s profit; but it would be absurd to call this 
excess, or profit, a part of the expenditure.... The master manulac- 
turer expends a certain quantity of raw material, of tools and im- 
plements of trade, and of subsistence for labour, and obtains in return 
a quantity of finished work. This finished work must possess a high- 
er exchangeable value than the materials, tools, and subsistence, 
by the advance of which it was obtained.” Torrens concludes there- 
Ircm that the excess of the selling price over the cost-price, or 
profit, is derived from the fact that the consumers, “either by imme- 
diate or circuitous barter give some greater portion of all the in- 
gredients of capital than their production costs.”° 

Indeed, the excess over a given magnitude cannot form a part 
of this magnitude, and therefore the profit, the excess value of a 
commodity over the capitalist’s expenditures, cannot form a part 
of these expenditures. Hence, if no other element than the value 
advance of the capitalist enters into the formation of the value of 
a commodity, it is inexplicable how more value should come out of 
production than went into it, for something cannot come out of 
nothing. But Torrens only evades this creation out of nothing by 
transferring it Irom the sphere of commodity-production to that 
of commodity-circulation. Profit cannot come out of production, 
says Torrens, for otherwise it would already be contained in the 
cost of production, and there would not be a surplus over this cost. 
Profit cannot come out of the exchange of commodities, replies 
Ramsay, unless it already existed before this exchange. The sum. 

7 a edition: Ch. V, 2.—Ed. 
. Torrens, An Essay on the Producti - 
shee, ry luction of Wealth, London, 1626, pp. 51 

COST-PRICR AND PROFIT 39 

of the value of the exchanged products is evidently not altered in 
the exchange of these products, whose surn of value it is. It is the 
same before and alter the exchange. It should be noted here that 
Malthus refers expressly to the authority of Torrens,’ although he 
himself has a different explanation for the sale of commodities 
above their value, or rather has no explanation at all, since all 
arguments of this sort never, in effect, fail to be reduced to the 
same thing as the once-famed negative weight of phlogiston. 

In a social order dominated by capitalist production even the 
non-capitalist producer is gripped by capitalist conceptions. Bal- 
zac, who is generally remarkable for his profound grasp ol reality, 
aptly describes in his last novel, Les Paysans, how a petty peasant 
performs many small tasks gratuitously for his usurer, whose good- 
will he is eager to retain, and how he fancies that he does not give 
the latter something for nothing because his own labour does not 
cost him any cash outlay. As for the usurer, he thus fells two dogs 
with one stone. He saves the cash outlay for wages and enmeshes 
the peasant, who is gradually ruined by depriving his own field 
of labour, deeper and deeper in the spider-web of usury. 

The thoughtless conception that the cost-price of a commodity 
constitutes its actual value, and that surplus-value springs from 
selling the product above its value, so that commodities would be 
sold at their value if their selling price were to equal their cost- 
price, i.e., if it were to equal the price of the consumed means of 
production plus wages, has been heralded to the world asa newly 
discovered secret of socialism by Proudhon with his customary qua- 
si-scientific chicanery. Indeed, this reduction of the value of commod- 
ities to their cost-price is the basis of his People’s Bank. It was 
earlier shown that the various constituent elements of the value of 
a product may be represented in proportional parts of the product 
itself. For instance (Buch I, Kap. VII,2, S. 211/203), * if the 
value of 20 Ibs. of yarn is 30 shillings—namely 24 shillings of 
means of production, 3 shillings of labour-power, and 3 shillings 
of surplus-value—then this surplus-value may be represented 
as */,, of the product=2 Ibs. of yarn. Should these 20 1bs. of yarn 
now be sold at their cost-price, at 27 shillings, then the purchaser 
receives 2 Ibs. of yarn for nothing, or the article issold ‘/,, below 
its value. But the labourer has, as before, performed his surplus- 
labour, only this time for the purchaser of the yarn instead of the 
capitalist yarn producer. It would be altogether wrong to assume 

7 Malthus, Definitions in Political Economy, Londan, 1853, pp. 70, 71. 
* English edition: Ch. 1X, 2, pp. 220-21.—Ea. 

40 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

that if all commodities were sold at their cost-price, the result 
would really be the same as if they had all been sold above their 
cost-price, but at their value. For even if the value of the labour- 
power, the length of the working-day, and the degree of exploita- 
tion of labour were the same everywhere, the quantities of surplus- 
value contained in the values of the various kinds of commodities 
would be unequal, depending on the different organic composition 
of the capitals advanced for their production.® 

5“The masses of value and of surplus-value produced by different capitals— 
the value of labour-power being given and its degree of exploitation being equal — 
vary directly as the amounts of the variable constituents of these capitals, i.e., 
as their constituents transformed into living labour-power.” (Buch I, Kap. IX, 
S. 312/303.) [English edition: Ch. X1, pp. 306-07.— £u.| 

CHAPTER II 
THE RATE OF PROFIT 

The general formula of capital is M—C—M’. In other words, 
a sum ol value is thrown into circulation to extract a Jarger sum out 
ol it. The process which produces this larger sum is capitalist pro- 
duction. The process that realizes it is circulation of capital. The 
capitalist does not produce a commodity for its own sake, nor for 
the sake of its use-value, or his personal consumption. The product 
in which the capitalist is really interested is not the palpable prod- 
uct itself, but the excess value of the product over the value of 
the capital consumed by it. The capitalist advances the total capi- 
tal without regard to the diflerent roles played by its components 
in the production ol surplus-value. He advances all these components 
uniformly, not just to reproduce the advanced capital, but rather 
to produce value in excess of it. The only way in which he can con- 
vert the value of his advanced variable capital into a greater value 
is by exchanging it for living labour and exploiting living labour. 
But he cannot exploit this labour unless he makes a simultaneous 
advance of the conditions for performing this labour, namely 
means of labour and subjects of labour, machinery and raw 
materials, i.e., unless he converts a certain amount of value in his 
possession into the form of conditions of production; for he is a 
capitalist and can undertake the process of exploiting labour only 
because, being the owner of the conditions of labour, he con- 
fronts the labourer as the owner of only labour-power. As already 
shown in the first book, it is precisely the fact that non-workers 
own the means of production which turns labourers into wage- 
workers and non-workers into capitalists. 

The capitalist does not care whether it is considered that he 
advances constant capital tomake a profit out of his variable cap- 
ital, or that he advances variable capital to enhance the value of 
the constant capital; that he invests money in wages to raise 
the value of his machinery and raw materials, or that he invests 
money in machinery and raw materials to be able to exploit labour. 

42 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

Although it is only the variable portion of capital which creates 
surplus-value, it does so only if the other portions. the condi- 
tions of production, are likewise advanced. Seeing that the capi- 
talist can exploit labour only by advancing constant capital and 
that he can turn his constant capital to good account only by advane- 
ing variable capital, he lumps them all together in his imagina- 
tion, and much more so since the actual rate of his gain is not 
determined by its proportion to the variable, but to the total cap- 
ital, not by the rate of surplus-value, but by the rate of profit. 
And the latter, as we shall see, may remain the same and yet ex- 
press different rates of surplus-value. 

The costs of the product include all the elements of its value paid 
by the capitalist or for which he has thrown an equivalent into 
production. These costs must be made good to preserve the capital 
or to reproduce it in its original magnitude. 

The value contained in a commodity is equal to the Jabour-time 
expended in its production, and the sum of this labour consists of 
paid and unpaid portions. But for the capitalist the costs of the com- 
modity consist oniy of that portion of the labour materialized in 
it for which he has paid. The surplus-labour contained in the com- 
modity costs the capitalist nothing, although, like the paid por- 
tion, it costs the labourer his labour, and although it creates 
value and enters into the commodity as a value-creating element 
quite like paid labour. The capitalist’s profit is derived from the 
fact that he has something to sell for which he has paid nothing. 
The surplus-value, or profit, consists precisely in the excess value 
of acommodity over its cost-price, i.e., the excess of the total la- 
bour embodied in the commodity over the paid labour embodied 
in it. The surplus-value, whatever its origin, is thus a surplus over the 
advanced total capital. The proportion of this surplus to the total 

capital is therefore expressed by the fraction = , in which C stands 

s 

for total capital. We thus obtain the rale of profit cmap as 

distinct from the rate of surplus-value ~. 

_ The rate of surplus-vaiue measured against the variable capital 
is called rate of surplus-value, The rate of surplus-value measured 
against the total capital is called rate of profit. These are two dil- 
ferent measurements of the same entity, and owing to the differ- 
ence of the two standards of measurement they express different 
proportions or relations of this entity. 

The transformation of surplus-value into profit must be deduced 
from the transformation of the rate of surplus-value into the rate 

RATE OF PROFIT 43 

of profit, not vice versa. And in fact it was rate of profit which was 
the historical point of departure. Surplus-value and rate of sur- 
plus-value are, relatively, the invisible and unknown essence that 
wants investigating, while rate of profit and therelore the appear- 
ance of surplus-value in the form of profit are revealed onthe sur- 
face of the phenomenon. 

So far as the individual capitalist is concerned, it is evident that 
he is only interested in the relation of the surplus-value, or the 
excess value at which he sells his commodities, to the total capital 
advanced for the production of the commodities, while the specific 
relationship and inner connection of this surplus with the various 
components of capital fail to interest him, and it is, moreover, 
rather in his interests to draw the veil over this specific relation- 
ship and this intrinsic connection. 

Although the excess value of a commodity over its cost-price is 
shaped in the immediate process of production, it is realized only 
in the process of circulation, and appears all the more readily to 
have arisen from the process of circulation, since in reality, under 
competition, in the actual market, it depends on market conditions 
whether or not and to what extent this surplus is realized. There 
is no need to waste words at this point about the fact that if a com- 
modity is sold above or below its value, there is merely another 
kind of division of surplus-value, and that this different division, 
this changed proportion in which various persons share in the surplus- 
value, does not in any way alter either the magnitudeor the nature 
of that surplus-value. It is not alone the metamorphoses discussed 
by us in Book IJ that take place in the process of circulation; 
they fall in with actual competition, the sale and purchase of com- 
modities above or below their value, so that the surplus-value re- 
alized by the individual capitalist depends as much on the sharp- 
ness of his business wits as on the direct exploitation of labour. 

In the process of circulation the time of circulation comes to 
exert its Influence alongside the working-time, thereby limiting 
the amount of surplus-value realizable within a given time span. 
Still other elements derived [rom circulation intrude decisively 
into the actual production process. The actual process of produc- 
tion and the process of circulation intertwine and intermingle 
continually, and thereby invariably adullerate their typical dis- 
tinctive features. The production of surplus-value, and of value in 
general, receives new definition in the process of circulation, as 
previously shown. Capital passes through the circuit of its meta- 
morphoses. Finally, stepping beyond its inner organic life, so to 
say, it enters into relations with outer life, into relations in which 

44 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

it is not capital and labour which confront one another, but capital 
and capital in one case, and individuals, again simply as buyers 
and sellers, in the other. The time of circulation and working-time 
cross paths and thus both seem to determine the surplus-value. 
The original form in which capital and wage-labour confront one 
another is disguised through the intervention of relationships 
seemingly independent of it. Surplus-value itself does not appear 
as the product of the appropriation of labour-time, but as an ex- 
cess of the selling price of commodities over their cost-price, the 
latter thus being easily represented as their actual value (valewr 
intrinséque), while profit appears as an excess of the selling price 
of commodities over their immanent value. 

True, the nature of surplus-value impresses itself constantly 
upon the consciousness of the capitalist during the process of pro- 
duction, as his greed for the labour-time ol others, etc., has re- 
vealed in our analysis of surplus-value. But: 1) the actual process of 
production is only a fleeting stage which continually merges with 
the process of circulation, just as the latter merges with the former, 
so that in the process of production, the more or less clearly dawn- 
ing notion of the source of the gain made in it, i.e., the inkling 
of the nature of surplus-value, stands at best as a factor equally 
valid as the idea that the realized surplus originates in a move- 
ment that is independent of the production process, that it arises 
in circulation, and that it belongs to capital irrespective of the lat- 
ter’s relation to labour. Even such modern economists as Ramsay, 
Malthus, Senior, Torrens, etc., identify these phenomena of cir- 
culation directly as proofs that capital in its bare material exist- 
ence, independent of its social relation to labour which makes 
capital of it, is, as it were, an independent source of surplus-value 
alongside Jabour and independent of labour. 2) Under the item 
of expenses, which embrace wages as well as the price of raw ma- 
terials, wear and tear of machinery, etc., the extortion of unpaid 
labour figures only as a saving in paying for an article which is 
included in expenses, only as a smaller payment for a certain 
quantity of labour, similar to the saving when raw materials are 
bought more cheaply, or the depreciation of machinery decreases. 
In this way the extortion of surplus-labour loses its specific char- 
acter. Its specific relationship to surplus-value is obscured. This 
is greatly furthered and facilitated, as shown in Book I (Abschn. 

VI),* by representing the value of labour-power in the form of 
wages. 

* English edition: Part \l --£e 

RATE OF PROFIT 45 

The relationships of capital are obscured by the fact that all 
parts of capital appear equally as the source of excess value 
(profit). 

The way in which surplus-value is transformed into the form of 
profit by way of the rate of profit is, however, a further develop- 
ment of the inversion of subject and object that takes place already 
in the process of production. In the latter, we have seen, the subjec- 
tive productive forces of labour appear as productive forces of cap- 
ital. On the one hand, the value, or the past labour, which domi- 
nates living labour, is incarnated in the capitalist. On the other 
hand, the labourer appears as bare material labour-power, as a 
commodity. Even in the simple relations of production this inyert- 
ed relationship necessarily produces certain correspondingly in- 
verted conceptions, a transposed consciousness which is further 
developed by the metamorphoses and modifications of the actual 
circulation process. 

It is altogether erroneous, as a study of the Ricardian schoot 
shows, to try to identify the laws of the rate of profit with the laws 
of the rate of surplus-value, or vice versa. The capitalist naturally 

does not see the difference between them. In the formula = the 

surplus-value is measured by the value of the total capital ad- 
vanced for its production, of which a part was totally consumed in 
this praduction and a part was merely employed in it. In fact, the 

formula a expresses the degree of self-expansion of the total cap- 

ital advanced, or, taken in conformity with inner conceptual 
connections ‘and the nature of surplus-value, it indicates the ratio 
of the amount of variation of variable capital to the magnitude of 
the advanced total capital. 

In itself, the magnitude of value of total capital has no inner 
relationship to the magnitude of surplus-value, at least not direct- 
ly. So far as its material elements are concerned, the total capi- 
tal minus the variable capital, that is, the constant capital, con- 
sists of the material requisites—the means of labour and mate- 
tials of labour—needed to materialize labour. It is necessary to 
have a certain quantity of means and materials of labour for a 
specific quantity of labour to materialize in commodities and there- 
by to produce value. A definite technical relation depending on 
the special nature of the labour applied is established between the 
quantity of labour and the quantity of means of production to which 
this labour is to be applied. Hence there is also to that extent a 
definite relation between the quantity of surplus-value, or surplus-. 

46 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

labour, and the quantity of means of production. For instance, if 
the labour necessary for the production of the wage amounts to 
a daily six hours, the labourer must work 12 hours to do six hours 
of surplus-labour, or produce a surplus-value of 100%. He uses up 
twice as much of the means of production in 12 hours as he does in 
six. Yet this is no reason lor the surplus-value produced by him in 
six hours to be directly related to the value of the means of produc- 
tion used up in those six, or in 12 hours. This value is here altogeth- 
er immaterial; it is only amatter of the technically required quan- 
tity. It does not matter whether the raw materials or means of 
labour are cheap or dear, as long as they have the required use-val- 
ue and are available in technically prescribed proportion to the 
labour to be applied. If | know that x Ibs. of cotton are consumed 
in an hour of spinning and that they cost a shillings, then, of course, 
I also know that 12 hours’ spinning consumes 12 x lbs. of cot- 
ton=12a shillings, and can then calculate the proportion of the 
surplus-value to the value of the 12 as well as to that of the six. 
Bul the relation of living labour to the va/ue of means of production 
obtains here only to the extent that a shillings serve as aname for 
x Ibs. of cotton; because a definite quantity of cotton has a defi- 
nite price, and therefore, conversely, a definite price may also serve 
as an index for adefinite quantity of cotton, so long as the price 
of cotton does not change. If I know that the labourer must work 
12 hours for me to appropriate six hours of surplus-labour, that 
therefore I must have a 12-hour supply of cotton ready for use, and 
if I know the price of this quantity of cotton needed for 12 hours, 
then I have an indirect relation between the price of cotton (as 
an index of the required quantity) and the surplus-value. But, 
conversely, I can never conclude the quantity of the raw material 
that may be consumed in, say, one hour, and not six, of spinning 
from the price of the raw material. There is, then, no necessary 
inner relation between the value of the constant capital, nor, there- 
fore, between the value of the total capital (=c-+v) and the sur- 
plus-value. 

Ii the rate of surplus-value is known and its magnitude given, 
the rate of profit expresses nothing but what it actually is, namely 
a different way of measuring surplus-value, its measurement ac- 
cording to the value of the total capital instead of the value of the 
portion of capital from which surplus-value directly originates by 
way of its exchange for labour. But in reality (i.e., in the world of 
phenomena) the matter is reversed. Surplus-value is given, but 
given as an excess of the selling price of the commodity over its 
cost-price; and it remains a mystery where this surplus originat- 

RATE OF PROFIT 47 

ed—Irom the exploitation of labour in the process of production, 
or from outwitting the purchaser in the process of circulation, or 
from both. What is also given is the proportion of this surplus to 
the value of the total capital, or the rate of profit. The calculation 
ol this excess of the selling price over the cost-price in relation to 
the value of the advanced total capital is very important and natu- 
ral, because in effect it yields the ratio in which total capital has 
been expanded, i.e., the degree of its self-expansion. If we proceed 
from this rate of profit, we cannot therefore conclude the specific 
relations between the surplus and the portion of capital invested in 
wages. We shall see in a subsequent chapter what amusing somer- 
saults Malthus makes when he tries in this way to get at the secret 
of the surplus-value and of its specific relation to the variable part 
of the capital. What the rate of profit actually shows is rather a 
uniform relation of the surplus to equal portions of the total cap- 
ital, which, from this point of view, does not show any inner differ- 
ence at all, unless it be between the fixed and circulating cap- 
ital. And it shows this difference, too, only because the surplus is 
calculated in two ways, namely, first, as a simple magnitude—as 
excess over the cost-price. In this, its initial, form, the entire cir- 
culating capital goes into the cost-price, while of the fixed capital 
only the wear and tear goes into it. Secand, the relation of this 
excess in value to the total value of the advanced capital. In this 
case, the value of the total fixed capital enters into the calculation, 
quile the same as the circulating capital. Therefore, the circulating 
capital goes in both times in the same way, while the fixed capi- 
tal goes in differently the first time, and in the same way as circu- 
lating capital the second time. Under the circumstances the differ- 
ence between fixed and circulating capital is the only one which 
obtrudes itself. 

If, as Hegel would put it, the surplus therefore re-reflects itself 
in itself out of the rate of profit, or, put differently, the surplus is 
more closely characterized by the rate of profit, it appears as a sur- 
plus produced by capital above its own value over a year, or in a 
given period of circulation. 

Although the rate of profit thus differs numerically from the rate 
of surplus-value, while surplus-value and profit are actually the 
same thing and numerically equal, profit is nevertheless a converted 
form of surplus-value, a form in which its origin and the secret of 
its existence are obscured and extinguished. In effect. profit is the 
form in which surplus-value presents itself to the view, and must 
initially be stripped by analysis to disclose the latter. In surplus- 
value, the relation between capital and labour is laid bare, in the 

48 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

relation of capital to profit, i.e., of capital to surplus-value that 
appears on the one hand,as an excess over the cost-price of commodi- 
ties realized in the process of circulation and, on the other, as a 
surplus more closely determined by its relation to the total capital, 
the capital appears as a relation fo itself, a relation in which it, as 
the original sum of value, is distinguished from a new value which 
it generated. One is conscious that capital generates this new value 
by its movement in the processes of production and circulation. 
But the way in which this occurs is cloaked in mystery and appears 
to originate from hidden qualities inherent in capital itself. 

The further we follow the process of the self-expansion of capital, 
the more mysterious the relations of capital will become, and the 
less the secret of its internal organism will be revealed. 

In this part, the rate of profit is numerically different from the 
rate of surplus-value; while profit and surplus-value are treated as 
having the same numerical magnitude but only a different form. 
In the next part we shall see how the alienation goes further, and 
how profit represents a magnitude differing also numerically from 
surplus-value. 

CHAPTER Ill 

THE RELATION OF THE RATE OF PROFIT 
TO THE RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

Here, as at the close of the preceding chapter, and generally in 
this entire first part, we presume the amount of profit falling to 
a given capital to be equal to the total amount of surplus-value 
produced by means of this capital during a certain period of cir- 
culation. We thus leave aside for the present the fact that, on the one 
hand, this surplus-value may be broken up into various sub-forms, 
such as interest on capital, ground-rent, taxes, etc., and that, on 
the other, it is not, as a rule, identical with profit as appropriated 
by virtue of a general rate of profit, which will be discussed in the 
second part. 

So far as the quantity of profit is assumed to be equal to that of 
surplus-value, its magnitude, and that of the rate of profit, is de- 
termined by ratios of simple figures given or ascertainable in every 
individual case. The analysis, therefore, first is carried on purely 
in the mathematical field. 

We retain the designations used in Books | and II. Total capital 
C consists of constant capital c and variable capital v. and produces 
a surplus-value s. The ratio of this surplus-value to the advanced 

variable capital, or <, is called the rate of surplus-value and desig- 

nated s’, Therefore ~ =s’, and consequently s=s’v. If this surplus- 

value is related to the tota] capital instead of the variable capital, 
it is called profit, p, and the ratio of the surplus-value s to the total 

capital C, or is called the rate of profit, p’. Accordingly, 

= 
c: 

1 s 
PC eqv" 
Now, substituting for s its equivalent s’v, we find 

er eee ees 
PSsc=say 

50 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

which equation may also be expressed by the proportion 
p’:s' =v:C,; 

the rate of profit is related to the rate of surplus-value as the variable 
capital is to the total capital. ; ; 

It follows from this proportion that the rate of profit, p’, is always 
smaller than s’, the rate of surplus-value, because v, the variable 
capital, is always smaller than C, the sum of vc, or the variable 
plus the constant capital; the only, practically impossible case 
excepted, in which v=C, that is, no constant capital at all, no 
means of production, but only wages are advanced by the capi- 
talist. 

However, our analysis also considers a number of other factors, 
which have a determining influence on the magnitude o/ c, v, and 
s, and must therefore be briefly examined. 

First, the value of money. We may assume this to be constant 
throughout. 

Second, ihe é/urnover. We shall leave this factor entirely out of 
consideration for the present, since its influence on the rate of prof- 
it will be treated specially in a later chapter. {Here we anticipate 

just one point, that the formula p'=s'e is strictly correct only for 

one period of turnover of the variable capital. But we may correct 
it for an annual turnover by substituting for the simple rate of sur- 
plus-value, s’, the annual rate of surplus-value, s’n. In this, n is 
the number of turnovers of the variable capital within one year. 
(Ci. Book II, Chapter XVI, 1.)—F. £.] 

Third, due consideration must be given to productivity of labour, 
whose influence on the rate of surplus-value has been thoroughly 
discussed in Book I (Abschn. IV).* Productivity of labour may 
also exert a direct influence on the rate of profit, at least of an indi- 
vidual capital, if, as has been demonstrated in Book I (Kap. X, 
$.323 314),** this individual capital operates with a higher than the 
average social productivity and produces commodities at a lower 
value than their average social value, thereby realizing an extra 
profit. However, this case will not be considered for the present, 
since in this part of the work we also proceed {rom the premise that 
commodities are produced under normal social conditions and are 
sold at their values. Hence, we assume in each case that the prod- 
uctivity of labour remains constant. In effect, the value-compo- 

* English edition: Part IV.—Ed. 
** English edition: Ch. XIJ, pp. 316-17.—Ed. 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 51 

sition of a capital invested in a branch of industry, that is, a cer- 
tain proportion between the variable and constant capital, always 
expresses a definite degree of Jabour productivity. As soon, there- 
fore, as this proportion is altered by means other than a mere 
change in the value of the material elements of the constant capi- 
‘tal, or a change in wages, the productivity of labour must likewise 
undergo a corresponding change, and we shall often enough see, 
for this reason, that changes in the factors c, v, and s also imply 
changes in the productivity of labour. 

The same applies to the three remaining factors—the length 
of the working-day, intensity of labour, and wages. Their influence 
on the quantity and rate of surplus-value has been exhaustively 
discussed in Book I. It will be understood, therefore, that notwith- 
standing the assumption, which we make for the sake of simplic- 
ity, that these three factors remain coristant, the changes that 
occur in v and s may nevertheless imply changes in the magnitude 
of these, their determining elements. In this respect we must brief- 
ly recall that the wage influences the quantity of surplus-value and 
the rate of surplus-value in inverse proportion to the length of 
the working-day and the intensity of Jabour; that an increase in 
wages reduces the surplus-value, while a lengthening of the working- 
day and an increase in the intensity of labour add to it. 

Suppose a capital of 100 produces a surplus-value of 20 employing 
20 labourers working a 10-hour day for a total weekly wage of 20. 
Then we have: 

80, -+ 20,20; s'= 100%, p’ == 20%. 

Now the working-day is lengthened to 15 hours without raising 
the wages. The total value produced by the 20 labourers will thereby 
increase from 40 to 60 (10 : 15=40 : 60}. Since v, the wages paid lo 
the labourers, remains the same, the surplus-value rises from 20 
to 40, and we have: 

80. + 20,-+.40,; s’== 200%, p’—40%. 

If, conversely, the ten-hour working-day remains unchanged, 
while wages fall from 20 to 12, the total value-product amounts to 
40 as before, but is differently distributed; v falls to12, leavinga 
remainder of 28 for s. Then we have: 

80, 12,498; s'=233'/,%, p’=3;—=30"),,%. 

Hence, we see that a prolonged working-day (or a corresponding 
increase in the.in‘ensity of labour) and a fall in wages both increase 

52 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

the amount, and thus the rate, of surplus-value. Conversely, a rise 
in wages, other things being equal, would lower the rate of surplus- 
value. Hence, if v rises through a rise in wages, it does not express a 
greater, but only a dearer quantity of labour, in which case s’ and 
p’ do not rise, but fall. ; ; : 

This indicates that changes in the working-day, intensity of la- 
bour and wages cannot take place without a simultaneous change 
in v and s and their ratio, and therefore alsa p’, which is the ratio 
of s to the total capital c-+-v. And it is also evident that changes in 
the ratio of s to v also imply corresponding changes in at 
least one of the three above-mentioned labour conditions. 

Precisely this reveals the specific organic relationship of variable 
capital to the movement of the total capital and to its self-expan- 
sion, and also its difference from constant capital. So far as genera- 
tion of value is concerned, the constant capital is important only for 
the value it has. And it is immaterial to the generation of value 
whether a constant capital of £1,500 represents 1,500 tons of iron 
at, say, £1, or 500 tons of iron at £3. The quantity of actual mate- 
tial, in which the value of the constant capital is incorporated, is 
altogether irrelevant to the formation of value and the rate of profit, 
which varies inversely to this value no matter what the ratio of the 
increase or decrease of the value of constant capital to the mass 
of material use-value which it represents. 

It is different with variable capital. It is not the value it has, not 
the labour incorporated in it, that matter at this point, but this 
value as a mere index of the total labour that it sets in motion and 
which is not expressed in it—the total labour, whose difference from 
the labour expressed in that value, hence the paid labour, i.e., 
that portion of the total labour which produces surplus-value, is 
all the greater, the less labour is contained in that value itself. 
Suppose, a ten-hour working-day is equal to ten shillings= ten 
marks. If the labour necessary to replace the wages, and thus the 
variable capital = 5 hours = 5shillings, then the surplus-labour = 
=5 hours and the surplus-value = 5 shillings. Should the necessary 
labour = 4 hours =4 shillings, then the surplus-labour=6 hours 
and the surplus-value=6 shillings. 

Hence, as soon as the value of the variable capital ceases to be 
an index of the quantity of labour set in motion by it, and, more- 
over, the measure of this index is altered, the rate of surplus-value 
will change in the opposite direction and inversely. 

Let us now go on to apply the above-mentioned equation ol the 

tate of profit, p’= s' 2 to the various possible cases. We shall suc- 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 53 

cessively change the value of the individual factors ols’ & and de- 

termine the effect of these changes on the rate of profit. In this way 
we shall obtain different series of cases, which we may regard ei- 
ther as successive altered conditions of operation for one and the 
same capital, or as different capitals existing side by side and in- 
troduced for the sake of comparison, taken, as it were, from differ- 
ent branches of industry or different countries. In cases, therefore, 
where the conception of some of our examples as successive condi- 
tions for one and the same capital appears to be forced or imprac- 
ticable, this objection falls away the moment they are regarded as 
comparisons of independent capitals. 

Hence, we now separate the product s’ = into its two factors 
s’ and = At first we shall treat s’ as constant and analyse the 
effect of the possible variations of z=: After that we shall treat 

the fraction eas constant and let s’ pass through its possible var- 

iations. Finally we shall treat all factors as variable magnitudes 
and thereby exhaust all the cases from which laws concerning the 
rate of profit may be derived. 

v . 
I. c’ constant, — variable 
Cc 

This case, which embraces a number of subordinate cases, may be 
covered by a general formula. Take two capitals, C and C,, with 
their respective variable components, v and v,, with a common rate 
of surplus-value s’, and rates of profit p’and p;. Then: 

v vy 

PSs oi PSs ro 

Now let us make a proportion of C and C,, and of v and v,. For 
instance, let the value of the fraction AisE, and that of = =e. 
Then C,==EC, and v,=ev. Substituting in the above equation these 
values for p, C, and v,, we obtain 

, r ev 
ps EC° 
Again, we may derive a second formula from the above two 
equations by transforming them into the proportion: 
renter Kiet Vn YM 
pip, =s c's Gc oe 

4 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

Since the value of a fraction is not changed if we multiply or di- 
vide its numerator and denominator by the same number, we may 

reduce = ands to percentages, that is, we may make C and C, 
1 

v 

both=100. Then we have = = ao Me = Tp and may then 

drop the denominators in the above proportion, obtaining: 
Pp: pi=vi vv’, oF: 

Taking any two capitals operating with the same rate of sur- 
plus-value, the rates of profit are to each other as the variable 
portions of the capitals calculated as percentages of their respec- 
tive total capitals. 

These two formulas embrace all the possible variations oft. 

One more remark before we analyse these various cases singly. 
Since C is the sum of c and v, of the constant and variable capitals, 
and since the rates of surplus-value, as of profit, are usually ex- 
pressed in percentages, it is convenient to assume that the sum of 
c—v is also equal to 100, i.e., to express c and v in percentages. For 
the determination of the rate of profit, if not of the amount, it is 
immaterial whether we say that a capital of 15,000, of which 12,000 
is constant and 3,000 is variable, produces a surplus-value of 3,000, 
or whether we reduce this capital to percentages: 

15,000 C = 12,000, + 3,000, (1 3,000,) 
100 C= 80, + 20, (+. 20,). 

In either case the rate of surplus-value s’=100%, and the rate 
of profit =20%. 

The same is true when wecompare two capitals, say, the foregoing 
capital with another, such as 

12,000 C= 10,800, + 1,200, (-+ 1,200,) 
100 C= 90, + 10, (-+- 10,) 

in both of which s’=100%, p’=10%, and in which the comparison 
with the foregoing capital is clearer in percentage form. 

On the other hand, if it is a matter of changes taking place in 
one and the same capital, the form of percentages is rarely to be 

used, because it almost always obscures these changes. If a capital 
expressed in the form of percentages: 

80, +20, +20, 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 55 

assumnes the form of percentages: 

90, + 10,-+ 10,, 

we cannot tell whether the changed composition in percentages 
90,+10,, is due to an absolute decrease of v or an absolute increase 
of c, or to both. We would need the absolute magnitudes in figures 
to ascertain this. In the analysis of the following individual cases 
of variation, however, everything depends on how these changes 
have come about; whether 80,+20, changed into 90,+10, through 
an increase of the constant capital without any change in the 
variable capital, for instance through 12,000,+-3,000, changing 
into 27,000,+3,000, (corresponding to a percentage of 90.+10,); 
or whether they took this form through a reduction of the variable 
capital, with the constant capital remaining unchanged, that is, 
through a change into 12,000.+-1,333'/,, (also corresponding to a 
percentage of 90,-- 10,); or, lastly, whether both of the terms changed 
into 13,500.-++-1,500, (corresponding once more to a percentage 
of 90,+10,). But it is precisely these cases which we shall have to 
successively analyse, and in so doing dispense with the convenient 
form of percentages, or at least employ these only as a secondary 
alternative. 

1) s’' and C constant, v variable. 

If v changes in magnitude, C can remain unaltered only ifc, the 
other component of C, that is, the constant capital, changes by tie 
same amount as v, but in the opposite direction. 

If C originally=80,+20,=100, and if v is then reduced to 10, 
then C can=100 only if c is increased to 90; 90.+-10,=100. Gener- 
ally speaking, if v is transformed into v +d, into Vv increased or 
decreased by d, then c must be transformed into cd, into c vary- 
ing by the same amount, but in the opposite direction, so that the 
conditions of the present case are satisfied. 

Similarly, if the rate of surplus-value s’ remains the same, while 
the variable capital v changes, the amount of surplus-value s must 
change, since s=s’v, and since one of the factors of s’v, namely v, 
is given another value. 

The assumptions of the present case produce, alongside the orig- 
inal equation, 

, ¥ 
P=Se) 
still another equation through the variation of v: 
, ov 
Pp, =Sa 

Cot 

56 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

in which v has become v, and p’, the resultant changed rate of profit, 
is to be found. 
It is determined by the following proportion: 

Or: with the rate of surplus-value and total capital remaining the 
same, the original rate of profit is to the new rate of profit produced 
by a change in the variable capital as the original variable capital 
is to the changed variable capital. 

If the original capital was, as above: 

1. 15,000 C=12,000.43,000,(+3,000,.), and if it is now: 

I. 15,000 C=13,000,4+-2,000,(+2,000,), then C=15,000 and 
s’=100% in either case, and the rate of profit of I, 20%, is to that 
of Il, 13'/,%0, as the variable capital of 1, 3,000, is to that of II, 
2,000. i.e., 20% : 13'',% =3,000 : 2,000. 

Now, the variable capital may either rise or fall. Let us first 
take an example in which it rises. Let a certain capital be origi- 
nally constituted and employed as follows: 

1, 100, +.20,-+ 10,; C—=120, s’=50%, p’=8'/,%. 

Now let the variable capital rise to 30. In that case, according 
to our assumption, the constant capital must fall from 100 to 90 
so that total capital remains unchanged at 120. Therate of surplus- 
value remaining constant at 50%, the surplus-value produced will 
then rise from 10 to 15. We shall then have: 

I. 90, +30, 115, C=120, s’=50%, p'=12"/,%. 

Let us first proceed from the assumption that wages remain un- 
changed. Then the other factors of the rate of surplus-value, i.e., 
the working-day and the intensity of labour, must also remain 
unchanged. In that event the rise of v (from 20 to 30) can signify 
only that another half as many labourers are employed. Then the 
total value produced also risesone half, from 30 to 45, and is dis- 
tributed, just as before, */, for wages and '/, for surplus-value. But 
at the same time, with the increase in the number of labourers, 
the constant capital, the value of the means of production, has 
fallen from 100 to 90. We have, then, a case of decreasing productiv- 
ity of labour combined with a simultaneous shrinkage of constant 
capital. Is such a case economically possible? 

_ In agriculture and the extractive industries, in which a decrease 
in labour productivity and, therefore, an increase in the number 
of employed labourers is quite comprehensible, this process is— 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 57 

on the basis and within the scope of capitalist production—attend- 
ed by an increase, instead of a decrease, of constant capital. Even 
if the above fall of c were due merely to a fall in prices, an individ- 
ual capital would beable to accomplish the transition from 1 to II 
only under very exceptional circumstances. But in the case of two 
independent capitals invested in diflerent countries, or in different 
branches of agriculture or extractive industry, it would be noth- 
ing out of the ordinary if in one of the cases more labourers (and 
therefore more variable capital) were employed and worked with 
less valuable or scantier means of production than in the other case. 

But let us drop the assumption that the wage remains the same, 
and Jet us explain the rise of the variable capital from 20 to 30 
through a rise of wages by one half. Then we shall have an entirely 
different case. The same number of labourers—say, twenty—con- 
tinue to work with the same or only slightly reduced means of pro- 
duction.1f the working-day remains unchanged—say, 10 hours—then 
the total value produced also remains unchanged. It was and re- 
mains=30. But all of this 30 is now required to make good the ad- 
vanced variable capital of 30; the surplus-value would disappear. We 
have assumed, however, that the rate of surplus-value should remain 
constant, that is, the same as in I, at 50%. This is possible only if 
the working-day is prolonged by one half to 15 hours. Then the 
20 labourers would produce a total value of 45 in 15 hours, and all 
conditions would be satisfied: 

Il. 90,+30,+15,; C=120, s'=50%, p’=12'),%. 

In this case, the 20 labourers do not require any more means 
of labour, tools, machines, ete., than in case I. Only the raw mate- 
rials or auxiliary materials would have to be increased by one half. 
In the event of a fall in the prices of these materials, the transi- 
tion from 1 to I] might be more possible economically, even for an 
individual capital in keeping with our assumption. And the capi- 
talist would be somewhat compensated by increased profits lor 
any loss incurred through the depreciation of his constant capital. 

Now let us assume that the variable capital falls, instead of ris- 
ing. Then we have but to reverse our example, taking II as the 
original caoital, and passing from II to I. 

II. 90, +30, +15, then changes into 

1. 100.+20,+10,, and it is evident that {his transposition does 
not inthe least alter any of the conditions regulating the respective 
rates of profit and their mutual relation. : 

If y falls from 30 to 20 because '’, iewer labourers are employed 
with the growing.constant capital, then we have before us the nor- 

58 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

mal case of modern industry, namely, an increasing productivity of 
labour, and the operation ol a larger quantity of means of production 
by fewer labourers. That this movement is necessarily connected 
with a simultaneous drop in the rate of profit will be developed in 
the third part of this book. 

If, on the other hand, v jalls from 30 to 20, because the same num- 
ber of labourers is employed at lower wages, the total value pro- 
duced would. with the working-day unchanged, as before=30,+ 
+15,=45. Since v fell to 20, the surplus-value would rise to 25, 
the rate of surplus-value from 50% to 125%, which would be con- 
trary to our assumption. Tocomply with the conditions of our case, 
the surplus-value, with its rate at 50%, must rather fall to 10, and 
the total value produced must, therefore, fall from 45 to 30, and 
this is possible only if the working-day is reduced by one-third. 
Then, as before, we have: 

100+ 20,-++ 10,; s'= 50%, p’=8'/,%. 

It need hardly be said that this reduction of the working-time, 
in the case of a fall in wages, would not occur in practice. But that 
is immaterial. The rate of profit is a function of several variable 
magnitudes, and if we wish to know how these variables influence 
the rate of profit, we must analyse the individual effect of each in 
turn, regardless of whether such an isolated effect is economically 
practicable with one and the same capital. 

2) s’ constant, v variable, C changes through the variation of v. 

This case differs from the preceding one only in degree. Instead 
of decreasing or increasing by as much as v increases or decreases, 
¢ remains constant. Under present-day conditions in the major in- 
dustries and agriculture the variable capital is only a relatively small 
part of the total capital. For this reason, its increase or decrease, so 
far as either is due to changes in the variable capital, are likewise 
relatively small. 

Let us again proceed with a capital: 

1, 100, +- 20, +- 10,5 C= 120, s'=50%, p’=8'/,%, 
which would then change, say, into: 
Ui. 100,+30,+ 15, C=130, s'=50%, p’=117/,,%. 

The opposite case, in which the variable capital decreases, would 
again be illustrated by the reverse transition from II to L. 
The economic conditions would be essentially the same as in the 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 59 

preceding case, and therefore they need not be discussed again. The 
transition from I to II implies a decrease in the productivity of la- 
bour by one half; for [1 the utilization of 100, requires an increase 
of labour by one half over that of I. This case may occur in agricul- 
ture. ® 

But while the total capital remains constant in the preceding 
case, owing to the conversion of constant into variable capital, or 
vice versa, there is in this case a tie-up of additional capital if the 
variable capital increases, and a release of previously employed 
capital if the variable capital decreases. 

3) s’ and v constant, c and therefore C variable. 

In this case the equation changes from: 

row wv: roe 
pis ¢ into pp=s' ce, 

and after reducing the same factors on both sides, we have: 
PrP’ =C:C,; 

with the same rate of surplus-value and equal variable capitals, the 
rates of profit are inversely proportional to the total! capitals. 
Should we, for example, have three capitals, or three different 
conditions of the same capital: 
1. 80, + 20, + 20,; =100, s’= 100%, p’ = 20%; 
Il. 100, +-20,+-20,; C==120, s'’= 100%, p’=167/,%; 
UI. 60,--20,4-20,; C= 80, s’=100%, p’=25%. 

Then we obtain the proportions: 
20% :167/,% == 120:100 and 20% :25% = 80: 100. 
The previously given general formula for variations ol Pa with 

a constant s’ was: 

A ev, 
Pi==S EG 

. , Vv 
now it becomes: Pp} =S ge, 
since v does not change, the factore = 2, becomes=1. 

Since s’v=s, the quantity of surplus-value, and since both s’ and 
v remain constant, it follows thats, too, is not affected by any var- 

* The manuscript has the fotlowing note at this point: “Investigate later in 
what manner this case is connected with ground-rent.” — F. &. 

62 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

reduced tle case to an instance of change of one variable, namely 
olc. 

Simultaneous variation of v, c, and C, does not, therefore, offer 
any new aspects and in the final analysis leads back to a case in 
which only one factor is a variable. 

Even the sole remaining case has actually been exhausted, 
namely that in which vand C remain numerically the same, while 
their material elements undergo a change of value, so that v stands 
for a changed quantity of labour put in motion and c Jor a changed 
quantity of means of production put in motion. 

In 80,+20,+20,, let 20, originally represent the wages of 20 
labourers working 10 hours daily. Then let the wages of each rise 
[rom 1 to 1';,. In that case the 20, will pay only 16 labourers instead 
of 20. But if 20 labourers produce a value of 40 in 200 working- 
hours, 16 labourers working 10 hours daily will in 160 working- 
hours produce a value of only 32. After deducting 20, lor wages, 
only 12 of the 32 would then remain for surplus-value. The rate of 
surplus-value would have fallen [rom 100% to 60%. But since we 
have assumed the rate of surplus-value to be constant, the working- 
day would have to be prolonged by one-quarter, Irom 10 to 12% 
hours. If 20 labourers working 10 hours daily=200 working-hours 
produce a value of 40, then 16 labourers working 12% hours daily== 
==200 hours will produce the same value, and the capital of 80,+ 
+20, would as before yield the same surplus-value of 20. 

Conversely, if wages were to fall to such an extent that 20, 
would represent the wages of 30 labourers, then s’ would remain 
constant only if the working-day were reduced Irom 10 to 6*/, hours. 
For 20 X10=30 x6; ,=200 working-hours. 

We have already in the main discussed to what extent c may in 
these divergent examples remain unchanged in terms ol value ex- 
pressed in money and yet represent different quantities of means 
of production changed in accordance with changing conditions. In 
its pure form this case would be possible only by way ol an exception. 

As for a change in the value of the elements of c which increases or 
decreases their mass but leaves the sum of the value of ¢ unchanged, 
it does not affect either the rate of profit or the rate of surplus- 
value, so long as it does not lead to a change in the magnitude o! v. 

We have herewith exhausted all the possible cases ol variation 
of v, c, and C in our equation. We have seen that the rate of profit 
may fall, remain unchanged, or rise, while the rate of surplus- 
value remains the same, with the least change in the Proportion of 

v e c, or toC, being sufficient to change tle rate of profit as 
well, 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUF 63 

We have seen, furthermore, that in variations of v there is a 
certain limit everywhere beyond which it is economically impossible 
for s’ to remain constant. Since every one-sided variation of ¢ must 
also reach a certain limit where v can no longer remain unchanged, 
we find that there are limils for every possible variation of = 

beyond which s’ must likewise become variable. In the variations 
of s’ which we shall now discuss, this interaction oi the different 
variables of our equation wil! stand out still clearer. 

II. s’ variable 
We obtain a general formula for the rates of profit with different 
rates of surplus-value, no matter whether < remains constant or 
not, by converting the equation: 

eg 
SC 
inlo 

in which pj, s’, v, and C, denote the changed values of p’. s’, 
v and C. Then we have: 

and hence: 
Vy 

3 Coss 
p= XY XE XP. 

Ss 

1) s’ variable, z constant, 

In this case we have the equations: 
, 7 ¥ v 

PSS ei MSCs 

in both of which os is equal, Therefore: 

The rates of profit of two capitals of the same composition are to 
each other as the two corresponding rates of surplus-value. Since 

in the fraction x it is not a-question of the absolute magnitudes of 

64 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

v and C, but only of their ratio, this applies to all capitals of equal 
composition whatever their absolute magnitude. 
80, + 20, 20; C=100, s= 100%, p’ == 20% 
160. + 40,+20,; C= 200, s'=50%, p = 10% 
100% :50% == 20% : 10%. 

If the absolute magnitudes of v and C are the same in both cases, 
the rates of profit are moreover also related to one another as the 
amounts of surplus-value: 

p ip, =SvisvV=—s:S,. 

For instance: 
80, + 20, + 20,; s=100%, p'—20% 
80, + 20, -+ 10,; s'=50%, p’=10% 
20% :10% = 100 20:50 x 20= 20,:10,. 

It is now clear that with capitals of equal absolute or percentage 
composition the rate of surplus-value can differ only if either the 
wages, of the length of the working-day, or the intensity of labour, 
differ. In the following three cases: 

1, 80,+20,+10, s'=50%, p’=10% 
If. 80,+20,+20,; s'= 100%, p’ 20% 
III. 80,+-20,+40,; s'=200%, p’= 40% 

the total value produced in I is 30 (20,-+10,); in II it is 40; 
in III it is 60. This may come about in three different ways. 

First, if the wages are different, and 20, stands for a different 
number of labourers in every individual case. Suppose capital 1 
employs 15 labourers 10 hours daily at a wage of £17/,, who produce 
a value of £30, of which £20 replace the wages and £10 are surplus- 
value. Ii wages fall to £1, then 20 labourers may be employed for 
{Q hours; they will produce a value of £40, of which £20 will replace 
the wages and £20 will be surplus-value. Should wages fall still 
more, to £?;,, thirty labourers may be employed for 10 hours. They 
will produce a value of £60, of which £20 will be deducted for wages 
and £40 will represent surplus-value. 

This case—a constant composition of capital in per cent, a constant 
working-day and constant intensity of labour, and the rate of sur- 
plus-value varying because of variation in wages—is the only one 
in which Ricardo’s assumption is correct: “Profit would be high or 
low, exactly in proportion as wages were low or high.” (Principles, 

Ch. I, Sect. II, p. 18 of the Works of D. Ricardo, ed. by Mac- 
Culloch, 1852.) ; ‘ 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 65 

Or second, if the intensity of labour varies. In that case, say, 20 
labourers working 10 hours daily with the same meanis of production 
produce 30 pieces of a certain commodity in 1, 40 in I], and 60 in 
III, of which every piece, aside from the value of the means of pro- 
duction incorporated in it, represents a new value of £1. Since 
every 20 pieces=£20 make good the wages, there remain 10 pieces= 
=£10 for surplus-value in 1, 20 pieces=£20 in II, and 40 pieces= 
=£40 in Ill. 

Or third, the working-day differs in length. If 20 labourers work 
with the same intensity for 9 hours in I, 12 hours in Il, and 18 
hours in III], their total products, 30 : 40 : 60 vary as 9: 12: 18, 
And since wages=20 in every case, 10, 20, and 40 respectively again 
remain as surplus-value. 

A rise or fall in wages, therefore, influences the rate of surplus- 
value inversely, and a rise or fall in the intensity of labour, and a 
lengthening or shortening of the working-day, act the same way on 
the rate of surplus-value and thereby, with = constant, on therate 
of profit. 

2) s’ and v variable, C constant. 
The following proportion applies in this case: 

p’:pj=s' aS eS svisiy, =s5,. 

The rates of profit are related to one another as the respective 
amounts of surplus-value. 

Changes in the rate of surplus-value with the variable capital 
remaining constant meant a change in the magnitude and distri- 
bution of the produced value. A simultaneous variation of v and 
s’ also always implies a different distribution, but not always a 
change in the magnitude of the produced value. Three cases are 
possible: 

a) Variation of v and s’ takes place in opposite directions, but 
by the same amount; for instance: 

80,+20,+10,; s’'=50%, p’= 10% 
90, + 10,-+ 20; == 200%, p’= 20%. 

The produced value is equal in both cases, hence also the quantity: 
of labour performed; 20,+10,=10,+20,=30. The only difference 
is that in the first case 20 is paid out for wages and 10 remains as 
surplus-value, while in the second case wages are only 10 and sur- 
plus-value is therefore 20. This is the only case in which the number 

4 — 2757 

66 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

of labourers, the intensity of labour, and the length of the working- 
day remain unchanged, while v and s’ vary simultaneously. 

b) Variation of s’ and v also takes place in opposite directions, 
but not by the same amount. In that case the variation of either 
v ors’ outweighs the other. 

1. 80,-+20,-+-20,; s'= 100%, p’=20% 
I. 72,28, 4-20; s'=717/,%, p' = 20% 
IIT. 84,-4-16,- 20,; s’= 125%, pp’ = 20%, 

Capital 1 pays for produced value amounting to 40 with 20,, 
IL a value of 48 with 28,, and III a value of 36 with 16,. Both the 
produced value and the wages have changed. But a change in the 
produced value means a change in the amount of labour performed, 
hence a change either in the number of labourers, the hours of la- 
bour. the intensity of labour, or in more than one of these. 

c) Variation of s’ and v takes place in the same direction. In that 
case the one intensifies the eflect of the other. 

90.-+-10,+ 10, s’'== 100%, p’== 10% 
80, -+-20,-+-30,; s’= 150%, p’ = 30% 
92-+8, +6; s'=75%, p’=6%. 

Here too the three values produced are different, namely 20, 50, 
and 14. And this difference in the magnitude of the respective quan- 
tities of labour reduces itself once more to a difference in the num- 
ber of labourers, the hours of labour, and the intensity of labour, 
or several or all of these factors. 

3) s’, v and C variable. 

This case offers no new aspects and is solved by the general for- 
mula given under II, in which s’ is variable, 

The effect of a change in the magnitude of the rate of surplus- 
value on the rate of profit hence yields the following cases: 

1) p’ increases or decreases in the same proportion as s’ if wre 
mains constant. 

80,4 20,+20, s'= 100%, p’—=20% 

80,-+20+10,; s’=50%, p’= 10% 
100% :50% — 20% «10%, 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 67 

2) p’ rises or falls at a faster rate than s’ if = moves in the same 

direction as s’, that is, if it increases or decreases when s’ increases 
or decreases. 

80,+20,-4+-10,; s'=50%, p’= 10% 
70, +80, sf 20s s' = 66"/,%, p’ = 20% 
4 :66"/,9 < 10% :20%, 

3) p’ rises or falls at a slower rate than s’ if = changes inversely 
to s’, but at a slower rate. 
80, + 20,+ 10, s'=50%, 

Pp" 
90, + 10,-+ 15.; s'= 150%, p’ 
50% : 150% >> 10% : 15%. 

4) p' rises while s’ falls, or falls while s’ rises if = changes in- 
versely to, and at a faster rale than s’. 

80,-|-20,-+-20,; s’=100%, p’=20% 
90,-+-10, +15; s'=150%, p'=15% 

s’ has risen from 100% to 150%, p’ has fallen from 20% to 15%. 
5) Finally, p’ remains constant whereas s’ rises or falls, while 

changes inversely to, but in exactly the same proportion as, s’. 
It is only this last case which still requires some explanation. 

We have observed earlier in the variations of = that one and the 

same rate of surplus-value may be expressed in very much differ- 
ent rates of profit. Now we see that one and the same rate of prof- 
it may be based on very much diflerent rates of surplus-value. 
But while any change in the proportion of v to C is sufficient to 
produce a difference in the rate of profit so long as s‘ is constant, 
a change in the magnitude of s’ must lead to a corresponding 

inverse change of = in order that the rate of profit remain the same. 

In the case of one and the same capital, or in that of two capitals 
in one and the same country this is possible but in exceptional 
cases. Assume, for example, that we have a capital of 

80, + 20,420; C+100, s’==100%, p'—= 20%; 

4* 

68 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS- VALUE INTO PROFIT 

and let us suppose that wages fall to such an extent that the same 
number of labourers is obtainable for 16, instead of 20,. Then, other 
things being equal, and 4, being released, we shall have: 

80,+ 16,+ 24, C=96, s’=150%, p’=—25%. 

In order that p’ may naw=20% as before, the total capital 
would have to increase to 120, the constant capital therefore ris- 
ing to 104: 

104.-- 16, 24, C= 120, s'=150%, p’=20%. 

This would only be possible if the fall in wages were attended 
simultaneously by a change in the productivity of labour which 
Tequired such a change in the composition of capital. Or, if the 
value in money of the constant capital increased from 80 to 104. 
In short, it would require an accidental coincidence of conditions 
such as occurs in exceptional cases. In fact, a variation ofs’ that 

does not cal] for the simultaneous variation of v, and thus of a ‘ 

is conceivable only under very definite conditions, namely in such 
branches of industry in which only fixed capital and labour are 
employed, while the materials of labour are supplied by Nature. 

But this is not so when the rates of profit of two different coun- 
tries are compared. For in that case the same rate of profit is, in 
effect, based largely on different rates of surplus-value. 

It follows from all of these five cases, therefore, that a rising 
rate of profit may correspond to a falling or rising rate of surplus- 
value, a falling rate of profit to a rising or falling rate of surplus- 
value, and a constant rate of profit to a rising or falling rate of 
surplus-value. And we have seen in | that a rising, falling, or con- 
sue rate of profit may also accord with a constant rate of surplus- 
Value. 

The rate of profit, therefore, depends on two main factors—the 
rate of surplus-value and the value-composition of capital. The 
efiects of these two factors may be briefly summed up as follows, 
by giving the composition in per cent, for it is immaterial which 
of the two portions of the capital causes the variation: 

The rates of profit of two different capitals, or of one and the 
same capital in two successive different conditions, 

are equal 

1) if the per cent composition of the capitals is the same and their 
tates of surplus-value are equal, 

2) if their per cent composition is not the same, and the rates of 
surplus-value are unequal, provided the products of the rates of 

RELATION OF RATE OF PROFIT TO RATE OF SURPLUS-VALUE 69 

surplus-value by the percentages of the variable portions of capi- 
tals (s’ by v) are the same, i.e., if the masses of surplus-value (s= 
=s’v) calculated in per cent of the total capital are equal; in other 
words, if the factors s’ and v are inversely proportional to one an- 
other in both cases. 

They are unequal 

1) if the per cent composition is equal and the rates of surplus- 
value are unequal, in which case they are related as the rates of 
surplus-value; 

2) if the rates of surplus-value are the same and the per cent com- 
position is unequal, in which case they are related as the variable 
portions of the capitals; 

3) if the rates of surplus-value are unequal and the per cent com- 
Position not the same, in which case they are related as the products 
s‘v, ie., as the quantities of surplus-value calculated in per cent 
of the total capital.’® 

* The manuscript contains also very detailed calculations of the difference be- 
tween the rate of surplus-value and the rate of profit (s‘'—p*), which has very inter- 
esting peculiarities, and whose movement indicates where the two rates draw 
apart or approach one another. These movements may also be represented by 
curves. | am not reproducing this material, because it is of less importance to the 
immediate purposes of this work, and because it is enough here to call attention 
to this fact for readers who wish to pursue this point further.—F. E&. 

CHAPTER IV 

THE EFFECT OF THE TURNOVER 
ON THE RATE OF PROFIT 

[The effect of the turnover on the production of surplus-value, 
and consequently of profit, has been discussed in Book II. Briefly 
summarized it signifies that owing to the time span required for 
turnover. not all the capital can be employed all at once in produc- 
tion; some of the capital always lies idle, either in the form of money- 
capital, of raw material supplies, ol finished but still unsold com- 
modity-capital, or of outstanding claims; that the capital in active 
production, i.e., in the production and appropriation of surplus- 
value, is always short by this amount, and that the produced and 
appropriated surplus-value is always curtailed to the same extent. 
The shorter the period of turnover, the smaller this idle portion of 
capital as compared with the whole, and the larger, therefore, the 
appropriated surplus-value, provided other conditions remain the 
same. 

Jt has already been shown in detail in Book II how the quantity 
of produced surplus-value is augmented by reductions in the pe- 
tiod of turnover, or of one of its two sections, in the time of pro- 
duction and the time of circulation. But since the rate of profit 
only expresses the relation of the produced quantity of surplus- 
value to the total capital employed in its production, it is evident 
that any such reduction increases the rate of profit. Whatever has 
been said earlier in Part II of Book II in regard to surplus-value, 
applies equally to profit and the rate of profit and needs no repeti- 
tion here. We wish only to stress a few of the principal points. 

The chief means of reducing the time of production is higher la- 
bour productivity, which is commonly called industrial progress. 
If this does not involve a simultaneous considerable increase in 
the outlay of total capital resulting irom the installation of expen- 
sive machinery, etc., and thus a reduction of the rate of profit, which 
is calculated on the total capital, this rate must rise, And this is 

EFFECT OF TURNOVER ON RATE OF PROFIT 71 

decidedly true in the case of many of the latest improvements in 
metallurgy and in the chemical industry. The recently discovered 
methods of producing iron and steel, such as the processes of Besse- 
mer, Siemens, Gilchrist-Thomas, etc., cut to a minimum at rela- 
tively small costs the formerly arduous processes. The making of 
alizarin, a red dye-stuff extracted from coal-tar, requires but a lew 
weeks, and this by means of already existing coal-tar dye-produc- 
ing installations, to yield the same resul{s which formerly required 
years. It took a year for the madder to mature, and it was customary 
to let the roots grow a few years more before they were processed. 

The chief means of reducing the time of circulation is improved 
communications. The last fifty years have brought about a revolu- 
{ion in this field, comparable only with the industrial revolution 
of the latter half of the 18th century. On land the macadamized 
road has been displaced by the railway, on sea the slow and irregu- 
lar sailing vessel has been pushed into the background by the rapid 
and dependable steamboat line, and the entire globe is being gir- 
dled by telegraph wires. The Suez Canal has fully opened East Asia 
and Australia to steamer tralfic. The time of circulation of a ship- 
ment of commodities to East Asia, at least twelve months in 1847 
(cf. Buch I], S. 235*), has now been reduced to almost as many 
weeks. The two Jarge centres of the crises of 1825-57, America and 
India, have been brought from 70 to 90 per cent nearer to the Euro- 
pean industrial countries by this revolution in transport. and have 
thereby lost a good deal of their explosive nature. The period of 
turnover of the total world commerce has been reduced to fhe same 
extent, and the elficacy of the capital involved in it has been more 
than doubled or trebled. It goes without saying that this has not 
been without effect on the rate of profit. 

To single out the effect of the turnover of total capital on the rate 
of profit we must assume all other conditions of the capitals to be 
compared as equal. Aside from the rate of surplus-value and the 
working-day it is also notably the per cent composition which we 
must assume to be the same. Now let us take a capital A composed 
of 80,+-20,=100 C, which makes two turnovers yearly at a rate of 
surplus-value of 100%. The annual product is then: 

160,+-40,+40,. However, to determine the rate of profit we do 
not calculate the 40, on the turned-over capital-value of 200, but 
on the advanced capital of 100, and thus obtain p’=40%. 

Now let us compare this with a capital B=160,+40,—200 C, 
which has the same rate of surplus-value of 100%, but which is 

* English edition: Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 11, Moscow, 1957, pp. 251-52. —E£d. 

72 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

turned over only once a year. The annual product of this capital is, 
therefore, the same as that of A: 

160,.+40,+40,. But this time the 40, are to be calculated on an 
advance of capital amounting to 200. which yields a rate ol profit 
of only 20%, or one half that of A. 

We find, then, that for capitals with an equal per cent composi- 
tion, with equal rates of surplus-value and equal working-days, 
the rates of profit of the two capitals are related inversely as their 
periods of turnover. If either the composition, the rates of surplus- 
value, the working-day, or the wages, are unequal in the two com- 
pared cases, this would naturally produce further differences in 
the rates of profit; but these are independent of the turnover and, 
for this reason, do not concern us at this point. They have aiready 
been discussed in Chapter II]. 

The direct effect of a reduced period of turnover on the production 
ol surplus-value, and consequently ol profit, consists of an increased 
elficiency imparted thereby to the variable portion ol capital, 
as shown in Book II, Chapter XVJ, “The Turnover of Variable 
Capital.” This chapter demonstrated that a variable capital of 
500 turned over ten times a year produces as much surplus-value 
in this time as a variable capital of 5,000 with the same rate of 
surplus-value and the same wages, turned over just once a year. 

Take capital I, consisting of 10,000 fixed capital whose annual 
depreciation is 10% =1,000, of 500 circulating constant and 500 
variable capital. Let the variable capital turn over ten times per 
year at a 100% rate of surplus-value. For the sakeol simplicity we 
assume in all the following examples that the circulating constant 
capital is turned over in the same time as the variable, which is 
generally the case in practice. Then the product ol one such period 
of turnover will be: 

100, (depreciation) +- 500, +-500, +-500, = 1,600 
and the product of one entire year, with ten such turnovers. will be 
1,000, (depreciation) + 5,000, +- 5,000, +- 5,000, = 16,009, 

C=11,000, s=5,000, p’= P20 — 455/,,%. 

Now let us take capita! II: 9,000 fixed capital, 1,000 annual wear 
and tear, 1,000 circulating constant capital, 1,000 variable capi- 
tal, 100% rate of surplus-value, 5 turnovers of variable capital 
per year, Then the product of each of the turnovers ol the variable 
capital will be: 

200, (depreciation) + 1,000, + 1,000, + 1,000, == 3,200, 

EFFECT OF TURNOVER ON RATE OF PROFIT 73 

and the total annual product after five turnovers: 
1,000, (depreciation) + 5,000, + 5,000, + 5,000, = 16,000, 

ea _ »_ 5,000 

C= 11,000, s= 5,000, p’= SOT = 45+),.%. 
Further, take capita! [II with no fixed capital, 6,000 circulating 
constant capital and 5,000 variable capital. Let there be one turn- 
over per year at a 100% rate of surplus-value. Then the total annual 

product is: 
6,000, -+- 5,000, +- 5,000, = 16,000, 

te _ +. 8,000 _. any 
C= 11,000, s=5,000, p’ =F p99 = 45/11%. 

In all the three cases we therefore have the same annual quantity 
of surplus-value=5,000, and, since the total capital is likewise 
equal in all three cases, namely=11,000, also the same rate of 
profit of 45°/%. 

But should capital I have only 5 instead of 10 turnovers of its 
variable part per year, the result would be different. The product of 
one turnover would then be: 

200, (depreciation) + 500, + 500, + 500, = 1,700. 
And the annual product: 
1,000, (depreciation) + 2,500, +- 2,500, + 2,500, = 8,500, 

_ _ : ,_ 2,900 gon, ys 
C= 11,000, s== 2,500; p’ = Figg = 227%. 

The rate of profit has fallen one half, because the period of turn- 
over has doubled. 

The quantity of surplus-value appropriated in one year is there- 
fore equal to the quantity of surplus-value appropriated in one 
turnover of the variable capital multiplied by the number of such 
turnovers per year. Suppose we call the surplus-value, or profit, 
appropriated in one year S, the surplus-value appropriated in one 
period of turnover s, the number of turnovers of the variable capi- 
tal in one year n, then S=sn, and the annual rate o!f surplus-value 
S’=s’n, as already demonstrated in Book II, Chapter XVI, I. 

It goes without saying that the formula pastas is cor- 
rect only so long as the v in the numerator is the same as that in 
the denominator. In the denominator v stands for the entire por- 
tion of the total capital used on an average as variable capital for 
the payment of wages. The v ol the numerator is. primarily only 

74 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

determined by the fact that a certain quantity of surplus-value =s 
is produced and appropriated by it, whose relation to it = ,ism’, 
the rate of surplus-value. It is only along these lines that the for- 
mula P= is transformed into the other: pss’. The v of 
the numerator will now be more accurately determined by the fact 
that it must equal the v of the denominator, that is, the entire 

variable portion of capital C. In other words, the equation past 
may be correctly transformed into the equation p’'=s'5 only if 
s stands for surplus-value produced in one turnover of the variable 
capital. Should s be only a portion of this surplus-value, then 
s=s’y is still correct, but this v is then smaller than the v in C= 
=c-y, because it issmaller than the entire variable capital expend- 
ed for wages. But should s stand for more than the surplus-value 
of one turnover of v, then a portion of this v, or perhaps the whole 
of it, serves twice, namely in the first and in the second turnover, 
and eventually in subsequent turnovers. The v which produces the 
surplus-value and represents the sum of all paid wages, is therefore 
greater than the v in c+-v and the calculation falls into error. 

To make the formula precise for the annual rate of profit, we must 
substitute the annual rate of surplus-value for the simple rate of 
surplus-value, that is, substitute S’ or s’n for s’. In other words, 
we must multiply the rate of surplus-value s’, or, what amounts to 
the same thing, the variable capital v contained in C, by n, the 
number of turnovers of this variable capital in one year. Thus we 
obtain p’=s'nz, which is the formula for the annual rate of profit. 

The amount of variable capital invested in his business is some- 
thing the capitalist himself does not know in most cases. We have 
seen in Chapter VII] of Book IJ, and shall see further along, that 
the only essential distinction within his capital which impresses 
itself upon the capitalist is that of fixed and circulating capital. 
He takes money to pay wages from his cash-box containing the part 
of the circulating capital he has on hand in the form of money, 
so far as it is not deposited in a bank; he takes money from the 
same cash-box for raw and auxiliary materials, and credits both 
items to the same cash-account. And even if he should keep a sep- 
arate account for wages, at the close of the year this would only 
show the sum paid out for this item, hence vn, but not the vari- 
able capital v itself. In order to ascertain this, he would have to 

EFFECT OF TURNOVER ON RATE OF PROFIT 75 

make a special calculation, of which we propose here to give an 
illustration. 

For this purpose we select the cotton spinnery of 10,000 mule 
spindles described in Book I (S. 209/201*) and assume that the data 
given there for one week of April 1871, are in force during the 
whole year. The fixed capital incorporated in the machinery was 
£10,000. The circulating capital was not given. We assume it to 
have been £2,500. This is a rather high estimate, but justified by 
the assumption, which we must always make here, that no credit 
operations were effected, hence no permanent or temporary employ- 
ment of other people’s capital. The value of the weekly product 
was composed of £20 for depreciation of machinery, £358 circu- 
lating constant advanced capital (rent £6; cotton £342: coal, gas, 
oil, £10), £52 variable capital paid out for wages, and £80 sur- 
plus-value. Therefore, 

20, (depreciation) + 358, +52,-+ 80,—510., 

The weekly advance of circulating capital therefore was 358,-++ 
+52,=410. In terms of per cent this was 87.3,+12.7,. For the 
entire circulating capital of £2,500 this would be £2,182 constant 
and £318 variable capital. Since the total expenditure for wages 
in one year was 52 times £52, or £2,704, it follows that in a year 
the variable capital of £318 was turned over almost exactly 8% 
times. The rate of surplus-value was °},,=153"'/,,%. We cal- 
culate the rate of profit on the basis of these elements by inserting 

the above values in the formula p’=s’n = s'=1534),,, n=8%, 
v=318, C=12,500; hence: 
318 

p= 158"),, x 8/, * 7y590 = 93-27 %- 
We test this by means of the simple formula p=. The total 

annual surplus-value or profit amounts to 52 times £80, or £4,160, 
and this divided by the total capital of £12,500 gives us 33.28%, 
or almost an identical result. This is an abnormally high rate of 
profit, which may only be explained by extraordinarily favourable 
conditions of the moment (very low prices of cotton along with 
very high prices of yarn), and could certainly not have obtained 
throughout the year. 

The s’n in the formula p’=s’n = stands, as has been said, for the 
thing called in Book II the anuual rate of surplus-value. In the above 

* English edition: p. 219.—Ed. 

76 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

case it is 153"/,,% multiplied by 8%. or in exact figures, 1,307°/,,%. 
Thus, if a certain Biedermann* was shocked by the abnormity 
of an annual rate of surplus-value of 1,000 used as an illustration 
in Book II, he will now perhaps be pacified by this annual rate of 
surplus-value of more than 1,300% taken from the living experi- 
ence of Manchester. In times of greatest prosperity, such as we have 
not indeed seen for a long time, such a rate is by no means a rarity. 

For that matter we have here an illustration of the actual com- 
position of capital in modern large-scale industry. The total capi- 
tal is broken up into £12,182 constant and £318 variable capital, 
a sum of £12,500. In terms of per cent this is 974%4,.+2%,=100 C. 
Only one-fortieth of the total, but in more than an eight-fold annual 
turnover, serves for the payment of wages. 

Since very few capitalists ever think of making calculations of 
this sort with reference to their own business, statistics is almost 
completely silent about the relation of the constant portion of the 
total social capital to its variable portion. Only the American cen- 
sus gives what is possible under modern conditions, namely the 
sum of wages paid in each line of business and the profits realized. 
Questionable as they may be, being based on the capitalist’s own 
uncontrolled statements, they are nevertheless very valuable and 
the only records available to us on this subject. In Europe we are 
far too delicate to expect such revelations from our major capital- 
ists.—F.E.] 

* Biedermann—Philistine. A pun, being also the name of the edilor of the 
Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung.—Ed. 

CHAPTER V 

ECONOMY IN THE EMPLOYMENT 
OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 

1. IN GENERAL 

The increase of absolute surplus-value, or the prolongation of 
surplus-labour, and thus of the working-day, while the variable 
capital remains the same and thus employs the same number of 
labourers at the same nominal wages, regardless of whether over- 
time is paid or not, reduces the relative value of the constant capital 
as compared to the total and the variable capital, and thereby 
increases the rate of profit, again irrespective of the growth of the 
quantity of surplus-value anda possibly rising rate of surplus-value. 
The volume of the fixed portion of constant capital, such as lactory 
buildings, machinery, elc., remains {he same, no matter whether these 
serve the labour-process 16 or 12 hours. A prolongation of the work- 
ing-day does not entail any fresh expenditures in this, the most 
expensive portion of constant capital. Furthermore, the value of 
the fixed capital is thereby reproduced inasmaller number of turn- 
over periods, so that the time for which it must be advanced to 
make a certain profit is abbreviated. A prolongation of the working- 
day therefore increases the profit, even if overtime is paid, or even 
if, up to a certain point. it is better paid than the normal hours of 
labour. The ever-mounting need to increase fixed capital in modern 
industry was therefore one of the main reasons prompting profit- 
mad capitalists {o lengthen the working-day.'? The same condi- 
tions do not obtain if the working-day is constant. Then it is neces- 
sary either to increase the number of labourers, and with them to 
a certain extent the amount of fixed capital, the buildings, machin- 

‘1 “Since in all factories there is a very large amount of fixed capital in build- 
ings and machinery, the greater the number of hours that machinery can be kept 
at work the greater will be the return.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 3ist October, 
1858, p. 8.) 

78 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

ery, etc., in order to exploit a grealer quantity of labour (for we 
leave aside deductions from wages or the depression of wages below 
their normal level), or, if the intensity and, consequently, the pro- 
ductivity of labour, increase and, generally, more relative surplus- 
value is produced, the magnitude of the circulating portion of con- 
stant capital increases in such industrial branches which use raw 
materials, since more raw material, etc., is processed in a given 
time; and, secondly, the ammount of machinery set in motion by the 
same number of labourers, therefore also this part of constant capi- 
tal, increases as well. Hence, an increase in surplus-value is accoin- 
panied by an increase in constant capital, and the growing exploita- 
tion of labour by greater outlays of the means of production through 
which labour is expioited, i.e., by a greater investment of capital. 
Therelore, the rate of profit is thereby reduced on the one hand while 
it increases on the other. 

Quite a number of current expenses remain almost or entire- 
ly the same whether the working-day is longer or shorter. The 
cost of supervision is less for 500 working-men during 18 working- 
hours than for 750 working-men during 12 working-hours. “The 
expense of working a factory 10 hours almost equals that of working 
it 12.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1848, p. 37.) State and 
municipal taxes, fire insurance, wages of various permanent employ- 
ees, depreciation of machinery, and various other expenses of a 
factory, remain unchanged whether the working-time is long or 
short. To the extent to which production decreases, these expenses 
rise as compared to the profit. (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 
1862, p. 19.) 

The period in which the value of the machinery and of the other 
components of fixed capital is reproduced is determined in practice 
not by their mere lifetime, but by the duration of the entire Jabour- 
process during which they serve and wear out. If the labourers 
must work 18 instead of 12 hours, this makes a difference of three 
days more per week, so that one week is stretched into one and a 
half, and two years into three. If this overtime ‘s unpaid the 
labourers give away gratis a week out of every three and a year out 
of every three on top of the normal surplus-labour time. In this way, 
the reproduction of the value of the machinery is speeded up 50% 
and accomplished in two-thirds of the usually required time. 

To avoid useless complications, we proceed in this analysis, and 
in that of price fluctuations for raw materials (Chap. VI), from the 
assumption that the mass and rate of surplus-value are given. 

As already shown in the presentation of co-operation, division of 
labour and machinery, the economy of production conditions found 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 79 

in large-scale production is essentially due to the fact that these 
conditions prevail as conditions of social, or socially combined, la- 
bour, and therefore as social conditions of !abour. They are common- 
ly consumed in the process of production by the aggregate labourer, 
instead of being consumed in small fractions by a mass of labour- 
ers operating disconnectedly or, at best, directly co-operating on a 
small scale. In a large factory with one or two central motors the 
cost of these motors does not increase in the same ratio as their 
horse-power and, hence, their possible sphere of activity. The cost 
of the transmission equipment does not grow in the same ratio 
as the total number of working machines which it sets in motion. 
The frame of a machine does not become dearer in the same ratio as 
the mounting number of tools which it employs as its organs, etc. 
Furthermore, the concentration of means of production yields a 
saving on buildings of various kinds not only for the actual work- 
shops, but also for storage, etc. The same applies to expenditures 
for fuel, lighting, etc. Other conditions of production remain the 
same, whether used by many or by few. 

This total economy, arising as it does from the concentration of 
means of production and their use en masse, imperatively requires, 
however, the accumulation and co-operation of labourers, i.e., 
a social combination of Jabour. Hence, it originates quite as much 
from the social nature of labour, just as surplus-value originates 
from the surplus-labour of the individual labourer considered singly. 
Even the continual improvements, which are here possible and neces- 
sary, are due solely to the social experience and observation en- 
sured and made possible by production of aggregate labour com- 
bined on a large scale. 

The same is true of the second big source of economy in the con- 
ditions of production. We refer to the reconversion of the excretions 
of production, the so-called waste, into new elements of production, 
either of the same, or of some other line of industry, to the proc- 
esses by which this so-called excretion is thrown back into the 
cycle of production and, consequently, consumption, whether pro- 
ductive or individual. This line of savings, which we shall later 
examine more closely, is likewise the result of large-scale social 
labour. It is the attendant abundance of this waste which renders 
it available again for commerce and thereby turns it into new ele- 
ments of production. It is only as waste of combined production, 
therefore of large-scale production, that it becomes important to 
the production process and remains a bearer of exchange-value. 
This waste, aside from the services which it performs as new 
element of production, reduces the cost of the raw material to the 

80 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

extent to which it is again saleable, for this cost always includes 
ihe normal waste, namely the quantity ordinarily lost in process- 
ing. The reduction of the cost of this portion of constant capital 
increases pro tanto the rate of profit, assuming the magnitude of 
the variable capital and the rate of surplus-value to be given. 

If the surplus-value is given, the rate of profit can be increased 
only by reducing the value of the constant capital required for 
commodity-production. So far as constant capital enters into 
the production of commodities, it is not its exchange-value, 
but its use-value alone, which matters. The quantity of la- 
bour which flax can absorb in a spinnery does not depend on its 
value, but on its quantity, assuming the productivity of Jabour, 
i.e., the level of technical development, to be given. In like man- 
ner the assistance rendered by a machine to, say, three labourers 
does not depend on its value, but on its use-value as a machine. 
On one level of technical development a bad machine may be 
expensive and on another a good machine may be cheap. 

The increased profit received by acapitalist through the cheapen- 
ing of, say, cotton and spinning machinery, is the result of higher 
labour productivity; not in the spinnery, to be sure, but in cotton 
cultivation and construction of machinery. It requires smaller 
outlays of the conditions of labour to incorporate a given quan- 
tity of labour, and hence to extract a given quantity of surplus- 
labour. The costs required to appropriate a certain quantity of 
surplus-labour diminish. 

We have already mentioned savings yielded in the production 
process through co-operative use of means of production by the ag- 
gregate, or socially combined, labour. Other savings of constant capi- 
tal arising fron the shortening of the time of circulation in which 
the development of means of communication is a dominant mate- 
rial factor will be discussed later. At this point we shall deal with 
the savings yielded by continuous improvements of machinery, 
namely 1) of its material, e. g., the substitution of iron for wood: 
2) the cheapening of machinery due to the general improvement of 
machine-building; so that, although the value of the fixed portion 
of constant capital increases continually with the development of 
Jabour on a large scale, il does not increase at the same rate;'? 
3) special improvements enabling existing machinery to work more 
cheaply and effectively; for instance, improvements of steam-boil- 
ers, etc., which will be discussed later on in greater detail; 4) re- 
duction of waste through better machinery. 

* Cf. Ure on the progress in factory construction. 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 81 

Whatever reduces the wear of machinery, and of fixed capital in 
general, for any given period of production, cheapens not only the 
individual commodity, in view of the fact that in its price every 
individual commodity reproduces its aliquot share of this depre- 
ciation, but reduces also the aliquot portion of the invested capital 
for this period. Repair work, etc., to the extent that it becomes nec- 
essary, is added to the original cost of the machinery. A reduction 
in repair cosls, due to greater durability of the machinery, lowers 
pro tanto the price of this machinery. 

It may again be said of all these savings that they are largely pos- 
sible only for combined labour, and are often not realized until 
production is carried forward on a still larger scale, so that they 
tequire an even greater combination of labour in the immediate 
process of production. 

However, on the other hand the development of the productive 
power of labour in any one line of production, e.g., the production 
of iron, coal, machinery, in architecture, etc., which may again be 
partly connected with progress in the field of intellectual produc- 
tion, notably natural science and its practical application, appears 
to be the premise for a reduction of the value, and consequently of 
the cost, of means of production in ofher lines of industry, e.g., 
the textile industry, or agriculture. This is self-evident, since a 
commodity which is the product of a certain branch of industry 
enters another as a means of production. Its greater or lesser price 
depends on the productivity of labour in the line of production from 
which it issues as a product, and is at the same time a factor that 
not only cheapens the commodities into whose production it goes 
as a means of production, but also reduces the value of the constant 
capital whose element it here becomes, and thereby one that in- 
creases the rate of profit. 

The characteristic feature of this kind of saving of constant 
capital arising [rom the progressive development of industry is 
that the rise in the rate of profit in one line of industry depends on 
the development of the productive power of labour in another. 
Whatever falls to the capitalist’s advantage in this case is once 
more a gain produced by social labour, if not a product of the la- 
bourers he himself exploits. Such a development of productive pow- 
er is again traceable in the final analysis to the social nature ol 
the labour engaged in production; to the division of labour in so- 
ciety; and to the development of intellectual labour, especially in 
the natural sciences. What the capitalist thus utilizes are the ad- 
vantages of the entire system of the social division of labour. It 
is ihe development of the productive power of labour in its exte- 

82 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

rior department, in that department which supplies it with means 
of production, whereby the value of the constant capital employed 
by the capitalist is relatively lowered and consequently the rate 
of profit is raised. . 

Another rise in the rate of profit is produced, not by savings 
in the labour creating the constant capital, but by savings in the 
application of this capital itself. On the one hand, the concentra- 
tion of labourers, and their large-scale co-operation, saves constant 
capital. The same buildings, arid heating and lighting appliances, 
etc., cost relatively less for the large-scale than for small-scale 
production. The same is true of power and working machinery. 
Although their absolute value increases, it falls in comparison to 
the increasing extension of production and the magnitude of the 
variable capital, or the quantity of labour-power set in motion. 
The economy realized by a certain capital within its own line of 
production is first and foremost an economy in labour, i.e., a re- 
duction of the paid labour of its own labourers. The previously 
mentioned economy, on the other hand, is distinguished from this 
one by the fact that it accomplishes the greatest possible ap- 
propriation of other people’s unpaid labour in the most eco- 
nomical way, i. e., with as little expense as the given scale of 
production will permit. Inasmuch as this economy does not rest 
with the previously mentioned exploitation of the productivity 
of the social labour employed in the production of constant capi- 
tal, but with the economy in the constant capital itself, it springs 
either directly from the co-operation and social form of labour 
within a certain branch of production, or from the production of 
machinery, etc., on a scale in which its value does not grow at the 
same rate as its use-value. 

Two points must be borne in mind here: If the value of c=zero, 
then p’=s’, and the rate of profit would be at its maximum. Sec- 
ond, however, the most important thing lor the direct exploita- 
tion of labour itself is not the value of the employed means of exploi- 
tation, be they fixed capital, raw materials or auxiliary substances. 
In so far as they serve as means of absorbing labour, as media 
in or by which labour and, hence, surplus-labour are materialized, 
the exchange-value of machinery, buildings, raw materials, etc., 
is quite immaterial. What is ultimately essential is, on the one 
hand, the quantity of them technically required for combination 
with a certain quantity of living labour, and, on the other, their 
suitability, i.e, not only good machinery, but also good raw and 
auxiliary materials. The rate of profit depends partly on the good 
quality of the raw material. Good material produces less waste. 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 83 

Less raw materials are then needed to absorb the same quantity 
of labour. Furthermore, the resistance to be overcome by the work- 
ing machine is also less. This partly affects even the surplus-val- 
ue and the rate of surplus-value. The labourer needs more time 
when using bad raw materials to process the same quantity. Assum- 
ing wages remain the same, this causes a reduction in surplus- 
labour. This also substantially affects the reproduction and accu- 
mulation of capital, which depend more on the productivity than 
on the amount of labour employed, as shown in Book I (S. 627/619 
ff.*). 

The capitalist’s fanatical insistence on economy in means of 
production is therefore quite understandable. That nothing is 
lost or wasted and the means of production are consumed only in 
the manner required by production itself, depends partly on the 
skill and intelligence of the labourers and partly on the discipline 
enforced by the capitalist for the combined labour. This disci- 
pline will become superfluous under a social system in which the 
labourers work for their own account. as it has already become prac- 
tically superfluous in piece-work. This fanatical insistence comes 
to the surface also conversely in the adulteration of the elements 
of production, which is one of the principal means of lowering the 
relation of the value of the constant capital to the variable capi- 
tal, and thus of raising the rate of profit. Whereby the sale of these 
elements of production above their value, so far as this reappears 
in the product, acquires a marked e:ement of cheating. This prac- 
tice plays an essential part particulerly in German industry, whose 
maxim is: People will surely appreciate if we send them good sam- 
ples at first, and then inferior goods afterward. However, as these 
matters belong to the sphere of competition they do not concern 
us here. 

It should be noted that this raising of the rate of profit by means 
of lowering the value of the constant capital, i-e., by reducing its 
expensiveness, does not in any way depend on whether the branch 
of industry in which it takes place produces luxuries, or necessi- 
ties lor the consumption of labourers, or means of production gener- 
ally. This last circumstance would only be of material importance 
if it were a question of the rate of surplus-value, which depends 
essentially on the value of Jabour-power, i.e., on the value of the 
customary necessities of the labourer. But in the present case the 
surplus-value and the rate of surplus-value have been assumed as 
given. The relation of surplus-value to total capital—and this de- 

* English edition: p. 603.—Ed. 

84 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

termines the rate of profit—depends under these circumstances 
exclusively on the value of the constant capital, and in no way on 
the use-value of the elements of which it is composed. 

A relative cheapening of the means of production does not, of 
course, exclude the possible increase of their absolute aggregate 
value, for the absolute volume in which they are employed grows 
tremendously with the development of the productive power ol 
labour and the attendant growth of the level of production. Econo- 
my in the use of constant capital, from whatever angle it may be 
viewed, is, in part, the exclusive result of the fact that the means 
of production function and are consumed as joint means of produc- 
tion of the combined labourer, so that the resulting saving appears 
as a product of the social nature of directly productive labour; 
in part, however, it is the result of developing productivity of 
labour in spheres which supply capital with its means of production, 
so that if we view the total labour in relation to total capital, and 
not simply the labourers employed by capitalist X in relation to 
capitalist X, this economy presents itself once more as a product 
of the development of the productive forces of social labour, with 
the only difference that capitalist X enjoys the advantage not 
only of the productivity of labour in his own establishment, but 
also of that in other establishments. Yet the capitalist views econ- 
omy of his constant capital as a condition wholly independent of, 
and entirely alien to, his labourers. He is always well aware, however, 
that the labourer has something to do with the employer buying 
much or little labour with the same amount of money (for this is 
how the transaction between the capitalist and labourer appears 
in his mind). This economy inthe application of the means of pro- 
duction, this method of obtaining acertain result with a minimum 
outlay appears more than any other inner power of labour as an 
inherent power of capital and a method peculiar and characteristic 
of the capitalist mode of production. 

This conception is so much the less surprising since it appears 
to accord with fact, and since the relationship of capital actually 
conceals the inner connection behind the utter indifference, isola- 
tion, and alienation in which they place the labourer vis-a-vis 
the means incorporating his labour. 

Firsf, the means of production that make up the constant capi- 
tal represent only the money belonging to the capitalist (just as 
the body of the Roman debtor represented the money of his credi- 
tor, according to Linguet) and are related to him alone, while the 
labourer, who comes in contact with them only in the direct proc- 
ess of production, deals with them as use-values of production 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 85 

only, as means of labour and materials of production. Increase or 
decrease of their value, therefore, has as little bearing on his rela- 
tions to the capitalist as the circumstance whether he may be work- 
ing with copper or iron. For that matter, the capitalist likes to 
view this point differently, as we shall later indicate, whenever 
the means of production gain in value and thereby reduce his rate 
of profit. 

Second, in so far as these means of production in the capitalist 
production process are at the same time means of exploiting Ja- 
bour, the labourer is no more concerned with their relative dearness 
or cheapness than a horse is concerned with the dearness or cheap- 
ness of its bit and bridle. 

Finally, we have earlier seen that, in fact, the labourer looks at 
the socia] nature of his Jabour, at its combination with the labour 
of others for a common purpose, as he would at an alien power; 
the condition of realizing this combination is alien property, whose 
dissipation would be totally indifferent to him if he were not com- 
pelled to economize with it. The situation is quite different in fac- 
tories owned by the labourers themselves, as in Rochdale, for in- 
stance. 

It scarcely needs to be mentioned, then, that as [ar as concerns 
the productivity of labour in one branch of industry as a lever for 
cheapening and improving the means of production in another, 
and thereby raising the rate of profit, the general interconnection 
of social labour affects the labourers as a matter alien to them, a 
matter that actually concerns the capitalist alone, since it is he 
who buys and appropriates these means of production. The fact 
thal he buys the product of labourers in another branch of industry 
with the product of labourers in his own, and that he therefore dis- 
poses of the product of the labourers of another capitalist only by 
gratuitously appropriating that of his own, is a development that 
is fortunately concealed by the process of circulation, etc. 

Moreover, since production on a large scale develops for the 
first time in its capitalist form, the thirst for profits on the one hand, 
and competition on the other, which compels the cheapest possible 
production of commodities, make this economy in the employment 
of constant capital appear as something peculiar to the capitalist 
a of production and therefore as a function of the capi- 
talist. 

Just as the capitalist mode of production promotes the develop- 
ment of the productive powers ol social labour, on the one hand, 
so does it whip on to economy in the employment of constant 
capital on the other. 

86 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

However, it is not only the alienation and indifference that arise 
between the labourer, the bearer of living labour, and the eco- 
nomical, i.e., rational and thrifty, use of the material conditions 
of his labour. In line with its contradictory and antagonistic na- 
ture, the capitalist mode of production proceeds to count the prodi- 
gious dissipation of the labourer’s life and health, and the lower- 
ing of his living conditions, as an economy in the use of con- 
stant capital and thereby as a means of raising the rate of 

rofit. 

. Since the labourer passes the greater portion of his life in the 
process of production, the conditions of the production process 
are largely the conditions of his active living process, or his liv- 
ing conditions, and economy in these living conditions is a meth- 
od of raising the rate of profit; just as we saw earlier that overwork, 
the transformation of the labourer into a work horse, is a means of 
increasing capital, or speeding up the production of surplus-value. 
Such economy extends to overcrowding close and unsanitary 
premises with labourers, or, as capitalists put it, to space saving; 
to crowding dangerous machinery into close quarters without using 
safety devices; to neglecting safety rules in production processes 
pernicious to health, or, as in mining, bound up with danger, etc. 
Not to mention the absence of all provisions to render the produc- 
tion process human, agreeable, or at least bearable. From the capi- 
talist point of view this would be quite a useless and senseless 
waste. The capitalist mode of production is generally, despite all 
its niggardliness, altogether too prodigal with its human material, 
just as, conversely, thanks to its method of distribution of products 
through commerce and manner of competition, it is very prodigal 
with its material means, and loses for society what it gains for the 
individual capitalist. 

Just as capital has the tendency to reduce the direct employment 
of living labour to no more than the necessary labour, and always 
to cut down the labour required to produce a commodity by exploit- 
ing the social productiveness of labour and thus to save a maxi- 
mum of directly applied living labour, so it has also the tendency 
to employ this Jabour, reduced to a minimum, under the most eco- 
nomical conditions, i.e., to reduce to its minimum the value of 
the employed constant capital. If it is the necessary labour-time 
which determines the value of commodities, instead of all the la- 
bour-time contained in them, so it is the capital which realizes 
this determination and, at the same time, continually reduces the 
labour-time socially necessary to produce a given commodity. The 
price of the commodity is thereby lowered to its minimum since 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 87 

every portion of the labour required for its production is reduced 
to its minimum. 

We must make a distinction in economy as regards use of con- 
stant capital. If the quantity, and consequently the sum of the 
value of employed capital, increases, this is primarily only a con- 
centration of more capital in a single hand. Yet it is precisely this 
greater quantity applied by a single source—attended, as a 
tule, by an absolutely greater but relatively smaller amount of 
employed labour—which permits economy ol constant capital. To 
take an individual capitalist, the volume of the necessary invest- 
ment of capital, especially of its fixed portion, increases. But its 
value decreases retative to the mass of worked-up materials and 
exploited labour. 

This is now to be briefly illustrated by a few exarnples. We shall 
begin at the end—the economy in the conditions of production, in 
so far as these also constitute the living conditions of the labourer. 

II. SAVINGS IN LABOUR CONDITIONS 
AT THE EXPENSE OF THE LABOURERS, 
COAL MINES. NEGLECT OF INDISPENSABLE OUTLAYS 

“Under the competition which exists among the coal-owners 
and coal-proprietors ... no more outlay is incurred than is sufficient 
to overcome the most obvious physical difficulties; and under that 
which prevails among the labouring colliers, who are ordinarily 
more numerous than the work to be done requires, a large amount 
of danger and exposure to the most noxious influences will gladly 
be encountered for wages a little in advance of the agricultural pop- 
ulation round them, in an occupation, in which they can moreover 
make a profitable use of their children. This double competition 
is quite sufficient ... to cause a large proportion of the pits to be 
worked with the most imperfect drainage and ventilation; often 
with ill-constructed shafts, bad gearing, incompetent engineers; 
and ill-constructed and ill-prepared bays and roadways; causing 
a destruction of life, and limb, and health, the statistics of which 
would present an appalling picture.” (First Report on Children’s 
Employment in Mines and Collieries, etc., April 21,1829, p. 102.) 
About 1860, a weekly average of 15 men lost their lives in the Eng- 
lish collieries. According to the report on Coal Mines Accidents 
(February 6, 1862), a total of 8,466 were killed in the ten years 
1852-61. But the report admits that this number is far too low, 
because in the first few years, when the inspectors had just been 
installed and their districts were far too large, a great many acci- 

88 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

dents and deaths were not reported. The very fact that the number 
ol accidents, though still very high, has decreased markedly since 
the inspection system was established, and this in spite of the limit- 
ed powers and insufficient numbers of the inspectors, demon- 
strates the natural tendency of capitalist exploitation. These human 
sacrifices are mostly due to the inordinate avarice of the mine own- 
ers. Very often they had only one shaft sunk, so that apart from 
the lack of effective ventilation there was no escape were this shaft 
to become obstructed. 

Capitalist production, when considered in isolation from the 
process of circulation and the excesses of competition, is very eco- 
nomical with the materialized labour incorporated in commodities. 
Yet, more than any other mode of production, it squanders human 
lives, or living labour, and not only blood and flesh, but also nerve 
and brain. Indeed, it is only by dint of the most extravagant waste 
of individual development that the development of the human race 
is at all safeguarded and maintained in the epoch of history imme- 
diately preceding the conscious reorganization of society. Since 
all of the economizing here discussed arises [rom the social nature 
of labour, it is indeed just this directly social nature of labour 
which causes the waste of life and health. The following question 
suggested by factory inspector R. Baker is characteristic in this re- 
spect: “The whole question is one for serious consideration, and in 
what way ¢his sacrifice of infant life occasioned by congregational 
labour can be best averted?” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 
1863. p. 157.) 

Factories. Under this heading there is covered the disregard for 
safety measures to ensure the security, comfort, and health of la- 
bourers also in the actual factories. It is to blame for a large por- 
tion of the casualty lists containing the wounded and killed indus- 
trial workers (cf. the annual factory reports). Similarly, lack of 
Space, ventilation, etc. 

As far back as October 1855, Leonard Horner complained about 
the resistance of very many manufacturers to the legal requirements 
concerning safety devices on horizontal shalts, although the danger 
was continually emphasized by accidents, many of them fatal, and 
although these safety devices did not cost much and did not inter- 
flere with production. (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1855, p. 6.) 
In their resistance against these and other legal requirements 
the manufacturers were openly seconded by the unpaid justices of 
the peace, who were themselves mostly manufacturers or friends 
of manufacturers, and handed down their decisions accordingly. 
What sort of verdicts these gentlemen handed down was revealed 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 89° 

by Superior Judge Campbell, who said with reference to one of 
them, against which an appeal had been made to him: “It is not 
an interpretation of the Act of Parliament, it is a repeal of the Act 
of Parliament” (loc. ci¢., p. 11). Horner states in the same report 
that in many factories labourers are not warned when machinery 
is about to be started up. Since there is always something to be done 
about machinery even when it is not operating, fingers and hands 
are always occupied with it, and accidents happen continually 
due to the mere omission of a warning signal (loc. cit., p. 44). The 
manufacturers had a trades-union at the time to oppose factory leg- 
islation, the so-called National Association for the Amendment of 
the Factory Laws in Manchester, which in March 1855 collected more 
than £50,000 by assessing 2 shillings per horse-power, to pay for 
the court proceedings against its members started by factory in- 
spectors, and to conduct the cases in the name of the union. It was 
a matter of proving that killing was not murder when it occurred 
for the sake of profit. A factory inspector for Scotland, Sir John 
Kincaid, tells about a certain firm in Glasgow which used the iron 
scrap at its factory to make protective shields for all its machinery, 
the cost amounting to £9 Is. Joining the manufacturers’ union 
would have cost it an assessment of #1] for its 110 horse-power, 
which was more than the cost of all its protective appliances. But 
the Nationa] Association had been organized in 1854 for the express 
purpose of opposing the law which prescribed such protection. The 
manufacturers had not paid the least heed to it during the whole pe- 
riod from 1844 to 1854. When the factory inspectors, at instruc- 
tions from Palmerston, then informed the manufacturers that the 
law would be enforced in earnest, the manufacturers instantly found- 
ed their association, many of whose most prominent members were 
themselves justices of the peace and in this capacity were supposed 
to enforce the law. When in Apri] 1855 the new Minister of the In- 
terior, Sir George Grey, offered acompromise under which the gov- 
ernment would be content with practically nominal safety appli- 
ances the Association indignantly rejected even this. In various 
lawsuits the famous engineer Thomas Fairbairn threw the weight 
of his reputation behind the principle of economy and in defence 
of the freedom of capital which had been violated. The head of 
factory inspection, Leonard Horner, was persecuted and maligned 
by the manufacturers in every conceivable manner. 

But the manufacturers did not rest until they obtained a writ of 
the Court of Queen’s Bench, according to which the Law of 1844 
did not prescribe protective devices for horizontal shafts installed 
more than seven feet above the ground and, finally, in 1856 they 

90 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

succeeded in securing an Act of Parliament entirely satisfactory to 
them in the circumstances, through the services of the bigot Wil- 
son Patten, one of those pious souls whose display of religion is 
always ready to do the dirty work for the knights of the money-bag. 
This Act practically deprived the labourers of all special protection 
and referred them to the common courts for compensation in the 
event of industrial accidents (sheer mockery in view of the exces- 
sive cost of English lawsuits), while it made it almost impossible 
for the manulacturer to lose the lawsuit by providing in a finely- 
worded clause for expert testimony. The result wasarapid increase 
of accidents. In the six months [rom May to October 1858, In- 
spector Baker reported that accidents increased by 21% compared 
with the preceding half-year. In his opinion 36.7% of these accidents 
might have been avoided. It is true that the number of accidents 
in i858 and 1859 was considerably below that of 1845 and 1846. 
It was actually 29% less although the number of labourers in the 
industries subject to inspection had increased 20%. But what was 
the reason Jor this? In so jar as this issue has been settled now (1865), 
it was mainly accomplished through the introduction of new machin- 
ery already provided with safety devices to which the manufactur- 
er did not object because they cost him no extra expense. Further- 
more, a lew labourers succeeded in securing heavy damages for 
their lost arms, and had this judgement upheld even by the highest 
courts. (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 30, 1861, p. 31, ditto April 
1862, p. 17.) 

So much for economy in devices protecting the life and limbs of 
labourers (among whom many children) against the dangers of 
handling and operating machinery. 

Work in enclosed places generally. It is well known to what extent 
economy of space, and thus of buildings, crowds labourers into close 
quarters. In addition, there is also economy in means of ventila- 
tion. Coupled with the long working-hours, the two cause a large 
increase in diseases of the respiratory organs, and an attendant in- 
crease in the death-rate. The following illustrations have been taken 
from Reports on Public Health, 6th report, 1863. This report was 
compiled by Dr. John Simon, well known from our Book I. 

Just as combination and co-operation of labour permits large- 
scale employment of machinery, concentration of means of pro- 
duction, and economy in their use, it is this very working together 
en masse in enclosed places and under conditions rather determined 
by ease of manufacture than by health requirements—it is this 
mass concentration in one and the same workshop that acts, on 
the one hand, as a source of greater profits for the capitalist and, 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 9] 

on the other, unless counteracted by a reduced number of hours 
and special precautions, as the cause of the squandering of the 
lives and health of the labourers. 

Dr. Simon formulates the following rule and backs it up with 
abundant statistics: “In proportion as the people of a district are 
attracted to any collective indoor occupation, in such proportion, 
other things being equal, the district death-rate by lung diseases 
will be increased” (p. 23). The cause is bad ventilation. “And prob- 
ably in all England there is no exception to the rule, that, in every 
district which has a large indoor industry, the increased mortality 
ol the workpeople is such as to colour the death-return of the whole 
district with a marked excess of lung disease” (p. 23). 

Mortality figures for industries carried on in enclosed places, 
collected by the Board of Health in 1860 and 1861, indicate that 
for the same number of men between the ages of 15 and 55, for which 
the death-rate from consumption and other pulmonary diseases in 
English agricultural districts is 100, the death-rate in Coventry is 
163, in Blackburn and Skipton 167, Congleton and Bradford 168, 
Leicester 171, Leek 182, Macclesfield 184, Bolton 190, Nottingham 
192, Rochdale 193, Derby 198, Salford and Ashton-under-Lyne 203, 
Leeds 218, Preston 220, and Manchester 263 (p. 24). The following 
table presents a still more striking illustration. 

Deaths from pulmo- 
nary diseases between 
the ages of 15 and 
District Chiel Industry 25. per 100.000 
population 
Men Women 
Berkhampstead Straw plaiting (women)... . 219 578 
Leighton Buzzard Straw plaiting (women), .. . 309 554 
Newport Pagnell Lace manufacture (women). . . 301 617 
Towcester Lace manufacture (women). . . 239 577 
Yeovil Marufacture of gloves (imainly 
women). 2... ee ee 230 409 
Leek Silk industry (predominantly 
women) 2... ee ee 437 856 
Congleton Silk induslry (predominantly 
women)... 2... . aes 566 790 
Macclesfield Silk industry (predominantly 
women) .........-. 593 890 
Healthy country | Agriculture... .....-. 331 333 
district 
: 

92 CONVERSION OF SUKPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

It shows the death-rate for pulmonary diseases separately for 
both sexes between the ages of 15 and 25 computed for every 100.000 
population. In the districts selected only women are employed in 
industries carried on in enclosed places, while men work in all 
other possible lines. 

In the silk districts, where more men are employed in the factory, 
their mortality is also higher. The death-rate from consumption, 
etc., for bath sexes, reveals, as the report says, “the atrocious sani- 
tary circumstances under which much of our silk industry is conduct- 
ed.” And it is in this same silk industry that the manufacturers, 
pleading exceptionally favourable and sanitary conditions in their 
establishments, demanded by way of an exception, and partially 
obtained, long working-hours for children under 13 years of age 
(Buch I, Kap. VIII, 6, S. 296/286)*. 

“Probably no industry which has yet been investigated has aflord- 
ed a worse picture than that which Dr. Smith gives of tailoring:— 
‘Shops vary much in their sanitary conditions, but almost univer- 
sally are overcrowded and ill-ventilated, and in a high degree un- 
Javourable to kealth.... Such rooms are necessarily warm; but 
when the gas is lit, as during the day-time in foggy days, and at 
night during the winter, the heat increases to 80° and even to up- 
wards of 90°, causing profuse perspiration, and condensation of 
vapour upon the panes of glass, so that it runs down in streams or 
drops from the roof, and the operatives are compelled to keep some 
windows open, at whatever risk to themselves of taking cold.’ And 
he gives the following account of what he found in 16 of the most 
important West End shops—'The largest cubic space in these ill- 
ventilated rooms allowed to each operative is 270 feet, and the least 
105 feet, and in the whole average only 156 feet per man. In one 
room, with a gallery running round it, and lighted only from the 
Tool, from 92 to upwards of 100 men are employed, where a large 
number of gas-lights burn, and where the urinals are in the closest 
proximity, the cubic space does not exceed 150 feet per man. 
In another room, which can only be called a kennel in a 
yard, lighted from the roof, and ventilated by a small 
skylight opening, five to six men work in a space of 112 cubic 
feet per man.’ ... Tailors, in those atrocious workshops which 
Dr. Smith describes, work generally for about 12 or 13 hours a 
day, and at some times the work will be continued for 15 or 
16 hours” (pp. 25, 26, 28). 

* English edition: Ch. X, 6, p. 293.—Ed. 

ECONOMY 1N EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 

93 

Death-rate per $00,000 
Number of persons Branches of industry and between lhe ages of 
employed jocality 
25-35 35-45 45-55 
958 , 265 Agriculture, England and 
Wales... 2. .54., 743 805 1,145 
22,301 men and : 
12,377 women Tailoring, London 958 1,262 2,093 
13,803 Type-setters and printers, 
London... . 2... 894 1,747 2,367 

(p. 30). It must be noted, and has in fact been remarked by 
John Simon, chief of the Medical Department and author of the 
report, that the mortality-rate for tailors, type-setters, and print- 
ers of London between the ages of 25 and 35 was cited lower than 
the real figure, because London employers in both lines of business 
havea large number of young people (probably up to 30 years of age) 
from the country engaged as apprentices and “improvers,” i.e., 
men getting additional training. These swell the number of hands for 
which the London industrial death-rates are computed. But they 
do not proportionally contribute to the number of deaths in Lon- 
don because their stay there is only temporary. If they fall ill dur- 
ing this period, they return to their homes in the country, where 
their death is registered if they die. This circumstance affects the 
earlier ages still more and renders the London death-rates for these 
age groups completely valueless as indexes of the ill-eflects of indus- 
try on health (p. 30). 

The case of the type-setters is similar to that of the tailors. In 
addition to lack of ventilation, to poisoned air, etc., there is still 
night-work to be mentioned. Their regular working-time is 12 to 
13 hours, sometimes 15 to 16. “Great heat and foulness which begin 
when the gas-jets are lit. ... It not infrequently happens that fumes 
from a foundry, or foul odours from machinery or sinks, rise from 
the lower room, and aggravate the evils of the upper one. The heated 
air of the lower rooms always tends to heat the upper by warming 
the floor, and when the rcoms are low, and the consumption of gas 
great, this is a serious evil, and one only surpassed in the case where 
the steam-boilers are placed in the lower room, and supply unwished- 
for heat to the whole house.... As a general expression, it may 
be stated that universally the ventilation is defective, and quite 
insufficient to remove the heat and the products of the combustion 

94 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

of gas in the evening and during the night, and that in many offices, 
and particularly in those made Irom dwelling-houses, the condition 
is most deplorable. ... And in some offices (especially those of weekly 
newspapers) there will be work—work too, in which boys between 
12 and 16 years ol age take equal part-—for almost uninterrupted 
periods of two days and a night at a time;—-while, in other print- 
ing-offices which lay themselves out for the doing of ‘urgent 
business, Sunday gives no relaxation to the workman, and his 
working-days become seven instead of six in every week” (pp. 26, 28). 

The milliners and dress-makers have already attracted our at- 
tention in Book I (Kap. VIII, 3, S. 249/241)* in respect to overwork. 
Their workshops are described in our report by Dr. Ord. Even if 
better during the day, they become overheated, foul, and unhealthy 
during the hours in which gas is burned. Dr. Ord found in 34 shops 
of the better sort that the average number of cubic feet per worker 
was as follows: 

“\.. In four cases more than 500, in four other cases [rom 400 to 
500, ... in seven others from 200 to 250, in four others from 150 to 
200, and in nine others only from 100 to 150. The largest of these 
allowances would but be scanty for continuous work, unless the 
space were thoroughly well ventilated; and, except with extraordi- 
nary ventilation, its atmosphere could not be tolerably wholesome 
during gas-light.” And here is Dr. Ord’s remark about one of the 
minor workshops which he visited, operated for the account of a 
middlernan: “One room area in cubical feet, 1,280; persons present, 
14; area to each, in cubical feet, 91.5.The women here were weary- 
looking and squalid; their earnings were stated to be 7s. to lhis. 
a week, and their tea. ... Hours 8 a. m. to 8 p. m. The small room 
into which these 14 persons were crowded was ill-ventilated. There 
were two movable windows anda fire-place, but the latter was blocked 
up and there was no special ventilation of any kind” (p. 27). 

The same report states with reference to the overwork of millin- 
ers and dress-makers: “... The overwork of the young women in 
fashionable dress-making establishments does not, for more than 
about four months of the year, prevail in that monstrous degree 
which has on many occasions excited momentary public surprise 
and indignation; but for the indoor hands during these months it 
will, as a rule, be of full 14 hours a day, and will, when there is 
pressure, be, for days together, of 17 or even 18 hours. At other times: 
of the year the work of the indoor hands ranges proba bly from 10 to 
14 hours; and uniformly the hours for outdoor hands are 12 or 13. 

* English edition: Ch. X, 3, pp. 254-55.—Ed. 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 95 

For mantle-makers, collar-makers, shirt-makers, and various other 
classes of needleworkers (including persons who work at the sew- 
ing-machine} the hours spent in the common workroom are few- 
er—generally not more than 10 to 12 hours; but, says Dr. Ord, the 
regular hours of work are subject to considerable extension in cer- 
tain houses at certain times, by the practice of working extra hours 
for extra pay, and in other houses by the practice of taking work 
away from houses of business, to be done alter hours at home, both 
practices being, it may be added, often compulsory” (p. 28). John 
Simon remarks in a footnote to this page: “Mr. Radcliffe, ... the 
Honorary Secretary of the Epidemiological Society, ... happening 
to have unusual opportunities for questioning the young women em- 
ployed in first-class houses of business ... has found that in only one 
out of twenty girls examined who called themselves ‘quite well’ could 
the state of health be pronounced good; the rest exhibiting in various 
degrees evidences of depressed physical power, nervous exhaustion, 
and numerous functional disorders thereupon dependent. He attrib- 
ules these conditions in the first place to the length of the hours 
of work— the minimum of which he estimates at 12 hours a day out 
of the season; and secondarily to... crowding and bad ventilation 
of workrooms, gas-vapours, insufficiency or bad quality of food, 
and inattention to domestic comfort.” 

The conclusion arrived at by the chief of the English Board of 
Health is that “it is practically impossible for workpeople lo insist 
upon that which in theory is their first sanitary right—the right 
that whatever work their employer assembles them to do, shall, 
so far as depends upon him, be, at his cost, divested of all needlessly 
unwholesome circumstances; ... while workpeople are practically 
unable to exact that sanitary justice for themselves, they also (not- 
withstanding the presumed intentions of the law) cannot expect 
any effectual assistance from the appointed administrators of the 
Nuisances Removal Acts” (p. 29). “Doubtless there may be some 
small technical difficulty in defining the exact line at which employ- 
ers shall become subject to regulation. But ... in principle, the 
sanitary claim is universal. And in the interest of myriads of la- 
bouring men and women, whose lives are now needlessly afflicted 
and shortened by the infinite physical suffering which their mere 
employment engenders, I would venture to express my hope, that 
universally the sanitary circumstances of labour may, at least so 
far, be brought within appropriate provisions of law, that the effec- 
tive ventilation of all indoor workplaces may be ensured, and that 
in every naturally insalubrious occupation the specific health-endan- 
gering influence may as far as practicable be reduced” (p. 31). 

96 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

II. ECONOMY IN THE GENERATION AND TRANSMISSION 
OF POWER, AND IN BUILDINGS 

In his October 1852 report L. Horner quotes a letter of the famous 
engineer James Nasmyth of Patricroft, the inventor of the 
steam-hammer, which, among other things, contains the fol- 
lowing: 

“The public are little aware of the vast increase in driving 
power which has been obtained by such changes of system and im- 
provements (of steam-engines) as I allude to. The engine power of 
this district (Lancashire) lay under the incubus of timid and prej- 
udiced traditions for nearly forty years, but now we are happily 
emancipated. During the last filteen years, but more especially in 
the course of the last four years (since 1848) some very important 
changes have taken place in the system of working condensing steam- 
engines. ... The result ... has been to realizea much greater amount 
of duty or work performed by the identical engines, and that again 
at a very considerable reduction of the expenditure of fuel. ... For 
a great many years alter the introduction of steam-power into the 
mills and manufactories of the above-named districts, the velocity 
of which it was considered proper to work condensing steam-engines 
was about 220 feet per minute of the piston; that is to say, an 
engine with a 5-feet stroke was restricted by ‘rule’ to make 22 rev- 
olutions of the crankshaft per minute. Beyond this speed it was 
not considered prudent or desirable to work the engine; and as all 
the mill gearing ... were made suitable to this 220 feet per minute 
speed of piston, this slow and absurdly restricted velocity ruled the 
working of such engines for many years. However, at length, either 
through fortunate ignorance of the ‘rule,’ or by better reasons on 
the part of some bold innovator, a greater speed was tried, and as 
the result was highly favourable, others followed the example, by, 
as it is termed, ‘letting the engine away,’ namely, by so modifying 
the proportions of the first motion wheels of the mill gearing as to 
permit the engine to run at 300 feet and upwards per minute, while 
the mill gearing generally was kept at its former speed.... This 
‘letting the engine away’... has led to the almost universal ‘speed- 
ing’ of engines, because it was proved that not only was there avail- 
able power gained from the identical engines, but also as the higher 
velocity of the engine yielded a greater momentum in the fly-wheel 
the motion was found to be much more regular.... We ... obtain 
more power from a steam-engine by simply permitting its piston to 
move at a higher velocity (pressure of steam and vacuum in the 
condenser remaining’ the same).... Thus, for example, suppose any 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 97 

given engine yields 40 horse-power when its piston is travelling at 
200 feet per minute, if by suitable arrangement or modification 
we can permit this same engine to run at such a speed as that its 
piston will travel through space at 400 feet per minute (pressure 
of steam and vacuum, as before said, remaining the same), we shall 
then have just double the power ... and as the pressure by steam 
and vacuum is the same in both cases, the strain upon the parts of 
this engine will be no greater at 400 than at 200 leet speed of piston, 
so that the risk of ‘break-down’ does not materially increase with 
the increase of speed. All the difference is, that we shall in such case 
consume steam at a rate proportional to the speed of piston, or 
nearly so; and there will be some small increase in the wear and tear 
of ‘the brasses’ or rubbing-parts, but so slight as to be scarcely 
worth notice.... But in order to obtain increase of power from the 
same engine by permitting its piston to travel at a higher velocity 
it is requisite ... to burn more coal per hour under the same boiler, 
or employ boilers of greater evaporating capabilities, i.e., greater 
steam-generating powers. This accordingly was done, and boilers 
of greater steam-generating or Waler-evaporating powers were sup- 
plied to the old ‘speeded’ engines, and in many cases near 100 per 
cent more work was got out of the identical engines by means of 
such changes as above named. About ten years ago the extraordi- 
Mary economical production of power as realized by the engines 
employed in the mining operations of Cornwall began to attract 
attention; and as competition in the spinning trade forced 
manulacturers to look to ‘savings’ as the chief source of profits, 
the remarkable difference in the consumption of coal per horse- 
power per hour, as indicated by the performance of the Cornish 
engines, as also the extraordinary economical performance 
of Woolf's double-cylinder engines, began to attract increased 
attention to the subject of economy of fuel in this district, 
and as the Cornish and double-cylinder engines gave a horse- 
power for every 3% to 4 pounds of coal per hour, while the 
generality of cotton-mill engines were consuming 8 or 12 pounds 
per horse per hour, so remarkable a difference induced mill-owners 
and engine-makers in this district to endeavour to realize, by the 
adoption of similar means, such extraordinary economical results 
as were proved to be common in Cornwall and France, where the 
high price of coal had compelled manufacturers to look more 
sharply to such costly departments of their establishments. The 
result of this increased attention to economy of fuel has been most 
important in many respects. In the first place, many boilers, the 
half of whose surface had been in the good old times of high profits 

5B 2757 

9s CONVERSION OF SUPRLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

left exposed quite naked to the cold air, began to get covered with 
{hick blankets of felt, and brick and plaster, and other modes and 
means whereby to prevent the escape of that heat from their ex- 
posed surface which had cost so much fuel to maintain, Steam- 
pipes began to be ‘protected’ in the same manner, and the outside 
of the cylinder of the engine felted and cased in with wood in like 
manner. Next came the use of ‘high steam,’ namely, instead of hav- 
ing the safety-valve loaded so as to blow off at 4, 6, or 8 Ibs. to 
the square inch, it was lound that by raising the pressure to 14 or 
90 Ibs. ... a very decided economy of fuel resulted; in other words, 
the work of the mill was performed by a very notable reduced con- 
sumption of coals, ... and those who had the means and the boldness 
carried the increased pressure and ‘expansion system’ of working 
to the full extent, by employing properly constructed boilers to 
supply steam of 30, 40, 50, 60, and 70 Ibs. to the square inch; 
pressures which would have frightened an engineer of the old school 
out of his wits. But as the economic results of so increasing the pres- 
sure of steam ... soon appeared in most unmistakable £ s. d. lors, 
the use of high-pressure steam-boilers for working condensing en- 
gines became almost general. And those who desired to go to the 
full extent ... soon adopted the employment of the Woolf engine 
in its full integrity, and most of our mills lately built are worked 
by the Woolf engines, namely, those on which there are two cylin- 
ders to each engine, in one of which the high-pressure steam from 
the boiler exerts or yields power by its excess of pressure over that 
of the atmosphere, which, instead of the said high-pressure steam 
being let pass off at the end of each stroke free into the atmosphere, 
is caused to pass into a low-pressure cylinder of about four times the 
area of the former, and after due expansion passes to the condenser, 
the economic result obtained [rom engines of this class is such that 
the consumption of fuel is at the rate of from 3% to 4 lbs. of coal 
per horse per hour; while in the engines of the old system the consump - 
tion used to be on the average from 12 to 14 lbs. per horse per 
hour. By an ingenious arrangement, the Woolf system of double 
cylinder or combined low and high pressure engine has been intro- 
duced extensively to already existing engines, whereby their per- 
formance has been increased both as to power and economy of fuel. 
The same result ... has been in use these eight or ten years, by 
having a high-pressure engine so connected with a condensing 
engine as to enable the waste steam of the former to pass on to 
and work the latter. This system is in many cases very convenient. 

“It would not be very easy to get an exact returnas to the increase 
of performartce or work done by the identical engines to which 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 99 

some or all of these improvements have been applied; I am confi- 
dent, however, ... that from the same weight of steam-engine ma- 
chinery we are now obtaining at least 50 per cent more duty or work 
performed on the average, and that in many cases, the identical 
steam-engines which in the days of the restricted speed of 290 feet 
per minute yielded 50 horse-power, are now yielding upwards 
of 100. The very economical results derived from the employ- 
ment of high-pressure steam in working condensing steam-engines, 
together with the much higher power required by mill extensions 
from the same engines, has within the Jast three years led to the adop- 
tion of tubular boilers, yielding a much more economical result 
than those formerly employed in generating steam for mill engines.” 
(Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1852, pp. 23-27.) 

What applies to power generation also applies to power transmis- 
sion and working machinery. 

“The rapid strides with which improvement in machinery has 
advanced within these few years have enabled manufacturers to 
increase production without additional moving power. The more 
economical application of labour has been rendered necessary by the 
diminished length of the working-day, and in most well-regulated 
mills an intelligent mind is always considering in what manner 
production can be increased with decreased expenditure. I have 
belore me a statement, kindly prepared by a very intelligent 
gentleman in my district, showing the number of hands employed, 
their ages, the machines at work, and the wages paid from 1840 
to the present time. In October 1840, his firm employed 600 hands, 
of whom 200 were under 13 years of age. In October last, 350 hands 
were employed, of whom 60 only were under 13; the same number of 
machines, within very few, were at work, and the same sum in 
wages was paid at both periods.” (Redgrave's Report in Reports 
of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1852, pp. 58-59.) 

These improvements of the machinery do not show their 
full effect until they are used in new, appropriately arranged fac- 
tories. 

“As regards the improvement made in machinery, I may say in 
the first place that a great advance has been made in the construc- 
tion of mills adapted to receive improved machinery.... In the 
bottom room I double all my yarn, and upon that single floor | 
shal! put 29,000 doubling spindles. I effect a saving of labour in 
the room and shed of at Jeast 10 per cent, not so much from any im- 
provement in the principle of doubling yarn, but from a concentra- 
tion of machinery under a single management; and I am enabled 
to drive the said number of spindles by one single shalt, a saving 

5" 

100 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

in shafting, compared with what other firms have to use to work 
the same number of spindles, of 60 per cent, in some cases 80 per 
cent. There is a large saving in oil, and shafting, and in grease... 
With superior mill arrangements and improved machinery, at the 
lowest estimate I have eflected a saving in labour of 10 per cent, 
a great saving in power, coal, oil, tallow, shalting and strapping.” 
(Evidence of a cotton spinner, Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct, 
1863, pp. 109, 110.) 

IV. UTILIZATION OF THE EXCRETIONS OF PRODUCTION 

The capitalist mode of production extends the utilization of the 
excretions of production and consumption. By the former we mean 
the waste of industry and agriculture, and by the latter partly the 
excretions produced by the natural exchange of matter in the human 
body and partly the form of objects that remains after their con- 
sumption. In the chemical industry, for instance, excretions of 
production are such by-products as are wasted in production on a 
smaller scale; iron filings accumulating in the manufacture of 
machinery and returning into the production of iron as raw mate- 
rial, etc. Excretions of consumption are the natural waste matter 
discharged by the human body, remains of clothing in the form of 
Tags, etc. Excretions of consumption are of the greatest importance 
for agriculture. So far as their utilization is concerned, there is an 
enormous waste of them in the capitalist economy. In London, for 
instance, they find no better use for the excretion of four and a half 
million human beings than to contaminate the Thames with it at 
heavy expense. 

Rising prices of raw materials naturally stimulate the utilization 
of waste products. 

The general requirements for the re-employment of these excre- 
tions are: large quantities of such waste, such as are available 
only in large-scale production; improved machinery whereby ma- 
terials, formerly useless in their prevailing form, are put into a 
state fit for new production; scientific progress, particularly of chem- 
istry, which reveals the useful properties of such waste. It is 
true that great savings of this sort are also observed in small-scale 
agriculture, as prevails in, say, Lombardy, southern China, and 
Japan. But on the whole, the productivity of agriculture under 
this system obtains from the prodigal use of human labour-power, 
which is withheld from other spheres of production. 

The so-called waste plays an important role in almost every in- 
dustry. Thus, the Factory Report for December 1863 mentions 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMENT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 101 

as one of the principal reasons why the English and many ol the 
Irish farmers do not like to grow flax, or do so but rarely, “the great 
waste ... which has taken place at the little water scutch mills... 
the waste in cotton is comparatively small, but in flax very large. 
The efficiency of water steeping and of good machine scutching will 
reduce this disadvantage very considerably.... Flax, scutched in 
freland in a most shameful way, and a large percentage actually 
lost by it, equal to 28 or 30 per cent”(Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
Dec. 1863, pp. 139, 142), whereas all this might be avoided through 
the use of better machinery. So much tow fell by the wayside that 
the factory inspector reports: “I have been informed with regard 
to some of the scutch mills in Ireland, that the waste made at them 
has often been used by the scutchers to burn on their fires at home, 
and yet it is very valuable” (p. 140 of the above report). We shall 
speak of cotton waste later, when we deal with the price Auctua- 
tions of raw materials. 

The wool industry was shrewder than the flax manufacturers. 
“It was once the common practice to decry the preparation of waste 
and woollen rags for re-manufacture, but the prejudice has entirely 
subsided as regards the shoddy trade, which has become an im- 
portant branch of the woollen trade of Yorkshire, and doubtless the 
cotton waste trade will be recognized in the same manner as sup- 
plying an admitted want. Thirty years since, woollen rags, i.e., 
pieces of cloth, old clothes, etc., of nothing but wool, would aver- 
age about £4 4s. per ton in price: within the last few years they 
have become worth £44 per ton, and the demand for them has so 
increased that means have been found for utilizing the rags of fab- 
rics of cotton and wool mixed by destroying the cotton and leaving 
the wool intact, and now thousands of operatives are engaged in 
the manufacture of shoddy, from which the consumer has greatly 
benefited in being able to purchase cloth of a fair and average qual- 
ity at a very moderate price” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 
1863, p. 107). By the end of 1862 the rejuvenated shoddy made up 
as much as one-third of the entire consumption of wool in English 
industry (Reports of Insp. of Fact., October 1862, p. 81). The 
“big benefit” for the “consumer” is that his shoddy clothes wear out 
in just one-third of the previous time and turn threadbare in one- 
sixth of this time. 

The English silk industry moved along the same downward 
path. The consumption of genuine raw silk decreased somewhat 
between 1839 and 1862, while that of silk waste doubled. Improved 
machinery helped to manufacture a silk useiul for many purposes 
from this ctherwise rather worthless stuff. 

102 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUF INTO PROFIT 

The most striking example of utilizing waste is furnished by 
the chemical industry. It utilizes not only its own waste, for which 
it finds new uses, but also that of many other industries. For in- 
stance, it converts the formerly almost useless gas-tar into aniline 
dyes, alizarin, and, more recently, even into drugs. 

This economy ol the excretions of production through their re- 
employment is to be distinguished from economy through the 
prevention of waste. that is to say, the reduction of excretions 
of production to a minimum, and the immediate utilization to 
armaximum of all raw and auxiliary materials required in pro- 
duction. 

Reduction of waste depends in part on the quality of the machin- 
ery in use. Economy in oil, soap, etc., depends on how well the me- 
chanical parts are machined and polished. This refers to the auxil- 
iary materials. In part, however, and this is most important, it 
depends on the quality of the employed machines and tools wheth- 
er a larger of smaller portion of the raw material is turned into 
waste in the production process. Finally, this depends on the qual- 
ity of the raw material itself. This, in turn, depends partly on the 
development of the extractive industry and agriculture which pro- 
duce the raw material (strictly speaking on the progress of civili- 
zation), and partly on the improvement of processes through which 
raw materials pass before they enter into manufacture. 

“Parmentier has demonstrated that the art of grinding grain has 
improved very materially in France since a none too distant epoch, 
for instance the time of Louis XIV, so that the new mills, compared 
to the old, can make up to half as much more bread from the same 
amount of grain. The annual consumption of a Parisian, indeed, 
has first been estimated at 4 se¢iers of grain, then at 3, finally at 
2, while nowadays it is only 1'/, seféers, or about 342 lbs. per capita.... 
In the Perche, where I have lived for.a long time, the crude mills 
of granite and trap rock millstones have been mostly rebuilt accord- 
ing to the rules of mechanics which has made such rapid progress 
in the last 30 years. They have been provided with good millstones 
from La Ferté, have ground the grain twice, the milling sack has 
been given a circular motion, and the output of flour from the same 
amount of grain has increased one-sixth. The enormous discrepancy 
between the daily grain consumption of the Romans and ourselves 
is therefore easily explained. It is due simply to imperfect methods 
of milling and bread-making. This is the way I feel I must explain 
a remarkable observation made by Pliny, XVIII, Ch. 20, 2: ... 
‘The flour was sold in Rome, depending on its quality, at 40, 48 
or 96 as per modius. These prices, so high in Proportion to the con- 

ECONOMY IN EMPLOYMI:NT OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 103 

temporaneous grain prices, are due to the imperfect state of the 
mills of that period, which were still in their infancy, and the re- 
sultant heavy cost of milling.’” (Dureau de la Malle, Economie 
Politique des Romains, Paris, 1840, I, pp. 280-81.) 

¥. ECONOMY THROUGH INVENTIONS 

These savings in the application of fixed capital are, we repeat, 
due to the employment o! the conditions of labour on a large scale; 
in short, are due lo the fact that these serve as conditions ol direct- 
ly social, or socialized labour or direct co-operation within 
the process of production. On the one hand, this is the indispensable 
Tequirement for the utilization of mechanical and chemical inven- 
tions without increasing the price of the commodity, and this is 
always the conditio sine qua non. On the other hand, only production 
on a large scale permits the savings derived [rom co-operative pro- 
ductive consumption. Finally, it is only the experience of 
ihz combined labourer which discovers and reveals the where and 
how of saving, the simplest methods of applying the discoveries, 
and the ways to overcome the practical [rictions arising from carry- 
ing out the theory—in its application to the production process—etc. 

Incidentally, a distinclion should be made between universal 
labour and co-operative labour. Both kinds play their role in the 
process of production, both flow one into the other, but both are also 
differentiated. Universal labour is all scientific labour, all discov- 
ery and all invention. This labour depends partly on the co-op- 
eration of the living, and partly on the utilization of the labours of 
those who have gone before. Co-operative labour, on the other hand, 
is the direct co-operation of individuals. 

The foregoing is corroborated by frequent observation, to wit: 

1) The great diflerence in the cost of the first model of a new ma- 
chine and that of its reproduction (regarding which, see Ure and 
Babbage). 

2) The far greater cost of operating an establishment based on a 
new invention as compared to later establishments arising ex sis 
ossibus. This is so very true that the trail-blazers generally go 
bankrupt, and only those who later buy the buildings, machinery, 
etc., at a cheaper price, make money out olf it. It is, therefore, 
generally the most worthless and miserable sort of money-capital- 
ists who draw the greatest profit out of all new developments of 
the universal labour of the human spirit and their social applica- 
tion through combined labour. 

CHAPTER VI 
THE EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 

I, FLUCTUATIONS IN THE PRICE OF RAW MATERIALS, 
AND THEIR DIRECT EFFECTS ON THE RATE OF PROFIT 

The assumption in this case, as in previous ones, is that no change 
takes place in the rate of surplus-value. It is necessary to analyse 
the case in its pure jorm. However, it might be possible for a specific 
capital, whose rate of surplus-value remains unchanged, to employ 
an increasing or decreasing number of labourers, in consequence of 
contraction or expansion caused by such fluctuations in the price 
of raw materials as we are to analyse here. In that case the quantity 
of surplus-value might vary, while the rate of surplus-value re- 
mains the same. Yet this should also be disregarded here as a side- 
issue. If improvements of machinery and changes in the price of 
raw materials simultaneously influence either the number of labour- 
ers employed by a definite capital, or the level of wages, one has 
but to put together 1) the effect caused by the variations of constant 
capital on the rate of profit, and 2) the effect caused by variations 
in wages on the rate of profit. The result is then obtained of itself. 

But in general, it should be noted here, as in the previous case, 
that if variations take place, either due to savings in constant cap- 
ital, or due to fluctuations in the price of raw materials, they al- 
ways affect the rate of profit,even if they leave the wage, hence the 
rate and amount of surplus-value, untouched. They change the mag- 

nitude of C in st, and thus the value of the whole fraction. It is 

therefore immaterial, in this case as well—in contrast to what we 
found in our analysis of surplus-value—in which sphere of production 
these variations occur; whether or not the production branches affect- 
ed by them produce necessities for labourers, or constant capital 
for the production of such necessities. The deductions made here are 
equally valid for variations occurring in the production of luxury 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 105 

articles, and by luxury articles we here mean all production that does 
not serve the reproduction of labour-power, 

The raw materials here include auxiliary materials as well, such 
as indigo, coal, gas, etc. Furthermore, so far as machinery is con- 
cerned under this head, its own raw material consists of iron, wood, 
leather, etc. Its own price is therefore affected by fluctuations in the 
price of raw materials used in its construction. To the extent that 
ils price is raised through fluctuations, either in the price of the raw 
materials of which it consists, or of the auxiliary materials con- 
sumed in its operation, the rate of profit falls pro tanfo. And vice 
versa. 

In the fo!lowing analysis we shall confine ourselves to fluctuations 
in the price of raw materials, not so far as they go to make up the 
raw materials of machinery serving as means ol labour or as auxil- 
iary materials applied in its operation, but in so far as they enter 
the process in which commodities are produced. There is just one 
thing to be noted here: the natural wealth in iron, coal, wood, etc., 
which are the principal elements used in the construction and oper- 
ation of machinery, presents itself here as a natural fertility of 
capital and is a factor determining the rate of profit irrespective 
o! the high or low level of wages. 

s 
iC 
causing a variation in the magnitude of c, and thereby of C, must 
also bring about a variation in the rate of profit, even if s and v, 
and their mutual relation, remain unaltered. Now, raw materials 
are one ol the principal components of constant capital. Even in 
industries which consume no actual raw materials, these enter the 
picture as auxiliary materials or components of machinery, etc., 
and their price Quctuations thus accordingly influence the rate of 
profit. Should the price of raw material fall by an amount=d, 

then :, or -, becomes — or ean Thus, the raleol profit 

Since the rate of profil is =, or = it is evident that everything 
ay 

Cc ety’ 
rises. Conversely, if the price of raw material rises, then a or 
=r becomes ere or ries and the rate of profit falls. ollie: 
conditions being equal, the rate of profit, therefore, falls and rises 
inversely to the price of raw material, This shows, among other 
things, how important the low price of raw material is for industrial 
countries, even if fluctuations in (he price of raw materials are not 
accompanied by variations in the sales sphere of the product, and 
thus quite aside from the relation of dernand to supply. I follows 
iurthermore that foreign trade influences the rate of profit, regardless 

106 CONVERSION OF SURPLVS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

ol its influence on wages through the cheapening of the necessities 
of life. The point is that it affects the prices of raw or auxiliary ma- 
terials consumed in industry and agriculture. It is due to an as 
yet imperfect understanding of the nature of the rate of profit and of 
its specific difference from the rate of surplus-value that, on the one 
hand, economists (like Torrens) wrongly explain the marked infu- 
ence of the prices of raw material on the rate of profit, which they 
note through practical experience, and that, on the other, econo- 
mists like Ricardo, who cling to general principles, do not recognize 
the influence of, say, world trade on the rate of profit. 

This makes clear the great importance to industry of the elimi- 
nation or reduction of customs duties on raw materials. The 
rational development of the protective tariff system made the ut- 
most reduction of import duties on raw materials one of its cardinal 
principles. This, and the abolition of the duly on corn, was the main 
object of the English free-traders, who were primarily concerned 
with having the duty on cotton lilted as well. 

The use of flour in the cotton industry may serve as an illustra- 
tion of the importance of a price reduction for an article which is 
not strictly a raw material but an auxiliary and at the same time 
one of the principal elements of nourishment. As far back as 1837, 
R. H. Greg’ calculated that the 100,000 power-looms and 250,000 
hand-looms then operating in the cotton-mills of Great Britain annu- 
ally consumed 41 million lbs. of flour to smooth the warp. He 
added a third of this quantity for bleaching and other processes, 
and estimated the total annual value of the flour so consumed at 
£342,000 for the preceding ten years. A comparison with flour 
prices on the continent showed that the higher flour price forced upon 
manufacturers by corn tariffs alone amounted to £170,000 per 
year. Greg estimated the sum at a minimum of £200,000 for 1837 
and cited a firm for which the flour price difference amounted to 
£1,C00 annually. As a result, “great manufacturers, thoughtful, 
calculating men of business, have said that ten hours’ labour would 
be quite sufficient, if the Corn Laws were repealed.” (Reports of 
Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1848, p. 98.) The Corn Laws were repealed. So 
were the duties on cotton and other raw materials. But no sooner 
had this been accomplished than the opposition of the manufactur- 
ers to the Ten Hours’ Bill became more violent than ever. And 
when the ten-hour factory day nevertheless became a law soon alter, 
the first result was a general attempt to reduce wages. 

The Factory Question and the Ten Hours’ Bi 
isa7, bine y Qi ours’ Bill by R. H, Greg, London, 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 17 

The value of raw and auxiliary materials passes entirely and all 
at one time into the value of the product in the manufacture of 
which they are consumed, while the elements of fixed capital trans- 
fer their value to the product only gradually in proportion to their 
wear and tear. It follows that the price of the product is influenced 
far more by the price of raw materials than by that of fixed capital, 
although the rate of profil is determined by the total value of the 
capital applied no matter how much of it is consumed in the making 
of the product. But it is evident—although we merely mention it 
in passing, since we here still assume that commodities are sold at 
their values, so that price fluctuations caused by competition do not 
as yet concern us—that the expansion or contraction of the market 
depends on the price of the individual commodity and is inversely 
proportional to the rise or fall of this price. It actually develops, 
therefore, that the price of the product does not rise in proportion 
to that of theraw material, and that it does not fall in proportion 
to that of raw material. Consequently, the rate of profit falls lower 
in one instance, and rises higher in the other than would have been 
the case if products were sold at their value. 

Further, the quantity and value of the employed machinery 
grows with the development of Jabour productivity but not in the 
same proportion as this productivity, i.e., not in the proportion in 
which this machinery increases its output. In those branches of in- 
dustry, therefore. which do consume raw materials, i.e., in which 
the subject of labour is itself a product of previous labour, the grow- 
ing productivity of labour is expressed precisely in the proportion 
in which a larger quantity of raw material absorbs a definile quan- 
tity of labour, hence in the increasing amount of raw material con- 
verted in, say, one hour into products, or processed into commodities. 
The value of raw material, therefore, forms an ever-growing 
component of the value of the commodity-product in proportion to 
the development of the productivity of labour, not only because 
it passes wholly into this latter value, but aiso because in every 
aliquot part of the aggregate product the portion representing 
depreciation of machinery and the portion formed by the newly 
added labour—both continually decrease. Owing to this falling 
tendency, the other portion of the value representing raw material 
increases proportionally, unless this increase is counterbalanced 
by a proportionate decrease in the value of the raw material arising 
from the growing productivity of the labour employed in its own 
production. 

Further, raw and auxiliary materials, just like wages, form parts 
of the circulating capital and must, therelore, be continually re- 

108 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

placed in their entirety through the sale of the product, while only 
the depreciation is to be renewed in the case of machinery, and 
first of all in the form of a reserve fund. It is, moreover, In no way 
essential for each individual sale to contribute its share to this re- 
serve fund, so long as the total annual sales contribute their annual 
share. This shows again how a rise in the price of raw material can 
curtail or arrest the entire process of reproduction if the price real- 
ized by the sale of the commodities should not suffice lo replace 
all the elernents of these commodities. Or, it may make it impossible 
to continue the process on the scale required by its technical basis, 
so that only a part of the machinery will remain in operation, or all 
the machinery will work for only a fraction of the usual time. 
Finally, the expense incurred through waste varies in direct 
proportion to the price fluctuations of the raw material, rising when 
they rise and falling when they fall. But there is a limit here as well. 
The Factory Report for April 1850 maintained: “One source of 
considerable loss arising from an advance in the price of the raw 
material would hardly occur to any one bul a practical spinner, viz., 
that from waste. I am informed that when cotton advances, the cost 
to the spinner, of the lower qualities especially, is increased in a 
ratio beyond the advance actually paid, because the waste made in 
spinning coarse yarns is fully 15 per cent; and this rate, while it 
causes a loss of %d. per |b. on cotton at 3%d. per Ib., brings up the 
loss to Id. per Jb. when cotton advances to 7d.” (Reports of Insp. 
of Fact., April 1850, p. 17.) But when, as a result of the American 
Civil War, the price of cotton rose to a level unequalled in almost 
100 years, the report read differently: “The price now given for waste, 
and its re-introduction in the factory in the shape of cotton waste, 
go some way to compensate for the difference in the loss by waste, 
between Surat cotton and American cotton, about 12% per cent. 

“The waste in working Surat cotton being 25 per cent, the cost of 
the cotton to the spinner is enhanced one-fourth before he has manu- 
factured it. The loss by waste used not to be of much moment when 
American cotton was 5d. or 6d. per Ib., for it did not exceed */,d. 
per 1b., but it is now of great importance when upon every Ib. of 
cotton which costs 2s. there is a loss by waste equal to 6d.”"* (Re- 
ports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1863, p. 106.) 

“* The report errs in the final sentence. Instead of 6d. it should be 3d. for loss 
through waste. This loss amounts to 25% in the case of Surat, and only }21/, to 
15% in the case of American cotton, and this latter is meant, the same percentage 
having been correctly calculated lor the price of 5 to 6d. It is true, however, that 
enn case of American cotton brought to Europe during the latter years of 
ane oe War the proportion of waste often rose considerably higher than before. 

EFFECT OF PRICK FLUCTUATIONS 109 

If. APPRECIATION, DEPRECIATION, RELEASE 
AND TIE-UP OF CAPITAL 

The phenomena analysed in this chapter require for their full 
development the credit system and competition on the world-mar- 
ket, the latter being the basis and the vital element of capitalist 
production. These more definite forms of capitalist production can 
only be comprehensively presented, however, alter the general na- 
ture of capital is understood. Furthermore, they do not come with- 
in the scope of this work and belong to its eventual continuation. 
Nevertheless the phenomena listed in the above title may be dis- 
cussed in a general way at this stage. They are interrelated, first 
with one another and, secondly, also with the rate and amount of 
profit. They are to be briefly discussed here if only because they cre- 
ate the impression that not only the rate, but also the amount of 
profit—which is actually identical with the amount of surplus- 
value—could increase or decrease independently of the movements 
of the quantity or rate of surplus-value. 

Are we to consider release and tie-up of capital, on the one hand, 
and its appreciation and depreciation, on the other, as different 
phenomena? 

The question is what we mean by release and tie-up of capital? 
Appreciation and depreciation are self-explanatory. All they mean 
is that a given capital increases or decreases in value as a result of 
certain general economic conditions, for we are not discussing the 
particular fate of an individual capital. All they mean, theretore, 
is that the value of a capital invested in production rises or falls, 
irrespective of its self-expansion by virtue of the surplus-labour 
employed by it. 

By tie-up of capita] we mean that certain portions of the total 
value of the product must be reconverted into elements of constant 
and variable capital if production is to proceed on the same scale. 
By release of capital we mean that a portion of the total value of the 
product which had to be reconverted into constant or variable cap- 
ital up to a certain time, becomes disposable and superfluous, 
should production continue on the previous scale. This release or 
tie-up of capital is different from the release or tie-up of revenue. 
If the annual surplus-value of an individual capital C is, lel us 
say, equal to x, then a reduction in the price of commodities con- 
sumed by the capitalists would make x—a sulficient to procure the 
same enjoyments, etc., as before. A portion of the revenue=a Is 
released, therefore, and may serve either to increase consumption 
or to be reconverted into capital (for the purpose of accumulation), 

110 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

Conversely, if x++-a is needed to continue to live as before, then this 
standard of living must either be reduced or a portion of the previ- 
ously accumulated income=a, expended as revenue. 

Appreciation and depreciation may afiect either constant or 
variable capital, or both, and in the case of constant capital it may, 
in turn, affect either the fixed, or the circulating portion, or both. 

Under constant capital we must consider the raw and auxiliary 
materials, including semi-finished products, all of which we here 
include under the term of raw materials, machinery, and other 
fixed capital. oo. 

In the preceding analysis we referred especially to variations in 
the price, or the value, of raw materials in respect to their influence 
on the rate of profit, and determined the general Jaw that with other 
conditions being equal, the rate of profit is inversely proportional 
to the value of the raw materials. This is absolutely true for capital 
newly invested in a business enterprise, in which the investment, 
i.e., the conversion of money into productive capital, is only just 
taking place. 

But aside from this capital, which is being newly invested, a 
large portion of the already functioning capital is in the sphere of 
circulation, while another portion is in the sphere of production. 
One portion is inthe market in the shape of commodities waiting to 
be converted into money; another is on hand as money, in whatever 
form, waiting to be reconverted into elements of production; finally, 
a third portion is in the sphere of production, partly in its original 
form of means of production such as raw and auxiliary materials, 
semi-finished products purchased in the market, machinery and oth- 
er fixed capital, and partly in the form of products which are in 
the process of manufacture. The effect of appreciation or deprecia- 
tion depends here to a great extent on the relative proportion of 
these component parts. Let us, for the sake of simplicity, leave aside 
all fixed capital and consider only that portion of constant capital 
which consists of raw and auxiliary materials, and semi-finished 
products, and both finished commodities in the market and 
commodities still in the process of production. 

II the price of raw material, for instance of cotton, rises, then the 
price of cotton goods—both semi-finished goods like yarn and fin- 
ished goods like cotton fabrics—manulactured while cotton was 
cheaper, rises also. So does the value of the unprocessed cotton held 
in stock, and of the cotton in the process of manufacture. The latter 
because it comes to represent more lJabour-time in retrospect and 

thus adds more than its original value {o the product which it en- 
ters, and more than the capitalist paid for it. 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS WW 

Hence, il the price of raw materials rises, and there is a consic- 
erable quantity of available finished commodities in the market, no 
matter what the stage of their manufacture, the value of these com- 
modities rises, thereby enhancing the value of the existing capital. 
The same is true for the supply of raw materials, etc., in the hands 
of the producer. This appreciation of value may compensate, or 
more than compensate, the individual capitalist, or even an entire 
separate sphere of capitalist production, for the drop in the rate of 
profit attending a rise in the price of raw materials. Without enter- 
ing into the detailed effects of competition, we migltt state for the 
sake of thoroughness that 1) if available supplies of raw material 
are considerable, they tend to counteract the price increase which 
occurred at the place of their origin; 2) if the semi-finished and 
finished goods press very heavily upon the market, their price is 
thereby prevented from rising proportionately to the price of their 
raw materials. 

The reverse takes place when the price of raw material Ialls. Other 
circumstances remaining the same, this increases the rate of profit. 
The commodities in the market, the articles in the process of pre- 
duction, and the available supplies of raw material, depreciate in 
value and thereby counteract the attendant rise in the rate of profit. 

The effect of price variations for raw materials is the more pro- 
nounced, the smaller the supplies available in the sphere of produc- 
tion and in the market at, say, the close of a business year, i.e., 
alter the harvest in agriculture, when great quantities of raw ma- 
terials are delivered anew. 

We proceed in this entire analysis from the assumption that the 
tise of fall in prices expresses actual fluctuations in value. But 
since we are here concerned with the effects such price variations 
have on the rate of profit, it matters little what is at the bottom of 
them. The present statements apply equally if prices rise or fall 
under the influence of the credit system, competition, ete., and not 
on account of fluctuations in value. 

Since the rate of profit equals the ratio of the excess over the value 
of the product to the value of the total capital advanced, a rise 
caused in the rate of profit by a depreciation of the advanced capi- 
tal would be asscciated with a loss in the value of capital. 
Similarly, a drop caused in the rate of profit by an appreci- 
ation of the advanced capital might possibly be associated with a 

ain. 

As for the other portion of constant capital, such as machinery 
and fixed capita! in general, the appreciation of value taking place 
in it with respect mainly to buildings, real estate, etc., cannot be 

112 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

discussed without the theory of ground-rent, and does not therefore 
belong in this chapter. But of a general importance to the question 
of depreciation are: ; 

The continual improvements which lower the use-value, and 
therefore the value, of existing machinery, factory buildings, etc. 
This process has a particularly dire effect during the first period 
of newly introduced machinery, before it attains a certain stage of 
maturity, when it continually becomes antiquated before it has 
time to reproduce its own value. This is one of the reasons for the 
flagrant prolongation of the working-time usual in such periods, 
for alternating day and night-shiits, so that the value of the machin- 
ery may be reproduced in a shorter time without having to place 
the figures for wear and tear too high. If, on the other hand, the 
short period in which the machinery is effective (its short life vis- 
a-vis the anticipated improvements) is not compensated in this 
manner, it gives up so much of its value to the product through 
moral depreciation that it cannot compete even with hand-labour.’* 

After machinery, equipment of buildings, and fixed capital in 
general, attain a certain maturity, so that they remain unaltered 
for some length of time at least in their basic construction, there 
arises a similar depreciation due to improvements in the methods 
of reproducing this fixed capital. The value of the machinery, etc., 
falls in this case not so much because the machinery is rapidly crowd- 
ed out and depreciated to a certain degree by new and more pro- 
ductive machinery, etc., but because it can be reproduced more 
cheaply. This is one of the reasons why large enterprises frequently 
do not flourish until they pass into other hands, i.e., after their 
first proprietors have been bankrupted, and their successors, who 
buy them cheaply, therefore begin from the outset with a smaller 
outlay of capital. 

It leaps to the eye, particularly in the case of agriculture, that 
the causes which raise or lower the price of a product, also raise or 
lower the value of capital, since the latter consists to a large degree 
of this product, whether as grain, cattle, ete. (Ricardo). 

There is still variable capital to be considered. 
_Inasmuch as the value of labour-power rises because there is a 
tise in the value of the means of subsistence required for its repro- 

** For examples see Babbage, among others. The i 
J 1 I : usual expedient—a reduc: 
tion of wages—is also employed in this instance, so that thie continual dene 
ciation acts quite contrary to the dreams of Mr. Carey's harmonious brain. 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 13 

duction, or falls because there is a reduction in their value — and 
the appreciation and depreciation of variable capital are really 
nothing more than expressions of these two cases—a drop in sur- 
plus-value corresponds to such appreciation and an increase in 
surplus-value to such depreciation, provided the length of the 
working-day remains the same. But other circumstances—the 
reiease and tie-up of capital—may also be associated with such 
cases, and since we have not analysed them so far, we shall briefly 
mention them now. 

If wages fall in consequence of a depreciation in the value of la- 
bour-power (which may even be attended by a rise in the real price 
of labour), a portion of the capital hitherto invested in wages is 
released. Variable capital is set free. In the case of new investments 
of capital, this has simply the effect of its operating with a higher 
rate of surplus-value. It takes less money than before to set in mo- 
tion the same amount of labour, and in this way the unpaid portion 
al labour increases at the expense of the paid portion. But in the case 
of already invested capital, not only does the rate of surplus-value 
tise but a portion of the capital previously invested in wages is 
also released. Until this time it was tied up and formed a regular 
portion which had to be deducted from the proceeds for the prod- 
uct and advanced for wages, acting as variable capital if the 
business were lo continue on its former scale. Now this portion 
is set [ree and may be used as a new investment, be it to extend 
the same business or to operate in some other sphere of produc- 
tion. 

Let us assure, for instance, that £500 per week were required at 
first to employ 500 labourers, and that now only £400 are needed 
for the same purpose. If the quantity of value produced in either 
case=£1,000, the amount of weekly surplus-value in the first 

case=£500 and the rate of surplus-value a5 100%. But alter 

the wage reduction the quantity of surplus-value £1,000—£400= 
=£600, and its rate a= 150%. And this increase in the rate of 
surplus-value is the only effect for one who starts a new enterprise 
in this sphere of production with a variable capital of £400 and 
a corresponding constant capital. But when this takes place in a 
business already in operation, the depreciation of the variable 
capital does not only increase the quantity of surplus-value from 
£500 to £600, and the rate of surplus-value from 100 to 150%, 
but releases £100 ol the variable capital for the further exploitation 
of labour. Hence, the same atnount of labour is exploited to greater 

114 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

advantage, and, what is more, the release of £100 makes it possible 
to exploit more labourers than before at the higher rate with the 
same variable capital of £500. 

Now the reverse situation. Suppose, with 500 employed labour- 
ers, the original proportion in which the product is divided= 
=400,+600,=1,000, making the rate ol surplus-value= 150%. In 
that case, the labourer receives £4, ,, or 16 shillings per week. Should 
500 labourers cost £500 per week, due to an appreciation of variable 
capital, each one of them will receive a weekly wage=£1, and 
+400 can employ only 400 labourers. If the same number of labour- 
ers as before is put to work, therefore, we have 500,-+500,=1,000, 
The rate of surplus-value would fall from 150 to 100%, which is 
one-third. In the case of new capital the only effect would be this 
lower rate of surplus-value. Other conditions being equal, the rate 
of profit would also have fallen accordingly, although not in the 
same pioportion. For instance, if c=2,000, we have in the one case 
2,000,+400,+600,=3,000. The rate of surplus-value=150%, 
the rate of profit = 9 = 95%. In ihe second case, 2,000,--500,+ 
—-500,=3,000. The rate of surplus-value=100%, the rate of profit = 
= a0". In the case of already invested capital, however, 
there would be a dual effect. Only 400 labourers could be employed 
with a £400 variable capital, and that at a rate of surplus-value of 
100%. They would therefore produce an aggregate surplus-value 
of only £400. Furthermore, since a constant capital of £2,000 
requires 500 labourers for its operation, 400 labourers can put into 
motion only a constant capital of £1,690. For production to con- 
tinue on the same scale, so that one-fifth of the machinery does not 
stand idle, £100 must be added to the variable capital in order to 
employ 500 labourers as before. And this can be accomplished only 
by tying up hitherto disposable capital, so that part of the accumu- 
lation intended to extend production serves merely to stop a gap, 
of a portion reserved for revenue is added to the old capital. Then 
a variable capital increased by £100 produces £100 less surplus- 
value. More capital is required to employ the same number of la» 
bourers, and at the same time the surplus-value produced by each 
labourer is reduced. 

The advantages resulting from a release and the disadvantages 
resulting from a tie-up of variable capital both exist only for cap- 
ital already engaged and reproducing itself under certain given 
conditions. For newly invested capital the advantages on the one 
hand, and the disadvantages on the other, are confined to an 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 5 

increase or drop in the rate of surplus-value, and to a corresponding. 
if in no way proportionate, change in the rate of profit. 

The release and tie-up of variable capital, just analysed, is the 
result of a depreciation or appreciation of the elements of variable 
capital, that is, of the cost of reproducing labour-power. 

But variable capital could also be released if, with the wage rate 
unchanged, fewer labourers were required due to the development 
of labour productivity to set in motion the same amount of constant 
capital. In like manner, there may reversely be a tie-up of addition- 
al variable capital if more labourers are required lor the same 
quantity of constant capital due to a drop in productivity. If, on the 
other hand, a portion of capital formerly employed as variable 
capital is employed in the form of constant capital, so that merely a 
different distribution exists between the components of the same 
capital, this has an influence on both the rate of surplus-value and 
the rate of profit, but does not belong under the heading of tie-up 
and release of capital, which is here being discussed. 

We have already seen that constant capital may also be tied up 
or released by the appreciation or depreciation of its component 
elements. Aside from this, if can be tied up only if the productive 
power of labour increases (provided a portion of the variable is not 
converted into constant capital), so that the same amount of labour 
creates a greater product and therefore sets in motion a larger con- 
stant capital. The same may occur under certain circumstances if 
productivity decreases, for instance in agriculture, so that tlle same 
quantity of Jabour requires more means of production, such as seeds 
or manure, drainage, etc., in order to produce the same output. 
Constant capital may bereleased without depreciation if improve- 
ments, utilization of the forces of Nature, etc., enable a constant 
capital of smaller value to technically perform the same services 
as were formerly performed by a constant capital ol greater value. 

We have seen in Book IJ that once commodities have been convert- 
ed into money, or sold, a certain portion of this money must be 
reconverted into the material elements ol constant capital, and in the 
proportions required by the technical nature of the particular sphere 
of production. In this respect, the most important element in all 
branches—aside from wages, i.e., variable capital—is raw mate- 
rial, including auxiliary material, which is particularly important 
in such lines of production as do not involve raw materials in the 
strict sense of the term, for instance in mining and the extractive 
industries in general. That portion of the price which is to make 

116 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUB INTO PROFIT 

good the wear and tear of machinery enters the accounts chiefly 
nominally so long as the machinery is at all in an operating condi- 
tion. It does not greatly matter whether it is paid for and replaced 
by money one day or the next, or at any other stage of the period of 
turnover of the capital. It is quite different in the case of the raw 
material. If the price of raw material rises, it may be impossible 
to make it good [fully out of the price of the commodities alter wages 
are deducted. Violent price fluctuations therefore cause interruptions, 
great collisions, even catastrophes, in the process of reproduction. 
It is especially agricultural produce proper, i.e., raw materials 
taken from organic nature, which—leaving aside the credit system 
for the present—is subject to such fluctuations of value in conse- 
quence of changing yields, etc. Due to uncontrollable natural condi- 
tions, favourable or unfavourable seasons, etc., the same quantity 
of labour may be represented in very different quantities of use- 
values, and a definite quantity of these use-values may therefore 
have very different prices. If the value x is represented by 100 Ibs. 

of ihe commodity a, then the price of one Ib. of a=s5i if it is re- 

presented by 1,000 Ibs. of a, the price of one Ib. of a=00 etc, 

This is therefore one of the elements of these fluctuations in the price 
of raw materials. A second element, mentioned at this point only for 
the sake of completeness—since competition and the credit system 
are still outside the scope of our analysis—is this: It is in the nature 
of things that vegetable and animal substances whose growth and 
production are subject to certain organic laws and bound up with 
definite natural time periods, cannot be suddenly augmented in the 
same degree as, for instance, machines and other fixed capital, or 
coal, ore, etc., whose reproduction can, provided the natural condi- 
tions do not change, be rapidly accomplished in an industrially 
developed country. It is therefore quite possible, and under a devel- 
oped system of capitalist production even inevitable, that the pro- 
duction and increase of the portion of constant capital consisting 
of fixed capital, machinery, etc., should considerably outstrip the 
portion consisting of organic raw materials, so that demand for the 
latter grows more rapidly than their supply, causing their price 
torise. Rising prices actually cause 1) these raw materials to be 
shipped from greater distances, since the mounting prices suffice to 
cover greater freight rates; 2) an increase in their production, which 
circumstance, however, will probably not, for natural reasons, 
multiply the quantity of products until the following year; 3) the 
Use of various previously unused substitutes and greater utiliza- 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 117 

tion of waste. When this rise of prices begins to exert a marked in- 
fluence on production and supply it indicates in most cases that the 
turning-point has been reached at which demand drops on account 
of the protracted rise in the price of the raw material and of all 
commodities of which it is an element, causing a reaction in the 
price of raw material. Aside from the convulsions which this 
causes in various forms through depreciation of capital, there are 
also other circumstances, which we shall mention shortly. 

But so much is already evident from the foregoing: The greater 
the development of capitalist production, and, consequently, the 
greater the means of suddenly and permanently increasing that 
portion of constant capital consisting of machinery, etc., and the 
more rapid the accumulation (particularly in times of prosperity), 
so much greater the relative over-production of machinery and other 
fixed capital, so much more frequent the relative under-production 
of vegetable and animal raw materials, and so much more pfo- 
nounced the previously described rise of their prices and the attend- 
ant reaction. And so much more frequent are the convulsions 
caused as they are by the violent price fluctuations of one of the 
main elements in the process of reproduction. 

If, however, a collapse of these high prices occurs because their 
tise caused a drop in demand on the one hand, and, on the other, 
an expansion of production in one place and in another importa- 
tion [rom remote and previously less resorted to, or entirely ignored, 
production areas, and, in both cases, a supply of raw materials 
exceeding the demand—particularly at the old high prices—then 
the result may be considered from different points of view. The sudden 
collapse of the price of raw materials checks their reproduction, 
and the monopoly of the original producing countries, which enjoy 
the most favourable conditions of production, is thereby restored: — 
possibly with certain limitations, but restored nevertheless. True, 
due to the impetus it has had, reproduction of raw material proceeds 
on an extended scale, especially in those countries which more or 
less possess a monopoly of this production. But the basis on which 
production carries on after the extension of machinery, ete., and 
which, alter some fluctuations, is toserve as the new normal basis, the 
new point of departure, is very much extended by the developments 
in the preceding cycle of turnover. In the meantime, the barely 
increased reproduction again experiences considerable impediments 
in some of the secondary sources of supply. For instance, it is easily 
demonstrated on the basis of the export tables that in the last thirty 
years (up to 1865) the production of cotton in India increases when- 
ever there has been a drop in American production, and subsequent- 

118 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

ly it drops again more or less permanently. During the period in 
which raw materials become dear, industrial capitalists join hands 
and form associations to regulate production. They did so alter the 
rise of cotton prices in 1848 in Manchester, for example, and simi- 
larly in the case of flax production in Ireland. But as soon as the 
immediate impulse is over and the general principle of competition 
to “buy in the cheapest market” (instead of stimulating production 
in the countries of origin, as the associations attempt to do, without 
regard to the immediate price at which these may happen at that 
time to be able to supply their product)—as soon as the principle 
of competition again reigns supreme, the regulation of the supply 
is left once again to “prices.” All thought of a common, all-embrac- 
ing and far-sighted control of the production of raw materials 
gives way once more to the faith that demand and supply will mu- 
tually regulate one another. And it must be admitted that such 
control is on the whole irreconcilable with the laws of capitalist 
production, and remains for ever a pious wish, or is limited to ex- 
ceptional co-operation in times of great stress and confusion.'® The 
superstition of the capitalists in this respect is so deep that in 
their reports even factory inspectors again and again throw up 
their hands in astonishment. The alternation of good and bad years 
naturally also provides for cheaper raw materials. Aside from the 
direct effect this has on raising the demand, there is also the added 
stimulus of the previously mentioned influence on the rate of profit. 
The aforesaid process of production of raw materials being gradually 
overtaken by the production of machinery, etc., is then repeated ona 
larger scale. An actual improvement of raw materials satisfying not 
only the desired quantity, but also the quality desired, such as 
cotton from India of American quality, would require a prolonged, 

** Since the above was written (1865), competition on the world-market has 
been considerably intensified by the rapid development of industry in all civil- 
ized countries, especially in America and Germany. The fact that the rapidly and 
enormously expanding productive forces today outgrow the control of the laws of 
the capitalist mode of commodity exchange, within which they are supposed to 
operate, impresses itseli more and more even on the minds of the capitalists. This 
is disclosed especially by two symptoms. First, by the new and general mania for 
a protective tariff, which differs irom the old protectionism in that now articles 
fit for export are those best protected. And secondly, by the trusts of manufactur- 
ers of whole spheres of production which regulate production, and thus prices 
and profits. [t goes without saying that these experiments are practicable only so 
long as the economic climate is relatively favourable. The first storm must upset 
them and prove that, although production assuredly needs regulation, it is cer- 
jain ee co ae which is fitted for that task. Meanwhile, the trusts 

lave no other mission but to see to it that the little fis i 
ch slices ceil Mes hie ee ittle fish are swallowed by the big 

EVFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 119 

regularly growirg and steady European demand (regardless of the 
economic conditions under which the Indian producer labours in 
his country). As it is, however, the sphere of production of raw ma- 
lerials is, by fits, first suddenly enlarged, and then again violently 
curtailed. All this, and the spirit of capitalist production in gener- 
al, may be very well studied in the cotton shortage of 1861-65, 
further characterized as it was by the fact that a raw material, one 
of the principal elements of reproduction, was for a time entirely 
unavailable. To be sure, the price may also rise in the event of an 
abundant supply, provided the conditions for this abundance are 
more knotty. Or, there may be an actual shortage of raw material. 
It was this last situation which originally prevailed in the cotton 
crisis. 

The closer we approach our own time in the history of production, 
the more regularly do we find, especially in the essential lines of 
industry, the ever-recurring alternation between relative apprecia- 
tion and the subsequent resulting depreciation of raw materials 
obtained from organic nature. What we have just analysed will be 
illustrated by the following examples taken from reports of factory 
inspectors. 

The moral of history, also to be deduced from cther observations 
concerning agriculture, is that the capitalist system works against 
a rational agriculture, or that a rational agriculture is incompat- 
ible with the capitalist system (although the latter promotes tech- 
nical improvements in agriculture), and needs either the hand of the 
small farmer living by his own labour or the control of associated 
producers, 

Herewith follow the illustrations referred to above, taken from 
the English Factory Reports. 

“The state of trade is better; but the cycle of good and bad times 
diminishes as machinery increases, and the changes [rom the one to 
the other happen oftener, as the demand for raw materials increases 
withit.... At present, confidence is not only restored after the panic 
of 1857, but the panic itself seems to be almost forgotten. Whether 
this improvement will continue or not depends greatly upon the 
price of raw materials, There appear to me evidences already, that 
in some instances the maximum has been reached, beyond which 
their manufacture becomes gradually less and less profitable, till 
il ceases to be so altogether. If we take, for instance, the lucrative 
years in the worsted trade of 1849 and 1850, we see that the price 
of English combing wool stood at Is. Id., and of Australian at be- 
tween Is. 2d. and Is. 5d. per Ib., and that on the average of the ten 

J20 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

years from 1841 to 1850. both inclusive, the average price of Eng- 
lish wool never exceeded Is. 2d. and of Australian wool Is. 5d. 
per Ib. But that in the commencement of the disastrous year of 
1857, the price of Australian wool began with ls. Ild., falling to 
ls. 6d. in December, when the panic was at its height, but has grad- 
ually risen again to Is. 9d. through 1858, at which it now stands, 
whilst that of English wool, commencing with Is. 8d., and rising in 
April and September 1857 to Is. 9d., Ialling in January 1858 to 
Is. 2d., has since risen to Is. 5d., which is 3d. per Ib. higher than 
the average of the ten years to which I have referred.... This shows, 
I think, one of three things,—either that the bankruptcies which 
similar prices occasioned in 1857 are forgotten; or that there is 
barely the wool grown which the existing spindles are capable of con- 
suming; or else, that the prices of manufactured articles are about to 
be permanently higher.... And as in past experience | have seen 
spindles and looms multiply both in numbers and speed in an in- 
credibly short space of time, and our exports of wool to France 
increase in an almost equal ratio, and as both at home and abroad 
the age of sheep seems to be getting less and less, owing to increas- 
ing populations and to what the agriculturalists call ‘a quick re- 
turn in stock," so I have often felt anxious for persons whom, with- 
out this knowledge, I have seen embarking skill and capital in 
undertakings, wholly reliant for their success on a product which 
can only be increased according to organic laws. ... The same state 
of supply and demand of all raw materials ... seems to account for 
many of the fluctuations in the cotton trade during past periods, 
as well as for the condition of the English wool market in the au- 
tumn of 1857, with its overwhelming consequences.”*? (R. Baker 
in Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1858, pp. 56-61.) 

The halcyon days of the West-Riding worsted industry, of York- 
shire, were 1849-50. This industry employed 29,246 persons in 1838; 
37,000 persons in 1843; 48,097 in 1845; and 74,891 in 1850. The 
same district had 2,768 mechanical looms in 1838; 11,458 in 1841; 
16,870 in 1843; 19,121 in 1845 and 29,539 in 1850. (Reports of Insp. of 
Fact., 1850, p. 60.) This prosperity of the carded wool industry excit- 
ed certain forebodings as early as October 1850. In his report for 
April 1851, Sub-Inspector Baker said in regard to Leeds and Brad- 
ford: “The state of trade is, and has been lor some time, very un- 
salisfactory. The worsted spinners are fast losing the profits of 

elt goes without saying that we do not, like Mr. Baker, explain the wool 
crisis of 1857 on the basis of the disproportion between the prices of raw material 

and product. This disproportion was itself but a symptom, and the crisis was a 
general one.—F,. E. 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 121 

1850, and, in the majority of cases, the manufacturers are not doing 
much good. | believe, at this moment, there is more woollen ma- 
chinery standing than | have almost ever known at one time, and 
the flax spinners are also turning off hands and stopping frames. 
The cycles of trade, in fact, in the textile fabrics, are now extremely 
uncertain, and | think we shall shortly find to be true .., that there 
is no comparison made between the producing power of the spindles, 
the quantity of raw material, and the growth of the population” 
(p. 52). 

The same is true of the cotton industry. In the cited report for 
October 1858, we read: “Since the hours of labour in factories have 
been fixed, the amounts of consumption, produce, and wages in all 
textile fabrics have been reduced to arule of three. ... I quote from a 
recent lecture delivered by ... the present Mayor of Blackburn, 
Mr. Baynes, on the cotton trade, who by such means has reduced 
the cotton statistics of his own neighbourhood to the closest approx- 
imation: — 

“Fach real and mechanical horse-power will drive 450 sell-acting 
mule spindles with preparation, or 200 throstle spindles, or 15 looms 
for 40 inches cloth, with winding, warping, and sizing. Each horse- 
power in spinning will give employment to 2% operatives, but in 
weaving to 10 persons, al wages averaging [ull 10s. 6d. a week to 
each person. ... The average counts of yarn spun and woven are from 
30s. to 32s. twist, and 34s. to 36s. weft yarns; and taking the spinning 
production at 13 ounces per spindle per week, will give 824,700 
lbs. yarn spun per week, requiring 970.000 Ibs. or 2,300 bales of 
cotton, at a cost of £28,300. ... The total cotton consumed in this 
district (within a five-mile radius round Blackburn) per week is 
1,530,000 Ibs., or 3,650 bales, at a cost of £44,625.... This is one- 
eighteenth of the whole cotton spinning of the United Kingdom, 
and one-sixth of the whole power-loom weaving.’ 

“Thus we see that, according to Mr. Baynes’s calculations, the 
total number of cotton spindles in the United Kingdom is 28,800,000, 
and supposing these to be always working full time, that the annual 
consumption of cotton ought to be 1,432.080,000 Ibs. But as the 
import of cotton, less the export in !856 and 1857, was only 
1 022,576,832 Ibs., there must necessarily be a deficiency of supply 
equal to 409,503,168 lbs. Mr. Baynes, however, who has been good 
enough to communicate with me on this subject, thinks that an 
annual consumption of cotton based upon the quantity used in 
the Blackburn district would be liable to be overcharged, owing’ 
to the difference, not only in the counts spun, but in the excellence 
of the machinery. He estimates the total annual consumption of 

122 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

cotton in the United Kingdom at 1,000,000,000 Ibs. But if he is right, 
and there really is an excess of supply equal to 22,576,832 Ibs., 
supply and demand seem to be nearly balanced already, without 
taking into consideration those additional spindles and looms which 
Mr. Baynes speaksol as getting ready for work in his own district, 
and, by parity of reasoning, probably in other districts also” 
(pp. 59, 60). 

Ill. GENERAL ILLUSTRATION. THE COTTON CRISIS OF 1861 -65. 
Preliminary History. 1845-60 

1845. The golden age of cotton industry. Price of cotton very low- 
L. Horner says on this point: “For the last eight years I have not 
known so active a state of trade as has prevailed during the last 
summer and autumn, particularly in cotton spinning. Throughout 
the half-year I have been receiving notices every week of new in- 
vestments of capital in factories, either in the form of new imills 
being built, of the lew that were untenanted finding occupters, of 
enlargements of existing mills, of new engines of increased power, 
and of manulacturing machinery.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
Oct. 1845, p. 13). 

1846. The complaints begin: “For a considerable time past 1 
have heard from the occupiers of cotton-mills very general com- 
plaints of the depressed state of their trade ... for within the last six 
weeks several mills have begun to work short time, usually eight 
hours a day instead of twelve; this appears to be on the increase.... 
There has been a great advance in the price of the raw material,... 
there has been not only no advance in the manulactured articles, 
but ... prices are lower than they were before the rise in cotton be- 
gan. From the great increase in the number of cotton mills within 
the last Jour years, there must have been, on the one hand, a greatly 
increased demand for the raw material, and, on the other, a greatly 
increased supply in the market of the manufactured articles; causes 
that must concurrently have operated against profits, supposing 
the supply of the raw material and the consumption of the manufac- 
tured article to have remained unaltered; but, of course, in the 
greater ratio by the late short supply of cotton, and the falling off 
in the demand for the manufactured articles in several markets, 
both home and foreign.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1846, p. 10.) 

The rising demand for raw materials naturally went hand in hand 
with a market flooded with manufactures. By the way, the expan- 
sion of industry at that time and the subsequent stagnation were 
not confined to the cotton districts. The carded wool district af 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 193 

Bradford had only 318 factories in 1836 and 490 in 1846. These 
figures do not by any means express the actual growth of production, 
since the existing factories were also considerably enlarged. This 
was particularly true of the flax spinning-mills. “All have contrib- 
uted more or less, during the last ten years, to the overstocking 
of the market, to which a great part of the present stagnation of 
trade must be attributed.... The depression ... naturally results 
from such rapid increase of mills and machinery.” (Reports of 
Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1846, p. 30.) 

1847. In October, a money panic. Discount 8%. This was preceded 
by the debacle of the railway swindle and the East Indian specu- 
lation in accommodation bills. But: 

“Mr. Baker enters into very interesting details respecting the in- 
creased demand, in the last few years, for cotton, wool, and flax, 
owing to the great extension of these trades. He considers the in- 
creased demand for these raw materials, occurring, as it has, ata 
period when the produce has fallen much below an average supply, 
as almost sufficient, even without reference to the monetary derange- 
ment, to account for the present state of these branches. This 
opinion is fully confirmed, by my own observations, and conver- 
sation with persons well acquainted with trade. Those several 
branches were all in a very depressed stale, while discounts were 
readily obtained at and under 5 per cent. The supply of raw silk 
has, on the contrary, been abundant, the prices moderate, and the 
trade, consequently, very active, till ... the last two or three weeks, 
when there is no doubt the monetary derangement has affected 
not only the persons actually engaged in the manufacture, but more 
extensively still, the manufacturers of fancy goods, who were great 
customers to the throwster. A reference to published returns shows 
that the cotton trade had increased nearly 27 per cent in the last 
three years. Cotton has consequently increased, in round numbers, 
from 4d. to Gd. per Ib., while twist, in consequence of the increased 
supply, is yet only a fraction above its former price. The woollen 
trade began its increase in 1836, since which Yorkshire has in- 
creased its manufacture of this arlicle 40 per cent, but Scotland exhib- 
its a yet greater increase. The increase of the worsted trade'® is 
still larger. Calculations give a result of upwards of 74 per cent in- 
crease within the same period. The consumption of raw wool has 
therefore been immense. Flax has increased since 1839 about 25 

6 A sharp distinction is made in England between woollen manufacture, 
which spins carded yarn from short wool and weaves it (main centre Leeds), 
and worsted manufacture, which makes worsted yarn from long .wool and weaves 
it (main seat Bradford, in Yorkshire).—F. £. 

124 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

per cent in England, 22 per cent in Scotland. and nearly 90 per cent 
in Ireland;’* the consequence of this, in connexion with bad crops. 
has been that the raw material has gone up £10 per ton, while the 
price of yarn has fallen 6d. a bundle.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
Oct. 1847, pp. 30-31.) ; 

1849. Since late in 1848 business revived. “The price of fax 
which has been so low as to almost guarantee a reasonable 
profit under any future circumstances, has induced the manu- 
facturers to carry on their work very steadily.... The woollen 
manufacturers were exceedingly busy for a while in the early part of 
the year,... [ fear that consignments of woollen goods often take the 
place of real demand, and that periods o!f apparent prosperity, i.e., 
of full work, are not always periods of legitimate demand. In some 
months the worsted has been exceedingly good, in fact flourishing... 
At the commencement of the period referred to, wool was exceedingly 
low: what was bought by the spinners was well bought, and no doubt 
in considerable quantities. When the price of wool rose with the 
spring wool sales, the spinner had the advantage, and the demand 
for manufactured goods becoming considerable and imperative, 
they kept it.” (Revorts of Insp. of Fact., 1849, p. 42.) 

“If we look at the variations in the state of trade, which have oc- 
curred in the manufacturing districts of the kingdom for a period 
now ol between three and four years, I think we must admit the exist- 
ence of a great disturbing cause somewhere ... but may not the 
immensely productive power of increased machinery have added 
another element to the same cause?” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
April 1849, pp. 42, 43.) 

In November 1848, and in May and summer of 1849, right up to 
October, business flourished. “The worsted stuff of trade, of which 
Bradford and Halifax are the great hives of industry, has been the 
one most active; this trade has never before reached anything like 
the extent, to which it has now attained... Speculation, and 
uncertainty as to the probable supply of cotton wool, have ever 
had the effect of causing greater excitement, and more frequent 
alterations in the state of that branch ol manufacture, than any 
other. There is... at present an accumulation in stock of the coarser 
kinds of cotton goods, which creates anxiety on the part of the 
smaller spinners, and is already acting to their detriment, having 
caused several of them to work their mills short time.” (Reports 
of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1849, Pp. 64-65.) 

; oe ues ay Pf output of Taine ade linen yarn in Ireland dealt 
ath: Ovexports of linen made of hand-mad i ilesi 
Lusatia, and Westphalia).—F. £. a a 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 125 

1850. April. Business continued brisk. The exception: “The great 
depression in a part of the cotton trade ... attributable to the scarcity 
in the supply of the raw material more especially adapted to the 
branch engaged in spinning low numbers of cotton yarns, or manu- 
facturing heavy cotton goods. A [ear is entertained that the increased 
machinery built recently for the worsted trade, may be followed 
with a similar reaction. Mr. Baker computes that in the year 1849 
alone the worsted looms have increased their produce 40 per cent, 
and the spindles 25 or 30 per cent, and they are still increasing at 
the same rate.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1850, p. 54.) 

1850. October. “The high price of raw cotton continues ... to cause 
a considerable depression in this branch of manufacture, especially 
in those descriptions of goods in which the raw material constitutes 
a considerable part of the cost of production.... The great advance 
in the price of raw silk has likewise caused a depression in many 
branches of that manufacture.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 
1850, p. 14.) 

And on pages 31 and 33 of the same report we learn that the Com- 
mittee of the Royal Society for the Promotion and Improvement 
of the Growth of Flax in Ireland predicted that the high price of 
flax, together with the low level of prices for other agricultural 
products, ensured a considerable increase in flax production in ihe 
ensuing year. 

1853. April. Great prosperity. L. Horner says in his report: “At 
no period during the last seventeen years that I have been offi- 
cially acquainted with the manufacturing districts in Lancashire 
have I known sich general prosperity; the activity in every branch 
is extraordinary.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1853, p.-19.) 

1858. October. Depression in the cotton industry. “Over-produc- 
tion.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1853, p. 15.) 

1854. April. “The woollen trade, although not brisk, has given 
full employment to all the [actories engaged upon that fabric, and 
a similar remark applies to the cotton factories. The worsted trade 
generally has been in an uncertain and unsatisfactory condition 
during the whole of the last half-year.... The manufacture of flax 
and hemp are more likely to be seriously impeded, by reason of the 
diminished supplies of the raw materials from Russia due to the 
Crimean war.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 1854, p. 37.) 

1859. “The trade in the Scottish flax districts still continues 
depressed—the raw material being scarce, as well as high in price; 
and the inferior quality of the last year’s crop in the Baltic, from 
whence come our principal supplies, will have an injurious effect 
on the trade of the district; jute, however, which is gradually su- 

126 CONVERSION OF SURDLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

perseding flax in many of the coarser fabrics, is neither unusually 
high in price, nor scarce in quantity ... about one halt of the machin- 
ery in Dundee is now employed in jute spinning. (Reports of 
Insp. of Fact., April 1859, p. 19.)}—“Owing to the high price of 
the raw material, flax spinning is still far from remunerating, and 
while all the otlier mills are going full time, there are several instances 
of the stoppage of flax machinery.... Jute spinning is... in a 
rather more satisfactory slate, owing to the recent decline in the 
price of material, which has now fallen to a very moderate point.” 
(Reports of Insp. of Fact,, Oct. 1859, p. 20.) 

1861-64, American Civil] War. Cotton Famine. The Greatest 
Example of an Interruption in the Production Process through 
Searcily and Dearness of Raw Material 

1860. April. “With respect to the stale of trade, I am happy to be 
able to inform you that, notwithstanding the high price af raw ma- 
terial, all the textile manufacturers, with the exception of silk, 
have been fairly busy during the past half-year.... In some of the 
cotton districts hands have been advertised for, and have migrated 
thither from Norfolk and other rural countries.... There appears to 
be, in every branch of trade, a great scarcity of raw material. It 
is ... the want of it alone, which keeps us within bounds. In the cot- 
ton trade, the erection of new mills, the formation of new systems 
oi extension, and the demand [or hands, can scarcely, | think, have 
been at any time exceeded. Everywhere there are new movements in 
search of raw material.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1860, p. 57.) 

1860, October. “The state of trade in the cotton, woollen, and flax 
districts has been good; indeed in Ireland, it is stated to have been 
‘very good’ for now more than a year; and that it would have been 
still better, but for the high price of raw material. The flax spin- 
ners appear to be looking wiih more anxiety than ever to the opening 
out of India by railways, and to the development of its agriculture, 
for a supply of flax which may be commensurate with their wants.” 
{Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1860, p. 37.) 

1861. April. “The state of trade is at present depressed... 
A few cotton mills are running short time, and many silk milis are 
only partially employed. Raw material is high. In almost every 
branch of textile manulacture it is above the price at which it can 
be manufactured for the masses of the consumers.” (Reports of 
Insp. of Fact., April 1861, p. 33.) 

It had become evident that in 1860 the cotton industry had over- 
produced. The effect of this made itself felt during {he next few 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 127 

years. “It has taken between two and three years to absorb the over- 
production of 1860 in the markets of the world.” (Reports of Insp. 
of Fact., December 1863, p. 127.) “The depressed state of the markets 
for cotton manufactures in the East, early in 1860, had a corre- 
sponding effect upon the trade of Blackburn, in which 30,000 
power-looms are usually employed almost exclusively in the produc- 
tion of cloth to be consumed in the East. There was consequently 
but a limited demand for labour for many months prior to the effects 
ol the cotton blockade being Jelt.... Fortunately this preserved many 
ol the spinners and manulacturers from being involved in the 
common ruin. Stocks increased in value so long as they were held, 
and there had been consequently nothing like that alarming de- 
Treciation in the value of property which might not unreasonably 
have been looked for in such a crisis.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
Oct. 1862, pp. 29, 31.) 

. 1861. October. “Trade has been Jor some time in a very depressed 
state.... It is not improbable indeed that during the winter months 
many establishments will be found to work very short time. This 
might, however, have been anticipated... irrespective of the causes 
which have interrupted our usual supplies of cotton from America 
and our exports, short time must have been kept during the ensuing 
winter in consequence of the great increase of production during 
ihe last three years, and the unsettled state of the Indian and Chi- 
nese markets.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1861, p. 19.) 

Cotton Waste. East Indian Cotton (Surat). Influence on the Wages 
of Labourers. Improvement of Machinery. Adding Starch Flour 
and Mineral Substitutes to Cotton. Effect of Starch Flour Sizing 
on Labourers. Manufacturers of Finer Yarn Grades. 
Manufacturers’ Fraud. 

“A manufacturer writes to me thus: ‘As to estimates of consump- 
tion per spindle, I doubt if you take sulficiently into calculation the 
fact that when cotton is high in price, every spinner of ordinary 
yarns (say up to 40s.) (principally 12s. to 32s.) will raise his counts 
as much as he can, ihat is, will spin 16s. where he used to spin 12s., 
or 29s. in the place of 16s., and so on; and the manufacturer using these 
fine yarns will make his cloth the usual weight by the addition of 
¢o much tore size. The trade is availing itself of this resource at 
present to an extent which is even discreditable. I have heard on 
good authority of ordinary export shirting weighing 8 lbs. which 
was made of 5'/, Ibs. colton and 2°/, Ibs. size.... In cloths of other 
descriptions as much as 50 per cent size is sometimes added; so 
that a manufacturer may and does truly boast that he is getting 

128 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

rich by selling cloth for less nioney per pound than he paid for the 
mere yarn of which they are composed.’ ” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
April 1864, p. 27.) 

“I have also received statements that the weavers attribute 
increased sickness to the size which is used in dressing the warps 
of Surat cotton, and which is not made of the same material as for- 
merly, viz., flour. This substitute for flour is said, however, to have 
the very important advantage of increasing greatly the weight of the 
cloth manufactured, making 15 lbs. of the raw material to weigh 
20 Its. when woven into cloth.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., 
Oct. 1863. This substitute was ground talcum, called China clay, 
or gypsum, called French chalk.) “The earnings of the weavers 
(meaning the operatives) are much reduced from the employment 
ol substitutes for flour as sizing for warps. This sizing, which gives 
weight to the yarn, renders it hard and brittle. Each thread of the 
warp in the loom passes through a part of the loom called ‘a heald’, 
which consists of strong threads to keep the warp in its proper place, 
and the hard state of ihe warp causes the threads of the heald to 
break frequently; and it is said to take a weaver five minutes to tie 
up the threads every time they break; and a weaver has to piece these 
ends at least ten times as often as formerly, thus reducing the pro- 
ductive powers of the loom in the working-hours.” (/bid., pp. 42-43.) 

“In Ashton, Stalybridge, Mossley, Oldham, etc., the reduction cf 
the time has been fully one-third, and the hours are lessening every 
week.... Simultaneously with this diminution of time there is also 
a reduction of wages in many departments.” (Reports of Insp. of 
Fact., Oct. 1861, pp. 12-13.) Early in 186] there was a strike among 
the mechanical weavers in some parts of Lancashire. Several 
manufacturers had announced a wage reduction of 5 to 7.5%. 
The operatives insisted that the wage scale remain the same while 
working-hours were reduced. This was not granted, and a strike 
was called. A month later, the operatives had to give in. But then 
they got both. “In addition to the reduction of wages to which the 
operatives at last consented, many mills are now running short 
time.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1861, p. 23.) 

1862. April. “The sufferings of the operatives since the date of 
my last report have greatly increased; but at no period of the history 
of manufactures, have sufferings so sudden and so severe been borne 
with so much silent resignation and so much patient self-respect.” 
(Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1862, p. 10.} “The proportionate 
number of operatives wholly out of employment at this date appears 
not to be much larger than it was in 1848, when there was an ordi- 
nary panic of sufficient consequences to excite alarm amongst the 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 129 

manufacturers, so much as to warrant the collection of similar sta- 
tistics of the state of the cotton trade as are now issued weekly... 
In May 1848, the proportion of cotton operatives out of work in 
Manchester out of the whole number usually employed was I5 per 
cent, on short time 12 per cent. whilst 70 per cent were in full work. 
On the 28th of May of the present year, of the whole number of 
persons usually employed 15 per cent were out of work, 35 per cent 
were onshort time, and 49 per cent were working full time.... Insome 
other places, Stockport for example, the averages of short time and 
of non-employment are higher, whilst those of full time are less,” 
because coarser numbers are spun there than in Manchester (p. 16). 

1862. October. “I find by the last return to Parliament that there 
were 2,887 cotton factories in the United Kingdom in 1861, 2,109 of 
them being in my district (Lancashire and Cheshire). | was aware 
that a very large proportion of the 2,109 factories in my district were 
small establishments, giving employment to few persons, but I have 
been surprised to find how large that proportion is. In 392, or 19 per 
cent, the steam-engine or water-wheel is under 10 horse-power; in 
345, or 16 per cent, the horse-power is above 10 and under 20; and 
in 1,372 the power is 20 horses and more.... A very large proportion 
of these smal] manulacturers—being more than a third of the whole 
number—were operatives themselves at no distant period: they 
are men without command of capilal.... The brunt of the burden 
then would have to be borne by the remaining two-thirds.” (Re- 
ports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1862, pp. 18. 19.) 

According to the same report, 40.146, or 11.3%, of the cotton 
employees in Lancashire and Cheshire were then working full time; 
134.767, or 38%, were working short time; and 179,721, or 50.7%, 
were unemployed. After deducting the returns from Manchester 
and Bolton, where mainly fine grades were spun, a line relatively 
little aflected by the cotton famine, the matter looks still more un- 
favourable; namely, fully employed 8.5%, partly employed 38%, 
and unemployed 53.5% (pp. 19 and 20). 

“Working up good or bad cotton makes a material difference to 
the operative. In the earlier part of the year, when manufacturers 
were endeavouring to keep their mills at work by using up all the 
moderately priced cotton they could obtain, much bad cotton was 
brought into mills in which good cotton was ordinarily used. and 
the difference to the operatives in wages was so great that many 
strikes took place on the ground that they could not make a fair 
day’s wages at the old rates.... In some cases, although working 
full time, the difference in wages from working bad cotton was as 
much as one half” (p. 27). 

6 — 2757 

130 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

1863. April. “During the present year there will not be full employ- 
ment for much more than one half of the cotton operatives in the 
country.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., April 1863, p. 14.) 

“A very serious objection to the use of Surat cotton, as manulac- 
turers are now compelled to use it, is that the speed of the machin- 
erv must be greatly reduced in the processes of manufacture. For 
some years past every effort has been made to increase the speed of 
machinery, in order to make the same machinery produce more work; 
and the reduction of the speed becomes therefore a question which 
affects the operative as well as the manufacturer; for the chief part 
of the operatives are paid by the work done; for instance, spinners 
are paid per Ib, for the yarn spun, weavers per piece for the number 
of pieces woven; and even with the other classes of operatives paid 
by the week there would be a diminution of wages in consideration 
ol the less amount of goods produced. From inquiries I have made, 
and statements placed in my hands. of the earnings of cotton oper- 
atives during the present year, I find there is a diminution aver- 
aging 20 per cent upon their former earnings, in some instances 
the diminution has been as much as 50 per cent, calculated upon 
the same rate of wages as prevailed in 1861” (p. 13). “...The sum 
earned depends upon ... the nature of the material operated upon... 
The position of the operatives in regard to the amount of their earn- 
ings is very much better now (October 1863) than it was this time 
last year. Machinery has improved, the material is better understood, 
and the operatives are able better to overcome the difficulties they 
had to contend with at first. I remember being in a sewing school 
(a charity institution for unemployed) at Preston last spring, when 
two young women, who had been sent to work at a weaving shed 
the day before, upon the representation of the manufacturer that 
they could earn 4s. per week, returned to the school to be readmitted, 
complaining that they could not have earned ls. per week. 1 have 
been informed of ‘self-acting minders’ ... men who manage a pair 
of self-acting mules, earning at the end of a lortnight’s full work 
8s. Ild., and that from this sum was deducted the rent of the house, 
the manufacturer, however, returning half the rent as a gilt. (How 
generous!) The minders took away the sum of 6s. Ild. In many places 
the sell-acting minders ranged from 5s. to 9s. per week, and the 
weavers from 2s. to 6s. per week in the last months of 1862.... At the 
present time a much more healthy state of things exists, although 
there is still a great decrease in the earnings in most districts... 
There are several causes which have tended to the reduction of earn- 
ings, besides the shorter staple of the Surat cotton and its dirty 
condition; for instance, it is now the practice to mix ‘waste’ largely 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 131 

with Surat, which consequently increases the difficulties of the 
spinner or minder. The threads, from their shortness of fibre, are 
more liable to break in the drawing out of the mule and in the 
twisting of the yarn, and the mule cannot be kept so continuously in 
motion.... Then, Irom the great attention required in watching the 
threads in weaving, many weavers can only mind one loom, and 
very few can mind more than two looms.... There has been a direct 
reduction of 5, 744 and !0 per cent upon the wages of the operatives. .., 
In the majority of cases the operative has to make the best of his 
material, and to earn the best wages he can at the ordinary rates... 
Another dilficully the weavers have sometimes to contend with 
is, that they are expected to produce well-finished cloth Irom 
inferior materials, and are subject to fine for the flaws in their 
work.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1863, pp. 41-43.) 

Wages were miserable, even where work was [ull lime. The 
cotton workers willingly offered themselves for all public works 
such as drainage, road-building, stone-breaking and street-paving, 
in which they were employed, to get their keep Irom the authorities 
(although this practically amounted to assistance to the manufac- 
turer. See Book I, S. 598/589*). The whole bourgeoisie stood 
guard over the labourers. Were the worst dog’s wages offered, and 
a labourer refused to accept them, the Relief Committee would 
strike him from its lists. It was in a way a golden age for the manu- 
facturers, for the Jabourers had either to starve or work at a price 
most profitable for the bourgeois. The Relief Committees acted 
as watch-dogs. At the same time, the manufacturers acted in secret 
agreement with the government to hinder emigration as much as 
possible, partly to retain in readiness the capita! invested in the 
flesh and blood ol the labourers, and partly to safeguard the house- 
rent squeezed out of the labourers. 

“The Relief Committees acted with great strictness upon this 
point. If work was offered, the operatives to whom it was proposed 
were struck off the lists, and thus compelled to accept the offer. 
When they objected to accept work ... the cause has been that their 
earnings would have been merely nominal, and the work exceedingly 
severe.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1863. p. 97.) 

The operatives were willing to perform any work given lo them 
under the Public Works Act. “The principle upon which industrial 
employments were organized varied considerably in different towns, 
but in those places even in which the outdoor work was not abso- 
lutely a labour test the manner in which labour was remunerated 

* English edition: pp. 574-75.—&d. 
6* 

132 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

by its being paid for either at the exact rate of relief, or closely 
approximating the rate, it became in fact a labour test” (p. 69). 
“The Public Works Act of 1863 was intended to remedy this incon- 
venience, and to enable the operative to earn his day’s wages as an 
independent labourer. The purpose of this Act was three-fold: 
firstly, to enable local authorities to borrow money of the Excheq- 
ver Loan Commissioners (with consent of the President of the 
Central Relief Committee); secondly, to facilitate the improvement 
of the towns of the cotton districts; thirdly, to provide work and 
remunerative wages to the unemployed operatives.” Loans to the 
amount of £883,700 had been granted under this Act up to the end 
of October 1863 (p. 70).The works undertaken were mainly canali- 
zation. road-building, street-paving, water-works reservoirs, etc. 

Mr. Henderson, president of the committee in Blackburn, wrote 
with reference to this to factory inspector Redgrave: “Nothing in 
my experience, during the present period of suflering and distress, 
has struck me more forcibly or given me more satisfaction, than the 
cheerful alacrity with which the unemployed operatives of this 
district have accepted of the work offered to them through the adop- 
tion of the Public Works Act, by the Corporation of Blackburn. 
A greater contrast than that presented between the cotton spinner 
as a skilled workman ina factory, and as a labourer in a sewer 14 
or 18 feet deep, can scarcely be conceived.” (Depending on the size 
of his family, he earned 4 to 12s. per week, this enormous 
amount providing sometimes for a family of eight. The townsmen 
derived a double profit from this. In the first place, they secured 
money to improve their smoky and neglected cities at exceptionally 
low interest rates. In the second place, they paid the labourers far 
less than the regular wage.) “Accustomed as he had been to a tem- 
perature all but tropical, to work at which agility and delicacy 
of manipulation availed him infinitely more than muscular strength 
and to double and sometimes treble the remuneration which it is 
possible for him now to obtain, his ready acceptance of the proffered 
employment involved an amount of self-denial and consideration 
the exercise of which is most creditable. In Blackburn the men have 
been tested at almost every variety of outdoor work; in excavating 
a stiff heavy clay soil to aconsiderable depth, in draining, in stone- 
breaking, in toad-making, and in excavating for street sewers to a 
depth of 14, 16, and sometimes 20 feet. In many cases while thus 
employed they are standing in mud and water to the depth of 10 or 
12 inches, and in all they are exposed to a climate which, for chilly 
humidity is not surpassed I suppose, even if it is equalled, by that 
of any district in England” (np. 91-92). “The conduct of the opera- 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 133 

tives has been almost blameless, and their readiness to accept and 
make the best of outdoor Jabour” (p. 69). 

1864. April. “Complaints are occasionally made in different dis- 
tricts of the scarcity of hands, but this deficiency is chiefly felt in 
particular departments, as, for instance, of weavers.... These com- 
plaints have their origin as much from the low rate of wages which 
the hands can earn owing to the inferior qualities of yarn used, as 
from any positive scarcity of workpeople even in that particular 
department. Numerous differences have taken place during the 
past month between the masters of particular mills and their oper- 
atives in respect of the wages. Strikes, ] am sorry to say, are but 
too [requently resorted to, ... the effect of the Public Works Act is 
felt as a competition by the mill-owners. The local committee at 
Bacup has suspended operations, for although all the mills are not 
running, yet a scarcity of hands has been experienced.” (Reports 
of Insp. of Fact., April 1864, pp. 9, 10.) It was indeed high time for 
the manufacturers. Due to the Public Works Act the demand for 
labour grew so strong thal many a factory hand was earning 4 to 5 
shillings daily in the quarries of Bacup. And so the public works 
were gradually suspended—this new edition of the A feliers natio- 
naux of 1848, but this time instituted in the interests of the bour- 
geoisie. 

Experiments in corpore vilt 

“Although 1 have given the actua! earnings of the operatives 
(fully employed} in several mills, it does not follow that they earn 
the same amount week by week. The operatives are subject to great 
fluctuation, from the constant experimentalizing of the manulactur- 
ers upon different kinds and proportions of cotton and waste in the 
same mill, the ‘mixings’ as it is called, being frequently changed; 
and the earnings of the operatives rise and fall with the quality of 
the cotton mixings; sometimes they have been within 15 per cent 
of former earnings, and then in a week or two, they have lallen from 
50 to 60 per cent.” Inspector Redgrave. who makes this report, then 
proceeds to cile wage figures taken from actual practice, of which 
the following examples may suffice: 

A, weaver, family of 6, employed 4 days a week, 6s. 8.5d.; 
B, twister, employed 4.5 days a week, 6s.; C, weaver, family ol 4, 
employed 5 days a week, 5s. Id.; D, slubber, family of 6, employed 
4 days a week, 7s. 10d.; E, weaver, family of 7, employed 3 days a 
week, 5s., etc. Redgrave continues: “The above returns ate deserv- 
ing of consideration, for they show that work would become a mis- 
fortune in many a lamily, as it not merely reduces the income, but 

134 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

brings it so low as to be utterly insulficient to provide more than a 
small portion of the absolute wants, were it not that supplemental 
relief is granted to operatives when the wages of the family do not 
reach the sum that would be given to them as relief, if they were all 
unemployed.” (Reports of Insp. of Fact., Oct. 1863, pp. 50-53.) 

“In no week since the 5th of June last was there more than two 
days seven hours and a few minutes employment for all the workers.” 
(/id., p. 121.) 

From the beginning of the crisis to March 25, 1863, nearly three 
million pounds sterling were expended by the guardians, the Central 
Relief Committee, and the Mansion House Committee (ibid., p. 13). 

“In a district in which the finest yarn is spun ... the spinners suffer 
an indirect reduction of 15 per cent in consequence of the change 
from South Sea Island to Egyptian cotton.... In an extensive dis- 
trict, in many parts of which waste is largely used as a mixture with 
Surat ... the spinners have had a reduction of 5 per cent, and have 
lost from 20 to 30 per cent in addition, through working Surat and 
waste. The weavers are reduced from 4 looms to 2 looms. In 1860, 
they averaged 5s. 7d. per loom, in 1863, only 3s. 4d. The fines, which 
formerly varied from 3d. to 6d. (for the weaver) on American, now 
run up to from Is. to 3s. 6d.” In one district, where Egyptian cotton 
was used with an admixture of East Indian “the average of the mule 
spinners, which was in 1860 18s. to 25s., now averages [rom 10s. 
to 18s. per week, caused, in addition to inferior cotton, by the re- 
duction of the speed of the mule to put an extra amount of twist in 
the yarn, which in ordinary times would be paid for according to 
list” (pp. 43, 44). “Although the Indian cotton may have been 
worked to profit by the manufacturer, it will be seen (see the wage 
list on p. 58) that the operatives are sufferers compared with 1861, 
and if the use of Surat be confirmed, the operatives will want to 
earn the wages of 1861, which would seriously affect the profits of 
the manufacturer, unless he obtain compensation either in the price 
of the raw cotton or of his products” (p. 105). 

Afouse-Rent. “The rent is [requently deducted from the wages of 
operatives, even when working short time, by the manufacturers 
whose cottages they may be occupying. Nevertheless the value of 
this class of property has diminished, and houses may be obtained 
at a reduction of from 25 to 50 per cent upon the rent of the kouses 
in ordinary times; for instance, a cottage which would have cost 3s. 
6d. per week can now be had for 2s. 4d. per week, and sometimes 
even for less" (p. 57). 

_ Emigration. The employers were naturally opposed to emigra- 
tion of labourers, because, on the one hand, “looking forward to 

EFFECT OF PRICE FLUCTUATIONS 135 

the recovery of the cotton trade from its present depression, they 
keep within their reach the means whereby their mills can be worked 
in the most advantageous manner.” On the other hand, “many 
manulacturers are owners of the houses in which operatives employed 
in their mills reside, and some unquestionably expect to obtain a 
portion of the back rent owing” (p. 96). 

Mr. Bernall Osborne said in a speech to his parliamentary constit- 
uents on October 22, 1864, that the labourers of Lancashire had 
behaved like the ancient philosophers (Staics). Not like sheep? 

CHAPTER VII 
SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 

Suppose, as is assumed in this part, the amount of profit in 
any particular sphere of production equals the sum of the surplus- 
value produced by the total capital invested in that sphere. Even 
then the bourgeois will not consider his profit as identical with 
surplus-value, i. e., with unpaid surplus-labour, and. 1o be sure, 
for the following reasons: 

\) In the process of circulation he forgets the process of produc- 
tion. He thinks that surplus-value is made when he realizes the 
value of commodities, which includes realization of their surplus- 
value, [A blank space which [follows in the manuscript, indicates 
that Marx intended to dwell in greater detail on this point.—F. E.] 

2) Assuming a uniform degree of exploitation, we have seen that 
regardless of all modifications originating in the credit system. re- 
gardless of the capitalists’ efforts to outwit and cheat one another, 
and, lastly, regardless of any favourable choice of the market—the 
rate of profit may differ considerably, depending on the low or high 
prices of raw materials and the experience of the buyer, on the 
relative productivity, efficiency and cheapness of the machinery, 
on the greater or lesser efficiency of the aggregate arrangement in 
the various stages of the productive process, elimination of waste, 
the simplicity and efficiency of management and supervision, etc. 
In short, given the surplus-value for a certain variable capital, it 
still depends very much on the individual business acumen of the 
capitalist, or of his managers and salesmen, whether this same sur- 
plus-value is expressed in agreater or smaller rate of profit, and ac- 
cordingly yields a greater or smaller amount of profit. Let the same 
surplus-value of £1,000, the product of £1,000 in wages, obtain 
in enterprise A for a constant capital of £9,000, and in enterprise 

B for £11,000. In case A we have pram or 10%. Incase B we 

»_ 1,000 , 
have p’=75-99q: oF 8'/,%. The total capital produces relatively more 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 137 

profit in enterprise A than in B, because of a higher rate of profit, 
although the variable capital advanced in both cases=£1,000 
and the surplus-value produced by each likewise=£1,000, so that 
in both cases there exists the same degree of exploitation of the same 
number of labourers. This difference in the presentation of the same 
mass of surplus-value, or the difference in the rates of profit, and 
therefore in the profit itself, while the exploitation of labour is 
the same, may also be due to other causes. Still, it may also be due 
wholly to a difference in the business acumen with which both 
establishments are run. And this circumstance misleads the capital- 
ist, convinces him that his profits are not due to exploiting labour, 
but, at least in part, to other independent circumstances, and par- 
ticularly his individual activity. 

The analyses in this first part demonstrate the incorrectness of the 
view (Rodbertus) according to which (as distinct [rom ground-rent, 
in which case, for example, the area ol real estate remains the same 
and vet the rent rises) a change in the magnitude of an individual 
capital is supposed to have no influence on the ratio of profit to 
capital, and thus on the rate of profit, because i! the mass of profit 
should grow, so does the mass of capital upon which it 1s calculated, 
and vice versa. 

This is true only in two cases. First, when—assuming that all other 
circumstances, especially the rate of surplus-value, remain un- 
changed—there isa change in the valueol that commodity which isa 
money-commodity. (The same occurs in a merely nominal change 
of value, the rise or fall of mere tokens of value, other conditions 
being equal.) Let the total capital=g100, and the profit=£20, 
the rate of profit being=20% . Should gold double, or fall by half, 
the same capital previously worth only £100, will be worth £200 if 
it rises, and the profit wil! be worth £40, 1. e., it will be expressed 
in so much money instead of the former £20: if it falls. the capital 
of £100 will be worth only £50, and the profit will be represented 
by a product, whose value will be £10. But ineither case 200:40= 
==50:10=100:20=20%. In all these examples there would, how- 
ever, have been no actual change in the magnitude of capita!-value, 
and only in the money-expression of the same value and the same 

. s 7 
surplus-value. For this reason =~, or the rate ol profit, could not be 

Cc 
affected. 
In the second case there is an actual change of magnitude in the 
value, but unaccompanied by a change in the ratio of v toc; in 

138 CONVERSION OF SURPLUS-VALUE INTO PROFIT 

other words, with a constant rate of surplus-value the relation of 
capital invested in labour-power (variable capital considered as an 
index of the amount of labour-power set in motion) to the capital 
invested in means of production remains the same. Under these 

circumstances, no matter whether we have C, or nC, or—, &.g., 

1,000, or 2,000, or 500, and the rate of profit being 20%, the profit = 
=200 in the first case, =400 in the second, and-=100 in the third. 
But 200:1,000=400:2,000=100:500=20%. That is to say, the rate 
of profit is unchanged, because the composition of capital remains 
the same and is not affected by the change in magnitude. Therefore, 
an increase of decrease in the amount ol profit shows merely an in- 
crease or decrease in the magnitude of the invested capital. 

In the first case there is, therefore, but the appearance of a change 
in the magnitude of the employed capital, while in the second case 
there is an actual change in magnitude, but no change in the organ- 
ic composition of the capital, i.e., in the relative proportions of 
its variable and constant portions. But with the exception of these 
two cases, a change in the magnitude of the employed capital is 
either the resuwif of a preceding change in the value of one ol its 
components, and therefore of a change in the relative magnitude 
of these components (as long as the surplus-value itself does not 
change with the variable capital); or, this change of magnitude (as 
in labour-processes on a large scale, introduction of new machinery, 
etc.) is the cause of a change in the relative magnitude of its two 
organic components. In all these cases, other circumstances remain- 
ing the same, a change in the magnitude of the employed capital 
must therefore be accompanied simultaneously by a change in the 
rate of profit. 

A rise in the rate of profit is always due to a relative or absolute 
increase of the surplus-value in relation to its cost of production, 
i.e., to the advanced total capital, or to a decrease in the difference 
between the rate of profit and the rate of surplus-value. 

_ Fluctuations in the rate of profit may occur irrespective of changes 
in the organic components of the capital, or of the absolute 
magnitude of the capital, through a rise or fall in the value of the 
fixed or circulating advanced capital caused by an increase or 4 
reduction of the working-time required for its reproduction, this 
increase or reduction taking place independently of the already exist- 
ing capital. The value of every commodity—thus also of the commod- 
ities making up the capital—is determined not by the necessary 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 139 

Jabour-time contained in it, but by the social labour-time required 
for its reproduction. This reproduction may take place under un- 
favourable or under propitious circumstances, distinct from the 
conditions of original production. If, under altered conditions, it 
takes double or, conversely, hall the time, to reproduce the same 
material capital, and if the value of money remains unchanged, a 
capital formerly worth £100 would be worth £200, or £50 respec- 
tively. Should this appreciation or depreciation affect all parts of 
capital uniformly, then the profit would also be accordingly expressed 
in double, or half, the amount of money. But il it involves a 
change in the organic composition of the capital, if the ratio of the 
variable to the constant portion of capital rises or falls, then, other 
circumstances remaining the same, the rate of profit will rise with 
arelatively rising variable capital and fall with a relatively falling 
one. If only the money-value of the advanced capital rises or falls 
(in consequence of a change in the value of money), then the money- 
expression of the surplus-value rises, or falls, in the same proportion. 
The rate of profit remains unchanged. 

eee 

PART If 

CONVERSION OF PROFIT 
INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

CHAPTER VIII 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITION OF CAPITALS 
IN DIFFERENT BRANCHES OF PRODUCTION 
AND RESULTING DIFFERENCES IN RATES OF PROFIT 

In the preceding part we demonstrated, among other things, 
that the rate ol profit may vary—tise or fall—while the rate of 
surplus-value remains the same. In the present chapter we assume 
that the intensity of labour exploitation, and therefore the rate of 
surplus-value and the length of the working-day, are the same in 
all the spheres of production into which the social labour of a given 
country is divided. Adam Smith has already comprehensively shown 
that the numerous differences in the exploitation of labour in vari- 
ous spheres of production balance one another by means of all 
kinds of existing compensations. or compensations accepted as such 
on the basis of current prejudice, so that they are merely evanescent 
distinctions and are of no moment in a study of the general rela- 
tions. Other differences, for instance those in the wage scale, rest 
largely on the difference between simple and complicated labour 
mentioned in the beginning of Book | (S. 19*), and have nothing to 
do with the intensity of exploitation in the different spheres of pro- 
duction, although they render the lot of the labourer in those spheres 
very unequal. For instance, if the labour of a goldsmith is better 
paid than that of a day-labourer, the former’s surplus-labour pro- 
duces proportionately more surplus-value than the latter's. And 
although the equalizing of wages and working-days, and thereby of 
the rates of surplus-value, among different spheres of production, 

* English edition: p. 44,—Ed. 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 141 

and even among different investments of capital in the same sphere 
of production, is checked by all kinds of local obstacles, it is never- 
theless taking place more and more with the advance of capitalist 
production and the subordination of all economic conditions to 
this mode of production. The study of such frictions, while impor- 
tant to any special work on wages, may be dispensed with as inci- 
dental and irrelevant in a general analysis of capitalist production. 
In a general analysis of this kind it is usually always assumed that 
the actual conditions correspond to their conception, or, what is 
the same, that actual conditions are represented only to the extent 
that they are typical of their own general case. 

The difference in the rates of surplus-value in different countries, 
and consequently the national differences in the degree of exploita- 
tion of labour, are immaterial for our present analysis, What we want 
to show in this part is precisely the way in which a general rate of 
profit takes shape in any given country. It is evident, however, 
that a comparison of the various national rates of profit requires 
only a collation of the previously studied with that which is here 
to be studied. First one should consider the differences in the nation- 
al rates of surplus-value, and then, on the basis of these given 
rates, a comparison should be made of the diflerences in the national 
rates of profit. In so far as those differences are not due to differences 
in the national rates of surplus-value, they must be due to cir- 
cumstances in which the surplus-value is assumed, just as in the 
analysis of this chapter, to be universally the same, i.e., constant. 

We demonstrated in the preceding chapter that, assuming the 
rate of surplus-value to be constant, the rate of profit obtaining 
for a given capital may rise or fall in consequence of circumstances 
which raise or lower the value of one or the other portion of constant 
capital, and so affect the proportion between the variable and con- 
stant components of capital. We further observed that circumstances 
which prolong or reduce the time of turnover of an individual capi- 
tal may similarly influence the rate of profit. Since the mass ol the 
profit is identical with the mass of the surplus-value, and with the 
surplus-value itself, it was also seen that the mass of the profit—as 
distinct from the rafe of profit—is not affected by the aforemen- 
tioned fluctuations of value. They only modify the rate in which a 
given surplus-value, and therefore a profit of a given magnitude, 
express themselves; in other words, they modily only the relative 
magnitude of profit, i.e., its magnitude compared with the magni- 
tude of the advanced capital. Inasmuch as capital was tied up or 
released by such fluctuations of value, it was not only the rate of 
profit, but the profit itself, which was likely to be affected in this 

142 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

indirect manner. However, this has then always applied only to such 
capital as was already invested, and not to new investments. Besides, 
ihe increase or reduction of profit always depended on the extent 
{o which the same capital could, in consequence of such fluctuation 
of value, set in motion more or less labour; in other words, it depend- 
ed on the extent to which the same capital could, with the rate of 
surplus-value remaining the same, obtain a larger or smaller amount 
of surplus-value. Far from contradicting the general rule, or from 
being an exception to it, this seeming exception was really but a 
special case in the application of the general rule. 

It was seen in the preceding part that, the degree of exploitation 
remaining constant, changes in the value of the component parts of 
constan capital and in the time of turnover of capital are attend- 
ed by changes in the rate of profit. The obvious conclusion is that 
the rates of profit in different spheres of production existing side by 
side have to differ when, other circumstances remaining unchanged, 
the time of turnover of capitals employed in the different spheres 
differs, or when the value-relation of the organic components 
of these capitals differs in the various branches of production. What 
we previously regarded as changes occurring successively with one 
and the same capital is now to be regarded as simultaneous differ- 
ences among capital investments existing side by side in different 
spheres of production. 

In these circumstances we shal! have to analyse: 1) the difference 
in the organic composition of capitals, and 2) the difference in their 
period of turnover. 

The premise in this entire analysis is naturally that by speaking 
of the composition or turnover of a capital in a certain line of pro- 
duction we always mean the average normal proportions ol capital 
invested in this sphere, and generally the average in the total capital 
employed in that particular sphere, and not the accidental differ- 
ences of the individual capitals. 

Since it is further assumed that the rate of surplus-value and the 
working-day are constant, and since this assumption also implies 
constant wages, a certain quantity of variable capital represents a 
definite quantity of labour-power set in motion, and therefore a def- 
inite quantity of materialized labour. If, therefore, £100 repre- 
sent the weekly wage of 100 labourers, indicating 100 actual labour- 
powers, then n times £100 indicate the labour-powers of n times 

100 
100 labourers, and £19 those of ee labourers. The variable 

capital thus serves here (as is always the case when the wage is giv- 
en) as an index of the amount of labour set in motion by a definite 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 143 

total capital. Differences in the magnitude of the employed varia- 
ble capitals serve, therefore, as indexes of the diference in the amount 
of employed labour-power. If £100 indicate 100 labourers per week, 
and represent 6,000 working-hours at 60 working-hours per week, 
then £200 represent 12,000, and £50 only 3,000 working-hours. 

By composition of capital we mean, as stated in Book I, 
the proportion of its active and passive components, i.e., of vari- 
able and constant capital. Two proportions enter into consideration 
under this heading. They are not equally important, although they 
may produce similar eflects under certain circumstances. 

The first proportion rests on a technical basis, and must be regard- 
ed as given at a certain stage of development of the productive forces. 
A definite quantity of labour-power represented by a definite 
number of labourers is required to produce a definite quantity of 
products in, say, one day, and—what is self-evident—thereby to 
consume productively, i.e.,,to sel in motion, a definite quantity 
of means of production, machinery, raw materials, etc. A definite 
number of labourers corresponds to a definite quantity of means 
oi production, and hence a definite quantity of living labour to a 
definite quantity of labour materialized in means of production. 
This proportion differs greatly in different spheres of production, 
and [requently even in different branches of one and the same indus- 
try, although it may by coincidence be entirely or approximately the 
same in entirely separate lines of industry. 

This proportion forms the technical composition of capital and 
is the real basis of its organic composition. 

However, it is also possible that this first proportion may be the 
same in different lines of industry, provided variable capital is 
merely an index of labour-power and constant capital merely an 
index of the mass of means of production set in motion by this la- 
bour-power. For instance, certain work in copper and iron may re- 
quire the same ratio of labour-power to mass of means of production. 
But since copper is more expensive than iron, the value-relation 
between variable and constant capital is different in each case, and 
hence also the value-composition of the two total capitals. The dil- 
ference between the technical composition and the value-composi- 
tion is manifested in each branch ak indusley in that the value-rela- 
tion of the two portions of capital may vary while the technical 
composition is constant, and the value-relation may remain the 
same while the technical composition varies. The latter case will, 
ol course, be possible only if the change in the ratio of the employed 
masses of means of production and labour-power is compensated by 
a reverse change in their values. 

144 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

The value-composition of capital, inasmuch as it is determined 
by, and reflects, its technical compesition, is called the organic 
composition of capital. *° a 

In the case of variable capital, therefore, we assume that it is 
the index of a definite quantity of labour-power, or of a definite 
number of labourers, or a definite quantity of living labour set in 
motion. We have seen in the preceding part that a change in the 
magnitude of the value of variable capital might eventually indi- 
cate nothing but a higher or lower price of the same mass of Jabour. 
But here, where the rate of surplus-value and the working-day are 
taken to be constant, and the wages for a definite working period are 
given, this is out of the question. On the other hand, a difference in 
the magnitude of the constant capital may likewise be an index of 
a change in the mass of means of production set in motion by a def- 
inite quantity of labour-power. But it may also stem from a differ- 
ence in value between the means of production set in motion in 
one sphere and those of another. Both points of view must therefore 
be examined here. 

Finally, we must take note of the following essential facts: 

Let £100 be the weekly wage of 100 labourers. Let the weekly 
working-hours=60. Furthermore, let the rate of surplus-value= 
100%. In this case, the labourers work 30 of the 60 hours for them- 
selves and 30 hours gratis for the capitalist. In fact, the £100 of 
wages represent just the 30 working-hours of 100 labourers, or alto- 
gether 3,000 working-hours, while the other 3,000 hours worked by 
the Jabourers are incorporated in the £100of surplus-value, or in 
the profit pocketed by the capitalist. Although the wage of £100 
does not, therefore, express the value in which the weekly labour of 
the 100 labourers is materialized, it indicates nevertheless (since 
the length of the working-day and the rate of surplus-value are giv- 
en) that this capital sets in motion 100 labourers for 6,000 working- 
hours. The capital of £100 indicates this, first, because it indicates 
the number of labourers set in motion, with £1=1 labourer per 
week, hence £100=100 labourers; and, secondly, because, since the 
rate of surplus-value is given as 100%, each of these labourers per- 
forms twice as much work as is contained in his wages, so that £1, 
i.e., his wage, which is the expression of half a week of labour, actu- 
ates a whole week’s labour, just as £100 sets in motion 100 weeks of 

** The above has already been briefly developed in the third edition of Book 1 
in the beginning of Kap. XXIII, S. 628 [English edition: beginning of Ch. XXV,p. 
612.— Ed.). Since the two first editions do not contain that passage, its repetition 
here is all the more desirable. —F. E 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 145 

labour, although it contains only 50. A very essential distinction 
is thus to be made in regard to variable capital laid out in wages. 
Its value as the sum of wages, i.e., as a certain amount of material- 
ized labour, is to be distinguished from its value as a mere index of 
the mass of living labour which it sets in motion. The latter is al- 
ways greater than the labour which it incorporates, and is, there- 
fore, represented by a greater value than that of the variable capi- 
ta!. This greater value is determined, on the one hand, by the num- 
ber of labourers set in motion by the variable capital and, on the 
other, by the quantity of surplus-labour performed by them. 

It follows from this manner of looking upon variable capital 
that: 

When a capital invested in production sphere A expends only 
100 in variable capital for each 700 of total capital, leaving 600 for 
constant capital. while a capital invested in production sphere B 
expends 600 for variable and only 100 for constant capital, then 
capital A of 700 sets in motion only 100 of labour-power, or, in 
the terms of our previous assumption, 100 weeks of labour, or 6,000 
hours of living labour, while the same amount of capital B will 
set in motion 600 weeks ol labour, or 36,000 hours of living labour. 
The capital in A would then appropriate only 50 weeks of labour, 
or 3,000 hours of surplus-labour, while the same amount of capital 
in B would appropriate 300 weeks of labour, or 18,000 hours. Vari- 
able capital is not only the index of the labour embodied in it. 
When the rate of surplus-value is known it is also an index of the 
amount of labour set in motion over and above that embodied 
in itself, i.e., of surplus-labour. Assuming the same intensity of 

exploitation, the profit in the first case would be 1 ="/, = 147/,%, 

. 0g ; ; 
and in the second case, 9” = 7, =85°/,%, or a six-fold rate of 

profit. In this case, the profit itself would actually be six times as 
great, 600 in B as against 100 in A, because the same capital set in 
motion six times as much living labour, which at the same level of 
exploitation means six limes as much surplus-value, and thus six 
times as much profit. 

But if the capital invested in A were not 700 but £7,000, while 
that invested in B were only £700, and the organic composition 
of both were to remain the same, then the capital in A would employ 
£1,000 of the £7,000 as variable capital, that is, 1,000 labourers 
per week 60,000 hours of living labour, of which 30,000 would be 
surplus-labour. Yet each £700 of the capital in A would continue 
to set in motion only one-sixth as much living labour, and hence 

146 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

only one-sixth as much surplus-labour, as the capital in B, and 
would produce only one-sixth as much profit. If we consider the 
rate of profit, then in A ae = = 147/,%, as compared with 
a or 85°/,%, in B. Taking equal amounts of capital, the rates 
of profit differ because, owing to the different masses of living la- 
bour set in motion, the masses of surplus-value, and thus of profit, 
differ, although the rates of surplus-value are the same. 

We get practically the same result if the technical conditions are 
the same in both spheres of production, but the value of the ele- 
ments of the employed constant capital is greater or smaller in the 
one than in the other. Let us assume that both invest £100 as varia- 
ble capital and therefore employ 100 labourers per week to set in 
motion the same quantity of machinery and raw materials. But let 
the latter be more expensive in B than in A. For instance, let the 
£100 of variable capital set in motion £200 of constant capital 
in A, and £400 in B. With the same rate of surplus-value, of 100%, 
the surplus-value produced is in either case equal to £100. Hence, 
the profit is also equal to £100 in both. But the rate of profit in A 
: 100 ik brag reals. 100 
i$ 309, - 100, = ie = 33'/,%, while in B it is 700, 100, = /s=20%. 
In iact, if we select a certain aliquot part of the total capital in 
either case, we find that in every £100 of B only £20, or one-filth, 
constitute variable capital, while in every £100 of A £33'/,, or one- 
third, form variable capital. B produces less profit [or each £100, 
because it sets in motion less living labour than A. The difference 
in the rates ol profit thus resolves itself once more, in this case, 
into a difference of the masses of profit, because of the masses of 
surplus-value, produced by each 100 of invested capital. 

The difference between this second example and the first is just 
this: The equalization between A and B in the second case would 
require only a change in the value of the constant capital of either 
A or B, provided the technical basis remained the same. But in 
the first case the technical composition itself is different in the two 
spheres of production and would have to be completely changed to 
achieve an equalization. 

The different organic composition of various capitals is thus in- 
dependent of their absolute magnitude. It is always but a ques- 
aan how much of every 100 is variable and how much constant 
capital. 

Capitals of different magnitude, calculated in percentages, or, 
what amounts to the same in this case, capitals of the same magni- 
tude operating for the same working-time and with the same de- 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 147 

gree of exploitation may produce very much diflerent amounts of 
Profit, because of surpius-value, for the reason that a difference in 
the organic composition of capital in different spheres of production 
implies a difference in their variable part, thus a difference in the 
quantities of living labour set in motion by them, and therefore 
also a difference in the quantities of surplus-labour appropriated by 
thei. And this surplus-labour is the substance of surplus-value, and 
thus of profit. In different spheres of production equal portions of 
the total capital comprise unequal sources of surplus-value, and 
the sole source of surplus-value is living labour. Assuming the same 
degree of labour exploitation, the mass of labour set in motion by a 
capital of 100, and consequently the mass of surplus-labour appro- 
priated by it, depend on the magnitude of its variable component. 
If a capital, consisting in percent of 90.+10,, produced as much 
surplus-value, or profit, al the same degree of exploitation as a 
capital consisting of 10.+90,, it would be as plain as day that the 
surplus-value, and thus value in general, must have anentirely dif- 
ferent source than labour, and that political economy would then be 
deprived of every rational basis. If we are to assume all the time 
that £1 stands for the weekly wage of a labourer working 60 hours, 
and that the rate of surplus-value is 100%, then it is evident that 
the total value-product of one labourer in a week, is € 2. Ten la- 
bourers would then produce no more than £20. And since £10 of 
the £20 replace the wages, the ten labourers cannot produce more 
surplus-value than £10. On the other hand, 90 labourers, whose 
total product is £180, and whose wages amount to £90, would pro- 
duce a surplus-value of £90. The rate of profit in the first case would 
thus be 10%, and in the other 90%. If this were not so, then value 
and surplus-value would be something else than materialized 
Jabour. Since capitals in different spheres of production viewed in 
percentages—or as capitals of equal magnitude—are divided difler- 
ently into variable and constant capital, setting in motion unequal 
quantities of living labour and producing different surplus-values, 
and therefore profits, it follows that the rate of profit, which con- 
sists precisely of the ratio of surplus-value to total capital in per 
cent, must also differ. 2 

Now, if capitals in different spheres of production, calculated in 
per cent, i.e., capitals of equal magnitude, produce unequal prof- 
its in consequence of their different organic composition, then it 
follows that the profits of unequal capitals in different spheres of 
Production cannot be proportional to their respective magnitudes, 
or that profits in different spheres of production are not proportion- 
al to the magnitude of the respective capitals invested in them. 

148 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

For if profits were to grow pro ra/a to the magnitude of invested 
capital, it would mean that in per cent the profits would be the 
same, so that in different spheres of production capitals of equal mag- 
nitude would have equal rates of profit, in spite of their different 
organic composition. It is only in the same sphere of production, 
where we have a given organic composition of capital, or in differ- 
ent spheres with the same organic composition of capital, that the 
amounts of profits are directly proportional to the amounts of in- 
vested capitals. To say thal the profits of unequal capitals are pro- 
portional to their magnitudes would only mean that capitals of 
equal magnitude yield equal profits, or that the rate of profit is 
the same for all capitals, whatever their magnitude and organic 
composition. 

These statements hold good on the assumption that the commodi- 
ties are sold at their values. The value of a commodity is equal to 
the value of the constant capital contained in it, plus the value of 
the variable capital reproduced in it, plus the increment—the 
surplus-value produced—of this variable capital. At the same rate 
of surplus-value, its quantity evidently depends on the quantity 
ol the variable capital. The value of the praduct of an individual 
capital of 100 is, in one case, 90,+-10y +10,=110; and in the other, 
10,+90, +90,=190. If the commodities go at their values, the 
first product is sold at 110, of which 10 represent surplus-value, or 
unpaid labour, and the second at 190, of which 90 represent surplus- 
value, or unpaid labour. 

This is particularly important in comparing rates of profit in 
different countries. Let us assume that the rate of surplus-value in 
one European country is 100%, so that the labourer works half of 
the working-day for himself and the other half for his employer. 
Let us further assume that the rate of profit in an Asian country is 
25%, so that the labourer works four-fifths of the working-day for 
himself, and one-fifth for his employer. Let 84,116, be the compo- 
sition of the national capital in the European country, and 
16,.+84, in the Asian country, where little machinery, etc., 
is used, and where a given quantity of labour-power consumes 
relatively little raw material productively in a given time. Then 
we have the following calculation: 

In the European country the value of the product=84 +16, + 
+16,=116; rate of profit= (16%. 

In the Asian country the value of the product =16,+-84y + 

+21,=121; rate of profit =F7 21%. 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 149 

The rate of profit in the Asian country is thus more than 25% 
higher than in the European country, although the rate of surplus- 
value in the former is one-fourth that of the Jatter. Men like Carey, 
Bastiat, and ¢u/ti quanti, would arrive at the very opposite conclu- 
sion. 

By the way, diflerent national rates of profit are mostly based on 
different national rates of surplus-value. But in this chapter we com- 
a unequal rates of profit derived from the same rate of surplus- 
value. 

Aside from differences in the organic composition of capitals, 
and therefore aside from the diflerent masses of labour—and conse- 
quently, other circumstances remaining the same, from different 
masses of surplus-labour set in motion by capitals of the same mag- 
nitude in different spheres of production, there is yet another source 
of inequality in rates of profit. This is the different period of 
turnover of capital in different spheres of production. We have seen 
in Chapter IV that, other conditions being equal, the rates of profit 
ol capitals of the same organic composition are inversely proportion- 
al to their periods of turnover. We have also seen that the same 
variable capital turned over in diflerent periods of time produces 
different quantities of annual surplus-value. The difference in the 
periods of turnover is therefore another reason why capitals of equal 
magnitude in different spheres of production do not produce equal 
profits in equal periods, and why, consequently, the rates of profit 
in these different spheres differ. 

As far as the ratio of the fixed and circulating capital in the compo- 
sition of capitals is concerned, however, it does not in itself affect 
the rate of profit in the least. It can affect the rate of profit only if 
in one case, this difference in composition coincides with a different 
ratio of the variable and constant parts, so that the difference in the 
rate ol profit is due to this latter difference, and not to the diferent 
ratio of fixed and circulating capital; and, in the other case, if 
the difference in the ratio of the fixed and circulating parts of capi- 
tal is responsible for a difference in the period of turnover in which 
a certain profit is realized. If capitals are divided into fixed and 
circulating capital in different proportions, this will naturally al- 
ways influence the period of turnover and cause differences in it. 
But this does not imply that the period of turnover, in which the 
same capitals realize certain profits, is different. For instance, A 
may continually have to convert the greater part of its product into 
raw materials, etc., while B may use the same macliinery, etc., 
for a longer time, and may need less raw material, but both A and B, 
being occupied in production, always bave a part of their capital 

150 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

engaged, the one in raw materials, i.e., in circulating capital, and 
the other in machinery, etc., or in fixed capital. A continually 
converts a portion of its capital from the form of commodities into 
that of money, and the latter again into the form of raw material, 
while B employs a portion of its capital for a longer time as an in- 
strument of labour without any such conversions. If both of them em- 
ploy the same amount of labour, they will indeed sell quantities 
of products of unequal value in the course of the year, but both quan- 
tities of products will contain equal amounts of surplus-value, and 
their rates of profit, calculated on the entire capital invested, will 
be thesame, although their composition of fixed and circulating 
capital, and their periods of turnover, are different. Both capitals 
realize equal profits in equal periods, although their periods of turn- 
over are different.*! The difference in the period of turnover is in 
itself of no importance, except so far as it affects the mass of sur- 
plus-labour appropriated and realized by the same capital in a giv- 
en time. If, therefore, a different division into fixed and circulating 
capital does not necessarily imply a different period of turnover, 
which would in its turn imply a different rate of profit, it is evident 
that if there is any such difference in the rates of profit, it is not due 
to a different ratio of fixed to circulating capital as such, but rather 
to the fact that this different ratio indicates an inequality in the 
periods of turnover affecting the rate of profit. 

It follows, therefore, that the different composition of constant 
capital in respect to its fixed and circulating portions in various 
branches of production has in itself no bearing on the rate of profit, 
since it is the ratio of variable to constant capital which decides 
this question, while the value of the constant capital, and therefore 
also its magnitude in relation to the variable is entirely unrelated 
to the fixed or circulating nature of its components. Yet it may be 
found—and this often leads to incorrect conclusions—that wher- 
ever fixed capital is considerably advanced this but expresses the 

1 [It follows from Chapter IV that the above statement correctly applies 
only when capitals A and B are differently composed in respect to their values, 
but that the percentages of their variable parts are proportionate to their periods 
of turnover, i.e., inversely proportionate to their number of turnovers. Let 
capital A have the following percentages of composition: 20, fixed+ 70, circulat- 
ing, and thus 90.+ 10,=100. At a rate of surplus-value of 100% the 10, produce 
10, in one turnover, yielding arate of profit lor one turnover=10%. Let capital 
B= 60, fixed+ 20, circulating, and thus 80,+-20,=100. The 20, produce 20, in 
one turnover at the above rate of surplus-value, yielding a rate of profit for one 
turnover=20% , which is double that of A. But if/A is turned over twice per year, 
and B only once, then 2x 10 also make 20, per year, and the annual rate of prof- 
it is the same for both, namely 20%.—F. E.] 

DIFFERENT COMPOSITIONS OF CAPITALS 151 

fact that production is on a large scale, so that constant capital 
greatly outweighs the variable, or that the living labour-power it 
employs is small compared to the mass of the means of production 
which it operates. 

We have thus demonstrated that different lines of industry have 
different rates of profit, which correspond to differences in the organ- 
ic composition of their capitals and, within indicated limits, also 
to their different periods of turnover; given the same time of turn- 
over, the law (as a general tendency) that profits are related to one 
another as the magnitudes of the capitals, and that, consequently, 
capitals of equal magnitude yield equal profits in equal periods, 
applies only to capitals of the same organic composition, even with 
the same rate of surplus-value. These statements hold good on the 
assumption which has been the basis of all our analyses so far, 
namely that the commodities are sold at their values. There is no 
doubt, on the other hand, that aside [rom unessential, incidental 
and mutually compensating distinctions, diflerences in the average 
rate of profit in the various branches of industry do not exist in 
reality, and could not exist without abolishing the entire system of 
capitalist production. It would seem, therefore, that here the theory 
of value is incompatible with the actual process, incompatible with 
the real phenomena of production, and that for this reason any at- 
tempt to understand these phenomena should be given up. 

It follows from the first part of this volume that the cost-prices 
of products in different spheres of production are equal if equal 
portions of capital have been advanced for their production, how- 
ever different the organic composition of such capitals. The distinc- 
tion between variable and constant capital escapes the capitalist in 
the cost-price. A commodity for whose production he must advance 
£100 costs him just as much, whether he invests 90.+-10,, or 
10,+90,. It costs him £100 in either case—no more and no less. 
The cost-prices are the same for equal capitals in different spheres, 
no matter how much the produced values and surplus-values may 
differ. The equality of cost-prices is the basis for competition among 
invested capitals, whereby an average profit is brought about. 

CHAPTER IX 

FORMATION OF A GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 
(AVERAGE RATE OF PROFIT) 
AND TRANSFORMATION OF THE VALUES 
OF COMMODITIES 
INTO PRICES OF PRODUCTION 

The organic composition ol capital depends at any given time on 
two circumstances: first, on the technical relation of labour-power 
employed to the mass of the means of production employed; second- 
ly, on the price of these means of production. This composition, as 
we have seen, must be examined on the basis of percentage ratios. 
We express the organic composition of a certain capital consisting 
* of constant and',, of variable capital, by the formula 80,+-20,. 
It is furthermore assumed in this comparison that the rate of sur- 
plus-value is unchangeable. Let it be any rate picked at random; 
say, 100°. The capital of 80.1-20, then produces a surplus-value 
of 20,, and this yields a rate of profit of 20% on the total capital. 
The magnitude of the actual value of its product depends on the 
magnitude of the fixed part of the constant capital, and on the por- 
tion which passes irom it through wear and tear into the product. 
But since this circumstance has absolutely no bearing on the rate 
ol profit, and hence, in the present analysis, we shall assume, for the 
sake ol simplicity, that the constant capital is everywhere uniformly 
and entirely transferred to the annual product of the capitals. It is 
further assumed that the capitals in the different spheres of produc- 
tion annually realize the same quantities of surplus-value propor- 
tionate to the magnitude of their variable parts. For the present, 
therefore, we disregard the difierence which may be produced in 
this respect by variations in the duration of turnovers. This point 
will be discussed later. 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 153 

Let us take five different spheres of production, and let the 
ae in each have a different organic composition as fol- 
ows: 

copie | Ranged Sue | Saygiae | Yatae | Bau 

I, 80,+20, 100% 20 120 20% 
II. 70,430, 100% 30 130 30% 
II]. 60,+40, 100% 40 140 40% 
IV, 85.+15, 100% 15 115 15% 
V. 95. + 5, 100%, 5 105 5% 

Here, in different spheres of production with the same degree 
of exploitation, we find considerably different rates of profit 
corresponding to the different organic composition of these 
capitals. 

The sum total of the capitals invested in these five spheres of 
production=500; the sum total of the surplus-value produced by 
them=110; the aggregate value of the commodities produced by 
them=610. If we consider the 500 as a single capital, and capitals 
I to V merely as its component parts (as, say, different departments 
of acotton-mill, which has different ratios of constant to variable 
capital in its carding, preparatory spinning, spinning, and weaving 
shops, and in which the average ratio for the [actory as a whole 
has still to be calculated), the mean composition of this capital of 
500 would=390,4+110,, or, in per cent,=78,-+-22,. Should each 
of the capitals of 100 be regarded as one-filth of the total capital, 
its composition would equal this average of 78.+22,; for every 
100 there would be an average surplus-value of 22; thus, the average 
rate of profit would=22%, and, finally, the price of every fifth 
of the total product produced by the 500 would=122. The product 
of each filth of the advanced total capita! would then have to be 
sold at 122. 

But to avoid entirely erroneous conclusions it must not be as- 
sumed that ali cost-prices= 100. 

With 80,420, and a rate of surplus-value=100%, the total 
value of commodities produced by capital 1=100 would be 
80,-++-20,+20,=120, provided the entire constant capital went 
into the annual product. Now, this may under certain circumstances 
be the case in some spheres of production. But hardly in cases where 

154 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

the proportion of c:v=4:1. We must, therefore, remember in com- 
paring the values produced by each 100 of the different capitals, 
that they will differ in accordance with the different composition 
of cas to ils fixed and circulating parts, and that, in turn, the fixed 
portions of each of the different capitals depreciate slowly or rapid- 
ly as the case may be, thus transferring unequal quantities of their 
value to the product in equal periods of time. But this is immate- 
rial to the rate of profit. No matter whether the 80, give up a value 
of 80, or 50, or 5, to the annual product, and the annual product 
consequently =80.+20,4-20,=120, or 50.+20,+20.=90, or 
5.+20,+20, = 45; in all these cases the redundance of the product’s 
value over its cost-price=20, and in calculating the rate of profit 
these 20 are related to the capital of 100 in all of them. The rate of 
profit of capital I, therefore, is 20% in every case. To make this 
still plainer, we let different portions of constant capital go into 
the value of the product of the same five capitals in the following 
table: 

: Rate of | surptus- | Rate | used | Value | cost. 
Capitals Surplus: Value Bont upc orem Price 
1. 80,420, 100% 20 20% 50 90 70 
1] 70,+-30, 100% 30 30% 51 LIL 81 
HT. 60,--40, 100% 40 40% 5l 131 91 
1V. 85.415, 100% 15 15% | 40 70 55 
V. 95.4- 5y 100% 5 5% | 10 20 15 
390.4110, = M40 10% — | — | = Jtota 
78,422, — 92 | 92%] — = = ne 

If we now again consider capitals I to V as a single total capital, 
we shal] see that, in this case as well, the composition of the sums 
ol these five capitals =500=390.+110,, so that we get the same 
average composition=78,+22,, and, similarly, the average 
surplus-value remains 22%. If we divide this surplus-value uni- 
formly among capitals I to V, we get the following commodity- 
prices: 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATR OF PROFIT 155 

s | 2] 2] 2 

> ea gS Eo 

Capitals 3 ene ae 2 

S ge ae £ 

se we 2 

5% >s 8S 8 
I. 80,4-20, 20 90 70 9: 22% e12) 
I]. 70;,+30, 30 1st 8l 103 22" —868 
IIL. 60,140) 40 131 91 113 "22.6 —18 
TV. 85,-++ 5, 15 70 55 77 22% +7 
V. 95.4- 5y 5 20 15 37 22% +17 

Taken together, the commodities are sold at 2+7+17=26 above, 
and 8+-18=26 below their value, so that the deviations of price 
from value balance out one another through the uniform distribu- 
tion of surplus-value, or through addition of the average profit of 
22 per 100 units of advanced capital to the respective cost-prices 
of the commodities I to V. One portion of the commodities is sold 
above its value in the same proportion in which the other is sold 
below it. And it is only the sale of the commodities at such prices 
that enables the rate of profit for capitals I to V to be uniformly 
22%, regardless of their different organic composition. The prices 
which obtain as the average of the various rales of profit in the differ- 
ent spheres of production added to the cost-prices of the different 
spheres of production, constitute the prices of production. They have 
as their prerequisite the existence of a general rate of profit, and 
this, again, presupposes that the rates of profit in every individual 
sphere of production taken by itself have previously been reduced 

to just as many average rates. These particular rates of profit == 

in every sphere of production, and must, as occurs in Part { of this 
book, be deduced out of the values of the commodities. Without 
such deduction the general rate of profit (and consequently the 
price of production of commodities) remains a vague and senseless 
conception. Hence, the price of production of a commodity is 
equal to its cost-price plus the profit, allotted to it in per cent, in 
accordance with the general rate of profit, or, in other words, to 
its cost-price plus the average profit. 

Owing to the different organic compositions of capitals invested 
in different lines of production, and, hence, owing to the circum. 
stance that—depending on the different percentage which the vari. 
able part makes up in a total capital of a given magnitude—capi. 

156 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

tals of equal magnitude put into motion very different quantities 
of labour, they also appropriate very different quantities of sur- 
plus-labour or produce very different quantities of surplus-value. 
Accordingly, the rates of profit prevailing in the various branches of 
production are originally very different. These different rates ol profit 
are equalized by competition to a single general rate of profit, 
which is the average of all these different rates of profit. The profit 
accruing in accordance with this general rate of profit to any capi- 
tal of a given magnitude, whatever its organic composition, is 
called the average profit. The price of a commodity, which is equal 
to its cost-price plus the share of the annual average profit on the 
total capital invested (not merely consumed) in its production that 
falls to it in accordance with the conditions of turnover, is called 
its price ol production. Take, for example, a capital of 500, of which 
100 is fixed capital, and let 10% of this wear out during one turn- 
over of the circulating capital of 400. Let the average profit for 
the period of turnover be 10%. In that case the cost-price of the 
product created during this turnover will be 10, for wear plus 
400 (cv) circulating capital 410, and its price of production will 
be 410 cost-price plus (10% profit on 500) 50=460. 

Thus, although in selling their commodities the capitalists of 
the various spheres of production recover the value of the capital 
consumed in their production, they do not secure the surplus-val- 
ue, and consequently the profit, created in their own sphere by the 
production of these commodities. What they secure is only as much 
surplus-value, and hence profit, as falls, when uniformly distribut- 
ed, to the share of every aliquot part of the total social capital 
from the total social surplus-value, or profit, produced in a given 
time by the social capital in all spheres of production. Every 100 
of an invested capital, whatever its composition, draws as much 
profit in a year, or any other period of time, as falls to the share 
of every 100, the n’th part of the total capital, during the same 
period. So far as profits are concerned, the various capitalists are 
just sa many stockholders in a stock company in which the shares 
of profit are uniformly divided per 100, so that profits differ in the 
case of the individual capitalists only in accordance with the amount 
of capital invested by each in the aggregate enterprise, i.e., accord- 
ing to his investment in social production as a whole, accord- 
ing to the number of his shares. Therefore, the portion of the price 
of commodities which replaces the elements of capital consumed in 
the production of these commodities, the portion, therefore, which 
will have to be used to buy back these consumed capital-values, 
i.e., their cost-price, depends entirely on the outlay of capital 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 157 

within the respective spheres of production. But the other element 
ol the price of commodities, the profit added to this cost-price, 
does not depend on the amount of profit produced in a given sphere 
of production by a given capital in a given period of time. It de- 
pends on the mass of profit which falls as an average for any given 
period to each individual capital as an aliquot part of the tolal 
social capital invested in social production.?? 

When a capitalist sells his commodities at their price of produc- 
tion, therefore, he recovers money in proportion to the value of 
the capital consumed in their production and secures profit in 
proportion to his advanced capital as the aliquot part in the total 
social capital. His cost-prices are specific. But the profit added to 
them is independent of his particular sphere of production, being 
a simple average per 100 units of invested capital. 

Let us assume that the five different investments I to V of the 
foregoing illustration belong to one man. The quantity of variable 
and constant capital consumed per 100 of the invested capital in 
each of the departments I to V in the production of commodities 
would be known, and this portion of the value of the commodities 
I to V would, needless to say, make up a part of their price, since at 
least this price is required to recover the advanced and consumed 
portions of the capital. These cost-prices would therefore be differ- 
ent for each class of the commodities [ to V, and would as such be 
set differently by the owner. But as regards the different quantities 
of surplus-value, or profit, produced by 1 to V, they might easily 
be regarded by the capitalist as profit on his advanced aggregate 
capital, so that each 100 units would get their definite aliquot 
part. Hence, the cost-prices of the commodities produced 
in the various departments I to V would be different; but 
that portion of their selling price derived from the profit added per 
100 capital would be the same for all these commodities. The aggre- 
gate price of the commodities I to V would therefore equal their 
aggregate value, i.e., the sum of the cost-prices I to V plus the sum 
of the surplus-values, or profits, produced in I to V. It would hence 
actually be the money-expression of the total quantity of past and 
newly applied labour incorporated in commodities I to V. And in 
the same way the sum olf the prices of production of al! commodities 
produced in society—the totality of all branches of production—is 
equal to the sum of their values. : 

This statement seems to conflict with the fact that under capi- 
talist production the elements of productive capital are, as a rule, 

2 Cherbuliez. 

CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

158 

bought on the market, and that for this reason their prices include 
profit which has already been realized, hence, include the price of 
production of the respective branch ol industry together with the 
profit contained in it, so that the profit of one branch of industry 
goes into the cost-price of another. But if we place the sum of the 
cost-prices of the commodities of an entire country on one side, 
and the sum of its surplus-values, or profits, on the other, the cal- 
culation must evidently be right. For instance, take a certain com- 
modity A. Its cost-price may contain the profits of B, C, D, etc., 
just as the cost-prices of B, C, D, ete., may contain the profits of A. 
Now, as we make our calculation the profit of A will not be included 
in its cost-price, nor will the profits of B, C, D, etc., be included in 
theirs. Nobody ever includes his own profit in his cost-price. If 
there are, therefore, n spheres of production, and if each makes a 
profit amounting to p, then their aggregate cost-price=k—np. 
Considering the calculation as a whole we see that since the profits 
ol one sphere of production pass into the cost-price of another, they 
are therefore included in the calculation as constituents of the total 
price of the end-product, and so cannot appear a second time on 
the profit side. If any do appear on this side, however, then only be- 
cause the commodity in question is itself an ultimate product, whose 
price of production does not pass into the cost-price of some other 
commodity. 

If the cost-price of a commodity includes a sum=p, which stands 
for the profits of the producers of the means ol! production, and ifa 
profit=p, is added to this cost-price, the aggregate profit P=p-+p,. 
The aggregate cost-price of the commodity, considered without the 
profit portions, is then its own cost-price minus P. Let this cost- 
price be k. Then, obviously,k+-P=k+p+p,. In dealing with sur- 
plus-values, we have seen in Book I (Kap. VII, 2, S. 211/203)* that 
the product of every capital may be so treated, as though a part of 
it replaces only capital, while the other part represents only sur- 
plus-value. In applying this approach to the aggregate product of 
society, we must make some rectifications. Looking upon sociely as 
a whole, the profit contained in, say, the price of flax cannot appear 
twice—not both as a portion of the linen price and as the profit of 
the flax. 

There is no difference between surplus-value and profit, as long 
as, e.g., A’s surplus-value passes into B’s constant capital. It is, 
after all, quite immaterial to the value of the commodities, whether 
the labour contained in them is paid or unpaid. This merely shows 

* English edition: Ch. IX, 2, pp. 220-21,—£u. 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 159 

that B pays for A’s surplus-value. A's surplus-value cannot be 
entered twice in the total calculation. 

But the difference is this: Aside from the fact that the price ol a 
particular product, let us say that of capital B, differs from its 
value because the surplus-value realized in B may be greater or 
smaller than the profit added to the price of the products of B, the 
same circumstance applies also to those commodities which form 
the constant part of capital B, and indirectly also its variable 
part, as the labourers’ necessities of life. So far as the constant por- 
tion is concerned, it is itself equal to the cost-price plus the sur- 
plus-value, here therefore equal to cost-price plus profit, and this 
profit may again be greater or smaller than the surplus-value for 
which it stands. As for the variable capital, the average daily wage 
is indeed always equal to the value produced in the number of hours 
the labourer must work to produce the necessities of life. But this 
number of hours is in its turn obscured by the deviation of the 
prices of production of the necessities of life from their values. How- 
ever, this always resolves itself to one commodity receiving too little 
of the surplus-value while another receives too much, so that the 
deviations from the value which are embodied in the prices of pro- 
duction compensate one another. Under capitalist production, the 
genera! law acts as the prevailing tendency only in a very compli- 
cated and approximate manner, as a never ascertainable average of 
ceaseless fluctuations. 

Since the general rate of profit is formed by taking the average of 
the various rates of profit for each 100 of capital invested in a def- 
inite period, e.g., a year, it follows that in it the difference brought 
about by different periods of turnover of different capitals is also 
effaced. But these differences have a decisive bearing on the differ- 
ent rates of profit in the various spheres of production whose aver- 
age forms the general rate of profit. 

In the preceding illustration concerning the formation of the 
average rate of profit we assumed each capital in each sphere of 
production=100, and we did so to show the difference in the rates 
of profit in per cent, and thus also the difference in the values of 
commodities produced by equa! amounts of capital. But it goes 
without saying that the actual amounts of surplus-value produced 
in each sphere of production depend on the magnitude ol the invest- 
ed capitals, since the composition of capita! is given in each sphere 
of production. Yet the actual ruse of profit in any particular sphere 
of production is not affected by the fact that the capital invest- 
ed is 100, or m times 100, or xm times 100. The rate of profit 
remains 10%, whetlier the total profit is 10:100, or 1,000:10,000, 

160 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

However, since the rates of profit differ in the various spheres 
of production, with very much different quantities of surplus-val- 
ue, or profit, being produced in ihem, depending on the proportion 
ol the variable to the total capital, it is evident that the average 
profit per 100 of the social capital, and hence the average, or 
general, rate of profit, will differ considerably in accordance with 
the respective magnitudes of the capitals invested in the various 
spheres. Let us take four capitals A, B,C, D. Let the rate of surplus- 
value for all=100°. Let the variable capital for each 100 
oi the total be 25 in A, 40 in B, 15 inC, and 10 in D. Then each 100 
of the total capital would yield a surplus-value, or profit, of 25 in 
A, 40 in B, 15 inC, and 10 in D. This would total 90, and if these 
four capitals are of the same magnitude, the average rate of profit 

would then be = or 22% %%, 

Suppose, however, the total capitals are as follows: A=200, B=300, 
C=1,000, D=4,000. The profits produced would then respec- 
tively=50, 120, 150, and 400. This makes a profit of 720, and an 
average rate of profit of 13'/,,% for 5,500, the sum of the four 
capitals. 

The masses of the total value produced differ in accordance with 
the magnitudes of the total capitals invested in A, B,C, D, respec- 
tively. The formation of the average rate of profit is, therefore, not 
merely a matter of obtaining the simple average of the difierent 
rates of profit in the various spheres of production, but rather one 
of the relative weight which these different rates of profit have in 
forming this average. This, however, depends on the relative mag- 
nitude of the capital invested in each particular sphere, or on the 
aliquot part which the capital invested in each particular sphere 
forms in the aggregate social capital. There wil] naturally be a 
very great difference, depending on whether a greater or smaller 
part of the total capital produces a higher or lower rate of profit. 
And this, again, depends on how much capital is invested in spheres, 
in which the variable capital is relatively small or large compared 
to the total capital. It is just like the average interest obtained 
by a usurer who Jends various quantities of capital at different 
interest rates; for instance, at 4, 5, 6, 7%, etc. The average rate will 
depend entirely on how much of his capital he has loaned out at 
each of the different rates of interest. 

The general rate of profit is, therefore, determined by two [actors: 

1) The organic composition of the capitals in the different spheres 

of production, and thus, the different rates of profit in the individual 
spheres. 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 161 

2) The distribution of the total social capital in these different 
spheres, and thus, the relative magnitude of the capital invested 
in each particular sphere at the specific rate of profit prevailing in 
it; i. e., the relative share of the total social capital absorbed by each 
individual sphere of production. : 

In Books I and II we dealt only with the vatue of commodities, 
On the one hand, the cost-price has now been singled out as a part 
of this value, and, on the other, the price of production of commodi- 
ties has been developed as its converted form. 

Suppose the composition of the average social capital is 80.+ 
+20,, and the annual rate of surplus-value, s’, is 100%. In that 
case the average annual profit for a capital of 100=20, and 
the general annual rate of profit=20%. Whatever the cost-price, 
k, of the commodities annually produced by a capital of 100, their 
price of production would then be k-++20. In those spheres of pro- 
duction in which the composition of capital would=(80—x) .+- 
+(20-+x),, the actually produced surplus-value, or the annual 
profit produced in that particular sphere, would be 20+x, that is, 
greater than 20, and the value of the produced commodities =k-+-20+ 
+x, that is, greater than k+20, or greater than their price of pro- 
duction. In those spheres, in which the composition of the capital = 
=(80-1-x),1-(20—x),, the annually produced surplus-value, or prof- 
it, would=20—x, or less than 20, and consequently the value of 
the commodities k-+ 20—x less than the price of production, which= 
=i-+ 20. Aside from possible differences in the periods of turnover, 
the price of production of the commodities would then equal their 
value only in spheres, in which the composition would happen to 
be 80,+20,. 

The specific development of the social productivity of labour in 
each particular sphere of production varies in degree, higher or lower, 
depending on how large a quantity of means of production are set 
in motion by a definite quantity of labour, hence in a given work- 
ing-day by a definite number of labourers, and, consequently, on 
how small a quantity of labour is required for a given quantity of 
means of production. Such capitals as contain a larger percentage 
of constant and a smaller percentage of variable capital than the 
average social capital are, therefore, called capitals of Aigher com- 
position, and, conversely, those capitals in which the constant is 
relatively smaller, and the variable relatively greater than in the 
average social capital, are called capitals of fower composition. 
Finally, we call those capitals whose composition coincides with 
the average, capitals of average composition. Should the average 
social capital be composed in per cent of 80,+20,, then a capital 

7 2757 

162 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

of 90,410, is higher, and a capital of 701-30, lower than the 
social average. Generally speaking, if the composition of the 
average social capital=m,+-n,, in which m and n are constant 
magnitudes and m—n=100, the formula (m+x),+(n—x), repre- 
sents the higher composition, and (m—x),+(n+x), the lower 
composition of an individual capital or group of capitals. The 
way in which these capitals perform their functions alter establish- 
ment of an average rate of profit and assuming one turnover per 
year, is shown in the following tabulation, in which I represents 
the average composition with an average rate of profit of 20%. 
1) 80,+20,+20,. Rate of profit=20%. 
Price of product=120. Value=120. 
11) 90,+10,+-10,. Rate of profit=20%. 
Price of product=120. Value=110. 

IIT) 70,+-30,+30,. Rate of profit =20%. 

Price of product=120. Value=130. 

The valueof the commodities produced by capital II] would, there- 
fore, be smaller than their price of production, the price of pro- 
duction of the commodities of II] smaller than their value, and only 
in the case of capital I in branches of production in which the compo- 
sition happens to coincide with the social average, would value and 
price of production be equal. In applying these terms to any partic- 
ular cases note must, however, be taken whether a deviation of 
the ratio between c and v is simply due to a change in the value of 
the elements of constant capital, rather than to a difference in the 
technical composition. 

The foregoing statements have at any rate modified the original 
assumption concerning the determination of the cost-price of commod- 
ities. We had originally assumed that the cost-price of a commodity 
equalled the value of the commodities consumed in its production. 
But for the buyer the price of production of a specific commodity is 
its cost-price, and may thus pass as cost-price into the prices of other 
commoedities. Since the price of production may differ from the val- 
ue of a commodity, it follows that the cost-price of a commodity 
containing this price of production of another commodity may also 
stand above or below that portion of its total value derived from the 
value of the means of production consumed by it. It is necessary to 
remember this modified significance of the cost-price, and to bear 
in mind that there is always the possibility of an error if the cost- 
price of a commodity in any particular sphere is identified with the 
value of the means of production consumed by it. Our present analy- 
sis does not necessitate a closer examination of this point. It remains 
true, nevertheless, that the cost-price of a commodity is always 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 163. 

smaller than its value. For no matter how much the cost-price of 
a commodity may differ from the value of the means of production 
consumed by it, this past mistake is immaterial to the capitalist. 
The cost-price of a particular commodity is a definite condition 
which is given, and independent of the production of our capitalist, 
while the result of his production is a commodity containing surplus- 
value, therefore an excess of value over and above its cast-price. 
For all other purposes, the statement that the cost-price is smaller 
than the value of a commodity has now changed practically into 
the statement that thecost-price is smaller than the price of produc- 
tion, As concerns the total social capital, in which the price of 
production is equal to the value, this statement is identical with 
the former, namely that the cost-price is smaller than the value. 
And while it is modified in the individual spheres of production, 
the fundamental fact always remains that in the case of the total 
social capital the cost-price of the commodities produced by it is 
smaller than their value, or, in the case of the total mass of social 
commodities, smaller than their price of peter which is 
identical with their value. The cost-price of a commodity refers 
only to the quantity of paid labour contained in it, while its value 
refers to all the paid and unpaid labour contained in it. The price 
of production refers to the sum of the paid labour plus a certain 
quantity of unpaid labour determined for any particular sphere of 
production by conditions over which it has no control. 

The formula that the price of production of a commodity=k+p, 
i.e., equals its cost-price plus profit, is now more precisely defined 
with p=kp’ (p’ being the general rate of profit). Hence the price 
of production==k-+-kp’. If k=300 and p’=15%, then the price of 
production is k-+kp’=300+300x7>, or 345. 

The price of production of the commodities in any particular 
sphere may change in magnitude: 

1) If the general rate of profit changes independently of this par- 
ticular sphere, while the value of the commodities remains the same 
(the same quantities of congealed and living labour being consumed 
in their production as before). 

2) If there is a change of value, either in this particular sphere 
in consequence of technical changes, or in consequerice of a change 
in the value of those commodities which form the elements of its 
constant capital, while the general rate of profit remains un- 
changed. ; 

3) Finally, if a combination of the two aforementioned circum- 
stances takes place. 

q* 

164 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

In spite of the great changes occurring continually, as we shall 
see, in the actual rates of profit within the individual spheres of 
production, any real change in the general rate of profit, unless 
brought about by way of an exception by extraordinary economic 
events, is the belated effect of a series of fluctuations extending over 
very long periods, fluctuations which require much time before 
consolidating and equalizing one another to bring about a change in 
the general rate of profit. In all shorter periods (quite aside Irom 
fluctuations of market-prices), a change in the prices of production 
is, therefore, always traceable prima jacie to actual changes in the 
value of commodities, i.e., to changes in the total amount of la- 
bour-time required for their production. Mere changes in the money- 
expression of the same values are, naturally, not at all considered 
here.* 

On the other hand, it is evident that from the point of view of 
the total social capital the value of the commodities produced by it 
(or, expressed in money, their price)=value of constant capital+ 
value of variable capital+-surplus-value. Assuming the degree 
of labour exploitation to be constant, the rate of profit cannot 
change so long as the mass of surplus-value remains the same, un- 
less there is a change in either the value of the constant capital, 
the value of the variable capital, or the value of both, so that C 

changes, and thereby=, which represents the general rate of profit. 

In each case, therefore, a change in the general rate of profit implies 
a change in the value of commodities which form the elements of 
the constant or variable capital, or of both. 

Or, the general rate of profit may change, while the value of the 
commodities remains the same, when the degree of labour exploi- 
tation changes. 

Or, if the degree of labour exploitation remains the same, the 
general rate of profit may change through a change in the amount of 
labour employed relative to the constant capital as a result of tech- 
nical changes in the Jabour-process. But such technical changes 
must always show themselves in, and be attended by, a change in 
the value of the commodities, whose production would then require 
more or Jess labour than before. 

We saw in Part I that surplus-value and profit are identical from 
the standpoint of their mass. But the rate of profit is from the very 
outset distinct from the rate of surplus-value, which appears at 
first sight as merely a different form of calculating. But at the same 

™ Corbet, p. 174. 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 165 

time this serves, also [rom the outset, to obscure and mystify the 
actual origin of surplus-value, since the rate of profit can rise or fall 
while the rate of surplus-value remains the same, and vice versa, 
and since the capitalist is in practice solely interested in the rate 
of profit. Yet there was difference of magnitude only between the 
rate of surplus-value and the rate of profit and not between the 
surplus-value itself and profit. Since in the rate of profit the sur- 
plus-value is calculated in relation to the total capital and the latter 
is taken as its standard of measurement, the surplus-value itself 
appears to originate from the total capital, uniformly derived from 
all its parts, so that the organic diflerence between constant and 
variable capital is obliterated in the conception of profit. Disguised 
as profit, surplus-value actually denies its origin, loses its charac- 
ter, and becomes unrecognizable. However, hitherto the distinction 
between profit and surplus-value applied solely to a qualitative 
change, or change of form, while there was no rea! difference of mag- 
nitude in this first stage of the change between surplus-value and 
profit, but only between the rate of profit and the rate of surplus- 
value. 

But it is diflerent, as soon as a general rate of profit, and thereby 
an average profit corresponding to the magnitude of invested capi- 
tal given in the various spheres of production, have been established. 

It is then only an accident if the surplus-value, and thus the profit, 
actually produced in any particular sphere of production, coincides 
with the profit contained in the selling price of a commodity. As a 
rule, surplus-value and profit and not their rates alone, are then difler- 
ent magnitudes. At a given degree of exploitation, the mass of 
surplus-value produced in a particular sphere of production is then 
more important for the aggregate average profit of social capital, 
and thus for the capitalist class in general, than for the individual 
capitalist in any specific branch of production. It is of importance 
tothe latter** only in so far as the quantity of surplus-value produced 
in his branch helps to regulate the average profit. But this is a 
process which occurs behind his back, one he does not see, nor un- 
derstand, and which indeed does not interest him. The actual differ- 
ence of magnitude between profit and surplus-value—not merely 
between the rate of profit and the rate of surplus-value—in the va- 
rious spheres of production now completely conceals the true nature 
and origin of profit not only [rom the capitalist, who has a special 
interest in deceiving himself on this score, but also from the labour- 

24 We naturally leave aside for the moment the possibility of securing a 
temporary extra profit through wage teductions, monopoly prices, etc. . 

166 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROTIT 

er. The transformation of values into prices of production serves 
to obscure the basis for determining value itself. Finally, since the 
mere transformation of surplus-value into profit distinguishes the 
portion of the value of a commodity forming the profit from the 
portion forming its cost-price, it is natural that the conception of 
value should elude the capitalist at this juncture, for he does not 
see the total labour put into the commodity, but only that portion 
of the total labour for which he has paid in the shape of means of 
production, be they living or not, so that his profit appears to him 
as something outside the immanent value of the commodity. Now 
this idea is fully confirmed, fortified, and ossified in that, from the 
standpoint of his particular sphere of production, the profit added 
to the cost-price is not actually determined by the limits of the for- 
mation of value within his own sphere, but through completely 
outside influences. 

The fact that this intrinsic connection is here revealed for the 
first time; that up to the present time political economy, as we shall 
see in the following and in Book IV, either forcibly abstracted itself 
from the distinctions between surplus-value and profit, and their 
rates, so it could retain value determination as a basis, or else 
abandoned this value determination and with it all vestiges of a 
scientific approach, in order to cling to the differences that strike 
the eye in this phenomenon—this confusion of the theorists best 
illustrates the utter incapacity of the practical capitalist, blinded 
by competition as he is, and incapable of penetrating its phenomena, 
to recognize the inner essence and inner structure of this process 
behind its outer appearance. 

In fact, all the laws evolved in Part I concerning the rise and fall 
of the rate of profit have the following two-fold meaning: 

1) On the one hand, they are the laws of the genera! rate of profit. 
In view of the many different causes which make the rate of profit 
rise or fall one would think, alter everything that has been said and 
done, that the general rate of profit must change every day. But a 
trend in one sphere of production compensates for that in another, 
their effects cross and paralyse one another. We shall later examine 
to which side these fluctuations ultimately gravitate. But they are 
slow. The suddenness, multiplicity, and different duration of the 
fluctuations in the individual spheres of production make them com- 
pensate for one another in the order of their succession in time, a 
fall in prices following a rise, and vice versa, so that they remain lim- 
ited to local, i.e., individual, spheres. Finally, the various local 
fluctuations neutralize one another. Within each individual sphere 
of production, there take place changes, i.e., deviations from the 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 167 

general rate ol profit, which counterbalance one another in a definite 
time on the one hand, and thus have no influence upon the general 
rate of profit, and which, on the other, do not react upon it, because 
they are balanced by other simultaneous local fluctuations. Since 
the general rate of profit is not only determined by the average rate 
ol profit in each sphere, but also by the distribution of the total so- 
cial capital among the different individual spheres, and since this 
distribution is continually changing, it becomes another constant 
cause of change in the general rate of profit. But it is a cause of 
change which mostly paralyses itself, owing to the uninterrupted* 
and many-sided nature of this movement. 

2) Within each sphere, there is some room for play for a longer 
or shorter space of time, in which the rate of profit of this sphere 
may fluctuate, before this fluctuation consolidates sufficiently after 
rising or falling to gain time for influencing the general rate of prof- 
it and therefore assuming more than local importance. The laws 
‘of the rate of profit, as developed in Part I of this book, likewise 
remain applicable within these limits ol space and time. 

The theoretical conception concerning the first transformation 
of surplus-value into profit, that every part of a capital yields a 
uniform profit, 25 expresses a practical fact. Whatever the composi- 
tion of an industrial capital, whether it sels in motion one-quarter 
of congealed labour and three-quarters of living labour, or three- 
quarters of congealed Jabour and one-quarter of living labour, wheth- 
er in one case it absorbs three times as much surplus-labour, or 
produces three times as much surplus-value than in another—in 
either case it yields the same profit, given the same degree of labour 
exploitation and leaving aside individual differences, which, inci- 
dentally, disappear because we are dealing in both cases with the 
average composition of the entire sphere of production. The individ- 
ual capitalist (or all the capitalists in each individual sphere of 
production), whose outlook is limited, rightly believes that his 
profit is not derived solely from the labour employed by him, or 
in his line of production. This is quite true, as lar as his average 
profit is concerned. To what extent this profit is due to the aggregate 
exploitation of labour on the part of the total social capital, i.e., 
by all his capitalist colleagues—this interrelation is a complete 
mystery to the individual capitalist; all the more so, since no bour- 
geois theorists, the political economists, have so lar revealed it. 
A saving of labour—not only labour necessary to produce a certain 

*In the original ‘‘interrupled’? [Unterbrochenheil}. Corrected after 

Marx's MS.—-Ed. 
28 Malthus. 

168 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

product, but also the number of employed labourers—and the employ- 
ment of more congealed labour (constant capital), appear to be very 
sound operations from the economic standpoint and do not seem to 
exert the least influence on the general rate of profit and the average 
profit. How could living labour be the sole source of profit, in 
view of the fact that a reduction in the quantity of labour required 
for production appears not to exert any influence on profit? More- 
over, it even seems in certain circumstances to be the nearest source 
of an increase of profits, at least for the individual capitalist. 

If in any particular sphere of production there is a rise or fail 
of the portion of the cost-price which represents the value of con- 
stant capital, this portion comes from the circulation and, either 
enlarged or reduced, passes [rom the very outset into the process of 
production of the commodity. If, on the other hand, thesame num- 
ber oj labourers produces more or less in the same time, so that the 
quantity of labour required for the production of a definite quantity 
of commodities varies while the number of Jabourers remains the 
same, that portion of the cost-price which represents the value of 
the variable capital may remain the same, i.e., contribute the same 
amount to the cost-price of the total product. But every one of the 
individual commodities whose sum makes up the total product, 
shares in more or less labour (paid and therefore also unpaid), and 
shares consequently in the greater or smaller outlay for this labour, 
i.e., a larger or smaller portion of the wage. The total wages paid 
by the capitalist remain the same, but wages differ if calculated per 
piece of the commodity. Thus, there is a change in this portion of the 
cost-price of the commodity. But no matter whether the cost-price 
of the individual commodity (or, perhaps, the cost-price of the sum 
of commodities produced by a capital of a given magnitude) rises 
or falls, be it due to such changes in its own value, or in that of its 
elements, the average profit of, e.g., 10% remains 10%. Still, 10% 
of an individual commodity may represent very different amounts, 
depending on the change of magnitude caused in the cost-price of 
the individual commodity by such changes of value as we have as- 
sumed. °§ 

So far as the variable capital is concerned—and this is most impor- 
tant, because it is the source of surplus-value, and because anything 
which conceals its relation to the accumulation of wealth by the 
capitalist serves to mystify the entire system—matters get cruder 
or appear to the capitalist in the following light: A variable capital 
of £100 represents the weekly wage of, say, 100 labourers. If these 

© Corbet. 

FORMATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 169 

100 labourers weekly produce 200 pieces of a commodity =200C, in 
a given working-time, then 1C—abstracted from that portion of its 
cost-price which is added by the constant capital, costs zits 10 shil- 
lings, since £100=200C. Now suppose that a change occurs in the 
productiveness of labour. Suppose it doubles, so that the same num- 
ber of labourers now produces twice 200C in the time which it pre- 
viously took to produce 200C. In that case (considering only that 

part ol the cost-price which consists of wages) ic—2 =5 shillings, 

since now £100=400C. Should the productiveness decrease 
ote half, the same labour would produce only 20 and since 

g100 = ‘ Ic=B™ = 31. The changes in the labour-time re- 

quired for the production of the commodities, and hence the changes 
in their value, thus appear in regard to the cost-price, and 
hence to the price of production, as a different distribution 
of the same wage for more or fewer commodities, depending on the 
greater or smaller quantity of commodities produced in the same 
working-time for the same wage. What the capitalist, and conse- 
quently also the political economist, see is that the part of the paid 
labour per piece of commodity changes with the productivity of 
labour, and that the value of each piece also changes accordingly. 
What they do not see is that the same applies to unpaid labour con- 
tained in every piece of the commodity, and this is perceived sc 
much less since the average profit actually is only accidentally de- 
termined by the unpaid labour absorbed in the sphere of the indi- 
vidual capitalist. It is only in such crude and meaningless form 
that we can glimpse that the value of commodities is determined 
by the labour contained in them. 

CHAPTER X 

EQUALIZATION OF THE GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 
THROUGH COMPETITION. 
MARKET-PRICES AND MARKET-VALUES. 
SURPLUS-PROFIT 

The capital invested in some spheres of production has a mean, 
or average, composition, that is, it has the same, or almost the 
same composition as the average social capital. 

In these spheres the price of production is exactly or almost 
the same as the value of the produced commodity expressed in money, 
If there were no other way of reaching a mathematical limit, this 
would be the one. Competition so distributes the social capital among 
the various spheres of production that the prices of production in 
each sphere take shape according tothe model of the pricesol pro- 
duction in these spheres of average composition, i.e., they=k-+kp’ 
(cost-price plus the average rate of profit multiplied by the cost- 
price). This average rate of profit, however, is the percentage of 
profit in that sphere of average composition in which profit, there- 
tore, coincides with surplus-value. Hence, the rate of profit is 
the same in all spheres of production, for it is equalized on the basis 
of those average spheres of production which has the average com- 
position of capital. Consequently, the sum of the profits in all 
spheres oj production must equal the sum of the surplus-values, 
and the sum of the prices of production of the total social product 
equal the sum of its value. But it is evident that the balance among 
spheres of production of different composition must tend to equalize 
them with the spheres of average composition, be it exactly or 
only approximately the same as the social average. Between the 
spheres more or less approximating the average there is again a 
tendency toward equalization, seeking the ideal average, i.e., 
an average that does not really exist, i.e, a tendency to take 
this ideal as a standard. In this way the tendency necessarily 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 71 

prevails to make the prices of production merely converted forms 
of value, or to turn profits into mere portions of surplus-value 
However, these are not distributed in Proportion to the surplus- 
value produced in each special sphere of production, but rather in 
proportion to the mass of capital employed in each sphere, so that 
equal masses of capital, whatever their composition, receive 
equal aliquot shares of the total surplus-value produced by the 
total social capital. 

In the case o! capitals of average, or approximately average, com- 
position, the price of production is thus the same or almost the same 
as the value, and the profit the same as the surplus-value produced 
by them. All other capitals, of whatever composition, tend toward 
this average under pressure of competition. But since the capitals 
of average composition are of the same, or approximately the same, 
structure as the average social capital, all capitals have the tend- 
ency, regardless of the surplus-value produced by them, to 
realize the average profit, rather than their own surplus-value in 
the price of their commodity, i.e., to realize the prices of pro- 
duction. 

On the other hand, it may be said that wherever an average 
profit, and therefore a general rate of profit, are produced—no matter 
by what means—such an average profit cannot be anything but 
the profit on the average social capital, whose sum is equal to the 
sum of surplus-value. Moreover, the prices obtained by adding 
this average profit to the cost-prices cannot be anything but the 
values transmuted into prices of production. Nothing would be 
altered if capitals in certain spheres of production would not, 
for some reason, be subject to the process of equalization. The 
average profit would then be computed on that portion of the social 
capital which enters the equalization process. It is evident that the 
average profit can be nothing but the total mass of surplus-values 
allotted to the various quantities of capital proportionally to their 
magnitudes in the different spheres of production. It is the total 
realized unpaid labour, and this total mass, like the paid, con- 
gealed or living, labour, obtains in the total mass of commodities 
and money that falls to the capitalists. 

The really difficult question is this: how is this equalization of 
profits into a general rate of profit brought about, since it is ob- 
viously a result rather than a point of departure? ; 

To begin with, an estimate of the values of commodities, for 
instance in terms of money, can obviously only be the result of 
their exchange. If, therefore, we assume such an estimate, we must 
regard it as the outcome of an actual exchange of commiodity-value 

172 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

for commodity-value. But how does this exchange of commodities 
at their real values come about? 

Let us first assume that all commodities in the different branches 
of production are sold at their real values. What would then be 
the outcome? According to the foregoing, very different rates of 
profit would then reign in the various spheres of production. It 
is prima facie two entirely different matters whether commodities 
are sold at their values (i.e., exchanged in proportion to the value 
contained in them at prices corresponding to their value), or wheth- 
er they are sold at such prices that their sale yields equal profits 
for equal masses of the capitals advanced for their respective pro- 
duction. 

The fact that capitals employing unequal amounts of living 
labour produce unequal amounts of surplus-value, presupposes at 
least to a certain extent that the degree of exploitation or the rate 
of surplus-value are the same, or that any existing differences in them 
are equalized by real or imaginary (conventional) grounds of com- 
pensation. This would assume competition among labourers and 
equalization through their continual migration from one sphere of 
production to another. Such a general rate of surplus-value—viewed 
as a tendency, like all other economic laws—has been assumed by us 
for the sake of theoretical simplification. But in reality it is an 
actual premise of the capitalist mode of production, although it is 
more or less obstructed by practical frictions causing more or less 
considerable local differences, such as the settlement laws for farm- 
labourers in Britain. But in theory it is assumed that the laws of 
capitalist production operate in their pure form. In reality there 
exists only approximation; but, this approximation is the greater, 
the more developed the capitalist mode of production and the less 
it is adulterated and amalgamated with survivals of former eco- 
nomic conditions. 

The whole difficulty arises from the fact that commodities are 
not exchanged simply as commodities, but as products of capétals, 
which claim participation in the total amount of surplus-value, 
proportional to their magnitude, or equal if they are of equal mag- 
nitude. And this claim is tobe satisfied by the total price for com- 
modities produced by a given capital in a certain space of time. 
This total price is, however, only the sum of the prices of the in- 
dividual commodities produced by this capital. 

The punctum saliens will be best brought out if we approach the 
matter as follows: Suppose, the labourers themselves are in posses- 
sion of their respective means of production and exchange their 
commodities with one another. In that case these commodities 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 173 

would not be products of capital. The value of the various means 
of labour and raw materials would differ in accordance with the tech- 
nical.nature of the labours performed in the different branches 
of production. Furthermore, aside from the unequal value of the 
means of production employed by them, they would require differ- 
ent quantities of means of production for given quantities of la- 
bour, depending on whether a certain commodity can be finished 
in one hour, another in one day, and so forth. Also suppose the la- 
bourers work an equal average length of time, allowing for compen- 
sations that arise from the different labour intensities, etc. In 
sucli a case, two labourers would, first, bath have replaced their out- 
lays, the cost-prices of the consumed means of production, in 
the commodities which make up the product of their day’s work. 
These outlays would differ, depending on the technical nature of 
their labour. Secondly, both of them would have created equal 
amounts of new value, namely the working-day added by them to 
the means of production. This would comprise their wages plus 
the surplus-value, the latter representing surplus-labour over and 
above their necessary wants, the product of which would however 
belong to them. To put it the capitalist way, both of them receive 
the same wages plus the same profit, or the same value, expressed, 
say, by the product of a ten-hour working-day. But in the first 
place, the values of their commodities would have to differ. In 
commodity I, for instance, the portion of value corresponding to 
the consumed means of production might be higher than in commod- 
ity I]. And, to introduce all possible differences, we might as- 
sume right now that commodity I absorbs more living labour, and 
consequently requires more labour-time to be produced, than com- 
modity I]. The values of commodities | and II are, therefore, very 
different. So are the sums of the values of the commodities, which 
represent the product of the labour performed by labourers 1 and 
II in a given time. The rates of profit would also differ considerably 
for I and II if we take the rate of profit to be the proportion of the 
surplus-value to the total value of the invested means oi production. 
The means of subsistence daily consumed by 1 and I] during pro- 
duction, which take the place of wages, here form the part of the 
invested means of production ordinarily called variable capital. 
But for equal working periods the surplus-values would be the 
same for I and II, or, more precisely, since 1 and I] each receive the 
value of the product of a day’s work, both of them receive equal 
values after the value of the invested “constant” elements has been 
deducted, and one portion of these equa! values may be regarded 
as a substitute for the means of subsistence consumed in production, 

174 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

and the other as surplus-value in excess of it. If labourer I has great- 
er expenses, they are made good by a greater portion of the value 
of his commodity, which replaces this “constant” part, and he 
therefore has to reconvert a larger portion of the total value of his 
product into the material elements of this constant part, while la- 
bourer II, though receiving less for this, has so much less to reconvert. 
In these circumstances, a difference in the rates of profit would 
therefore be immaterial, just as it is immaterial to the wage-labourer 
today what rate of profit may express the amount of surplus-value 
filched from him, and just as in international commerce the differ- 
ence in the various national rates of profit is immaterial to commod- 
ity exchange. 

The exchange of commodities at their values, or approximately 
at their values, thus requires a much lower stage than their exchange 
at their prices of production, which requires a definite level of 
capitalist development. 

Whatever the manner in which the prices of various commodities 
are first mutually fixed or regulated, their movements are always 
governed by the law of value. If the labour-time required for their 
production happens to shrink, prices fall; if it increases, prices 
rise, provided other conditions remain the same. 

Apart from the domination of prices and price movement by the 
law of value, it is quite appropriate to regard the values of commod- 
ities as not only theoretically but also historically prius to the 
prices of production. This applies toconditions in which the labourer 
owns his means of production, and this is the condition of the land- 
owning farmer living of his own labour and the craitsman, in the 
ancient as well as in the modern world. This agrees also with the 
view *? we expressed previously, that the evolution of products into 
commodities arises through exchange between different communities, 
not between the members of the same community. It holds not 
only for this primitive condition, but also for subsequent conditions, 
based on slavery and serfdom, and for the guild organization of 
handicrafts, so long as the means of production involved in each 
branch of production can be transferred from one sphere to another 
only with difficulty and therefore the various spheres of production 
are related to one another, within certain Jimits, as foreign coun- 
tries or communist communities. 

For prices at which commodities are exchanged to approximately 
correspond to their values, nothing more is necessary than 

*? Jn 1865, this was merely Marx’s “view.” Today, alter the extensive research 

ranging from Maurer to Morgan into the nature of primitive communities, it is 
an accepted fact which is hardly anywhere denied.—F. E. 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 175 

1) for the exchange of the various commodities to cease being durely 
accidental or only occasional; 2) so far as direct exchange of commod- 
ities is concerned, for these commodities to be produced on both 
sides in approximately sufficient quantities to meet mutual require- 
ments, something learned from mutual experience in trading and 
therefore a natural outgrowth of continued trading; and 3) so far 
as selling is concerned, for no natural or artificial monopoly to 
enable either of the contracting sides to sell commodities above 
their value or to compel them to undersell. By accidental monop- 
oly we mean a monopoly which a buyer or seller acquires through 
an accidental state of supply and demand. 

The assumption that the commodities of the various spheres of 
production are sold at their value merely implies, of course, that their 
value is the centre of gravity around which their prices fluctuate, 
and their continual rises and drops tend to equalize. There is also 
the market-value—ol which later—to be distinguished {rom the 
individual value of particular commodities produced by different 
producers. The individual value of some of these commodities will 
be below their market-value (that is, less Jabour-time is required 
for their production than expressed in the market-value) while 
that of others will exceed the market-value. On the one hand, mar- 
ket-value is to be viewed as the average value of commodities pro- 
duced in a single sphere, and, on the other, as the individual value 
of the commodities produced under average conditions of their 
respective sphere and forming the bulk of the products of that 
sphere. It is only in extraordinary combinations that commodi- 
ties produced under the worst, or the most favourable, conditions 
regulate the market-value, which, in turn, forms the centre of 
fluctuation for market-prices. The latter, however, are the same 
for commodities of the same kind. If the ordinary demand is satis- 
fied by the supply of commodities of average value, hence of a 
value midway between the two extremes, then the commociities 
whose individual value is below the market-value realize an 
extra surplus-value, or surplus-profit, while those, whose individual 
value exceeds the market-value, are unable to realize a portion 
of the surplus-value contained in them. 

It does no good to say that the sale of commodities produced un- 
der the least favourable conditions proves that they are required 
to satisly the demand. If in the assumed case the price were high- 
er than the average market-value, the demand would be smailer.* 
At a certain price, a commodity occupies just so much place on the 
market. This place remains the same in case of a price change only 

* In the original ‘‘greater'’ [grdsser]. Corrected after Marx's MS.—£d. 

176 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

if the higher price is accompanied by a drop in the supply of the 
commodity, and a lower price by an increase af supply. And if 
the demand is so great that it does not contract when the price 
is regulaled by the value of commodities produced under. the least 
favourable conditions, then these determine the market-value. 
This is not possible unless demand is greater than usual, or if 
supply drops below the usual level. Finally, if the mass of the pro- 
duced commodities exceeds the quantity disposed of at average 
market-values, the commodities produced under the most favour- 
able conditions regulate the market-value. They may, for example, 
be sold exactly or approximately at their individual value, in 
which case the commodities produced under the least favourable 
conditions may not even realize their cost-price, while those pro- 
duced under average conditions realize only a portion of the 
surplus-value contained in them. What has been said here of market- 
value applies to the price of production as soon as it takes the 
place of market-value. The price of production is regulated in each 
sphere, and likewise regulated by special circumstances. And this 
price of production is, in its turn, the centre around which the daily 
market-prices fluctuate and tend to equalize one another within 
definite periods. (See Ricardo on determining the price of production 
through those working under the least favourable conditions). 

No matter how the prices are regulated, we arrive at the follow- 
ing: 
1) The law of value dominates price movements with reductions 
or increases in required labour-time making prices of production 
fall or rise. It is in this sense that Ricardo (who doubtlessly realized 
that his prices of production deviated from the value of commodi- 
ties) says that “the inquiry to which I wish to draw the reader’s 
attenlion relates to the effect of the variations in the relative 
value of commodities, and not in their absolute value.” 

2) The average profit determining the pricesof production must 
always be approximately equal to that quantity of surplus-value 
which falls to the share of individual capital in its capacity of an 
aliquot part of the total social capital. Suppose that the general 
rate of profit, and therefore the average profit, are expressed by 
money-value greater than the money-value of the actual average 
surplus-value. So far as the capitalists are concerned, it is then 
immaterial whether they reciprocally charge 10 or 15% profit. 
Neither of these percentages covers more actual commodity-value 
than the other, since the overcharge in money is mutual. As for 
the labourer (the assumption being that he receives his normal 
wage and the rise in the average profit does not therefore imply an 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 177 

actual deduction from his wage, i.e., it expresses something entire- 
ly different from the normal surplus-value of the capitalist), 
the rise in commodity-prices caused by an increase of the average 
profit must correspond to the rise of the money-expression of the 
variable capital. Such a general nominal increase in the rate of profit 
and the average profit above the limit provided by the ratio of the 
actual surplus-value to the total invested capital is not, in effect, 
possible without causing an increase in wages, and also an increase 
in the prices of commodities forming the constant capilal. The 
reverse is true in case of a reduction.Since the total value of the com- 
modities regulates the total surplus-value, and this in turn regu- 
lates the level of average profit and thereby the general rate of 
profit—as a general law ora law governing fluctuations—it follows 
that the law of value regulates the prices of production. 

What competition, first in a single sphere, achieves is a single 
market-value and market-price derived from the various individual 
values of commodities. And it is competition of capitals in diferent 
spheres, which first brings out the price of production equalizing 
the rates of profit in the different spheres. The latter process re- 
quires a higher development of capitalist production than the 
previous one. 

For commodities of the same sphere of production, the same 
kind, and approximately the same quality, to be sold at their val- 
ues, the following two requirements are necessary: 

First, the different individual values must be equalized at one 
social value, the above-named market-value, and this implies 
competition among producers of the same kind of commodities 
and, likewise, the existence of a common market in which they 
offer their articles for sale. For the market-price of identical com- 
modities, each, however, produced under different individual circum- 
stances, lo correspond to the market-value and not to deviate from 
it either by rising above or falling below it, it is necessary that the 
pressure exerted by different sellers upon one another be su/ficient 
to bring enough commodities to market to fill the social requirements, 
i.e., a quantity for which society is capable of paying the market- 
value. Should the mass of products exceed this demand, the commod- 
ities would have to be sold below their markel-value; and con- 
versely, above their market-value if the mass of products were not 
large enough to meet the demand, or, whal amounts to the same, 
if the pressure of competition among sellers were not strong enough 
to bring this mass of products to market. Should the market-value 
change, this would also entail a change in the conditions on which 
the tolal mass of commodities could be sold. Should the market- 

178 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

value fall, this would entail a rise in the average social demand 
(this always taken to mean the effective demand), which could, 
within certain limits, absorb larger masses of commodities. Should 
the market-value rise, this would entail a drop in the social de- 
mand, and a smaller mass of commodities would be absorbed. Hence, 
if supply and demand regulate the market-price, or rather the devia- 
tions of the market-price from the market-value, then, in turn, 
the market-value regulates the ratio of supply to demand, or the 
centre round which fluctuations of supply and demand cause 
market-prices to oscillate. 

Looking closer, we find that the conditions applicable to the 
value of an individual commodity are here reproduced as condi- 
tions governing the value of the aggregate of a certain kind of 
commodity. Capitalist production is mass production from the very 
outset. But even in other, less developed, modes of production that 
which is produced in relatively smal! quantities as a common prod- 
uct by small-scale, even if numerous, producers, is concentrated in 
large quantities—at least in the case of the vital commodities— 
in the hands of relatively few merchants. The latter accumulate them 
and sell them as the common product of an entire branch of pro- 
duction, or of a more or less considerable contingent of it. 

It should be here noted in passing that the “social demand,” 
i.e., the factor which regulates the principle of demand, is essen- 
tially subject to the mutual relationship of the difierent classes and 
their respective economic position, notably therefore to, firstly, 
the ratio of total surplus-value to wages, and, secondly, to the 
relation of the various parts into which surplus-value is split up 
(profit, interest, ground-rent, taxes, etc.). And this thus again shows 
‘how absolutely nothing can be explained by the relation of supply 
to demand before ascertaining the basis on which lhis relation rests. 

Although both commodity and money represent a unity of ex- 
change-value and use-value, we have already seen (Buch I, Kap. I, 
3*) that in buying and selling both of these functions are polarized 
at the two extremes, the commodity (seller) representing the use- 
value, and the money (buyer) representing the exchange-value. 
One of the first premises of selling was thatacommodity should 
have use-value and should therefore satisfy a social need. The 
other premise was that the quantity of labour contained in thecom- 
modity should represent socially necessary labour, i.e., its indi- 
vidual value (and, what amounts to the same under the present 
assumption, its selling price) should coincide with its social value.?® 

* English edition: Ch. I, 3.—Ed. 

** Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, Berlin, 1859, 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 179 

Let us apply this to the mass of commodities available in the 
market, which represents the product of a whole sphere. 

The matter will be most readily pictured by regarding this whole 
mass of commodities, produced by one branch of industry, as one 
commodity, and the sum of the prices of the many identical com- 
modities as one price. Then, whatever has been said of a single 
commodity applies literally to the mass of commodities of an en- 
tire branch of production available in the market. The requirement 
that the individual value of a commodity should correspond to 
its social value is now realized, or [further determined, in that 
the mass contains social labour necessary for its production, and 
that the value of this mass is equal to its market-value. 

Now suppose that the bulk of these commodities is produced un- 
der approximately similar normal social conditions, so that this 
value is at the same time the individual value of the individual 
commodities which make up this mass. If a relatively small por- 
tion of these commodities may now have been produced below, 
and another above, these conditions, so that the individual val- 
ue of one portion is greater, and that of the other smaller, than 
the average value of the bulk of the commodities, but in such 
proportions that these extremes balance one another, so that the 
average value of the commodities at these extremes is equal to 
the value of commodities in the centre, then the market-value is 
determined by the value of the commodities produced under aver- 
age conditions.*® The value of the entire mass of commodities is 
equal to the actual sum of the values of all individual commodi- 
ties taken together, whether produced under average conditions, 
or under conditions above or below the average. In that case, the 
market-value, or social value, of the mass of commodities—the 
necessary labour-time contained in them—is determined by the 
value of the preponderant mean mass. 

Suppose, on the contrary, that the total mass of the commodi- 
ties in question brought to market remains the same, while the 
value of the commodities produced under less favourable condi- 
tions fails to balance out the value of commodities produced un- 
der more favourable conditions, so that the part of the mass pro- 
duced under less favourable conditions forms a relatively weighty 
quantity as compared with the average mass and with the other 
extreme. In that case, the mass produced under less favourable 
conditions regulates the market, or social, value. 

Suppose, finally, that the mass of commodities produced under 
better than average conditions considerably exceeds that produced 

2 Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, Berlin, 1859. 

180 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

under worse conditions, and is large even compared with that 
produced under average conditions. In that case, the part produced 
under the most favourable conditions determines the market- 
value. We ignore here the overstocked market, in which the part 
produced under most favourable conditions always regulates the 
market-price. We are not dealing here with the market-price, 
in so far as it differs from the market-value, but with the various 
determinations of the market-value itself.*° 

In fact, strictly speaking (which, of course, occurs in reality only 
in approximation and with a thousand modifications) the market- 
value of the entire mass, regulated as it is by the average values, 
is in case I equal to the sum of their individual values; although 
in the case of the commodities produced at the extremes, this 
value is represented as an average value which is forced upon 
them. Those who produce at the worst extreme must then sell their 
commodities below the individual value; those producing at the 
best extreme sell them above it. 

In case I] the individual lots of commodity-values produced 
at the two extremes do not balance one another. Rather, the lot 
produced under the worse conditions decides the issue. Strictly 
speaking, the average price, or the market-value, of each indi- 
vidual commodity, or each aliquot part of the total mass, would 
now be determined by the total value of the mass as obtained by 
adding up the values of the commodities produced under different 
conditions, and in accordance with the aliquot part of this total 
value falling to the share of each individual commodity. The 
market-value thus obtained would exceed the individual value 
not only of the commodities belonging to the favourable extreme, 

*° The controversy between Storch and Ricardo with regard to ground-rent 
(a coniroversy pertaining only to the subject; in fact, the two opponents pay 
No aitention to one another), whether the market-value (or rather what 
they call market-price and price of production respectively) was regu- 
lated by the commodities produced under unfavourable conditions (Ricardo), or 
by those produced under favourable conditions (Storch), resolves itself in the 
final analysis in that both are right and both wrong, and that both of them have 
failed to consider the average case. Compare Corbet on the cases in which the price 
is regulated by commodities produced under the most favourable conditions. — 
“It is not meant to be asserted by him (Ricardo) that two particular lots of two 
different articles, as a hat and a pair of shoes, exchange with one another when 
those two particular lots were produced by equal quantities of labour. By 
‘commodity’ we must here understand the ‘description of commodity,’ not a 
particular individual hat, pair of shoes, etc. The whole labour which produces 
all the hats in England is to be considered, to this purpose, as divided among 
all the hats. This seems to me not to have been expressed at first, and in the general 
statements of this doctrine." (Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes in Political 
Economy, etc., London, 1821, pp. 53-54.) 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 181 

but also of those belonging to the average lot. Yet it would still 
be below the individual value of those commodities produced at 
the unfavourable extreme. How close the market-value approaches 
or finally coincides with, the latler would depend entirely on the 
volume occupied by commodities produced at the unfavourable 
extreme of the commodity sphere in question. If demand is only 
slightly greater than supply, the individual value of the unfavout- 
ably produced commodities regulates the market-value. 

Finally, if the lot of commodities produced at the favourable 
extreme occupies greater place than the other extreme, and also 
than the average lot, as it does in case II], then the market-value 
falls below the average value. The average value, computed by 
adding the sums of values at the two extremes and at the middle, 
stands here below the value of the middle, which it approaches, 
or vice versa, depending on the relative place occupied by the 
favourable extreme. Should demand be weaker than supply, the 
favourably situated part, whatever its size, makes room for itself 
forcibly by paring its price down to its individual value. The mar- 
ket-value cannot ever coincide with this individual value of the 
commodities produced under the most favourable conditions, 
except when supply far exceeds demand. 

This mode of determining market-values, which we have here 
outlined abstractly, is promoted in the real market by competition 
among the buyers, provided the demand is large enoughto absorb 
the mass of commodities at values so fixed. And this brings us 
to the other point. 

Second, to say that a commodity has a use-value is merely to 
say that it satisfies some social want. So long as we dealt with in- 
dividual commodities only, we could assume that there was a 
need for a particular commodity—its quantity already implied 
by its price without inquiring further into the quantity required 
to satisfy this want. This quantity is, however, of essential im- 
portance, as soon as the product of an entire branch of production 
is placed on one side, and the social need for it on the other. It 
then becomes necessary to consider the extent, i.e., the amount 
of this social want. 

In the foregoing determinations of market-value it was assumed 
that the mass of the produced commodities is given, i.e., remains 
the same, and that there is a change only in the proportions of 
its constituent elements, which are produced under different con- 
ditions, and that, hence, the market-value of the same mass of 
commodities is differently regulated. Suppose, this mass corre- 
sponds in size to the usual supply, leaving aside the possibility 

182 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

that a portion of the produced commodities may be temporarily 
withdrawn from the market. Should demand for this mass now 
also remain the same, this commodity will be sold at its market- 
value. no matter which of the three aforementioned cases regu- 
lates this market-value. This mass of commodities does not merely 
satisly a need, but satisfies it to its [ull social extent. Should their 
quantity be smaller or greater, however, than the demand for them, 
there will be deviations of the market-price from the market- 
value. And the first deviation is that if the supply is too small, 
the market-value is always regulated by the commodities produced 
under the least favourable circumstances and, if the supply is too 
large, always by the commodities produced under the most favour- 
able conditions; that therefore it is one of the extremes which 
determines the market-value, in spite of the fact that in accordance 
with the mere proportion of the commodity masses produced under 
different conditions, a different result should obtain. If the differ- 
ence between demand and the available quantity of the product 
is more considerable, the market-price will likewise be considera- 
bly above or below the market-value. Now, the difference be- 
tween the quantity of the produced commodities and that quan- 
tity of them at which they are sold at market-value may be due 
to two reasons. Either the quantity itself changes, becoming too 
small or too large, so that reproduction would have taken place 
on a different scale than that which regulated the given market- 
value. In that case the supply changed, although demand re- 
mained the same, and there was, therefore, relative over-production 
or under-production. Or else reproduction, and thus supply, re- 
mained the same, while demand shrank or increased, which may be 
due to several reasons. Although the absolute magnitude of the 
supply was the same, its relative magnitude, its magnitude 
relative to, or measured by, the demand, had changed. The effect 
is the same as in the first case, but in the reverse direction. Fi- 
nally, if changes take place on both sides, but either in reverse 
directions, or, if in the same direction, then not to the same ex- 
tent, if therefore there are changes on both sides, but these alter 
the former proportion between the two sides, then the final result 
must always lead to one of the two above-mentioned cases. 
The real difficulty in formulating the general definition of 
supply and demand is that it seems to take on the appearance of a 
tautology. First consider the supply—the product available in 
the market, or that which can be delivered to it. To avoid dwelling 
upon useless detail, we shall here consider only the mass annually 
Teproduced in every given branch of production and ignore the 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 183 

greater or lesser faculty possessed by the different commodities to 
be withdrawn from the market and stored away for consumption, 
say, until next year. This annual reproduction is expressed by a 
certain quantity—in weight or numbers—depending on whether 
this mass of commodities is measured in discrete elements or con- 
tinuously. They are not only use-values satisfying human wants, 
but these use-values are available in the market in definite quanti- 
ties. Secondly, however, this quantity of commodities has a spe- 
cific market-value, which may be expressed by a multiple of the 
market-value of the commodity, or of its measure, which serves 
as unit. Thus, there is no necessary connection between the quanti- 
tative volume of the commodities in the market and their market- 
value, since, for instance, many commodities have a specifically 
high value, and others a specifically low value, so that a given 
sum of values may be represented by a very large quantity of one 
commodity, and a very small quantity of another. There is only 
the following connection between the quantity of the articles avail- 
able in the market and the market-value of these articles: On a 
given basis of labour productivity the production of a certain 
quantity of articles in every particular sphere of production re- 
quires a definite quantity of social labour-time; although this 
proportion varies in diflerent spheres of production and has no 
inner relation to the usefulness of these articles or the special na- 
ture of their use-values. Assuming all other circumstances to be 
equal, and acertain quantity a of some commodity to cost b labour- 
time, a quantity na of the same commodity will cost nb labour- 
time. Further, if society wants to satisfy some want and have an 
article produced for this purpose, it must pay for it. Indeed, since 
commodity-production necessitates a division of labour, society 
pays for this article by devoting a portion of the available labour- 
time to its production. Therefore, society buys it with a definite 
quantity of its disposable labour-time.That part of society which 
through the division of labour happens to employ its labour in pro- 
ducing this particular article, must receive an equivalent in 
social labour incorporated in articles which satisfy its own wants. 
However, there exists an accidental rather than a necessary con- 
nection between the total amount of social labour applied to a social 
article, i.e., between the aliquot part of society's total Jabour-power 
allocated to producing this article, or between the volume which 
the production of this article occupies in total production, on the 
one hand, and the volume whereby society seeks to satisly the 
want gratified by the article in question, on the other. Every in- 
dividual article, or every definite quantity of a commodity may, 

184 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

indeed, contain no more than the social labour required for its 
production, and from this point of view the market-value of this 
entire commodity represents only necessary labour, but if this 
commodity has been produced in excess of the existing social needs, 
then so much olf the social labour-time is squandered and the mass 
of the commodity comes to represent a much smaller quantity of 
social! labour in the market than is actually incorporated in it.(It 
is only where production isunder the actual, predetermining 
control of society that the latter establishes a relation between 
the volume of social labour-time applied in producing definite 
articles, and the volume of the social want to be satisfied by these 
articles.) For this reason, these commodities must be sald below 
their market-value, and a portion of them may even be altogether 
unsaleable. The reverse applies if the quantity of social labour 
employed in the production of a certain kind of commodity is 
too small to meet the social demand for that commodity. But if 
the quantity of social labour expended in the production of a 
certain article corresponds to the social demand for that article, 
so that the produced quantity corresponds to the usual scale of 
teproduction and the demand remains unchanged, then the article 
is sold at its market-value. The exchange, or sale, of commodities 
at their value is the rational state of affairs, i.e., the natural law 
of their equilibrium. It is this law that explains the deviations, and 
not vice versa, the deviations that explain the law. 

Now let us look at the other side—the demand. 

Commodities are bought either as means of production or means 
of subsistence to enter productive or individual consumption. It 
does not alter matters that some commodities may serve both pur- 
poses. There is, then, a demand for them on the part of producers 
(here capitalists, since we have assumed that means of production 
have been transformed into capital) and of consumers. Both ap- 
pear at first sight to presuppose a given quantity of social want 
on the side of demand, corresponding on the other side to a def- 
inite quantity of social output in the various lines of production. 
If the cotton industry is to accomplish its annual reproduction 
on a given scale, it must have the usual supply of cotton, and, 
other circumstances remaining the same, an additional amount 
of cotton corresponding to the annual extension of reproduction 
caused by the accumulation of capital. This is equally true with 
regard to means of subsistence. The working-class must find at 
least the same quantity of necessities on hand if it is to continue 
living in its accustomed average way, although they may be more 
or less differently distributed among the different kinds of commou- 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 185 

ities. Moreover, there must be an additional quantity to allow for 
the annual increase of population. The same, with more or less 
modification, applies to other classes. 

It would seem, then, that there is on the side of demand a cer- 
tain magnitude of definite social wants which Tequire for their 
satisfaction a definite quantity of a commodity on the market. But 
quantitatively, the definite social wants are very elastic and chang- 
ing. Their fixedness is only apparent. If the means of subsistence 
were cheaper, or money-wages higher, the labourers would buy more 
of them, and a greater “social need” would arise for them, leaving 
aside the paupers, etc., whose “demand” is even below the narrowest 
limits of their physical wants. On the other hand, if cotton were 
cheaper, for example, the capitalists’ demand for it would increase, 
more additional capital would be thrown into the cotton industry, 
etc. We must never forget that the demand for productive consump- 
tion is, under our assumption, a demand of the capitalist, whose 
essential purpose is the production of surplus-value, so that he 
produces a particular commodity to this sole end. Still, this does 
not hinder the capitalist, so long as he appears in the market as a 
buyer of, say, cotton, from representing the need for this cotton, 
just as it is immaterial to the seller of cotton whether the buyer 
converts it into shirting or gun-cotton, or whether he intends to 
turn it into wads for his own, and the world’s, ears. But this does 
exert a considerable influence on the kind of buyer the cap- 
ilalist is. His demand for cotton is substantially modified by 
the fact that it disguises his real need for making profit. 
The limits within which the need for commodities in the market, 
the demand, differs quantitatively from the actual social need, 
naturally vary considerably for different commodities; what | 
mean is the difference between the demanded quantity of com- 
modities and the quantity which would have been in demand at 
other money-prices or other money or living conditions of the 
buyers. 

Nothing is easier than to realize the inconsistencies of demand 

and supply, and the resulting deviation of market-prices from 
market-values. The real difficulty consists in determining what is 
meant by the equation of supply and: demand. ; 
’ Supply and demand coincide when their mutual proportions 
are such that the mass of commodities of a definite line of produc- 
tion can be sold at their market-value, neither above nor below 
it. That is the first thing we hear. 

The second is this: If commodities are sold at their market- 
values, supply and demand coincide. 

186 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

If supply equals demand, they cease to act, and for this very 
reason commodities are sold at their market-values. Whenever 
two forces operate equally in opposite directions, they balance 
one another, exert no outside influence, and any phenomena tak- 
ing place in these circumstances must be explained by causes other 
than the effect of these two forces. If supply and demand balance 
one another, they cease to explain anything, do not affect market- 
values, and therefore leave us so much more in the dark about the 
reasons why the market-value is expressed in just this sum of mon- 
ey and no other. It is evident that the real inner laws of capital- 
ist production cannot be explained by the interaction of supply 
and demand (quite aside from a deeper analysis of these two social 
motive forces, which would be out of place here), because these 
laws cannot be observed in their pure stale, until supply and 
demand cease to act, i.e., are equated. In reality, supply and de- 
mand never coincide, or, if they do, it is by mere accident, hence 
scientifically=0, and to be regarded as not having occurred. But 
political economy assumes that supply and demand coincide with 
one another. Why? To be able to study phenomena in their funda- 
mental relations, in the form corresponding to their conception, 
that is, is tostudy them independent of the appearances caused by the 
movement of supply and demand. The other reason is to find the 
actual tendencies of their movements and to some extent to record 
them. Since the inconsistencies are of an antagonistic nature, 
aad since they continually succeed one another, they balance out 
one another through their opposing movements, and their mutual 
contradiction. Since, therefore, supply and demand never equal 
one another in any given case, their differences follow one another 
in such a way—and the result of a deviation in one direction is 
that it calls forth a deviation in the opposite direstion—that supply 
and demand are always equated when the whole is viewed over a 
certain period, but only as an average of past movements, and 
only as the continuous movement of their contradiction. In 
this way, the market-prices which have deviated from the mar- 
ket-values adjust themselves, as viewed from the standpoint of 
their average number, to equal the market-values, in that devia- 
tions from the latter cancel each other as plus and minus. And 
this average is not merely of theoretical, but also of practical im- 
portance to capital, whose investment is calculated on the fluc- 
tuations and compensations of a more or less fixed. period. 

On the one hand, the relation of demand and supply, therefore, 
only explains the deviations of market-prices from market-values. 
On the other, it explains the tendency to eliminate these devia- 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 187 

tions, i.e., to eliminate the effect of the relation of demand and 
supply. (Such exceptions as commodities which have a price with- 
out having a value are not considered here.) Supply and demand 
may eliminate the effect caused by their difference in many differ- 
ent ways. For instance, if the demand, and consequently the mar- 
ket-price, fall, capital may be withdrawn, thus causing supply 
to shrink. It may also be that the market-value itself shrinks and 
balances with the market-price as a result of inventions which re- 
duce the necessary labour-time. Conversely, if the demand increases, 
and consequently the market-price rises above the market- 
value, this may lead to too much capital flowing into this line of 
production and production may swell to such an extent that the 
market-price will even fal! below the market-value. Or, it may 
lead to a price increase, which cuts the demand. In some lines of 
production it may also bring about a rise in the market-value itself 
for a shorter or longer period, with a portion of the desired prod- 
ucts having to be produced under worse conditions during this 
period. 

Supply and demand determine the market-price, and so does 
the market-price, and the market-value in the further analysis, 
determine supply and demand. This is obvious in the case of de- 
mand, since it moves in a direction opposite to prices, swelling 
when prices fall, and vice versa. But this is also true of supply. 
Because the prices of means of production incorporated in the offered 
commodities determine the demand for these means of production, 
and thus the supply of commodities whose supply embraces the 
demand for these means of production. The prices of cotton are 
determinants in the supply of cotton goods. 

To this confusion—determining prices through demand and 
supply, and, at the same time, determining supply and demand 
through prices—must be added that demand delermines supply, 
just as supply determines demand, and production determines the 
market, as well as the market determines production.*! ‘ 

*' The following subtility is sheer nonsense: “Where the quantity of wages, 
capital, and land, required to produce an article, are become different from what 
they were, that which Adam Smith calls the natural price of it, is also different, 
and that price, which was previously itsnatural price, becomes, wilhreference to this 
alteration, its market-price; because, though neither the supply, nor the quantity 
wanted, may have been changed”—both of them change here, just because the 
market-value, or, in the case of Adam Smith, the price of production, changes in 
consequence of a change of value—‘“that supply is not now exactly enough for 
those persons who are able and willing to pay what is now the cost o} production, 
but is cither greater or less than that; so that the proportion between the supply 
and what is with reference to the new cost of production the effectual demand, is 

188 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

Even the ordinary economist (see footnote) agrees that the pro- 
portion between supply and demand may vary in consequence of 
a change in the market-value of commodities, without a change 
being brought about in demand or supply by extraneous circum- 
stances. Even he must admit that, whatever the market-value, 
supply and demand must coincide in order for it to be established, 
In other words, the ratio of supply to demand does not explain the 
market-value, but conversely, the latter rather explains the fluctua- 
tions of supply and demand. The author of the Observations continues 
aiter the passage quoted in the footnote: “This proportion” (between 
demand and supply), “however, if we still mean by ‘demand’ and 
‘natural price,’ what we meant just now, when referring to Adam 
Smith, must always be a proportion of equality; for it is only when 
the supply is equal to the effectual demand, that is, to that demand 
which will neither more nor less than pay the natural price, that the 
natural price is in fact paid; consequently, there may be two very 
different natural prices, at different times, for the same commodity, 
and yet the proportion, which the supply bears to the demand, be 
in both cases the same, namely, the proportion of equality.” It is 
admitted, then, that with two different natural prices of the same 
commodity, at different times, demand and supply are always 
able to, and must, balance one another if the commodity is to be 
sold at its natural price in both instances. Since there is no differ- 
ence in the ratio of supply to demand in either case, but a difler- 
ence in the magnitude of the natural price itself, it follows that 
this price is obviously determined independently of demand and 
supply, and thus that it can least of all be determined by 
them. 

different from what it was. An alteration in the rate of supply will then take 
place, if there is no obstacle in the way of it, and at last bring the cammodity to 
its new natural price. It may then seem good to some persons to say that, as the 
commodity gels fo its natural price by an alteration in its supply, the natural 
price is as much owing to one proportion between the demand and supply, as 
the market-price is to another; and consequently, that the natural price, just as 
much as the market-price, depends on the proportion that demand and supply 
bear to each other.” (The great principle of demand and supply is called into 
action to determine what A. Smith calls natural prices aswell as market-prices."— 
Malthus.) (Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes, etc., London, 1821, pp. 60- 
61.) The good man does not grasp the fact that it is precisely the change in the 
Cost of production, and thus in the value, which caused a change in the demand, 
in the present case, and thus in the proportion between demand and supply, and 
that this change in the demand may bring about a change in the supply. This 
would prove just the reverse of what our good thinker wants to prove. lt would 
prove that the change in the cost of production is by no means due to the propor- 
tion of demand and supply, but rather regulates this proportion. 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OP PROFIT 139 

For a commodity to be sold at its market-value, i.e., proportion- 
ally to the necessary social labour contained in it, the total quan- 
tity of social labour used in producing the total mass of this com- 
modity must correspond to the quantity of the social want lor it, 
i.e., the effective social want. Competition, the fluctuations of 
market-prices which correspond to the fluctuations of demand 
and supply, tend continually to reduce to this scale the total quan- 
tity of labour devoted to each kind of commodity. 

The proportion of supply and demand recapitulates, first, the rela- 
tion of use-value to exchange-value, of commodity to money, and of 
buyer to seller; and, second, that of producer to consumer, although 
both of them may be represented hy third parties, the merchants. 
In considering buyer and seller, it suffices to counterpose them in- 
dividually in order to present their relationship. Three individuals 
are enough for the complete metamorphosis of a commodity, and 
therefore for the process of sale and purchase taken as a whole. 
A converts his commodity into the money of B, to whom he sells 
his commodity, and reconverts his money again into commodities, 
when he uses it to make purchases from C; the whole process 
takes place among these three. Further, in the study of money it 
had been assumed that the commodities are sold at their values be- 
cause there was absolutely no reason to consider prices diver- 
gent from values, it being merely a matter of changes of form which 
commodities undergo in their transformation into money and 
their reconversion from money into commodities. As soon as a 
commodity has been sold and a new commodity bought with the 
receipts, we have before us the entire metamorphosis, and to this 
process as such it is immaterial whether the price of the commodity 
lies above or below its value. The value of the commodity remains 
important as a basis, because the concept of money cannot he de- 
veloped on any other foundation, and price, in its general mean- 
ing, is but value in the form of money. At any rate, it is assumed 
in the study of money as a medium of circulation that there is 
not just one metamorphosis of a certain commodity. It is rather 
the social interrelation of these metamorphoses which is studied. 
Only thus do we arrive at the circulation of money and the devel- 
opment of its function as a medium of circulation. But however impor- 
tant this connection may be for the conversion of money into a 
circulating medium, and for its resulting change of form, it is of 
no moment to the transaction between individual buyers and sellers. 

In the case of supply and demand, however, the supply is equal 
to the sum of sellers, or producers, of a certain kind of commodity, 
and the demand equals the sum of buyers or consumers (both pro- 

190 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

ductive and individual) of the same kind of commodity. The sums 
react on ome another as units, as aggregate forces. The individ- 
ual counts here only as part of a social force, as an atom of the 
mass, and it is in this form that competition brings out the social 
character of production and consumption. 

The side of competition which happens for the moment to be 
weaker is also the side in which the individual acts independently 
of, and often directly against, the mass of his competitors, and 
precisely in this manner is the dependence of one upon the other 
impressed upon them, while the stronger side acts always more 
or less as aunited wholeagainst its antagonist. If the demand for 
this particular kind of commodity is greater than the supply, one 
buyer outbids another—within certain limits—and so raises 
the price of the commodity for all of them above the market-value, 
while on the other hand the sellers unite in trying to sell at a high 
market-price. If, conversely, the supply exceeds the demand, one 
begins to dispose of his goods at a cheaper rate and theothers must 
follow, while the buyers unite in their efforts to depress the market- 
price as much as_ possible below the market-value. The common 
interest is appreciated by each only so long as he gains more by it 
than without it. And unity of action ceases the moment one or the 
other side becomes the weaker, when each tries to extricate him- 
self on his own as advantageously as he possibly can. Again, if 
one produces more cheaply and can sell more goods, thus possessing 
himself of a greater place in the market by selling below the current 
market-price, or market-value, he will do so, and will thereby 
begin a movement which gradually compels the others to introduce 
the cheaper mode of production, and one which reduces 
the socially necessary labour to a new, and lower, level. If one side 
has the advantage, all belonging to it gain. It is as though they 
exerted their common monopoly. If one side is weaker, then one 
may try on his own hook to become the stronger (for instance, one 
who works with lower costs of production), or at least to get off 
as lightly as possible, and in such cases each for himself and the 
devil take the hindmost, although his actions affect not only him- 
self, but also all his boon companions. * 

* “If each man of a class could never have more than a given share, or ali- 
quot part, of the gains and possessions of the whale, he would readily combine 
to ratse the gain”; (he does it as soon as the proportion of demand to supply 
permits it) “this is monopoly, But where each man thinks that he may anyway 
increase the absolute amount of his awn share, though by a process which lessens 
the whole amount, he will often do it; this is competition.” (An Inquiry into 
those Principles Respecting the Nature of Demand, ete., London, 1821, p. 105.) 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 191 

Demand and supply imply the conversion of value into market- 
value, and so far as they proceed on a capitalist basis, so far as 
the commodities are products of capital, they are based on Capi- 
talist production processes, i.e., on quite different relationships 
than the mere purchase and sale of goods. Here it is not a question 
of the formal conversion of the value of commodities into prices, 
i.e., not of a mere change of form. It is a question of definite devi- 
ations in quantity of the market-prices from the market-values, 
and, further, from the prices of production. In simple purchase 
and sale it suffices to have the producers of commodities as such 
counterposed to one another. In further analysis supply and de- 
mand presuppose the existence of different classes and sections of 
classes which divide the total revenue of a society and consume it 
among themselves as revenue, and, therefore, make up the demand 
created by revenue. While on the other hand it requires an insight 
into the over-all structure of the capitalist production process 
for an understanding of the supply and demand created among 
themselves by producers as such. 

Under capitalist production it is not merely a matter of obtain- 
ing an equal mass of value in another form—be it that of money 
or some other commodity—for a mass of values thrown into cir- 
culation in the form of a commodity, but it is rather a matter of 
realizing as much surplus-value, or profit, on capital advanced 
for production, as any other capital of the same magnitude, or 
pro rata to its magnitude in whichever line it is applied. It is, 
therefore, a matter, at least as a minimum, of selling the com- 
modities at prices which yield the average profit, i.e., at prices of 
production. In this form capital becomes conscious of itself as a 
social power in which every capitalist participates proportionally 
to his share in the total social capital. 

First, capitalist production is in itself indifferent to the partic- 
ular use-value, and distinctive features of any commodity it 
produces. In every sphere of production itis only concerned with 
producing surplus-value, and appropriating a certain quantity of 
unpaid labour incorporated in the product of labour. And it is like- 
wise in the nature of the wage-labour subordinated by capital that 
it is indifferent to the specific character of its labour and must submit 
to being transformed in accordance with the requirements of capital 
and to being transferred [rom one sphere of production to another. 

Second, one sphere of production is, in fact, just as good or just 
as bad as another. Every one of them yields the same profit, and 
every one of them would be useless if the commodities it produced 
did not satisly some social need. 

192 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

Now, if the commodities are sold at their values, then, as we 
have shown, very different rates of profit arise in the various 
spheres of production, depending on the different organic composi- 
tion of the masses of capital invested in them. But capital with- 
draws from a sphere with a low rate of profit and invades others, 
which yield a higher profit. Through this incessant outflow and 
influx, or, briefly, through its distribution among the various 
spheres, which depends on how the rate of profit falls here and rises 
there, it creates such a ratioof supply to demand that the average 
profit in the various spheres of production becomes the same, and 
values are, therefore, converted into prices of production. Capi- 
tal succeeds in this equalization, to a greater or lesser degree, de- 
pending on the extent of capitalist development in the given na- 
tion; i.e., on the extent the conditions in the country in question 
are adapted for the capitalist mode of production. With the prog- 
ress of capitalist production, it also develops its own conditions 
and subordinates to its specific character and its immanent laws 
all the social prerequisites on which the prodisction process is based. 

The incessant equilibration of constant divergences is accom- 
plished so much more quickly, 1) the more mobile the capital, i.e., 
the more easily it can be shifted from one sphere and from one place 
to another; 2) the more quickly labour-power’ can be transferred 
from one sphere to another and from one production locality to 
another. The first condition implies complete freedom of trade with- 
in the society and the removal of al! monopolies with the excep- 
tion of the natural ones, those, that is, which naturally arise out 
of the capitalist mode of production. It implies, furthermore, the 
development of the credit system, which concentrates the inor- 
ganic mass of the disposable social capital vis-a-vis the individual 
capitalist. Finally, it implies the subordination of the various 
spheres of production to the control of capitalists. This last impli- 
cation is included in our premises, since we assumed that it wasa 
matter of converting values into prices of production in all capital- 
istically exploited spheres of production. But this equilibration 
itself runs into greater obstacles, whenever numerous and large 
spheres of production not operated on a capitalist basis (such as 
soil cultivation by small farmers), filter in between the capital- 
ist enterprises and become linked with them. A great density of 
population is another requirement.—The second condition implies 
the abolition of all laws preventing the labourers from transfer- 
ting from one sphere of production to another and from one local 
centre of production to another; indifference of the labourer to 
the nature of his labour; the greatest possible reduction of labour 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OP PROFIT 193 

in all spheres of production to simple labour; the elimination of 
all vocational prejudices among labourers; and last but not least, 
a subjugation of the labourer to the capitalist mode of production. 
es reference to this belongs to a special analysis of competi- 
ion. 

It follows from the foregoing that in each particular sphere of 
production the individual capitalist, as well as the capitalists 
as a whole, take direct part in the exploitation of the total working- 
class by the totality of capital and in the degree of that exploita- 
tion, not only out of general class sympathy, but also for direct 
economic reasons. For, assuming all other conditions—among 
them the value of the total advanced constant capital—to be giv- 
en, the average rate of profit depends on the intensity of exploi- 
tation of the sum total of labour by the sum total of capital. 

The average profit coincides with the average surplus-value 
produced for each 100 of capital, and so far as the surplus- 
value is concerned the foregoing statements apply as a matter of 
course. In the case of the average profit the value of the ad- 
vanced capital becomes an additional element determining the 
rate of profit. In fact, the direct interest taken by the capitalist, 
or the capital, of any individual sphere of productionin the ex- 
ploitation of the labourers who are directly employed is confined to 
making an extra gain, a profit exceeding the average, eilher through 
exceptional overwork, or reduction of the wage below the average, 
or through the exceptional productivity of the labour employed. 
Aside from this, a capitalist who would not in his line of production 
employ any variable capital, and therefore any labourer (in reality an 
exaggerated assumption), would nonetheless be as much interested 
in the exploitation of the working-class by capital, and would derive 
his profit quite as much from unpaid surplus-labour, as, say, a capi- 
talist who would employ only variable capital (another exaggera- 
tion), and who would thus invest his entire capital in wages, But the 
degree of exploitation of labour depends on the average intensity 
of labour if the working-day is given, and on the length of the work- 
ing-day if the intensity of exploitation is given. The degree of 
exploitation of labour determines the rate of surplus-value. and 
therefore the mass of surplus-value for a given total mass of varia- 
ble capital, and consequently the magnitude of the profit. The 
individual capitalist, as distinct Irom his sphere as a whole, has the 
same special interest in exploiting the labourers he personally 
employs as the capital of a particular sphere, as distinct from the 
total social capital, has in exploiting the labourers directly em- 
ployed in that sphere. 

8 — 2757 

194 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

On the other hand. every particular sphere of capital, and every 
individual capitalist, have the same interest in the productivity 
oi the social labour employed by the sum total of capital. For two 
things depend on this productivity: First, the mass of use-values 
in which the average profit is expressed; and this is doubly im- 
portant, since this average profit serves as a fund for the accu- 
mulation of new capital and as a fund for revenue to be spent for 
consumption. Second, the value of the total capital invested (con- 
stant and variable), which, the amount of surplus-value, or profit, 
for the whole capitalist class being given, determines the rate of 
profit, or the profit on a certain quantity of capital. The special 
productivity of labour in any particular sphere, or in any indi- 
vidual enterprise ol this sphere, is of interest only to those capitalists 
who are directly engaged in it, since it enables that particular 
sphere, vis-a-vis the total capital, or that individual capitalist, 
vis-a-vis his sphere, to make an extra profit. 

Here, then, we have a mathematically precise proof why capi- 
talists iorm a veritable freemason society vis-a-vis the whole 
working-class, while there is little love lost belween them in com- 
petition among themselves. 

The price of production includes the average profit. We call it 
price of production. It is really what Adam Smith calls natural 
price, Ricardo calls price of production, ot cost of production, and 
the physiocrats call prix nécessaire, because in the long run it is 
a prerequisite of supply, of the reproduction of commodities in 
every individual sphere.** But none of them has revealed the differ- 
ence between price of production and value. We can well under- 
stand why the same economists who oppose determining the value 
of commodities by Jabour-time, i.e., by the quantity of labour 
contained in them, why they always speak of prices of production 
as centres around which market-prices fluctuate. They can afford 
to do it because the price of production is an utterly external and 
prima facie meaningless form of the value of commodities, a form 
as it appears in competition, therefore in the mind of the vulgar 
capitalist, and consequently in that of the vulgar economist. 

Our analysis has revealed how the market-value (and everything 
said concerning it applies with appropriate modifications to the 
price of production) embraces a surplus-profil for those who produce 
in any particular sphere of production under the most favourable 

* Malthus. 

EQUALIZATION OF GENERAL RATE OF PROFIT 195 

conditions. With the exception of crises, and of over-production 
in general, this applies to all market-prices, no matter how much 
they may deviate from market-values or market-prices of produc- 
tion. For the market-price signifies that the same price is paid for 
commodities of the same kind, although they may have been pro- 
duced under very different individual conditions and hence may 
have considerably different cost-prices. (We do not speak at this 
point of any surplus-profits due to monopolies in the usual sense 
of the term, whether artificial or natural.) 

A surplus-profit may also arise if certain spheres of production 
are in a position to evade the conversion of the values of their 
commodities into prices of production, and thus the reduction of 
their profits to the average profit. We shall devote more attention 
to the further modifications of these two forms of surplus-profit 
in the part dealing with ground-rent. 

8* 

CHUAPTER XI 

EFFECTS OF GENERAL WAGE FLUCTUATIONS 
ON PRICES OF PRODUCTION 

Let the average composition of social capital be 80,+20,, and 
the profit 20%. The rate of surplus-value is then 100%. A general 
increase of wages, all else remaining the same, is tantamount to 
a reduction in the rate of surplus-value. In the case of average 
capital, profit and surplus-value are identical. Let wages rise 25%. 
Then the same quantity of labour, formerly set in motion with 
20, will cost 25. We shall then have a turnover value of 80,+ 
-+25,+15, instead of 80,420,+20,. As before, the labour set in 
motion by the variable capital produces a value of 40. II v rises 
from 20 to 25, the surplus s, or p, will amount to only 15. The profit 
of 15 on a capital of 105 is 14°/,%, and this would be the new 
average rate of profit. Since the price of production of commod- 
ities produced by the average capital coincides with their value, 
ihe price of production of these commodities would have re- 
mained unchanged. A wage increase would therefore have caused a 
drop in profit, but no change in the value and price of the com- 
modities. 

Formerly, as long as the average profit was 20%, the price of 
production of commodities produced in one period of turnover 
was equal to their cost-price plus a profit of 20% on this cost- 
price, therefore=k-+kp'=k+ 7%. In this formula k is a variable 
magnitude, changing in accordance with the value of the means 
ol production that go into the commodities, and with the amount: 
of depreciation given up by the fixed capital to the product. The 

price of production would then amount to k+ hk 

Let us now select a capital, whose composition is lower than the 
original composition of the average social capital of 80.+20. 
(which has now changed into 76*}4),+23'7),,,)i Say, 50, +50,. 

WAGE FLUCTUATIONS AND PRICES OF PRODUCTION 197 

In this case, the price of production of the annual product before 
the wage increase would have been 50,.+-50,+20,=120, assuming 
for the sake of simplicity that the entire fixed capital passes through 
depreciation into the product and that the period of turnover is 
the same as in the first case. For the same quantity of labour set in 
motion a wage increase of 25% means an increase of the variable cap- 
ital from 50 to 62%, If the annual product were sold at the former 
price of production of 120, this would give us 50,+62%,+7%4., 
or a rate of profit of 67/,%. But the new average rate of profit 
is 14°/,%, and since we assume all other circumstances to remain 
the same, the capital of 50,1624, must also make this profit. 
Now, a capital of 112% makes a profit of 16*/,, at a rate of 
profit of 14*/,%. Therefore, the price of production of the com- 
modities produced by this capital is now 50,+62%,-+167/,, = 
=128*/,,, Owing to a wage riseof 25%, the price of production’ of 
the same quantity of the same commodities, therefore, has here 
risen from 120 to 128*/,,, or more than 7%, 

Conversely, suppose we take a sphere of production of a higher 
composition than the average capital; say, 92,1+8,. The original 
average profit in this case would still be 20, and if we again 
assume that the entire fixed capital passes into the annual prod- 
uct and that the period of turnover is the same as in cases } and II, 
the price of production of the commodity is here also 120. 

Owing to the rise in wages of 25% the variable capital for the 
same quantity of labour rises from 8 to 10, the cost-price of the 
commodities from 100 to 102, while the average rate of profit falls 
from 20% to 147/,%. But 100: 14°/,=102: 14*/,. The profit now 
falling to the share of 102 is therefore 14*/,. For this reason, the 
total product sells at k-+kp’=102+1!4*/,==116*/,. The price 
of production has therefore fallen from 120 to 116*/,, or 3°/,. 

Consequently, if wages are raised 25%: 

1) the price of production of the commodities of a capital of 
average social composition does not change; 

2) the price of production of the commodities of a capital of 
lower composition rises, but not in proportion to the fall in profit, 

3) the price of production of the commodities of a capital of 
higher composition falls, but also not in the sare proportion as 

rofit. 

‘ Since the price of production of the commodities of the average 
capital remained the same, equal to the value of the product, 
the sum of the prices of production of the products of all capitals 
remained the sameas well, and equal to the sum total of the values 
produced by the aggregate capital. The increase on one side and 

198 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

the decrease on the other balance for the aggregate capital on the 
level of the average social capital. 

If the price of production rises in case II and falls in case III, 
these opposite effects alone, which are brought about by a fall 
in the rate of surplus-value or by a general wage increase, show 
that this cannot be a matter of compensation in the price for the 
tise in wages, since the fall in the price of production in case III 
cannot compensate thecapitalist for the fall in profit, and since the 
tise of the price in case IJ does not prevent a fall in profit. Rather, 
in either case, whether the price rises or falls, the profit remains 
the same as that of the average capital, in which case the price 
remains unchanged. It is the same average profit which has 
fallen by 5°',, or somewhat over 25%, in the case of Il as well 
as III. It follows from this that if the price did not rise in II and 
fall in IT], I] would have to sell below and III above the new re- 
duced average profit. It is self-evident that, depending on whether 
50, 25, or 10 per 100 units of capital are laid out for wages, the 
eflect of a wage increase on a capitalist who has invested;/,, of his 
capital in wages must be quite diflerent irom that on one who has 
invested '), or '/,. An increase in the price of production on the 
one side, a fall on the other, depending on a capital being below 
or above the average socia] composition, occurs solely by virtue of 
the process of levelling the profit to the new reduced average profit. 

How would a general reduction in wages, and a corresponding 
general rise of the rate of profit, and thus of the average profit, 
now affect the prices of production of commodities produced by 
capitals deviating in opposite directions from the average social 
composition? We have but to reverse the foregoing exposition to 
obtain the result (which Ricardo fails to analyse). 

I. Average capital =80.-+20,=100; rate of surplus-value=100%; 
price of production=value of commodities=80,+20,+20 =120; 
tate of profit=20% . Suppose wages fall by one-fourth. Then the 
same constant capital is set in motion by I5,, instead of 20,.Then 
the value of commodities=80.+ 15,4-25,=120. The quantity of 
labour performed by v remains unchanged, except that the value 
newly created by it is distributed diflerently between the capital- 
ist and the labourer. The surplus-value rises from 20 to 25 and the 
rate of surplus-value from **/,, to?*/,,, or [rom 100% to 1667/,%. The 
profit on 95 now==25, so that the rate of profit per 100=26"/ ,. The 
new composition of the capital in per cent is now 84*/,, +15!) = 
=100. . . 

{1. Lower composition. Originally 50,4-50,, as above. Due to 
the fall of wages by one-fourth v is reduced to 37%, and consequent- 

WAGE FLUCTUATIONS AND PRICES OF PRODUCTION 199 

ly the advanced total capital to 50.-+37%,=87%. If we apply the 
new rate of profit of 26"/,,% to this, we get 100 : 26°),,==87%%:23') 
The same mass of commodities which formerly cost 120, now costs 
Sela Oath this being a price reduction of almost 

70. 

III. Higher composition. Originally 92.+8,=100. The reduc- 
tion of wages by one-fourth reduces 8, to 6,, and the total capital 
lo 98. Consequently, 100 : 26°/,,=98 : 25'*/,,. The price of production 
of the commodity, formerly 100-+-20=120, is now, alter the {ail 
in wages, 984-25'*;,,=123'*/,,, this being a rise of almost 4. 

It is evident, therefore, that we have but to follow the same de- 
velopment in the opposite direction with the appropriate modi- 
fications; that a general reduction of wages is attended by a general 
rise of surplus-value, of the rate of surplus-value and, other cir- 
cumstances remaining the same, of the rate of profit, even if ex- 
pressed in a different proportion; a fall in the prices of production 
for commodities produced by capitals of lower composition, and a 
rise in the prices of production for commodities produced by cap- 
itals of higher composition. The result is just the reverse of that 
observed for a genera! rise of wages.** In both cases—rise or fall 
of wages—it is assumed that the working-day remains the same, and 
also the prices of the means of subsistence. In these circumstances 
a fall in wages is possible only if they stood higher than the 
normal price of labour, or if they are depressed below this price. 
The way in which the matter is modified ifthe rise or fall of wages 
is due to a change in value, and consequently the price of produc- 
tion cf commodities usually consumed by the labourer, will 
be analysed at some length in the part dealing with ground-rent. 
At this point, however, the following remarks are to be made once 
and for all: 

Should the rise or fall in wages be due to a change in the value 
of the necessities of life, a modification of the foregoing findings 
can take place only to the extent that commodities, whose change 
of price raises or lowers the variable capital, also go into the con- 
stant capital as constituent elements and therefore affect more than 
just the wages alone. But if they affect only wages, the above 
analysis contains all that needs to be said. 

% It is very peculiar that Ricardo (who naturally proceeds differently from 
us, since he did not understand the levelling of values to prices of production) 
did not once consider this eventuality, but only the first case, that of a wage rise 
and its influence on the prices of production of commodities. And the seroum 
pecus imitatorum did not even attempt to make this extremely self-evident, actu- 
ally tautological, practical application. 

200 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

In this entire chapter, the establishment of the general rate of 
profit and the average profit, and consequently, the transmutation 
of values into prices of production, are assumed as given. The 
question merely was, how a general rise or fall in wages affected 
the assumed prices of production of commodities. This is but a 
very secondary question compared with the other important points 
analysed in this part. But it is the only relevant question treated 
by Ricardo, and, as we shall see, he treated it one-sidedly and 
unsatisfactorily. 

CHAPTER XIT 
SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 

1, CAUSES IMPLYING A CHANGE IN THE PRICE 
OF PRODUCTION 

There are just two causes that can change the price of production 
of a commodity: 

First. A change in the general rate of profit. This can solely be 
due to a change in the average rate of surplus-value, or, if the aver- 
age rate of surplus-value remains the same, to a change in the 
ratio of the sum of the appropriated surplus-values to the sum olf 
the advanced total social capital. 

If the change in the rate of surplus-value is not due to a depres- 
sion of wages below normal, or their rise above normal—and 
movements of that kind are to be regarded merely as oscillations— 
it can only occur either through a rise, or fall, in- the value of la- 
bour-power, ihe one being just as impossible as the other unless 
there is a change in the productivity of the labour producing means 
of subsistence, i.e., in the value of commodities consumed by the 
labourer, 

Or, through a change in the proportion of the sum of appropri- 
ated surplus-values to the advanced total capital of society. Since 
the change in this case is not caused by the rate of surplus-value, 
it must be caused by the total capital, or rather its constant part. 
The mass of this part, technically considered, increases or decreases 
in proportion to the quantity of labour-power bought by the var- 
iable capital, and the mass of its value thus increases or decreases 
with the increase or decrease of its own mass. It also increases 
or decreases, therefore, proportionately to the mass of the value of 
the variable capital. If the same labour sets more constant capital 
in motion, it has become more productive. If the reverse, then less 

productive. Thus, there has been a change in the productivity of 
labour, and there must have occurred a change in the value of cer- 
tain commodities. 

202 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

The following law, then, applies to both cases: If the price of 
production of a commodity changes in consequence of a change in 
the general rate of profit, its own value may have remained un- 
changed. However, a change must have occurred in the value of 
other commodities. 

Second. The general rate of profit remains unchanged. In this 
case the price of production of a commodity can change only if 
its own value has changed. This may be due to more, or less, la- 
bour being required to reproduce the commodity in question, either 
because of a change in the productivity of labour which produces 
this cominodity in its final form, or of the labour which produces 
those commodities that go into its production. The price of produc- 
tion of cotton yarn may fall, either because raw cotton is pro- 
duced cheaper than before, or because the labour of spinning has 
become more productive due to improved machinery. 

The price of production, as we have seen, =k-+p, equal to cost- 
price plus profit. This, however, =k+-kp’, in which k, the cost- 
price, is a variable magnitude, which changes for different spheres 
of production and is everywhere equal to the value of the constant 
and variable capital consumed in the production of the commodity, 
and p’ is the average rate of profit in percentage form. If k=200, 
and p’=20%, the price of production k+kp’=200+-200-**/,,.= 
=200+40=240. This price of production may clearly remain the 
same, in spite of a change in the value of the commodities. 

All changes in the price of production of commodities are re- 
duced, in the last analysis, to changes in value. But not all changes 
in the value of commodities need express themselves in changes 
in the price of production. The price of production is not determined 
by the value of any one commodity alone, but by the aggregate 
value of all commodities. A change in commodity A may therefore 
be balanced by an opposite change in commodity B, so that the 
general relation remains the same. 

II. PRICE OF PRODUCTION OF COMMODITIES OF AVERAGE 
COMPOSITION 

We have seen how a deviation in prices of production from val- 
ues arises from: 

1) adding the average profit instead of the surplus-value con- 
tained in a commodity to its cost-price; 

2) the price of production, which so deviates from the value of 
a commodity, entering into the cost-price of other commodities 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 203 

as one of its elements, so that the cost-price of a commodity may 
already contain a deviation from value in those means of produc- 
lion consumed by it, quite aside from a deviation of its own which 
may arise through a difference between the average profit and the 
surplus-value. 

It is therefore possible that even the cost-price of commodities 
produced by capitals of average composition may differ from the 
sum of the values of the elements which make up this component 
of their price of production. Suppose, the average composition is 
80.+20,. Now, it is possible that in the actual capitals of this 
composition 80, may be greater or smaller than the value of c, 
i.e., the constant capital, because this ¢ may be made up of com- 
modities whose price of production differs from their value. In the 
same way, 20, might diverge from its value if the consumption of 
the wage includes commodities whose price of production diverges 
from their value; in which case the labourer would work a longer, 
or shorter, time to buy them back (to replace them) and would 
thus perform more, or less, necessary labour than would be required 
if the price of production of such necessities of life coincided with 
their value. 

However, this possibility does not detract in the least from the 
correctness of the theorems demonstrated which hold for commodi- 
ties of average composition. The quantity of profit falling to these 
commodities is equal to the quantity olf surplus-value contained 
in them. For instance, in a capital of the given composition 80.+ 
+20,, the most important thing in determining surplus-value is not 
whether these figures are expressions of actual values, but how 
they are related to one another, i.e., whether v='/, of the total 
capital, and c=*/,. Whenever this is the case, the surplus-value 
produced by v is, as was assumed, equal to the average profit. 
On the other hand, since it equals the average profit, the price of 
production=cost-price plus profit=k+-p=k-+s; i-e., in practice 
it is equal to the value of the commodity. This implies that a rise 
or fall in wages would not change the price of production, k+p, 
any more than it would change the value of the commodities, and 
would merely effect a corresponding opposite movernent, a fall or 
arise, in the rate of profit. For if arise or fall of wages were here 
to bring about a change in the price of commodities, the rate of 
profit in these spheres of average composition would rise above, 
or fall below, the level prevailing in other spheres. The sphere 
of average composition maintains the same level of profit as the 
other spheres only so long as the price remains unchanged. The 
practical result is therefore the same as it would be if its prod- 

204 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

ucts were sold at their real value. For if commodities are sold at 
their actual values, it is evident that, other conditions being 
equal, a rise, or fall, in wages will cause a corresponding fall or 
rise in profit, but no change in the value of commodities, and 
that under all circumstances a rise or fall in wages can never affect 
the value of commodities, but only the magnitude of the surplus- 
value. 

Ill, THE CAPITALIST’S GROUNDS FOR COMPENSATING 

It has been said that competition levels the rates of profit of 
the different spheres of production into an average rate of profit 
and thereby turns the values of the products of these different 
spheres into prices of production. This occurs through the continual 
transfer of capital from one sphere to another, in which, for the 
moment, the profit happens to lie above average. The fluctuations 
of profit caused by the cycle of fat and lean years succeeding one 
another in any given branch of industry within given periods must, 
however, receive due consideration. This incessant outflow and 
inflow of capital between the different spheres of production creates 
trends of rise and fall inthe rate of profit, which equalize one another 
more or less and thus havea tendency to reduce the rate of profit 
everywhere to the same common and general level. 

This movement of capitals is primarily caused by the level of 
market-prices, which lift profits above the general average in one 
place and depress them below it in another. Merchant’s capital is 
left out of consideration as it is irrelevant at this point, for we know 
from the sudden paroxysms of speculation appearing in certain 
popular articles that it can withdraw masses of capital from one 
line of business with extraordinary rapidity and throw them with 
equal rapidity into another. Yet with respect to each sphere of ac- 
tual production—industry, agriculture, mining, etc.—the trans- 
fer of capital from one sphere to another offers considerable difficul- 
ties, particularly on account of the existing fixed capital. Expe- 
rience shows, moreover, that if a branch of industry, such as, say, 
the cotton industry, yields unusually high profits at one period, it 
makes very little profit, or even suffers losses, at another, so that in 
a certain cycle of years the average profit is much the same as in 
other branches. And capital soon learns to take this experience 
into account. 

What competition does nof show, however, is the determination 
of value, which dominates the movement of production; and the 
values that lie beneath the prices of production and that determine 

SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 905 

them in the last instance. Competition, on the other hand, shows: 
1) the average profits, which are independent of the organic compo- 
sition of capital in the different spheres of production, and there- 
fore also of the mass of living labour appropriated by any given 
capital in any given sphere of exploitation; 2) the rise and fall of 
prices of production caused by changes in the level of wages, a phe- 
nomenon which at first glance completely contradicts the value 
relation of commodities; 3) the fluctuations of market-prices, which 
reduce the average market-price of commodities ina given period of 
time, not to the markel-vatwe, but to a very different market-price 
of production, which diverges considerably from this market-value. 
All these phenomena scem to contradict the determination of value 
by labour-time as much as the nature of surplus-value consisting of 
unpaid surplus-labour. Thus everything appears reversed in compe- 
tition. The final pattern of economic relations as seen on thie sur- 
face, in their real existence and consequently in the conceptions by 
which the bearers and agents of these relations seek to understand 
them, is very much different from, and indeed quite the reverse of, 
their inner but concealed essential pattern and the conception 
corresponding to it. 

Further. As soon as capitalist production reaches a certain level 
of development, the equalization of the different rates of profit 
in individual spheres to general rate of profit no longer proceeds 
solely through the play of attraction and repulsion, by which mar- 
ket-prices attract or repel capital. After average prices, and their 
corresponding market-prices, become stable for a time it reaches the 
consciousness of the individual capitalists that this equalization 
balances definite differences, so that they include these in their mu- 
tual calculations. The differences exist in the mind of the capitalists 
and are taken into account as grounds for compensating. 

Average profit is the basic conception, the conception that cap- 
itals of equal magnitude must yield equal profits in equal time 
spans. This, again, is based on the conception that the capital in 
each sphere of production must share pro rafa to ils magnitude in 
the total surplus-value squeezed out of the labourers by the total 
social capital; or, that every individual capital should be regarded 
merely as a part of the total social capital, and every capitalist 
actually as a shareholder in the total social enterprise, each sharing 
in the total profit pro rata to the magnitude of his share of capital. 

This conception serves as a basis for the capitalist’s calculations, 
for instance, that a capital whose turnover is slower than another’s, 
because its commodities take longer to be produced, or because they 
are sold in remoter markets, nevertheless charges the profit it loses 

206 CONVERSION OF PROFIT INTO AVERAGE PROFIT 

in this way. and compensates itself by raising the price. Or else, 
that investments of capital in lines exposed to greater hazards, for 
instance in shipping. are compensated by higher prices. As soon as 
capitalist production, and with it the insurance business, are devel- 
oped, the hazards are. in effect, made equal for all spheres of pro- 
duction (cf. Corbet): but the more hazardous lines pay higher in- 
surance rates, and recover them in the prices of their commodities. 
In practice all this means that every circumstance, which renders 
one line of production—and al! of them are considered equally 
necessary within certain limits—less profitable, and another more 
profitable, is taken into account once and for all as valid ground for 
compensation, without always requiring the renewed action of 
competition to justily the motives or factors for calculating this 
compensation. The capitalist simply forgets—or rather fails to 
see. because competition does not point it out to him—that all 
these grounds for compensalion mutually advanced by capitalists 
in calculating the prices of commodities of different lines of pro- 
duction merely come down to the fact that they all have an equal 
claim, pro rata to the magnitude of their respective capitals, to 
the common loot, the total surplus-value. It rather seems to them 
that since the profit pocketed by them differs from the surplus-val- 
ue they appropriated, these grounds for compensation do not lev- 
el out their participation in the total surplus-value, but crease the 
profit iiself, which seems to be derived from the additions made 
on one or another ground to the cost-price of their commodities. 

In other respects the statements made in Chapter VII, p. 116,* 
concerning the capitalists’ assumptions as to the source of surplus- 
value, apply also to average profit. The present case appears differ- 
ent only in so far as a saving in cost-price depends on individual 
business acumen, alertness, etc., assuming the market-price of com- 
modities and the exploitation of labour to be given. 

* Present edition: pp. 136-37.—L£d. 

SSS ———— 
PART Ul 

THE LAW OF THE TENDENCY 
OF THE RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

CHAPTER XIII 
THE LAW AS SUCH 

Assuming a given wage and working-day, a variable capital, for 
instance of 100, represents a certain number of employed la- 
bourers. It is the index of this number. Suppose £100 are the wages 
of 100 labourers for, say, one week. If these labourers perform equal 
amounts of necessary and surplus labour, if they work daily as many 
hours for themselves, i.e., for the reproduction of their wage, as 
they do for the capitalist, i.e., for the production of surplus-value, 
then the value of their total product =£200, and the surplus-value 

they produce would amount to £100. The rate of surplus-value, =, 

would=100%. But, as we have seen, this rate of surplus-value would 
nonetheless express itself in very different rates of profit, depending 
on the different volumes of constant capital c an consequently 
of the total capital C, because the rate of profit= co The rate of 
surplus-value is 100% 

If c=50, and v= 100, then p' =; = 667/,%; 

100 
ae! 
.c==100, and v=100, then p’ =m 50% 

» c=200, and v= 100, then p’ == 33! /5%0; 
» c=300, and v—100, then p t= = 25%: 
» c-=400, and v=100, then p= 7 = 20%, 

This is how the same rate of surplus-value would express itself 
under the same degree of labour exploitation in a falling rate ol 

208 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

profit, because the material growth of the constant capital implies 
also a growth—albeit not in the same proportion—in its value, 
and consequently in that of the total capital. 

If it is further assumed that this gradual change in the composi- 
tion of capital is not confined only to individual spheres of produc- 
tion, but that it occurs more or less in all, or at least in the key 
spheres of production, so that it involves changes in the average 
organic composition of the total capital of a certain society, then 
the gradual growth of constant capital in relation to variable capi- 
tal must necessarily lead to a gradual fail of the general rate of 
profit, so long as the rate of surplus-value, or the intensity of ex- 
ploitation of labour by capital, remain the same. Now we have seen 
that it is a law of capitalist production that its development is at- 
tended by a relative decrease of variable in relation to constant 
capital, and consequently to the total capital set in motion. This 
is just another way of saying that owing to the distinctive methods 
ol production developing in the capitalist system the same number 
of labourers, i.e., the same quantity oi labour-power set in mo- 
tion by a variable capital of a given value, operate, work up and 
productively consume in the same time span an ever-increasing 
quantity of means of labour, machinery and fixed capital of all 
sorts, raw and auxiliary materials—and consequently a constant 
capital of an ever-increasing value. This continual! relative decrease 
of the variable capital vis-a-vis the constant, and consequently 
the total capital, is identical with the progressively higher organic 
composition of the social capital in its average. It is likewise just 
another expression for the progressive development of the social 
productivity of labour, which is demonstrated precisely by the fact 
that the same number of labourers, in the same time, i.e., with 
less labour, convert an ever-increasing quantity of raw and aux- 
iliary materials into products, thanks to the growing application of 
machinery and fixed capital in general. To this growing quantity 
of value of the constant capital—although indicating the growth 
of the real mass of use-values of which the constant capital mate- 
rially consists only approximately—corresponds a progressive 
cheapening of products, Every individual product, considered by 
itself, contains a smaller quantity of labour than it did on a lower 
level of production, where the capital invested in wages occupies 
a far greater place compared to the capital invested in means of 
production. The hypothetical series drawn up at the beginning of 
this chapter expresses, therefore, the actual tendency of capitalist 
production. This mode of production produces a progressive rela- 
tive decrease of the variable capital as compared to the constant 

THE LAW AS SUCH 209 

capital, and consequently a continuously tising organic composi- 
tion of the total capital. The immediate result of this is that the 
rate ol 'surplus-value, at the same, or even a rising, degree of labour 
exploitation, is represented by a continually falling general rate of 
profit. (We shall see later why this fall does not manifest itself 
in an absolute form, but rather as a tendency toward a progressive 
fall.) The progressive tendency of the general rate of profit to fall 
is, therefore, just an expression peculiar to the capitalist mode of 
production of the progressive development of the social productiv- 
ity of labour. This does not mean to say that the rate of profit 
may not fall temporarily for other reasons. But proceeding from 
the nature of the capitalist mode of production, it is thereby proved 
a logical necessity that in its development the general average rate 
of surplus-value must express itself in a falling general rate of profit. 
Since the mass of the employed living labour is continually on the 
decline as compared to the mass of materialized labour set in mo- 
tion by it, i.e., to the productively consumed means of produc- 
tion, it follows that the portion of living labour, unpaid and con- 
gealed in surplus-value, must also be continually on the decrease 
compared to the amount of value represented by the invested total 
capital. Since the ratio of the mass of surplus-value to the value of 
the invested 1otal capital forms the rate of profit, this rate must 
constantly fall. 

Simple as this law appears from the foregoing statements, all of 
political economy has so far had little success in discovering it, as 
we shall see in a later part. The economists perceived the phenome- 
non and cudgelled their brains in tortuous attempts to interpret it. 
Since this law is of great importance to capitalist production, it 
may be said to be a mystery whose solution has been the goal of all 
political economy since Adam Sinith, the difference between the 
various schools since Adam Smith having been in the divergent ap- 
proaches to a solution. When we consider, on the other hand, that 
up to the present political economy has been running in circles 
round the distinction between constant and variable capital, but 
has never known how to define it accurately; that it has never sepa- 
rated surplus-value from profit, and never even considered profit 
in its pure form as distinct from its different, independent compo- 
nents, such as industrial profit, commercial profit, interest, and 
ground-rent; that it has never thoroughly analysed the differences 
in ihe organic composition of capital, and, for this reason, has nev- 
er thought of analysing the formation of the general rate of profit— 
if we consider all this, the failure to solve this riddle is no longer 
surprising. 

210 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

We intentionally present this law before going on to the division 
of profit into different independent categories. The fact that this 
analysis is made independently of the division of profit into difler- 
ent parts, which [all to the share of different categories of people, 
shows Irom the outset that this law is, in its entirety, independent 
ol this division, and just as independent of the mutual relations 
of the resultant categories of profit. The profit to which we are 
here referring is but another name for surplus-value itself, which is 
presented only in its relation to total capital rather than to varia- 
ble capital, from which it arises. The drop in the rate ol profit, there- 
fore, expresses the falling relation of surplus-value to advanced 
total capital, and is for this reason independent of any division 
whatsoever of this surplus-value among the various categories. 

We have seen that at a certain stage of capitalist development, 
where the organic composition of capital c :'v was 50: 100, a rate 
of surplus-value of 100% was expressed in arate of profit of 66°/,%, 
and that at a higher stage, where c : v was 400 : 100, the same rate 
oi surplus-value was expressed in a rate of profit of only 20%. What 
is true of different successive stages of development in one country, 
is alsc true of different coexisting stages of development in differ- 
ent countries. In an undeveloped country, in which the former com- 
position of capital is the average, the general rate of profit would= 
=66"',°, while in a country with the latter composition and a much 
higher stage of development it would=20%. 

The difference between the two national rates of profit might 
disappear, or even be reversed, if labour were less productive in 
the less developed country, so that a larger quantity of labour were 
to be represented in a smaller quantity of the same commodities, 
and a larger exchange-value were represented in less use-value. The 
labourer would then spend more of his time in reproducing his own 
means of subsistence, or their value, and less time in producing 
surplus-value; consequently, he would perform Jess surplus-labour, 
with the result that the rate of surplus-value would be lower. Sup- 
pose, the labourer of the Jess developed country were to work °/, of 
the working-day for himself and '/, for the capitalist; in accordance 
with the above illustration, the same labour-power would then be 
paid with 133'/, and would furnish a surplus of only 66°/,. A con- 
stant capital of 50 would correspond toa variable capital of 133'/,. 
The rate of surplus-value would amount to 667/, : 133'/,=50%, and 
the rate of profit to 66*/, : 183'/,, or approximately 364%. 

Since we have not so far analysed the different component parts 
of profit, i.e., they do not for the present exist for us, we make the 
following remarks beforehand merely to avoid misunderstanding: 

THE LAW AS sucH 211 

In comparing countries in different stages of development it would 
be a big mistake to measure the level of the national rate of profit 
by, say, the level of the national rate of interest, namely when com- 
paring countries with a developed capitalist production with 
countries in which labour has not yet been formally subjected to 
capital, although in reality the labourer is exploited by the capi- 
{alist (as, for instance, in India, where the ryot manages his farm as 
an independent producer whose production as such is not, therefore 
as yet subordinated to capital, allhough the usurer may not only 
rob him of his entire surplus-labour by means of interest, but may 
also, to use a capitalist term, hack off a part of his wage). This in- 
terest comprises all the profit, and more than the profit, instead 
of merely expressing an aliquot part of the produced surplus-value, 
or profil, as it does in countries with a developed capitalist pro- 
duction. On the other hand, the rate of interest is, in this case, most- 
ly determined by relations (loans granted by usurers to owners of 
larger estates who draw ground-rent) which have nothing to do with 
profit, and rather indicate to what extent usury appropriates 
ground-rent. 

As regards countries possessing different stages of development 
of capitalist production, and consequently capitals of different or- 
ganic composition, a country where the normal working-day is 
shorter than another’s may have a higher rate of surplus-value 
(one of the factors which determines the rate of profil). Firs/, if 
the English ten-hour working-day is, on account of its higher in- 
tensily, equal to an Austrian working-day of 14 hours, then, divid- 
ing the working-day equally in both instances, 5 hours of English 
surplus-labour may represent a greater value on the world-market 
than 7 hours of Austrian surplus-labour. Second, a larger portion 
of the English working-day than of the Austrian may represent 
sur plus-labour. 

The law of the falling rate of profit, which expresses the same, or 
even a higher, rate of surplus-value, states, in other words, thal any 
quantity of the average social capital, say, a capilal of 100, com- 
prises an ever larger portion of means ol labour, and an ever smaller 
portion of living labour. Therefore, since the aggregale mass of 
living labour operating the means of production decreases in re- 
lation to the value of these means of production, it follows that the 
unpaid labour and the portion of value in which it is expressed must 
decline as compared to the value of the advanced total capital. Or: 
An ever smaller aliquot part of invested total capital is converted 
into living labour, and this total capital, therefore, absorbs in pro- 
portion to its magnitude less and less suiplus-labour, although 

212 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

ihe unpaid part of the labour applied may at the same time grow 
in relation to the paid part. The relative decrease of the variable 
and increase of the constant capital, however much both parts may 
grow in absolute magnitude, is, as we have said, but another ex- 
pression for greater productivity of labour. 

Let a capital of 100 consist of 80,+20,, and the latter=20 la- 
bourers. Let the rate of surplus-value be 100%, i.e., the labourers 
work half the day for themselves and the other half for the capital- 
ist. Now let the capital of 100 in a less developed country =20,+- 
—80,, and let the latter=80 labourers. But these labourers require 
2" ol the day for themselves, and work only */, for the capitalist. 
Everything else being equal, the labourers in the first case produce 
a value of 40, and in the second of 120. The first capital produces 
80,+-20,+-20,= 120; rate of profit=20%. The second capital, 20,+- 
—80,—40,=140; rate of profit 40%. In the second case the rate of 
profit is, therefore, double the first, although the rate of surplus- 
value in the first =100%. which is double that of the second, where 
it is only 50%. But then, a capital of the same magnitude appro- 
priates the surplus-labour of only 20 labourers in the first case, and 
of 80 labourers in the second case. 

The law of the progressive falling of the rate of profit, or the rel- 
ative decline of appropriated surplus-labour compared to the mass 
of materialized labour set in motion by living labour, does not rule 
out in any way that the absolute mass of exploited labour set in 
motion by the social capital, and consequently the absolute mass 
of the surplus-labour it appropriates, may grow; nor, that the capi- 
tals controlled by individual capitalists may dispose of a growing 
mass of labour and, hence, of surplus-labour, the latter even though 
the number of labourers they employ does not increase. 

Take a certain working population of, say, two million. Assume, 
furthermore, that the length and intensity of the average working- 
day, and the level of wages, and thereby the proportion between 
necessary and surplus labour, are given. In that case the aggregate 
labour of these two million, and their surplus-labour expressed in 
surplus-value, always produces the saine magnitude of value. But 
with the growth of the mass of the constant (fixed and circulating) 
capital set in motion by this labour, this produced quantity of 
value declines in relation to the value of this capital, which value 
grows with its mass, even if not in quite the same proportion. This 
ratio, and consequently the rate of profit, shrinks in spite of the 
fact that the mass ol commanded living labour is the same as before, 
and the same amount of surplus-labour is sucked out of it by the 
capital, It changes because {he mass of materialized labour set in 

THE LAW AS suUCH 213 

motion by living labour increases, and not because the mass 
of living labour has shrunk. It is a relative decrease, not an absolute 
one, and has, in fact, nothing to do with the absolute magnitude of 
the labour and surplus-labour set in motion. The drop in the rate 
of profit is not due to an absolute, but only to a relative decrease 
of the variable part of the total capital, i.e., to its decrease in re- 
lation to the constant part. 

What applies to any given mass of labour and surplus-labour, 
also applies to a growing number of labourers, and, thus, under the 
above assumption, to any growing mass of commanded labour in 
general, and to its unpaid part, the surplus-labour, in particular. 
If the working population increases from two million to three, and 
if the variable capital invested in wages also rises to three million 
from its former two million, while the constant capital rises from 
four million to fifteen million, then, under the above assumption 
of a constant working-day and a constant rate of surplus-value, 
the mass of surplus-labour, and of surplus-value, rises by one hall, 
i.e., 50%, from two million to three. Nevertheless, in spite of this 
growth of the absolute mass of surplus-labour, and hence of sur- 
plus-value, by 50%, the ratio of variable to constant capital would 
fall from 2:4 to 3: 15, and the ratio of surplus-value to total cap- 
ital would be (in millions): 

I. 4,+2,+2, C=6, p’=33'/,%. 
I, 15,+3,4+3,; C==18, p’=167/,%. 

's 

While the mass of surplus-value has increased by one half, the 
rate of profit has fallen by one half. However, the profit is only the 
surplus-value calculated in relation to the total social capital, and 
the mass of profit, its absolute magnitude, is socially equal to the 
absolute magnitude of the surplus-value. The absolute magnitude 
of the profit, its total amount, would, therefore, have grown by 
50%, in spite of its enormous relative decrease compared to the ad- 
vanced total capital, or in spite of the enormous decrease in the gen- 
eral rate of profit. The number of labourers employed by capital, 
hence the absolute mass of the labour set in motion by it, and there- 
fore the absolute mass of surplus-labour absorbed by it, the mass 
of the surplus-value produced by it, and {herefore the absolute mass 
of the profit produced by it, ca, consequently, increase, and in- 
crease progressively, in spite of the progressive drop in the rate of 
profit. And this not only can be so. Aside from temporary fluctua- 
tions it musf be so, on the basis of capitalist production. 

Essentially, the capitalist process of production is simultaneous- 
ly a process of accumulation. We have shown that with the devel-- 

214 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

opment of capitalist production the mass of values to be simply 
reproduced, of maintained, increases as the productivity of labour 
grows. even il the labour-power employed should remain constant. 
But with the development of social productivity of Jabour the mass 
of produced use-values, of which the means of production form a 
part, grows still more. And the additional labour, through whose 
appropriation this additional wealth can be reconverted into cap- 
ital. does not depend on the value, but on the mass of these means 
of production (including means of subsistence), because in the pro- 
duction process the labourers have nothing to do with the value, 
but with the use-value, of the means of production. Accumulation 
itself, however, and the concentration of capital that goes with it, 
is a material means of increasing productiveness. Now, this growth 
of the means of production includes the growth of the working popu- 
lation, the creation of a working population, which corresponds to 
the surplus-capital, or even exceeds its general requirements, thus 
leading to an over-population of workers. A momentary excess of 
surplus-capital over the working population it has commandeered, 
would have a two-fold effect. It would, on the one hand, by raising 
wages, mitigate the adverse conditions which decimate the offspring 
of the labourers and would make marriages easier among them, so as 
gradually to increase the population. On the other hand, by apply- 
ing methods which yield relative surplus-value (introduction and 
improvement of machinery) it would produce a far more rapid, ar- 
tificial, relative over-population, which in its turn, would be a 
breeding-ground for a really swift propagation of the population, 
since under capitalist production misery produces population. 
It therefore follows of itself from the nature of the capitalist proc- 
ess of accumulation, which is but one facet of the capitalist 
production process, that the increased mass of means of production 
that is to be converted into capital always finds a correspondingly 
increased, even excessive, exploitable worker population. As the 
process of production and accumulation advances therefore, the 
mass of available and appropriated surplus-labour, and hence the 
absolute mass of profit appropriated by the social capital, must 
grow. Along with the volume, however, the same laws of production 
and accumulation increase also the value of the constant capital 
in a mounting progression more rapidly than that of the variable 
part of capital, invested as it is in living labour. Hence, the same 
laws produce for the social capital a growing absolute mass of profit, 
and a falling rate of profit. 

We shall entirely ignore here that with the advance of capitalist 
production and the attendant development of the productiveness 

THE LAW AS SUCII 215 

of social labour and multiplication of production branches, hence 
products, the same amount of value represents a progressively in- 
creasing mass of use-values and enjoyments. 

The development of capitalist production and accumulation 
lifts labour-processes to an increasingly enlarged scale and thus im- 
parts to them ever greater dimensions, and involves accordingly larg- 
er investments of capital for each individual establishment. A 
mounting concentration of capitals (accompanied, though ona smaller 
scale, by an increase in the number of capitalists) is, therefore, one of 
its material requirements as well as one of its results. Hand in 
hand with it, mutually interacting, there occurs a progressive ex- 
propriation of the more or less direct producers. [t is, then, natural 
for the individual capitalists tocommand increasingly large armies 
of labourers (no matter how much the variable capital may decrease 
in relation to the constant), and natural, too, that the mass of sur- 
plus-value, and hence profit, appropriated by them, should grow 
simultaneously with, and in spite of, the fall in the rate of profit. 
The causes which concentrate masses o! labourers under the command 
of individual capitalists, are the very same that swell the mass of 
the invested fixed capital, and auxiliary and raw materials, in 
mounting proportion as compared to the mass of employed living 
labour. 

It requires no more than a passing remark at this point to indi- 
cate that, given a certain labouring population, the mass of sur- 
plus-value, hence the absolute mass of profit, must grow if the rate 
of surplus-value increases, be it through a lengthening or intensi- 
fication of the working-day, or through a drop in the value of wages 
due to an increase in the productiveness of labour, and that it must 
do so in spite of the relative decrease of variable capital in respect 
to constant. 

The same development of the productiveness of social labour, 
the same laws which express themselves in a relative decrease of 
variable as compared to total capital, and in the thereby facilitated 
accumulation, while this accumulation in its turn becomes a start- 
ing-point for the further development of the productiveness and 
for a further relative decrease of variable capital—this same devel- 
opment manifests itself, aside Irom temporary iluctuations, in a pro- 
gressive increase of the total employed labour-power and a progres- 
sive increase of the absolute mass of surplus-value, and hence of profit. 

Now, what must be the form of this double-edged law of a de- 
crease in the rate ol profit and a simultaneous increase in the absolute 
mass of profit arising [rom the same causes? As a law based on the 
fact that under given conditions the appropriated mass of surplus- 

216 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

labour, hence of surplus-value, increases, and that, so lar as the total 
capital is concerned, or the individual capital as an aliquot part of 
the total capital. profit and surplus-value are identical magnitudes? 

Let us take an aliquot part of capital upon which we calculate 
the rate of profit, e.g., 100. These 100 represent- the aver- 
age composition of the total capital, say 80,+20,. We have seen 
in the second part of this book that the average rate ol profit in the 
various branches of production is determined not by the particular 
composition of each individual capital, but by the average social 
composition. As the variable capital decreases relative to the con- 
stant, hence the total capital of 100, the rate of profit, or the 
relative magnitude of surplus-value, i.e., its ratio to the advanced 
total capital of 100, falls even though the intensity of exploitation 
were to remain the same, or even to increase. But it is not this rel- 
ative magnitude alone which falls. The magnitude of the sur- 
plus-value or profit absorbed by the total capital of 100 also falls 
absolutely. At a rate of surplus-value of 100%, a capital of 60,+-40, 
produces a mass of surplus-value, and hence of profit, amounting to 40; 
acapital of 70_4-30, a mass ol profit of 30; and for a capital of 80,+ 
—20. the profit falls to 20. This falling applies to the mass of surplus- 
value, and hence of profit, and is due to the fact that the total capi- 
tal of 100 employs less living labour, and, the intensity of labour 
exploitation remaining the same, sets in motion less surplus-labour, 
and therefore produces less surplus-value. Taking any aliquot part 
of the social capital, i. e., a capital of average composition, as a 
standard by which to measure surplus-value—and this is done in 
all profit calculations—a relative fall of surplus-value is generally 
identical with its absolute fall. In the cases given above, the rate 
of profit sinks [rom 40% to 30% and to 20%, because, in fact, the 
mass of surplus-value, and hence of profit, produced by the same cap- 
ital falls absolutely from 40 to 30 and to 20. Since the magnitude 
oi the value of the capital, by which the surplus-value is measured, 
is given as 100, a fall in the proportion of surplus-value to this giv- 
en magnitude can be only another expression for the decrease ol 
the absolute magnitude of surplus-value and profit. This is, indeed, 
a tautology. But, as shown, the fact that this decrease occurs at 
all, arises from the nature of the development of the capitalist proc- 
ess of production. 

On the other hand, however, the same causes which bring about 
an absolute decrease of surplus-value, and hence profit, on a given 
capital, and consequently of the rate of profit calculated in per cent, 
produce an increase in the absolute mass of surplus-value, and hence 
of profit, appropriated by. thesocial capital (i.e., by all capitalists 

THE LAW AS SUCH 217 

taken as a whole). How does this occur, what is the only way in 
which this can occur, or what are the conditions obtaining in this 
seeming contradiction? 

If any aliquot part=100 of the social capital, and hence any 100 
of average social composition, is a given magnitude, for which there- 
fore a fall in the rate of profit coincides with a [all in the absolute 
magnitude of the profit because the capital which here serves as a 
standard of measurement is a constant magnitude, then the magni- 
tude of the social capital, like that of the capital in the hands of 
individual capitalists, is variable, and in keeping with our assump- 
tions it must vary inversely with the decrease of its variable portion. 

In our former illustration, when the percentage of composition 
was 60,+40,, the corresponding surplus-value, or profit, was 40, 
and hence the rate of profit 40% . Suppose, the total capital in this 
stage of composition was one million. Then the total surplus-val- 
ue, and hence the tetal profit, amounted to 400,000. Now, if the 
composition later=80,+-20,, while the degree of labour exploi- 
tation remained the same, then the surplus-value or profit for each 
100=20. But since the absolute mass of surplus-value or 
profit increases, as demonstrated, in spite of the decreasing rate of 
profil or the decreasing production of surplus-value by every 100 
of capital—increases, say, from 400,000 to 440, 000, then this occurs 
solely because the total] capital which formed at the time of this 
new composition has risen to 2,200,000. The mass of the total cap- 
ital set in motion has risen to 220%, while the rate of profit has 
fallen by 50% . Had the total capital no more than doubled, it would 
have to produce as much surplus-value and profit to obtain a rate of 
profit of 20% as theold capital of 1,000,000 produced at 40%. Had 
it grown to less than double, it would have produced less surplus-val- 
ue, or profit, than the old capital of 1,000,000, which, in its for- 
mer composition, would have had to grow from 1,000,000 to no more 
than 1,100,000 to raise its surplus-value from 400,000 to 440,000. 

We again meet here the previously defined law that the relative 
decrease of the variable capital, hence the development of the so- 
cial productiveness of labour, involves an increasingly large mass of 
total capital to set in motion the same quantity of labour-power and 
squeeze out the same quantity of surplus-labour. Consequently, the 
possibility of a relative surplus of labouring people develops pro- 
portionately to the advances made by capitalist production not 
because the productiveness of social labour decreases, but because 
it increases. It does not therefore arise out of an absolute dispropor- 
tion between labour and the means of subsistence, or the means for 
the production of these means of subsistence, but out of a dispro- 

218 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

portion occasioned by capitalist exploitation of labour, a dispro- 
portion between the progressive growth of capital and its relatively 
shrinking need for an increasing population. 

Should the rate of profit fall by 50%, it would shrink one half. 
li the mass of profit is to remain the same, the capital must be dou- 
bled. For the mass oi profit made at a declining rate of profit to re- 
main the same, the multiplier indicating the growth of the total 
capital must be equal to the divisor indicating the fall of the rate of 
profit. If the rate of profit falls from 40 to 20, the total capital must 
rise inversely at the rate of 20: 40 to obtain the same result. If 
the rate of profit falls from 40 to 8, the capital would have to in- 
crease at the rate of 8: 40, or five-jold. A capital of 1,000,000 at 
40% produces 400,000, and a capital of 5,000,000 at 8% like- 
wise produces 400,000. This applies if we want the result to re- 
main the same. But if the result is to be higher, then the capital 
must grow at a greater rate than the rate of profit falls. In other 
words, jor the variable portion of the total capital not to remain 
the same in absolute terms, but to increase absolutely, in spite of 
its falling in percentage of the total capital, the total capital must 
grow at a faster rate than the percentage of the variable capital 
falls. It must grow so considerably that in its new composition it 
should require more than the old portion of variable capital to pur- 
chase labour-power. If the variable portion of a capital=100 should 
fall from 40 to 20, the total capital must rise higher than 200 to be 
able to employ a larger variable capital than 40. 

Even if the exploited mass of the working population were to 
remain constant, and only the length and intensity of the working- 
day were to increase, the mass of the invested capital would have 
to increase, since it would have to begreater in order to employ the 
same mass of labour under the old conditions of exploitation after 
the composition of capital changes. 

Thus, the sare development of the social productiveness of la- 
bour expresses itself with the progress of capitalist production on 
the one hand in a tendency of therate of profit to fall progressively 
and, on the other, in a progressive growth of the absolute mass of 
the appropriated surplus-value, or profit; so that on the whole a 
relative decrease of variablecapital and profit is accompanied by an 
absolute increase of both. This two-fold effect, as we have seen, can 
express itself only in a growth of the total capital at a pace more 
rapid than that at which the rate of profit falls. For an absolutely 
increased variable capital to be employed in a capital of higher 
composition, or one in which the constant capital has increased rel- 
atively more, the total capital must not only grow proportionately 

THE LAW AS SUCII 219 

to its higher composition, but still more rapidly. It follows, then 
that as the capitalist mode of production develops, an ever larger 
quantity of capital is required to employ the same, let alone an in- 
creased, amount of labour-power. Thus, on a capitalist foundation, 
the increasing productiveness of labour necessarily and permanently 
creates a seeming over-population of labouring people. If the ya- 
riable capital forms just '/, of the total capital instead of the former 
‘f,, the total capital must be trebled to employ the same amount of 
labour-power. And if twice as much labour-power is to be employed, 
the total capital must increase six-fold. 

Political economy, which has until now been unable to explain 
the law of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall, pointed self-con- 
solingly to the increasing mass of profit, i. e., to the growth of the ab- 
solute magnitude of profit, be it for the individual capitalist or for 
the social capital, but this was also based on mere platitude and 
speculation, 

To say that the mass of profit is determined by two factors— 
first, the rate of profit, and, secondly, the mass of capital invested 
at this rate, is mere tautology. It is therefore but a corollary of this 
tautology to say that there is a possibility for the mass of profit 
to grow even though the rate of profit may fall at the same time. It 
does not help us one step farther, since it is just as possible for the 
capital to increase without the mass of profit growing, and for it 
to increase even while the mass of profit falls. For 100 at 25% 
yields 25, and 400 at 5% yields only 20.°* But if the same causes 

38 “We should also expect that, however the rate of the profits of stock might 
diminish in consequence of the accumulation of capital on the land and the rise 
of wages, yet the aggregate amount of profits would increase. Thus, anbpeee that, 
with repeated accumulations of £100,000, the rate of profit should fall from 20 to 
19, to 18, to 17%, aconstantly diminishing rate, we shouldexpect that the whole 
amount of profits received by those successive owners of capital would be al- 
ways progressive; that it would be greater when the capital was £200,000, than 
when $100,000; still greater when £300,000; and so on, increasing, though at a 
diminishing rate, with every increase of capital. This progression, however, is 
only true for acertain time; thus 19% on £200,000 is more than 20 on £100, 000; 
again 18% on £300,000 is more than 19% on £200,000; but alter capital has ac- 
cumulated toa large amount, and profits have fallen, the further accumulation 
diminishes the aggregate of profits. Thus, suppose the accumulation should 
be £1,000,000, and the profits 7%, the whole amount of profits will be 
£70,000; now if an addition of £100,000 capital be made to the million, and prol- 
its should Fall to 6%, £66,000 or a diminution of 44,000 will be received by the 
owners of the stock, although the whole amount of stock will be increased from 
£1,000,000 to £1,100,000."—Ricardo, Political Economy, Chap. VI (Works. 
ed. by MacCulloch, 1852, pp. 68-69).—The fact is, that the assumption has here 
been made that theZcapital increases from 1,000,000 to 1,100,000, that is, by 10%, 
while the rate of profit falls from 7 ta 6, lence by I4%/,%. Mine illae lacrimaet 

920 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

which make the rate of profit fall, entail the accumulation, i.e., 
the formation, of additional capital, and if each additional capi- 
tal employs additional labour and produces additional surplus-val- 
ue: if, on the other hand, the mere fall in the rate of profit implies 
that the constant capital, and with it the total old capital, have 
increased, then this process ceases to be mysterious. We shall 
see later to what deliberate falsifications some people resort in 
their calculations to spirit away the possibility of an increase in 
the mass of profit simultaneous witl a decrease in the rate of 
rofit. 
' We have shown how the same causes that bring about a tendency 
for the general rate of profit to fall necessitate an accelerated accu- 
mulation of capital and, consequently, an increase in the absolute 
magnitude, or total mass, of the surplus-labour (surplus-value, 
profit) appropriated by it. Just as everything appears reversed in 
competition, and thus in the consciousness of tlie agents of compe- 
tition, so also this law, this inner and necessary connection between 
two seeming contradictions. It is evident that within the proportions 
indicated above a capitalist disposing of a large capital will receive 
a larger mass of profit than a small capitalist making seemingly 
high profits. Even a cursory examination of competition shows, 
furthermore, that under certain circumstances, when the greater 
capitalist wishes to make room for himself on the market, and to 
crowd out the smaller ones, as happens in times of crises, he makes 
practical use of this, i.e., he deliberately lowers his rate of profit 
in order to drive the smaller ones to the wall. Merchant’s capital, 
which we shall describe in detail later, also notably exhibits phe- 
nomena which appear to attribute a fall in profit to an expansion 
of business, and thus of capital. The scientific expression for this 
false conception will be given later. Similar superficial observa- 
tions result from a comparison of rates of profit in individual 
lines of business, distinguished either as subject to free competition, 
or to monopoly. The utterly shallow conception existing in the 
minds of the agents of competition is found in Roscher, namely, 
that a reduction in the rate of profit is “more prudent and humane.” 
The fall in the rate of profit appears in this case as an effect of an 
increase in capital and of the concomitant calculation of the capi- 
talist that the mass of profits pocketed by him will be greater at a 
smaller rate of profit. This entire conception (with the exception of 
Adam Smith’s, which we shall mention later) rests on an utter mis- 
apprehension of what the general rate of profit is, and on the crude 
notion that prices are actually determined by adding a more or less 
arbitrary quota of profit to the true value of commodities. Crude as 

THE LAW a8 SUCH 221 

these ideas are, they arise necessarily out of the inverted aspect 
which the immanent laws of capitalist production represent in com- 
petition. 

The law that a fall in the rate of profit due to the development of 
productiveness is accompanied by an increase in the mass of profit, 
also expresses itself in the fact that a fall in the price of commodi- 
ties produced by a capital is accompanied by a relative increase 
of the masses of profit contained in them and realized by their 
Sale. 

Since the development of the productiveness and the correspond- 
ingly higher composition of capital sets in motion an ever-increas- 
ing quantity of means of production through a constantly decreas- 
ing quantity of labour, every aliquot part of the total product, 
i.e., every single commodity, or each particular lot of commodities 
in the total mass of products, absorbs less living labour, and also 
contains less materialized labour, both in the depreciation of the 
fixed capital applied and in the raw and auxiliary materials con- 
sumed. Hence every single commodity contains a smaller sum of 
labour materialized in means of production and of labour newly 
added during production. This causes the price of the individual 
commodity to fall. But the mass of profits contained in the individ- 
ual commodities may nevertheless increase if the rale of the ab- 
solute or relative surplus-value grows. The commodity contains less 
newly added labour, but its unpaid portion grows in relation to its 
paid portion. However, this is the case only within certain limits. 
With the absolute amount of living labour newly incorporated in 
individual commodities decreasing enormously as production de- 
velops, the absolute mass of unpaid labour contained in them will 
likewise decrease, however much it may have grown as compared to 
the paid portion. The mass of profit on each individual commodity 
will shrink considerably with the development of the productive- 
ness of labour, in spite of a growth in the rate of surplus-value. 
And this reduction, just as the fall in the rate of profit, is only de- 
layed by the cheapening of the elements of constant capital and by 
the other circumstances set forth in the first part of this book, 
which increase the rate of profit at a given, or even falling, rate of 
surplus-value. 

That the price of individual commodities whose sum makes up 
the total product of capital falls, means simply that a certain quan- 
tity of labour is realized in a larger quantity of commodities, so 
that each individual commodity contains less labour than before. 

292 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

This is the case even if the price of one part of constant capital, 
such as raw material, etc., should rise. Outside of a few cases (for 
instance, if the productiveness of labour uniformly cheapens all 
elements of the constant, and the variable, capital), the rate of 
profit will fall, in spite of the higher rate of surplus-value, 1) be- 
cause even a larger unpaid portion of ihe smaller total amount of 
newly added labour is smaller than a smaller aliquot unpaid por- 
tion of the former larger amount, and 2) because the higher compo- 
sition of capital is expressed in the individual commodity by the 
fact that the portion of its value in which newly added labour is 
materialized decreases in relation to the portion of its value which 
represents raw and auxiliary material, and the wear and tear of 
fixed capital. This change in the proportion of the various compo- 
nent parts in the price of individual commodities, i. e., the decrease 
ol that portion of the price in which newly added living labour is 
materialized, and the increase of that portion of it in which form- 
erly materialized labour is represented, is the form which ex- 
presses the decrease of the variable in relation to the constant capital 
through the price of the individual commodities. Just as this de- 
crease is absolute for a certain amount of capital, say of 100, it is 
also absolute for every individual commodity as an aliquot part of 
the reproduced capital. However, the rate of profit, if calculated 
merely on the elements of the price of an individual commodity, 
would be different from what it actually is. And for the following 
Treason: 

[The rate of profit is calculated on the total capital invested, 
but for a definite time, actually a year. The rate of profit is the 
ratio of the surplus-value, or profit, produced and realized in a 
year, to the total capital calculated in percent. It is, therefore, not 
necessarily equal to a rate of profit calculated for the period of 
turnover of the invested capital rather than for a year. It is only 
if the capital is turned over exactly in one year that the two 
coincide. 

On the other hand, the profit made in the course of a year is 
merely the sum of profits on commodities produced and sold during 
that same year. Now, if we calculate the profit on the cost-price of 

commodities, we obtain a rate of profit =£ in which p stands 

for the profit realized during one year, and k for the sum of {he cost- 
prices of commodities produced and sold within the same period. It 

is evident thal this rate of profit 4 will not coincide with the actual 

THE LAW AS SUCII 223 

rate ol profit = mass of profit divided by total capital, unless 

k=C, that is, unless the capital is turned over in exactly one year. 
Let us take three different conditions of an industrial capital. 
I. A capital of £8,000 produces and sells annually 5,000 pieces of 
a commodity at 30s. per piece, thus making an annual turnover of 
£7,500. It makes a profit of 10s. on each piece, or £2,500 per 
year. Every piece, then, conlains 20s. advanced capital and 
10s. profit, so that the rate of profit per piece is $5250. The 
turned-over sum of £7,500 contains £5,000 advanced capital and 
£2,500 profit. Rate of profit per turnover, ‘, likewise = 50%. 
2,500 

But calculated on the total capital the rate of profit S000 = 
=311;,%; 

II. The capital rises to £10,000. Owing to increased productiv- 
ity of labour it is able to produce annually 10,000 pieces of the 
commodity at a cost-price of 20s. per piece. Suppose, the commod- 
ity is sold at a profit of 4s., hence at 24s. per piece. In that case 
the price of the annual product=£12,000, of which £10,000 is 

P 
c 

advanced capital and £2,000 is profit. The rate of profit pat per 
piece, and eam for the annual turnover, or in both cases=20%. 

And since the total capital is equal to the sum of the cost-prices, 
namely £10,000, it follows that é& the actual rate of profit, is in 

this case also 20%. 

III. Let the capital rise to £15,000 owing to a constant growth 
of the productiveness of labour, and let it annually produce 30,000 
pieces of the commodity at a cost-priceof 13s. per piece, each piece 
being sold at a profit of 2s., or at 15s. The annual turnover there- 
fore =30,000 X 15s. =£22,500, of which £ 19,500 is advanced capi- 

: Pi 3,000 
tal and £3,000 profit. The rate of profit £ then= a7 = 
ay p_ 3,000 arg, 
==155/,,%. But C= Rog 20%. 

We see, therefore, that only in case 11, where the turned-over cap- 
ilal-value is equal to the lotal capital, the rate of profit per piece, 
or per tolal amount of turnover, is the same as the rate of profit 
calculated on the otal capilal. In case I, in which the amount of 
the turnover is smaller than ihe total capital, the rate of profit 
calculated on the cost-price of the commodity is higher; and in 
case III, in which the total capital is smaller than ihe amount of 

9224 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

the turnover, it is lower than the actual rate calculated on the 
total capital. This is a general rule. 

In commercial practice, the turnover is generally calculated inac- 
curately. It is assumed that the capital has been turned over once as 
soon as the sum of the realized commodity-prices equals the sum of 
the invested total capital. But the capifal can complete one whole 
turnover only when the sum of the cos¢-prices of the realized commod- 
ities equals the sum of the total capital.—F. E.] 

This again shows how important it is in capitalist production to 
regard individual commodities, or the commodity-product of a 
certain period, as products of advanced capital and in relation to 
the total capital which produces them, rather than in isolation, by 
themselves, as mere commodities. 

The rate of profit must be calculated by measuring the mass of 
produced and realized surplus-value not only in relation to the con- 
sumed portion of capital reappearing in the commodities, but 
also to this part plus that portion of unconsumed but applied cap- 
ital which continues to operate in production. However, the 
mass of profit cannot be equal to anything but the mass of profit 
or surplus-value, contained in the commodities themselves, and to 
be realized by their sale. 

If the productivity of industry increases, the price of individual 
commodities falls. There is less !abour in them, less paid and un- 
paid labour. Suppose, the same labour produces, say, triple its 
former product. Then ?/, less labour yields individual product. And 
since profit can make up but a portion of the amount of labour con- 
tained in an individual commodity, the mass of profit in the indi- 
vidual commodity must decrease, and this takes place within cer- 
tain limils, even if the rate of surplus-value should rise. In any case, 
the mass of profit onthe total product does not fall below the orig- 
inal mass of profit so long as the capital employs the same number 
of labourers at the same degree of exploitation. (This may also occur 
if fewer labourers are employed at a higher rate of exploitation.) 
For the mass of profit on the individual product decreases pro- 
portionately to the increase in the number of products.The mass 
of profit remains the same, but ‘it is distributed differently over 
the total amount of commodities. Nor does this alter the distri- 
bution between the labourers and capitalists of {he amount of value 
created by newly added labour. The mass of profit cannot increase 
so long as the same amount of labour is employed, unless the unpaid 
surplus-labour increases, or, should intensity of exploitation re- 
main the same, unless the number of labourers grows. Or, both 
these causes may combine to produce this result. In all these cases— 

THE LAW AS SUCH 225 

which, however, in accordance with our assumption, presuppose an 
increase of constant capital as compared to variable, and an in- 
crease in the magnitude of total capital—the individual commodity 
contains a smaller mass of profit and the rate of profit falls even 
if calculated on the individual commodity. A given quantity ofnewly 
added labour materializes in a larger quantity of commodities. The 
price of the individual commodity falls. Considered abstractly the 
rate of profit may remain the same, even though the price of the 
individual commodity may fall as a result of greater productiveness 
of labour and a simultaneous increase in {he number of this cheaper 
commodity if, for instance, the increase in productiveness of labour. 
acts uniformly and simultaneously on all the elements of the com- 
modity, so that its total price falls in the same proportion in which 
the productivity of labour increases, while, on the other hand, the 
mutual relation of the different elements of the price of the com- 
modity remains the same. The rate of profit could even rise if a rise 
in the rate of surplus-value were accompanied by a substantial 
reduction in the value of the elements of constant, and particularly 
of fixed, capital. But in reality, as we have seen, the rate of profit 
will fall in the long run. In no case does a fall in the price of any 
individual commodity by itself give a clue to the rate of profit. Ev- 
erything depends on the magnitude of the total capital invested in 
its production. For instance, if the price of one yard of fabric falls 
from 3s. to 1*/,s.; if we know that before this price reduction 
it contained 17/,s. constant capital, yarn, etc., °/,s. wages, 
and */,s. profit, while after the reduction it contains Is. con- 
stant capital, '/, s. wages, and */,s. profit, we cannot tell if 
the rate of profit has remained the same or not. This depends on 
whether, and by how much, the advanced total capital has increased, 
and how many yards more it produces in a given time. 

The phenomenon, springing [rom the nature of the capitalist 
mode of production, that increasing productivity of labour implies 
a drop in the price of the individual commodity, or of a certain 
mass of commodities, an increase in the number of commodities, 
a reduction in the mass of profit on the individual commodity and 
in the rate of profit on the aggregate of commodities, and an increase 
in the mass of profit on the total quantity of commodities—this 
phenomenon appears on the surface only in a reduction of the mass 
of profit on the individual commodity, a fall in its price, an in- 
crease in the mass of profit on the augmented total number of com- 
modities produced by the total social capital or an individual cap- 
italist. It then appears as if the capitalist adds less profit to the 
price of the individual commodity of his own free will, and makes up 

9 — 2757 

996 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

for it through the greater number of commodities he produces, 
This conception rests upon the notion of profit upon alienation, 
which, in its turn, is deduced from the conception of merchant cap- 
ital. 

We have previously seen in Book I (4. and 7 Abschnitt)* that 
the mass of commodities growing along with the productivity of 
labour and the cheapening of the individual commodity as such 
(as long as these commodities do not enter the price of Jabour-pow- 
er as determinants)—that this does not affect the proportion 
between paid and unpaid labour in the individual commodity, in 
spite of the falling price. 

Since all things appear distorted, namely, reversed in compe- 
tition, the individual capitalist may imagine: 1) that he is reduc- 
ing his profit on the individual commodity by cutting its price, 
but still making a greater profit by selling a larger quantity of com- 
modities; 2) that he fixes the price of the individual commodities 
and that he determines the price of the total product by multipli- 
cation, while the original process is really one of division (see Book 
I, Kap. X, S. 281**), and multiplication is only correct secondari- 
ly, since it is based on that division. The vulgar economist does 
practically no more than translate the singular concepts of the cap- 
italists, who are in the thrall of competition, into a seemingly 
more theoretical and generalized language, and attempt to substan- 
tiate the justice of those conceptions. 

The fall in commodity-prices and the rise in the mass of profit 
on the augmented mass of these cheapened commodities is, in 
fact, but another expression for the law of the falling rate of profit 
attended by a simultaneously increasing mass of profit. 

The analysis of how far a falling rate of profit may coincide with 
rising prices no more belongs here than that of the point previously 
discussed in Book I (S. 280-81),*** concerning relative surplus-val- 
ue. A capitalist working with improved but not as yet generally 
adopted methods of production sells below the market-price, but 
above his individual price of production; his rate of profit rises until 
competition levels it out. During this equalization period the sec- 
ond requisite, expansion of the invested capital, makes its appear- 
ance. According to the degree of this expansion the capitalist 
will be able to employ a part of his former labourers, actually per- 
haps all of them, or even more, under the new conditions, and hence 
1o produce the same, or a greater, mass of profit. 

* English edition: Parts IV and VII.—Ed. 
** English edition: Ch. XII, pp. 316:17.—£d. 
*** English edition: pp. 316-17.—Ed. 

CHAPTER XIv 
COUNTERACTING INFLUENCES 

If we consider the enormous development of the productive forces 
of social labour in the last 30 years alone as compared with all 
preceding periods; if we consider, in particular, the enormous mass 
of fixed capital, aside from the actual machinery, which goes into 
the process of social production as a whole, then the difficulty 
which has hitherto troubled the economist, namely to explain the 
falling rate of profit, gives place to its opposite, namely to explain 
why this fall is not greater and more rapid. There must be some 
counteracting influences at work, which cross and annul the effect 
oj the general law, and which give it merely the characteristic of 
a tendency, for which reason we have referred to the fall of thegen- 
eral rate of profit as a tendency to fall. 

The following are the most general counterbalancing forces: 

I, INCREASING INTENSITY OF EXPLOITATION 

The degree of exploitation of labour, the appropriation of sur- 
plus-labour and surplus-value, is raised notably by lengthening the 
working-day and intensifying labour. These two points have been 
comprehensively treated in Book I as incidental to the production 
of absolute and relative surplus-value. There are many ways of in- 
tensifying labour which imply an increase of constant, as compared 
to variable, capital, and hence a fall in the rate of profit, such as 
compelling a labourer to operate a larger number of machines. In 
such cases—and in most procedures serving the production of 
relative surplus-values—the same causes which increase the rate 
of surplus-value, may also, from the standpoint of given quanti- 
ties of invested total capital, involve a fall in the mass of surplus- 
value. Bul there are other aspects of intensification, such as the 
greater velocities of machinery, which consume more raw material 
in the same time, but, so far as the fixed capital is concerned, wear 
out the machinery so much faster, and yet do not in any way affect 

g* 

298 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

the relation of its value to the price of the Jabour which sets it in 
motion. But notably, it is prolongation of the working-day, this 
invention of modern industry, which increases the mass of appro- 
priated surplus-labour without essentially altering the proportion 
of the employed labour-power to the constant capital set in motion 
by it, and which rather tends to reduce this capital relatively. 
Moreover, it has already been demonstrated—and this constitutes 
the real secret of the tendency of the rate of profit to fall—that 
the manipulations to produce relative surplus-value amount, on 
the whole, to transforming as much as possible of a certain quan- 
tity of labour into surplus-value, on the one hand, and employing 
as little labour as possible in proportion to the invested capital, on 
the other, so that {he same reasons which permit raising the inten- 
sity of exploitation rule out exploiting thesame quantity of labour 
as before by the same capital. These are the counteracting tenden- 
cies, which, while eflecting a rise in the rate of surplus-value, also 
tend to decrease the mass of surplus-value, and hence the rate of 
profit produced by a certain capital. Mention should also be made 
here of the wide-spread introduction of female and child labour, 
in so far as the whole family must now perform more surplus-labour 
for capital than before, even when the total amount of their wages 
increases, which is by no means always the case.—Everything 
that promotes the production of relative surplus-value by mere im- 
provement in methods, as in agriculture, without altering the mag- 
nitude of the invested capital, has the same effect. The constant 
capital, it is true, does not, in such cases, increase in relation to 
the variable, inasmuch as we regard the variable capital as an in- 
dex of the amount of labour-power employed, but the mass of the 
product does increase in proportion to the labour-power employed. 
The same occurs, if the productiveness of labour (no matter, wheth- 
er its product goes into the labourer’s consumption or into the ele- 
ments of constant capital) is freed from hindrances in communica- 
tions, from arbitrary or other restrictions which have become obsta- 
cles inthe course of time; from fetters of all kinds, without directly 
afiecting the ratio of veriable to constant capital. 

It might be asked whether the factors that check the fall of the 
tate of profit, but that always hasten its fall in the last analysis, 
whether these include the temporary, but always recurring, eleva- 
tions in surplus-value above the general level, which keep occur- 
Ting now in this and now in that line of production redounding to 
the benefit of those individual capitalists, who make use of inven- 
tions, etc., before these are introduced elsewhere. This question 
must be answered in the alfirmative. 

COUNTERACTING INFLUENCES 9299 

The mass of surplus-value produced by a capital of a given mag- 
nitude is the product of two factors—the rate of surplus-value mul- 
tiplied by the number of labourers employed at this rate. At a giv- 
en rate of surplus-value it therefore depends on the number of 
labourers, and it depends on the rate of surplus-value when the 
number of labourers is given. Generally, therefore, it depends on 
the composite ratio of the absolute magnitudes of the variable cap- 
ital and the rate of surplus-value. Now we have seen that, on the 
average, the same factors which raise the rate of relative surplus- 
value lower the mass of the employed labour-power. It is evident, 
however, that this will occur to a greater or lesser extent, depend- 
ing on the definite proportion in which this conflicting movement 
obtains, and that the tendency towards a reduction in the rate of 
profit is notably weakened by a rise in the rate of absolute surplus- 
value, which originates with the lengthening of the working-day. 

We saw in the case of the rate of profit that a drop in the rate 
was generally accompanied by an increase in the mass of profit, 
due to the increasing mass of totat capital employed. From the 
standpoint of the total variable capital of society, the surplus-value 
it has produced is equal to the profit it has produced. Both the ab- 
solute mass and the rate of surplus-value have increased; the 
one because the quantity of labour-power employed by society has 
grown, and the other, because the intensity of exploitation of this 
labour-power has increased. But in the case of a capital of agiven 
magnitude, e.g., 100, the rate of surplus-value may increase, while 
the average mass may decrease; for the rate is determined by the 
proportion, in which the variable capital produces value, while 
the mass is determined by the proportion of variable capital to the 
total capital. 

The rise in the rate of surplus-value is a factor which determines 
the mass of surplus-value, and hence also the rate of profit, for it 
takes place especially under conditions, in which, as we have pre- 
viously seen, the constant capital is either not increased at all, or 
not proportionately increased, in relation to the variable capital. 
This factor does not abolish the general law. But it causes that law 
to act rather as a tendency, i.e., as a law whose absolute action is 
checked, retarded, and weakened, by counteracting circumstances. 
But since the same influences which raise the rate of surplus-value 
(even a lengthening of the working-time is a result of large-scale in- 
dustry) tend to decrease the labour-power employed by a certain 
capital, it follows that they also tend to reduce the rate of profit 
and to retard this reduction. If one labourer is compelled to perform 
as much labour as would rationally be performed by at least two, 

230 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

and if this is done under circumstances in which this one labourer 
can replace three, then this one labourer will perform as much 
surplus-labour as was formerly performed by two, and the rate of 
surplus-value will have risen accordingly. But he will not perform 
as much as three had performed, and the mass of surplus-value 
will have decreased accordingly. But this reduction in mass will 
be compensated, or limited, by the rise in the rate of surplus-value, 
If the entire population is employed at a higher rate of surplus-val- 
ue, the mass of surplus-value will increase, in spite of the popula- 
tion remaining the same. It will increase still more if the popula- 
tion increases. And although this is tied up witha relative reduction 
of the number of employed labourers in proportion to the magni- 
tude of the total capital, this reduction is moderated, or checked, 
by the rise in the rate of surplus-value. 

Before leaving this point, it is to be emphasized once more that 
with a capital of a given magnitude the rate of surplus-value may 
rise, while its mass is decreasing, and vice versa. The mass of sur- 
plus-value is equal totherate multiplied by the number of labourers; 
however, the rate is never calculated on the total, but only on the 
variable capital, actually only for every working-day. On the other 
hand, with a given magnitude of capital-value, the rate of profit 
can neither rise nor fall without the mass of surplus-vatue also ris- 
ing or falling. 

Il, DEPRESSION OF WAGES BELOW THE VALUE 
OF LABOUR-POWER 

This is mentioned here only empirically, since, like many other 
things which might be enumerated, it has nothing to do with the 
general analysis of capital, but belongs in an analysis of competi- 
tion, which is not presented in this work. However, it is one of the 
DO voy a factors checking the tendency of the rate of profit 
to fall. 

M1. CHEAPENING OF ELEMENTS OF CONSTANT CAPITAL 

Everything said in Part I of this book about factors which raise 
the rate of profit while the rate of surplus-value remains the same, 
or regardless of the rate of surplus-value, belongs here. Hence also, 
with respect to the total capital, that the valueol the constant cap- 
ital does not increase in the same proportion as its materia! volume. 
For instance, the quantity of cotton worked up by a single European 
spinner in a modern factory has grown tremendously compared to 

COUNTERACTING INFLUENCES 231 

the quantity formerly worked up by a European spinner with a 
spinning-wheel. Yet the value of the worked-up cotton has not 
grown in the same proportion as its mass. The same applies to 
machinery and other fixed capital. In short, the same development 
which increases the mass of the constant capital in relation to the 
variable reduces the value of its elements as a result of the increased 
productivity of labour, and therefore prevents the value of con- 
stant capital, although it continually increases, from increasing 
at the same rate as its material volume, i.e., the material volume of 
the means of production set in motion by the same amount of labour- 
power. In isolated cases the mass of the elements of constant capi- 
tal may even increase, while its value remains the same, or falls. 

The Joregoing is bound up with the depreciation of existing cap- 
ital (that is, of its material elements), which occurs with the devel- 
opment of industry. This is another continually operating factor 
which checks the fall of the rate of profit, although it may under 
certain circumstances encroach on the mass of profit by reducing 
the mass of the capital yielding a profit. This again shows that the 
same influences which tend to make therate of profit fall, also mod- 
erate the effects of this tendency. 

IV. RELATIVE OVER-POPULATION 

Its propagation is inseparable from, and hastened by, the develop- 
ment of the productivity of labour as expressed by a fall in the rate 
of profit. The relative over-population becomes so much more appar- 
ent in a country, the more the capitalist mode of production is 
developed in it. This, again, is the reason why, on the one hand, 
the more or less imperfect subordination of Jabour to capital contin- 
ues in many branches of production, and continues longer than 
seems at first glance compatible with the general stage of develop- 
ment. This is due to the cheapness and abundance of disposable or 
unemployed wage-labourers, and to the greater resistance, which 
some branches of production, by their very nature, render to the 
transformation of manual work into machine production. On the 
other hand, new lines of production are opened up, especially for 
the production of luxuries, and it is these that take as their basis 
this relative over-population, often set free in other lines of produc- 
tion through the increase of their constant capital. These new lines 
start out predominantly with living labour, and by degrees pass 
through the same evolution as the other lines of production. In 
either case the variable capital makes up a considerable portion of 
the total capital and wages are below the average, so that both the 

932 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

raie and mass of surplus-value in these lines of production are 
unusually high. Since the general rate of profit is formed by levelling 
the rates of profit in the individual branches of production, how- 
ever, the same factor which brings about the tendency in the rate of 
profit to fall, again produces a counterbalance to this tendency and 
more or less paralyses its efiects. 

Y¥, FOREIGN TRADE 

Since foreign trade partly cheapens the elements of constant cap- 
ital, and partly the necessities of life for which the variable capi- 
tal is exchanged, it tends to raise the rate of profit by increasing 
the rate of surplus-value and lowering the value of constant capi- 
tal. It generally acts in this direction by permitting an expansion 
of the scale of production. I1 thereby hastens the process of accu- 
mulation, on the one hand, but causes the variable capital to 
shrink in relation to the constant capital, on the other, and thus has- 
tens a fall in the rate of profit. In the same way, the expansion of 
foreign trade, although the basis of the capitalist mode of production 
in its infJancy, has become its own product, however, with the fur- 
ther progress of the capitalist mode of production, through the innate 
necessity of this mode of production, its need for an ever-expand- 
ing market. Here we see once more the dual nature of this effect. 
(Ricardo has entirely overlooked this side of foreign trade.) 

Another question—really beyond the scope of our analysis 
because of its special nature—is this: Is the general rate of profit 
raised by the higher rate of profit produced by capital invested in 
foreign, and particularly colonial, trade? 

Capitals invested in foreign trade can yield a higher rate of 
profit, because, in the first place, there is competition with commod- 
ities produced in other countries with inferior production facili- 
ties, so that the more advanced country sells its goods above their 
value even though cheaper than the competing countries. In so far 
as the labour of the more advanced country is here realized as la- 
bour of a higher specific weight, the rate of profit rises, because la- 
bour which has not been paid as being of a higher quality is sold as 
such. The same may obtain in relation to the country, to which com- 
modities areexported and to that from which commodities are import- 
ed; namely, the latter may offer more materialized labour in ind 
than it receives, and yet thereby receive commodities cheaper than 
it could produce them. Just as a manufacturer who employs a new 
invention before it becomes generally used, undersells his competi- 
tors and yet sells his commodity above its individual value, thai is, 

COUNTERACTING INFLUENCES 233 

realizes the specifically higher productiveness of the labour he 
employs as surplus-labour. He thus secures a surplus-profit. As 
concerns capitals invested in colonies, etc., on the other hand, they 
may yield higher rates of profit for the simple reason that the rate 
of profit is higher there due to backward development, and like- 
wise the exploitation of labour, because of the use of slaves, coolies, 
etc. ee should not these higher rates of profit, realized by capitals 
invested in certain lines and sent home by them, enter into the 
equalization of the general rate of profit and thus tend, pro tanto, to 
raise it, unless it is the monopolies that stand in the way.** There 
is so much less reason for it, since these spheres of investment of cap- 
ita] are subject to the laws of free competition. What Ricardo fan- 
cies is mainly this: with the higher prices realized abroad commod- 
ities are bought there in return and sent home. These commodi- 
ties are thus sold on the home market, which fact can at best be but a 
temporary extra disadvantage of these favoured spheres of production 
over others. This illusion falls away as soon as it is divested of 
its money-form. The favoured country recovers more labour in ex- 
change for less labour, although this difference, this excess is pock- 
eted, as in any exchange between labour and capital, by a certain 
class. Since the rate of profit is higher, therefore, because it is gen- 
erally higher in a colonial country, it may, provided natural con- 
ditions are favourable, go hand in hand with low commodity- 
prices. A levelling takes place but not a levelling to the old level, 
as Ricardo feels. 

This same foreign trade develops the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion in the home country, which implies the decrease of variable 
capital in relation to constant, and, on the other hand, causes over- 
production in respect to foreign markets, so that in the long run it 
again has an opposite effect. 

We have thus seen in a general way that the same influences 
which produce a tendency in the general rate of profit to fall, also 
call forth counter-eflects, which hamper, retard, and partly para- 
lyse this fall. The latter do not do away with the law, but impair 
its elect. Otherwise, it would not be the fall of the general rate of 
profit, but rather its relative slowness, that would be incompre- 
hensible. Thus, the law acts only as a tendency. And it is only un- 
der certain circumstances and only after long periods that its effects 
become strikingly pronounced. 

33 Adam Smith was right in this respect, contrary to Ricardo, who said: 
"They contend that the equality of profits will be hrought about by the general 
rise of profits; and I am ol the opinion that the profits of the favoured trade 
will speedily submit to the general level.” (Works, ed. by MacCulloch, p. 73.) 

934 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

Before we go on, in order to avoid misunderstandings, we should 
recall two, repeatedly treated, points. 

First; The same process which brings about a cheapening of com- 
modities in the course of the development of the capitalist mode of 
production, causes a change in the organic composition of the social 
capital invested in the production of commodities, and consequently 
lowers the rate of profit. We must be careful, therefore, not to iden- 
tify the reduction in the relative cost of an individual commodity, 
including that portion of it which represents wear and tear of machin- 
ery, with the rise in the value of the constant in relation to varia- 
ble capital, although, conversely, every reduction in the relative 
cost of the constant capital assuming the volume of its material 
elements remains the same, or increases, tends to raise the rate of 
profit, i.e., to reduce pro tanto the value of the constant capital in re- 
lation to the shrinking proportions of the employed variable capital. 

Second: The fact that the newly added living labour contained 
in the individual commodities, which taken together make up the 
product of capital, decreases in relation to the materials they con- 
tain and the means of labour consumed by them; the fact, therefore, 
that an ever-decreasing quantity of additional living labour is 
materialized in them, because their production requires less la- 
bour with the development of the social productiveness—this fact 
does not affect the ratio, in which the living labour contained in 
the commodities breaks up into paid and unpaid labour. Quite 
the contrary. Although the total quantity of additional living la- 
bour contained in the commodities decreases, the unpaid portion 
increases in relation to the paid portion, either by an absolute or a 
relative shrinking of the paid portion; for the same mode of pro- 
duction which reduces the total quantity of additional living la- 
bour in a commodity is accompanied by a rise in the absolute and 
relative surplus-value. The tendency of the rate of profit to fall is 
bound up with a tendency of the rate of surplus-value to rise, hence 
with a tendency for the rate of labour exploitation to rise. Nothing 
is more absurd, for this reason, than to explain the fall in the rate 
of profit by a rise in the rate of wages, although this may be the case 
by way of an exception. Statistics is not able to make actual anal- 
yses of the rates of wages in different epochs and countries, until 
the conditions which shape the rate of profit are thoroughly under- 
stood. The rate of profit does not fall because labour becomes less 
productive, but because it becomes more productive. Both the rise 
in the rate of surplus-value and the fall in the rate of profit are but 
specific forms through which growing productivity of labour is 
expressed under capitalism. 

COUNTERACTING INFLUENCES 7 235, 

YI. THE INCREASE OF STOCK CAPITAL 

The foregoing five points may still be supplemented by the fol- 
lowing, which, however, cannot be more fully treated for the pres- 
ent. With the progress of capitalist production, which goes hand in 
hand with accelerated accumulation, a portion of capital is calcu- 
lated and applied only as interest-bearing capital. Not in the sense 
in which every capitalist who lends out capital is satisfied with 
interest, while the industrial capitalist pockets the investor’s 
profit. This has no bearing on the level of the general rate of profit, 
because for the latter profit =interest-+-profit of all kinds+-ground- 
rent, the division into these particular categories being imma- 
terial to it. But in the sense that these capitals, although invested in 
large productive enterprises, yield only large or sinall amounts of 
interest, so-called dividends, after all costs have been deducted. In 
railways, for instance. These do not therefore go into levelling the 
general rate of profit, because they yield a lower than average rate 
of profit. If they did enter into it, the general rate of profit would 
fall much lower. Theoretically, they may be included in the cal- 
culation, and the result would then be a lower rate of profit than 
the seemingly existing rate, which is decisive for the capitalists; 
it would be lower, because the constant capital particularly in 
these enterprises is largest in its relation to the variable capital. 

CHAPTER XV 

EXPOSITION OF THE INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS 
OF THE LAW 

I, GENERAL 

We have seen in the first part of this book that the rate of profit 
expresses the rate of surplus-value always lower than it actually 
is. We have just seen that even a rising rate of surplus-value has a 
tendency to express itself in a falling rate of profit. The rate of 
profit would equal the rate of surplus-value only if c=0, i.e., if 
the total capital were paid out in wages. A falling rate of profit 
does not express a falling rate of surplus-value, unless the propor- 
tion of the value of the constant capital to the quantity of labour- 
power which sets it in motion remains unchanged or the amount of 
labour-power increases in relation to the value of the constant cap- 
ital. 

On the plea of analysing therate of profit, Ricardo actually anal- 
yses the rate of surplus-value alone, and this only on the assump- 
tion that the working-day is intensively and extensively a constant 
magnitude. 

A fall in the rateof profit and accelerated accumulation are differ- 
ent expressions of the same process only in so far as both reflect 
the development of productiveness. Accumulation, in turn, has- 
tens the fall of the rate of profit, inasmuch as it implies concentra- 
tion of labour on a large scale, and thus a higher composition of 
capital. On the other hand, a fall in the rate of profit again hastens 
the concentration of capital and its centralization through expro- 
priation of minor capitalists, the few direct producers who still 
have anything left to be expropriated. This accelerates accumula- 
tion with regard to mass, although the rate of accumulation falls 
with the rate of profit. 

On the other hand, the rate of self-expansion of the total capital, 
or the rate of profit, being the goad of capitalist production (just as 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OP THE LAW 237 

self-expansion of capital is its only purpose), its fall checks the 
formation of new ripe aeelh capitals and thus appears as a threat 
to: the development ol the capitalist production process. It breeds: 
over-production, speculation, crises, and surplus-capital along- 
side surplus-population. Those economists, therefore, who, like 
Ricardo, regard the capitalist mode of production as absolute, 
feel at this point that it creates a barrier itself, and for this rea- 
son attribute the barrier to Nature (in the theory of rent), not to 
production. But the main thing about their horror of the falling 
rate of profit is the feeling that capitalist production meets in the 
development of its productive forces a barrier which has nothing 
to do with the production of wealth as such; and this peculiar bar- 
rier testifies to the Jimitations and to the merely historical, tran- 
sitory character of the capitalist mode of production; testifies 
that for the production of wealth, it is not an absolute mode, more- 
over, that at acertain stageit rather conflicts with its further devel- 
opment. 

True, Ricardo and his school considered only industrial profit, 
which includes interest. But the rate of ground-rent likewise has a 
tendency to fall, although its absolute mass increases, and may 
also increase proportionately more than industrial profit. (See Ed. 
West, who developed the law of ground-rent before Ricardo.) If 
we consider the total! social capital C, and use p, for the industrial 
profit that remains after deducting interest and ground-rent, i for 

i s_ Pp _ ptitr oh 
interest, and r for ground-rent, then waee oo a+ 

+246. We have seen that while s, the total amount of surplus- 
value, is continually increasing in the course of capitalist develop- 
ment, = is just as steadily declining, because C grows still more 
rapidly than s. Therefore it is by no means a contradiction for p,, 
i, andr to be steadily increasing, each individually, while zat’ 

as well as 23, a and o should each by itself be steadily shrink- 

ing, or that p, should increase in relation to i, or r inrelation to 
p,, or to p, and i. With a rising total surptus-value or profit s=p, 

and a simultaneously falling rate of profit zat the proportions 

of the parts p,, i, and r, which make up s=p, may change at will 
within the limits set by the total amount of s without thereby affect- 

ing the magnitude of s or +. 

238 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

The mutual variation of p,, i andr is merely a varying distribu- 

i r 
tion of s among different classes. Consequently, 3, = of = the 
rate of individual industrial profit, the rate of interest, and the 
ratio of ground-rent to the total capital, may rise inrelation to one 

another, while = the general rate of profit, falls. The only condi- 

tion is that the sum of all three=<. If the rate of profit falls from 

50% to 25%, because the composition of a certain capital with, 
say, a rate of surplus-value=100°% has changed from 50,.+-50, to 
75.—25,, then a capital of 1,000 will yield a profit of 500 in the 
first case, and in the second a capital of 4,000 will yield a profit 
of 1,000. We see that s or p have doubled, while p’ has fallen by 
one half. And if that 50% was formerly divided into 20 profit, 

10 interest, and 20 rent, then E=W%, e=10%, and G=20%. 

If the proportions had remained the same alter the change from 50% 
to 25%, then &—10%, 2=5%, and ~=10%. If, however, 

Py 
Cc 
should fall to 8% and < to 4%, then “would rise to 13%. The 
relative magnitude of r would have risen as against p, and i, while 
p’ would have remained the same. Under both assumptions, the 
sum of p,, i, and r would have increased, because produced by a 
capital four times as large. Furthermore, Ricardo’s assumption that 
originally industrial profit (plus interest) contains the entire sur- 
plus-value is historically and logically false. It is rather the prog- 
ress of capitalist production which 1) gives the whole profit di- 
rectly to the industrial and commercial capitalists for further dis- 
tribution, and 2) reduces rent to the excess over the profit. On 
this capitalist basis, again, the rent grows, being a portion of profit 
(i.e., of the surplus-value viewed as the product of the total capi- 
tal), but not that specific portion of the product, which the capital- 
ist pockets. 

Given the necessary means of production, i.e., a sulficient accu- 
mulation of capital, the creation of surplus-value is only limited 
by the labouring population if the rate of surplus-value, i.e., the 
intensity of exploitation, is given; and no other limit but the inten- 
sity of exploitation if the labouring population is given. And the cap- 
italist process of production consists essentially of the production 
of surplus-value, represented in the surplus-product or that aliquot 
portion of the produced commodities materializing unpaid labour. 
It must never be forgotten that the production of this surplus-val- 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 239 

ue—and the reconversion of a portion of it into capital, or the 
accumulation, forms an integrate part of this production of sur- 
plus-value—is the immediate purpose and compelling motive of 
capitalist production. It will never do, therefore, to represent capi- 
talist production as something which it is not, namely as produc- 
tion whose immediate purpose is enjoyment or the manufacture 
of the means of enjoyment for the capitalist. This would be over- 
looking its specific character, which is revealed in all its inner es- 
sence. 

The creation of this surplus-value makes up the direct process 
of production, which, as we have said, has no other limits but those 
mentioned above. As soon as all the surplus-labour it was possible 
to squeeze out has been embodied in commodities, surplus-yalue 
has been produced. But this production of surplus-value com- 
pletes but the first act of the capitalist process of production—the 
direct production process. Capital has absorbed so and so much 
unpaid labour. With the development of the process, which expresses 
itself in a drop in the rate of profit, the mass of surplus-value 
thus produced swells to immense dimensions. Now comes the sec- 
ond act of the process. The entire mass of commodities, i.e., the 
total product, including the portion which replaces the constant 
and variable capital, and that representing surplus-value, must be 
sold. If this is not done, or done only in part, or only at prices be- 
low the prices of production, the labourer has been indeed exploit- 
ed, but his exploitation is not realized as such for the capitalist, 
and this can be bound up with a total or partial failure to realize 
the surplus-value pressed out of him, indeed even with the partial 
or total loss of the capital. The conditions of direct exploitation, and 
those of realizing it, are not identical. They diverge not only in 
place and time, but also logically. The first are only limited by 
the productive power of society, the latter by the proportional rela- 
tion of the various branches of production and the consumer power 
of society. But this Jast-named is not determined either by the ab- 
solute productive power, or by the absolute consumer power, but 
by the consumer power based on antagonistic conditions oi distri- 
bution, which reduce the consumption of the bulk of society to a 
minimum varying within more or less narrow limits. It is furthermore 
restricted by the tendency to accumulate, the drive to expand cap- 
ital and produce surplus-value on an extended scale. This is law 
for capitalist production, imposed by incessant revolutions in 
the methods of production themselves, by the depreciation of 
existing capital always bound up with them, by the general com- 
petitive struggle and the need to improve production and expand 

240 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

its scale merely as a means of self-preservation and under penalty 
of ruin. The market must, therefore, be continually extended, so 
that its interrelations and the conditions regulating them assume 
more and more the form of a natural law working independently of 
the producer, and become ever more uncontrollable. This internal 
contradiction seeks to resolve itself through expansion of the out- 
lying field of production, But the more productiveness develops, 
the more it finds itself at variance with the narrow basis on which 
the conditions of consumption rest. It is no contradiction at all on 
this self-contradictory basis that there should be an excess of capi- 
tal simultaneously with a growing surplus of population. For while a 
combination of these two would, indeed, increase the mass of pro- 
duced surplus-value, it would at the same time intensify the contra- 
diction between the conditions under which this surplus-value is 
produced and those under which it is realized. 

li a certain rate of profit is given, the mass of profit will always 
depend on the magnitude of the advanced capital. The accumula- 
tion, however, is then determined by that portion of this mass which 
is reconverted into capital. As for this portion, being equal to the 
profit minus the revenue consumed by the capitalists, it will depend 
not merely on the value of this mass, but also on the cheapness of 
the commodities which the capitalist can buy with it, commodi- 
ties which pass partly into his consumption, his revenue, and partly 
into his constant capital. (Wages are here assumed to be 
given.) 

The mass of capital set in motion by the labourer, whose value 
he preserves by his labour and reproduces in his product, is quite 
difierent from the value which he adds to it. If the mass of the 
capital=1,000 and the added labour=100, the reproduced cap- 
ital=1,100. If the mass=100 and the added labour=20, the 
teproduced capital=120. In the first case the rate of profit=10%, 
in the second=20%. And yet more can be accumulated out of 
100 than out of 20. And thus the river of capital rolls on (aside 
from its depreciation through increase of the productiveness), 
or its accumulation does, not in proportion to the rate of profit, 
but in proportion to the impetus it already possesses. So far as 
it is based on a high rate of surplus-value, a high rate of profit is 
possible when the working-day is very long, although labour is 
not highly productive. It is possible, because the wants of the la- 
bourers are very small, hence average wages very low, although 
the labour itself is unproductive. The low wages will correspond to 
the labourers’ lack of energy. Capital then accumulates slowly, in 
spite of the high rate of profit. Population jis stagnant and the work- 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF TITE LAW 241 

ing-time which the product costs, is great, while the wages paid 
to the Jabourer are small. ; 

The rate of profit does not sink because the labourer is exploited 
any less, but because generally less labour is employed in propor- 
tion to the employed capital. 

If, as shown, a falling rate of profit is bound up with an increase 
in the mass of profit, a larger portion of the annual product of Ja- 
bour is appropriated by the capitalist under the category of capital 
(as a replacement for consumed capital) and a relatively smaller 
portion under the category of profit. Hence the fantastic idea of 
priest Chalmers, that the less of the annual product is expended by 
capitalists as capital, the greater the profits they pocket. In which 
case the state church comes to their assistance, to care for the con- 
sumption of the greater part of the surplus-product, rather than 
having it used as capital. The preacher confounds cause with effect. 
Furthermore, the mass of profit increases in spite of its slower rate 
with the growth of the invested capital. However, this requires a 
simultaneous concentration of capital, since the conditions of pro- 
duction then demand employment of capital on a larger scale. It 
also requires its centralization, i.e., the swallowing up of the 
small capitalists by the big and their deprivation of capital. It 
is again but an instance of separating—raised to the second power— 
the conditions of production from the producers to whose 
number these smal] capitalists still belong, since their own labour 
continues to play a role in their case. The labour of a capitalist 
stands altogether in inverse proportion to the size of his capital, 
i. e., to the degree in which he is a capitalist. It is this same se- 
verance of the conditions of production, on the one hand, from the 
producers, on the other, that forms the conception of capital. It 
begins with primitive accumulation (Buch I, Kap. XXIV),* appears 
as a permanent process in the accumulation and concentration of 
capital, and expresses itself finally as centralization of existing cap- 
itals in a few hands and a deprivation of many of their capital (to 
which expropriation is now changed). This process would soon bring 
about the collapse of capitalist production if it were not for coun- 
teracting tendencies, which have a continuous decentralizing ef- 
fect alongside the centripetal one. 

* English edition: Part VI11.—E£d. 

242 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

Il. CONFLICT BETWEEN EXPANSION OF PRODUCTION 
AND PRODUCTION OF SURPLUS-VALUE 

The development of the social productiveness of labour is mani- 
fested in two ways: first, in the magnitude of the already produced 
productive forces, the value and mass of the conditions of 
production under which new production is carried on, and in the 
absolute magnitude of the already accumulated productive capital; 
secondly, in the relative smallness of the portion of total capital 
laid out in wages, i.e., in the relatively small quantity of living la- 
bour required for the reproduction and self-expansion of a given 
capital, for mass production. This also implies concentration of cap- 
ital. 

In relation to employed labour-power the development of the 
productivity again reveals itself in two ways: First, in the increase 
of surplus-labour, i.e., the reduction of the necessary labour-time 
required for the reproduction of labour-power. Secondly, in the de- 
crease of the quantity of labour-power (the number of labourers) 
generally employed to set in motion a given capital. 

The two movements not only go hand in hand, but mutually in- 
fluence one another and are phenomena in which the same law ex- 
presses itself. Yet they affect the rate of profit in opposite ways. 
The total mass of profit is equal to the total mass of surplus-value, 

surplus-value 

advanced total capital ° 
however, as a total, is determined first by its rate, and second by 
the mass of labour simultaneously employed at this rate, or, what 
amounts to the same, by the magnitude of the variable capital. 
One of these factors, the rate of surplus-value, rises, and the other, 
the number of labourers, falls (relatively or absolutely). Inasmuch 
as the development of the productive forces reduces the paid portion 
of employed labour, it raises the surplus-vaiue, because it raises its 
tate; but inasmuch as it reduces the total mass of labour employed 
by a given capital, it reduces the factor of the number by which 
the rate of surplus-value is multiplied to obtain its mass. Two la- 
bourers, each working 12 hours daily, cannot produce the same 
mass of surplus-value as 24 who work only 2 hours, even if they 
could live on air and hence did not have to work for themselves at 
all. In this respect, then, the compensation of the reduced number 
of labourers by intensifying the degree of exploitation has certain 
insurmountable limits. It may, for this reason, well check the fall 
in the rate of profit, but cannot prevent it altogether. 

the rate of profit= 2 = 

The surplus-value, 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 243 

With the development of the capitalist mode of production, 
therefore, the rate of profit falls, while its mass increases with the 
growing mass of the capital employed. Given the rate, the absolute 
increase in the mass of capital depends on its existing magnitude. 
But, on the other hand, if this magnitude is given, the proportion 
of its growth, i.e., the rate of its increment, depends on the rate of 
profit. The increase in the productiveness (which, moreover, we re- 
peat, always goes hand in hand with a depreciation of the available 
capital) can directly only increase the value of the existing capital if 
by raising the rate of profit it increases that portion ol the value of the 
annual product which is reconverted into capital. As concerns the pro- 
ductivity of labour, this can only occur (since this productivity has 
nothing direct to do with the value of the existing capital) by raising 
the relative surplus-value, or reducing the value of the constant 
capital, so that the commodities which enter either the reproduction 
of labour-power, or the elements of constant capital, are cheapened. 
Both imply a depreciation of the existing capital, and both go hand 
in hand with a reduction of the variable capital in relation to the 
constant. Both cause a fall in the rate of profit, and both slow it down. 
Furthermore, inasmuch as an increased rate of profit causes a great- 
er demand lor Jabour, it tends to increase the working population 
and thus the material, whose exploitation makes real capital out 
of capital. 

Indirectly, however, the development of the productivity of la- 
bour contributes to the increase of the value of the existing capital 
by increasing the mass and variety of use-values in which the same 
exchange-value is represented and which form the material sub- 
stance, i.e., the material elements of capital, the material objects 
making up the constant capital directly, and the variable capital at 
least indirectly. More products which may be converted into capi- 
tal, whatever their exchange-value, are created with the same cap- 
ital and the same labour. These products may serve to absorb ad- 
ditional labour, hence also additional surplus-labour, and therefore 
create additional capital. The amount of labour which a capital 
can command does not depend on its value, but on the mass of raw 
and auxiliary materials, machinery and elements ol fixed capital 
and necessities of life, all of which it comprises, whatever their 
value may be. As the mass of the labour employed, and thus of sur- 
plus-labour increases, there is alsoagrowth inthe value of the re- 
produced capital and in the surplus-value newly added to it. — 

These two elements embraced by the process of accumulation, 
however, are not to be regarded merely as existing side by side in 
repose, as Ricardo does. They contain a contradiction which mani- 

244 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

fests itself in contradictory tendencies and phenomena. These an- 
tagonistic agencies counteract each other simultaneously. : 

Alongside the stimulants of an actual increase of the labouring 
population, which spring from the increase of the portion of the 
total social product serving as capital, there are agencies which 
create a merely relative over-population. 

Alongside the fall in the rate of profit mass of capitals grows, 
and hand in hand with this there occurs a depreciation of existing 
capitals which checks the fall and gives an accelerating motion 
to the accumulation of capital-values. 

Alongside the development of productivity there develops 
a higher composition of capital, i.e., the relative decrease of 
the ratio of variable to constant capital. 

These different influences may at one time operate predomi- 
nantly side by side in space, and at another succeed each other 
in time. From time to time the conflict of antagonistic agencies 
finds vent in crises. The crises are always but momentary and 
forcible solutions of the existing contradictions. They are 
violent eruptions which for a time restore the disturbed equi- 
librium. 

The contradiction, to put it in a very general way, consists 
in that the capitalist mode of production involves a tendency 
towards absolute development of the productive forces, regard- 
less of the value and surplus-value it contains, and regardless 
of the social conditions under which capitalist production takes 
place; while, on the other hand, its aim is to preserve the value 
of the existing capital and promote its self-expansion to the highest 
limit (i.e., to promote an ever more rapid growth of this value), 
The specific feature about it is that it uses the existing value of 
capital as a means of increasing this value to the utmost. The 
methods by which it accomplishes this include the fall of the rate 
of profit, depreciation of existing capital, and development of 
the productive forces of labour at the expense of already created 
Productive forces. 

The pericdical depreciation of existing capital—one of the 
means immanent in capitalist production to check the fall of 
the rate of profit and hasten accumulation of capital-value through 
formation of new capital—disturbs the given conditions, within 
which the process of circulation and reproduction of capital takes 
place, and is therefore accompanied by sudden stoppages and crises 
in the production process. 

The decrease of variable in relation to constant capital, which 
goes hand in hand with the development of the productive forces, 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 245 

stimulates the growth of the labouring population, while contin- 
ually creating an artificial over-population. The accumulation 
of capital in terms of value is slowed down by the falling rate 
of profit, to hasten still more the accumulation of use-values, 
while this, in its turn, adds new momentum to accumulation 
in terms of value. 

Capitalist production seeks continually to overcome these 
immanent barriers, but overcomes them only by means which 
eae place these barriers in its way and on a more formidable 
scale. 

The real barrier of capitalist production is capital itself. It 
is that capital and its self-expansion appear as the starting and 
the closing point, the motive and the purpose of production; that 
production is only production for capital and not vice versa, 
the means of production are not mere means for a constant expan- 
sion of the living process of the socie/y of producers. The limits 
within which the preservation and self-expansion of the value of 
capital resting on the expropriation and pauperization of the 
great mass of producers can alone move—these limits come con- 
tinually into conflict with the methods of production employed 
by capital for its purposes, which drive towards unlimited ex- 
tension of production, towards production as an end in itself, 
towards unconditional development of the social productivity 
of labour. The means—unconditional development of the produc- 
tive forces of society—comes continually into conflict with the 
limited purpose, the sel[-expansion of the existing capital. The 
capitalist mode ol production is, for this reason, a historical means 
of developing the material forces of production and creating 
an appropriate world-market and is, at the same time, a con- 
tinual conflict between this its historical task and its own 
corresponding relations of social production. 

(II. EXCESS CAPITAL AND EXCESS POPULATION 

A drop in the rate of profit is attended by a rise in the mini- 
mum capital required by an individual capitalist for the pro- 
ductive employment of labour; required both for its exploitation 
generally, and for making the consumed labour-time suffice as 
the labour-time necessary for the production of the commodities, 
so that it does not exceed the average social labour-time required 
for the production of the commodities. Concentration increases 
simultaneously, because beyond certain limits a large capital 

246 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

with a small rate of profit accumulates faster than a small capital 
with a large rate of profit. At a certain high point this increasing 
concentration in its turn causes a new fall in the rate of profit. 
The mass of small dispersed capitals is thereby driven along the 
adventurous road of speculation, credit frauds, stock swindles, 
and crises. The so-called plethora of capital always applies es- 
sentially to a plethora of the capital for which the fall in the rate 
of profit is not compensated through the mass of profit—this 
is always true of newly developing fresh offshoots of capital— 
or to a plethora which places capitals incapable of action on their 
own at the disposal of the managers of large enterprises in the 
form of credit. This plethora of capita] arises from the same 
causes as those which call forth relative over-population, and 
is, therefore, a phenomenon supplementing the latter, although 
they stand at opposite poles—unemployed capital at one pole, 
and unemployed worker population at the other. 

Over-production of capital, not of individual commodities— 
although over-production of capital always includes over-pro- 
duction of commodities—is therefore simply over-accumulation 
of capital. To appreciate what this over-accumulation is (its clos- 
er analysis follows later), one need only assume it to be absolute. 
When would over-production of capital be absolute? Over-pro- 
duction which would affect not just one or another, or a few impor- 
tant spheres of production, but would be absolute in its full scope, 
hence would extend to all fields of production? 

There would be absolute over-production of capital as soon 
as additional capital for purposes of capitalist production=0. 
The purpose of capitalist production, however, is self-expansion 
of capital, i.e., appropriation of surplus-labour, production of 
surplus-value, of profit. As soon as capital would, therefore, have 
grown in such a ratio to the labouring population that neither 
the absolute working-time supplied by this population, nor the 
relative surplus working-lime, could be expanded any further 
(this last would not be feasible at any rate in the case when the 
demand for labour were so strong ihat there were a tendency for 
wages to rise); at a point, therefore, when the increased capital 
produced just as much, or even less, surplus-value than it did be- 
fore its increase, there would be absolute over-production of capi- 
tal; i.e., the increased capital C+AC would produce no more, 
or even less, profit than capital C before its expansion by AC. 
In both cases there would be a steep and sudden fall in the genera] 
rate of profit, but this time due to a change in the composition 
of capital not caused by the development of the productive forces, 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 247 

but rather by a rise in the money-value of the variable capital 
(because of increased wages) and the corresponding reduction in 
the proportion of surplus-labour to necessary labour, 

In reality, it would appear that a portion of the capital would 
lie completely or partially idle (because it would have to crowd 
out some of the active capital before it could expand its own val- 
ue), and the other portion would produce values at a lower rate 
of profit, owing to the pressure of unemployed or but partly em- 
ployed capital. It would be immaterial in this respect if a part 
of the additional capital were to take the place of the old capi- 
tal, and the latter were to take its position in the additional cap- 
ital. We should still always have the old sum of capital on one 
side, and the sum of additional capital on the other. The fall 
in the rate of profit would then be accompanied by an absolute 
decrease in the mass of profit, since the mass of employed Jabour- 
power could not be increased and the rate of surplus-value raised 
under the conditions we had assumed, so that the mass of surplus- 
value could not be increased either. And the reduced mass of 
profit would have to be calculated on an increased total capital. 
But even if it is assumed that the employed capital continues to 
self-expand at the old rate of profit, and the mass of profit hence 
remains the same, this mass would still be calculated on 
an increased total capital, this likewise implying a fall in the 
rate of profit. If a total capital of 1,000 yielded a profit of 100, 
and after being increased to 1,500 still yielded 100, then, in the 
second case, 1,000 would yield only 667/,. Self-expansion of the old 
capital, in the absolute sense, would have been reduced. The cap- 
ital=1,000 would yield no more under the new circurnstances 
than formerly a capital=666? ,. 

It is evident, however, that this actual depreciation of the old 
capital could not occur without a struggle, and that the addi- 
tional capital AC could not assume the functions of capital with- 
out a struggle. The rate of profit would not fall under the effect 
of competition due to over-production of capital. It would rather 
be the reverse; it would be the competitive struggle which would 
begin because the fallen rate of profit and over-production of 
capital originate [rom the same conditions. The part of AC in 
the hands of old functioning capitalists would be allowed to 
remain more or less idle to prevent a depreciation of their own 
original capital and not to narrow its place in the field of pro- 
duction, Or they would employ it, even at a momentary loss, to 
shift the need of keeping additional capital idle on newcomers 
and on their competitors in general. 

248 TENDENGY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

That portion of AC which is in new hands would seek to as- 
sume a place for itself at the expense of the old capital, and would 
accomplish this in part by forcing a portion of the old capital 
to lie idle. It would compel the old capital to give up its old place 
and withdraw to join completely or partially unemployed addi- 
tional capital. 

A portion of the old capital has to lie unused under all circum- 
stances; it has to give up its characteristic quality as capital, so 
far as acting as such and producing value is concerned. The com- 
petitive struggle would decide what part of it would be particularly 
affected. So long as things go well, competition effects an operating 
fraternity of the capitalist class, as we have seen in the case of the 
equalization of the general rate of profit, so that each shares in the 
common loot in proportion to the size of his respective investment. 
But as soon as it no longer is a question of sharing profits, but 
of sharing losses, everyone tries to reduce his own share to a min- 
imum and to shove it off upon another. The class, as such, must 
inevitably lose. How much the individual capitalist must bear 
of the loss, i.e., to what extent he must share in it at all, is de- 
cided by strength and cunning, and competition then becomes 
a fight among hostile brothers. The antagonism between each in- 
dividual capitalist’s interests and those of the capitalist class 
as a whole, then comes to the surface, just as previously the iden- 
lity of these interests operated in practice through competition. 

How is this conflict settled and the conditions restored which 
correspond to the “sound” operation of capitalist production? 
The mode of settlement is already indicated in the very emergence 
oi the conflict whose settlement is under discussion. It implies 
the withdrawal and even the partial destruction of capital amount- 
ing to the full value of additional capital AC, or at least a part 
of it. Although, as the description of this conflict shows, the loss 
is by no means equally distributed among individual capitals, 
its distribution being rather decided through a competitive struggle 
in which the loss is distributed in very different proportions and 
forms, depending on special advantages or previously captured 
positions, so that one capital is left unused, another is destroyed, 
and a third suffers but a relative loss, or is just temporarily de- 
preciated, etc. 

But the equilibrium would be restored under all circumstances 
through the withdrawal or even the destruction of more or less 
capital. This would extend partly to the material substance of 
capital, i.e., a part of the means of production, of fixed and cir- 
culating capital, would not operate, not act as capital; some of 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 249 

the operating establishments would then be brought 
still. Although, in this respect, time attacks and Receicat an 
of production (except land), the stoppage would in reality cause 
far greater damage to the means of production. However, the main 
effect in this case would be that these means of production would 
cease to function as such, that their function as means of produc- 
tion would be disturbed for a shorter or longer period. 

The main damage, and that of the most acute nature, would 
occur in respect to capital, and in so lar as the latter possesses 
the characteristic of value it would occur in respect to the values 
ofcapitals. That portion of the value of a capital which exists only 
in the form of claims on prospective shares of surplus-value, i.e., 
profit, in fact in the form of promissory notes on production in 
various forms, is immediately depreciated by the reduction of 
the receipts on which it is calculated. A part of the gold and sil- 
ver lies unused, i.e., does not function as capital. Part of the 
commodities on the market can complete their process of circu- 
lation and reproduction only through an immense contraction 
of their prices, hence through a depreciation of the capital which 
they represent. The elements of fixed capital are depreciated to 
a greater or lesser degree in just the same way. It must be added 
that definite, presupposed, price relations govern the process 
of reproduction, so that the latter is halted and thrown into con- 
fusion by a general drop in prices. This confusion and stagnation 
paralyses the function of money as a medium of payment, whose 
development is geared to the development of capital and is based 
on those presupposed price relations. The chain of payment ob- 
ligations due at specific dates is broken in a hundred places. The 
confusion is augmented by the attendant collapse of the credit 
system, which develops simultaneously with capital, and leads 
to violent and acute crises, to sudden and forcible depreciations, 
to the actual stagnation and disruption of the process of reproduc- 
tion, and thus to a real falling off in reproduction. 

But there would have been still other agencies at work at the 
same time. The stagnation of production would have laid off 
a part of the working-class and would thereby have placed the em- 
ployed part in a situation, where it would have to submit to a re- 
duction of wages even below the average. This has the very same 
effect on capital as an increase of the relative or absolute surplus- 
value at average wages would have had. Prosperity would have 
led to more marriages among labourers and reduced the decimation 
ol offspring. While implying a real increase in population, this 
does not signify an increase in the actual working population. But 

250 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

it affects the relations of the labourer to capital in the same way 
as an increase of the number of actually working labourers would 
have aflected them. On the other hand, the fall in prices and the 
competitive struggle would have driven every capitalist to lower 
the individual value of his total product below its general value 
by means of new machines, new and improved working methods, 
new combinations, i.e., to increase the productivity of a given 
quantity of labour, to lower the proportion of variable to constant 
capital, and thereby to release some labourers; in short, to create 
an artificial over-population. Ultimately, the depreciation of 
the elements of constant capital would itself tend to raise the 
rate of profit. The mass of employed constant capital would have 
increased in relation to variable, but its value could have fallen. 
The ensuing stagnation of production would have prepared— 
within capitalistic limits—a subsequent expansion of production. 

And thus the cycle would run its course anew. Part of the cap- 
ital, depreciated by its functional stagnation, would recover its 
old value. For the rest, the same vicious circle would be described 
once more under expanded conditions of production, with an ex- 
panded market and increased productive forces. 

However, even under the extreme conditions assumed by us 
this absolute over-production of capital is not absolute over-pro- 
duction, not absolute over-production of means of production. 
It is over-production of means of production only in so far as the 
latter serve as capital, and consequently include a self-expansion 
of value, must produce an additional value in proportion to the 
increased mass. 

Yet it would still be over-production, because capital would 
be unable to exploit labour to the degree required by a “sound,” 
“normal” development of the process of capitalist production, to 
a degree which would at least increase the mass of profit along 
with the growing mass of the employed capital; to a degree which 
would, therefore, prevent the rate of profit from falling as much 
as ihe capital grows, or even more rapidly. 

Over-production of capital is never anything more than over- 
production of means of production—of means of labour and 
necessities of lile—which may serve as capital, i.e, may serve 
to exploit labour at a given degree of exploitation, a fall in the 
intensity of exploitation below a certain point, however, calls 
forth disturbances, and stoppages in the capitalist production 
process, crises, and destruction of capital. It is no contradiction 
that this over-production of capital is accompanied by more or 
less considerable relative over-population. The circumstances which 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF TITE LAW 251 

increased the productiveness of labour, augmented the mass of 
produced commodities, expanded markets, accelerated accumu- 
lation of capital both in terms of its mass and its value, and lowered 
the rate of profit—these same circumstances have also created, 
and continuously create, a relative over-population, an over-pop- 
ulation of labourers not employed by the surplus-capital owing 
to the low degree of exploitation at which alone they could be 
employed, or at least owing to the low rate of profit which they 
would yield at the given degree of exploitation. 

If capital is sent abroad, this is not done because it absolutely 
could not be applied at home, but because it can be employed 
at a higher rate of profit in a foreign country. But such capital 
is absolute excess capital for the employed labouring population 
and for the home country in general. It exists as such alongside 
the relative over-population, and this is an illustration of how 
both of them exist side by side, and mutually influence one another. 

On the other hand, a fall in the rate of profit connected with 
accumulation necessarily calls forth a competitive struggle. Com- 
pensation of a fall in the rate of profit by a rise in the mass of 
profit applies only to the total social capital and to the big, firmly 
placed capitalists. The new additional capital operating independent- 
ly does not enjoy any such compensating conditions. I{ must 
still win them, and so it is that a fall in the rate of profit calls 
forth a competitive struggle among capitalists, not vice versa. 
To be sure, the competitive struggle is accompanied by a tempo- 
rary rise in wages and a resultant further temporary fall of the 
rate of profit. The same occurs when there is an over-production 
of commodities, when markets are overstocked. Since the aim of 
capital is not to minister to certain wants, but to produce profit, 
and since it accomplishes this purpose by methods which adapt 
the mass of production to the scale of production, not vice versa, 
a rift must continually ensue between the limited dimensions of 
consumption under capitalism and a production which forever 
tends to exceed this immanent barrier. Furthermore, capital con- 
sists of commodities, and therefore over-production of capital 
implies over-production of commodities. Hence the peculiar phe- 
nomenon of economists who deny over-production of commodities, 
admitting over-production of capital. To say that there is no 
general over-produclion, but rather a disproportion within the 
various branches of production, is no more than to say that under 
capitalist production the proportionality of the individual branches 
of production springs as a continual process from disproportion- 
ality, because ihe cohesion of the aggregate production imposes 

252 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

itself as a blind law upon the agents of production, and not as 
a law which, being understood and hence controlled by their com- 
mon mind, brings the productive process under their joint con- 
trol. It amounts furthermore to demanding that countries in whick 
capitalist production is not developed, should consume and pro- 
duce at a rate which suits the countries with capitalist produc- 
tion. If it is said that over-production is only relative, this is 
quite correct; but the entire capitalist mode of production is only 
a relative one, whose barriers are not absolute. They are absolute 
only for this mode, i.e., on its basis. How could there otherwise 
be a shortage of demand for the very commodities which the mass 
of the people lack, and how would it be possible for this demand 
to be sought abroad, in foreign markets, to pay the labourers 
at home the average amount of necessities of life? This is pos- 
sible only because in this specific capitalist interrelation the sur- 
plus-product assumes a form in which its owner cannot offer it 
for consumption, unless it first reconverts itself into capital for 
him. If it is finally said that the capitalists have only to exchange 
and consume their commodities among themselves, then the en- 
tire nature of the capitalist mode of production is lost sight of; 
and also forgotten is the fact that it is a matter of expanding 
the value of the capital, not consuming it. In short, all these ok- 
jections to the obvious phenomena oi! over-production (phenom- 
ena which pay no heed to these objections) amount to the con- 
tention that the barriers of capitalist production are not barriers 
of production generally, and therefore not barriers of this spe- 
cific, capitalist mode of production. The contradiction of the 
capitalist mode of production, however, lies precisely in its 
tendency towards an absolute development of the productive 
forces, which continually come into conflict with the specific 
conditions of production in which capital moves, and alone can 
move. 

There are not too many necessities of life produced, in pro- 
portion to the existing population. Quite the reverse. Too little 
is produced to decently and humanely satisfy the wants of the 
great mass. 

There are not too many means of production produced to employ 
the able-bodied portion of the population. Quite the reverse. In 
the first place, too large a portion of the produced population 
is not really capable of working, and is through force of circum- 
stances made dependent on exploiting the Jabour of others, or 
on labour which can pass under this name only under a miserable 
mode of production. In the second place, not enough means of 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 253 

production are produced to permit the employment of the entire 
able-bodied population under the most productive condi- 
tions, so that their absolute working period could be shortened 
by the mass and effectiveness of the constant capital employed 
during working-hours. 

On the other hand, too many means of labour and necessities 
ol life are produced at times to permit of their serving as means 
for the exploitation of labourers at a certain rate of profit. Too 
many commodities are produced to permit of a realization and 
conversion into new capital of the value and surplus-value con- 
tained in them under the conditions of distribution and consump- 
tion peculiar to capitalist production, i.e., too many to permit 
of the consummation of this process without constantly recurring 
explosions. 

Not too much wealth is produced. But at times too much wealth 
is produced in its capitalistic, self-contradictory forms. 

The limitations of the capitalist mode of production come to 
the surface: 

1) In that the development of the productivity of labour creates 
out of the falling rate of profit a law which at a certain point 
comes into antagonistic conflict with this development and must 
be overcome constantly through crises. 

2) In that the expansion or contraction of production are de- 
termined by the appropriation of unpaid labour and the propor- 
tion of this unpaid labour to materialized labour in general, or, 
to speak the language of the capitalists, by profit and the pro- 
portion of this profit to the employed capital, thus by a definite 
rate of profit, rather than the relation of production to social 
requirements, i.e., to the requirements of socially developed hu- 
man beings. It is for this reason that the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction meets with barriers at a certain expanded stage of pro- 
duction which, if viewed from the other premise, would reversely 
have been altogether inadequate. It comes to a standstill at a 
point fixed by the production and realization of profit, and not 
the satisfaction of requirements. 

If the rate of profit falls, there follows, on the one hand, an 
exertion of capital in order that the individual capitalists, through 
improved methods, etc., may depress the value of their individual 
commodity below the social average value and thereby realize 
an extra profit at the prevailing market-price. On the other hand, 
there appears swindling and a general promotion of swindling 
by recourse to frenzied ventures with new methods of produc- 
tion, new investments of capital, new adventures, all for the sake 

254 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

of securing a shred of extra profit which is independent of the 
general average and rises above it. 

The rate of profit, i.e, the relative increment of capital, is 
above all important to all new offshoots of capital seeking to 
find an independent place for themselves. And as soon as forma- 
tion of capital were to fall into the hands of a few established 
big capitals, for which the mass of profit compensates for the 
falling rate of profit, the vital flame ol production would be alto- 
gether extinguished. It would die out. The rate of profit is the 
motive power of capitalist production. Things are produced only 
so long as they can be produced with a profit. Hence the concern 
of the English economists over the decline of the rate of profit. 
The fact that the bare possibility of this happening should worry 
Ricardo, shows his profound understanding of the conditions 
of capitalist production. It is that which is held against him, 
it is his unconcern about “human beings,” and his having an eye 
solely for the development of the productive forces, whatever 
the cost in human beings and capital-values—it is precisely that 
which is the important thing about him. Development of the pro- 
ductive forces of social labour is the historical task and justifi- 
cation of capital. This is just the way in which it unconsciously 
creates the material requirements of a higher mode of production. 
What worries Ricardo is the fact that the rate of profit, the stim- 
ulating principle of capitalist production, the fundamental 
premise and driving force of accumulation, should be endangered 
by the development of production itself. And here the quantitative 
proportion means everything. There is, indeed, something deeper 
behind it, of which he is only vaguely aware. It comes to the sur- 
face here in a purely economic way—i.e., from the bourgeois 
point of view, within the limitations of capitalist understanding, 
from the standpoint of capitalist production itseli—that it has 
its barrier, that it is relative, that it is not an absolute, but only 
a historical mode of production corresponding to a definite limited 
poet in the development of the material requirements of pro- 

uction. 

IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REMARKS 

Since the development of the productivity of labour proceeds 
very disproportionately in the various lines of industry, and 
not only disproportionately in degree but frequently also in op- 
posite directions, it follows that the mass of average profit (=sur- 
Plus-value) must be substantially below the level one would nat- 
urally expect after the development of the productiveness in the 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF THE LAW 955 

most advanced branches of industry, The fact that the develop- 
ment of the productivity in different lines of industry proceeds 
at substantially different rales and frequently even in opposite 
directions, is not due merely to the anarchy of competition and 
the peculiarity of the bourgeois mode of production. Productiv- 
ity of labour is also bound up with natural conditions, which 
frequently become less productive as productivity grows—inas- 
much as the latter depends on social conditions. Hence the oppo- 
site movements in these diflerent spheres—progress here, and 
retrogression there. Consider the mere inftuence of the seasons, 
for instance, on which the bulk of raw materials depends for its 
mass, the exhaustion of forest lands, coal and iron mines, etc. 

While the circulating part of constant capital, such as raw 
materials, etc,, continually increases its mass in proportion to the 
productivity of labour, this is not the case with fixed capital, 
such as buildings, machinery, and lighting and heating facilities, 
etc. Although in absolute terms a machine becomes dearer with 
the growth of its bodily mass, it becomes relatively cheaper. If 
five labourers produce ten times as much of a commodity as be- 
fore, this does not increase the outlay for fixed capital ten-fold; 
although the value of this part of constant capital increases with 
the development of the productiveness, it does not by any means 
increase in the same proportion. We have frequently pointed out 
the difference in the ratio of constant to variable capital as ex- 
pressed in the fall of the rate of profit, and the difference in the 
same ratio as expressed in relation to the individual commodity 
and its price with the development of the productivity of labour. 

[The value of a commodity is determined by the total labour- 
time of past and living labour incorporated in it. The increase 
in labour productivity consists precisely in that the share of living 
labour is reduced while that of past labour is increased, but in 
such a way that the total quantity of labour incorporated in that 
commodity declines; in such a way, therefore, that living Jabour 
decreases more than past labour increases. The past labour con- 
tained in the value of a commodity—the constant part of cap- 
ital—consists partly of the wear and tear of fixed, partly of 
circulating, constant capital entirely consumed by that commodity, 
such as raw and auxiliary materials. The portion of value deriv- 
ing from raw and auxiliary materials must decrease with the in- 
creased productivity of labour, because with regard to these ma- 
terials the productivity expresses itself precisely by reducing 
their value. On the other hand, it is most characteristic of rising 
labour productivity that the fixed part of constant capital is 

256 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

strongly augmented, and with it that portion of its value which is 
transferred by wear and tear to the commodities. For a new method 
of production to represent a real increase in productivity, it must 
transfer a smaller additional portion of the value of fixed capital 
to each unit of the commodity in wear and tear than the portion 
of value deducted from it through the saving in living 
labour; in short, it must reduce the value of the commodity. It 
must obviously do so even if, as it occurs in some cases, an addi- 
tional value goes into the value of the commodity for more or 
dearer raw or auxiliary materials over and above the additional 
portion for wear and tear of the fixed capital. All additions to 
the value must be more than offset by the reduction in value re- 
sulting from the decrease in living labour. 

This reduction of the total quantity of labour going into a com- 
modity seems, accordingly, to be the essential criterion of in- 
creased productivity of labour, no matter under what social con- 
ditions production is carried on. Productivity of labour, indeed, 
would always be measured by this standard in a society, in which 
producers regulate their production according to a preconceived 
plan, or even under simple commodity-production. But how does 
the matter stand under capitalist production? 

Suppose, a certain line of capitalist industry produces a normal 
unit of its commodity under the following conditions: The wear 
and tear of fixed capital amounts to % shilling per piece; raw and 
auxiliary materials go into it to the amount of 17% shillings 
per piece; wages, 2 shillings; and surplus-value, 2 shillings at a 
rate of surplus-value of 100%. Total value=22 shillings. We 
assume for the sake of simplicity that the capital in this line of 
production has the average composition of social capital, so that 
the price of production of the commodity is identical with its 
value, and the profit of the capitalist with the created surplus- 
value. Then the cost-price of the commodity=%+17%+2=20s., 

the average rate of profit 10%, and the price of production 

per piece of the commodity, like its value=29s. 

Suppose a machine is invented which reduces by half the living 
labour required per piece of the commodity, but trebles that 
portion of its value accounted for by the wear and tear of the 
fixed capital. In that case, the calculation is: Wear and tear= 
=1%sh., raw and auxiliary materials, as before, 17%sh., wages, 
Ish., surplus-value Ish., total 2Ish. The commodity then falls 
Ish. in value; the new machine has certainly increased the pro- 
ductivity of labour. But the capitalist sees the matter as follows: 

INTERNAT. CONTRADICTIONS OF TILE LAW 257 

his cost-price is now 14s. for wear, 17%s. for raw and auxil- 
iary materials, Is. for wages, total 20s., as before. Since 
the rate of profit is not immediately altered by the new machine, 
he will receive 10% over his cost-price, that is, 2s. The price 
of production, then, remains unaltered=22s., but is 1s. above 
the value. For a society producing under capitalist conditions 
the commodity has not cheapened. The new machine is no improve- 
ment for it. The capitalist is, therefore, not interested in intro- 
ducing it. And since its introduction would make his present, 
not as yet worn-out, machinery simply worthless, would turn it 
into scrap-iron, hence would cause a positive loss, he takes good 
care not to commit this, what is for him a utopian, mistake. 

The law of increased productivity of labour is not, therefore, 
absolutely valid for capital. So far as capital is concerned, pro- 
ductiveness does not increase through a saving in living labour 
in general, but only through a saving in the paid portion of living 
labour, as compared to Jabour expended in the past, as we have 
already indicated in passing in Book I (Kap. XIII, 2, S. 409/398). * 
Here the capitalist mode of production is beset with another con- 
tradiction. Its historical mission is unconstrained development 
in geometrical progression of the productivity of human labour. 
It goes back on its mission whenever, as here, it checks the develop- 
ment of productivity. It thus demonstrates again that it is be- 
coming senile and that it is more and more outlived. }? 

Under competition, the increasing minimum of capital re- 
quired with the increase’in productivity for the successful opera- 
tion of an independent industrial establishment, assumes the 
following aspect: As soon as the new, more expensive equipment 
has become universally established, smaller capitals are hence- 
forth excluded from this industry. Smaller capitals can carry 
on independently in the various spheres of industry only in the 
infancy of mechanical inventions. Very large undertakings, such 
as railways, on the other hand, which have an unusually high 
proportion of constant capital, do not yield the average rate of 
profit, but only a portion of it, only an interest. Otherwise the gen- 
eral rate of profit would have fallen still lower. But this offers 

* English edition: Ch. XV, 2, pp. 392-93.—Ed. 

7 The foregoing is placed in brackets, because, though a rehash of the notes 
of the original manuscript, it goes in some points beyond the scope of the mate- 
tial found in the original.—f. E&. 

10— 2757 

258 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO FALL 

direct employment to large concentrations of capital in the form 
of stocks. 

Growth of capital, hence accumulation of capital, does not 
imply a fall in the rate of profit, unless it is accompanied by the 
aforementioned changes in the proportion of the organic con- 
stituents of capital. Now it so happens that in spite of the constant 
daily revolutions in the mode of production, now this and now 
that larger or smaller portion of the total capital continues to 
accumulate for certain periods on the basis of a given average pro- 
portion of those constituents, so that there is no organic change 
with its grawth, and consequently no cause for a fall in the rate 
ol profit. This constant expansion of capital, hence also an ex- 
pansion of production, on the basis of the old method of pro- 
duction which goes quietly on while new methods are already 
being introduced at its side, is another reason, why the rate of 
profit does not decline as much as the total capital of society 
grows. 

The increase in the absolute number of labourers does not occur 
in all branches of production, and not uniformly in all, in spite 
oi the relative decrease of variable capital laid out in wages. In 
agriculture, the decrease of the element of living labour may be 
absolute. 

At any rate, it is but a requirement of the capitalist mode of 
production that the number of wage-workers should increase 
absolutely, in spite of its relative decrease. Labour-power becomes 
redundant for it as soon as it is no longer necessary to employ 
it for 12 to 15 hours daily. A development of productive forces 
which would diminish the absolute number of labourers, i.e., 
enable the entire nation to accomplish its total production in a 
shorter time span, would cause a revolution, because it would 
put the bulk of the population out of the running. This is another 
manifestation of the specific barrier of capitalist production, 
showing also that capitalist production is by no means an abso- 
lute form for the development of the productive forces and for 
the creation of wealth, but rather that at a certain point it comes 
into collision with this development. This collision appears partly 
in periodical crises, which arise from the circumstance that now 
this and now that portion of the labouring population becomes 
redundant under its old mode of employment, The limit of capi- 
talist production is the excess time of the labourers. The absolute 
spare time gained by society does not concern it. The development 
of productivity concerns it only in so far as it increases the sur- 
plus labour-time of the working-class, not because it decreases 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF TIIE LAW 259 

the labour-time for material production in general. It moves 
thus in a contradiction. 

We have seen that the growing accumulation of capital implies 
its growing concentration. Thus grows the power of capital, the 
alienation of the conditions of social production personified in 
the capitalist from the real producers. Capital comes more and 
more to the fore as a social power, whose agent is the capitalist. 
This social power no longer stands in any possible relation to that 
which the labour of a single individual can create. It becomes an 
alienated, independent, social power, which stands opposed to 
society as an object, and as an object that is the capitalist’s source 
of power. The contradiction between the general social power 
into which capital develops, on the one hand, and the private 
power of the individual capitalists over these social conditions 
of production, on the other, becomes ever more irreconcilable, 
and yet contains the solution of the problem, because it implies 
at the same time the transformation of the conditions of produc- 
tion into general, common, social, conditions. This transformation 
stems from the development of the productive forces under capi- 
talist production, and from the ways and means by which this 
development takes place. 

No capitalist ever voluntarily introduces a new method of pro- 
duction, no matter how much more productive it may he, and 
how much it may increase the rate of surplus-value, so long as it 
reduces the rate of profit. Yet every such new method of produc- 
tion cheapens the commodities. Hence, the capitalist sells them 
originally above their prices of production, or, perhaps, above 
their value. He pockets the diflerence between their costs of pro- 
duction and the market-prices of the same commodities produced 
at higher costs of production. He can do this, because the aver- 
age labour-time required socially for the production of these 
latter commodities is higher than the labour-time required for 
the new methods of production. His method of production stands 
above the social average. But competition makes it general and 
subject to the general law. There follows a fall in the rate of pro/- 
it—perhaps first in this sphere of production, and eventually 
it achieves a balance with the rest—which is, therefore, wholly. 
independent of the will of the capitalist. 

It is stil] to be added to this point, that this same law also 
governs those spheres of production, whose product passes neither: 
directly nor indirectly into the consumption of the labourers, 

10* 

260 TENDENCY OF RATE OF PROFIT TO PALL 

or into the conditions under which their necessities are produced; 
it applies, therefore, also to those spheres of production, in which 
there is no cheapening of commodities to increase the relative 
surplus-value or cheapen labour-power. (At any rate, a cheapen- 
ing of constant capital in all these lines may increase the rate 
of profit, with the exploitation of labour remaining the same.) 
As soon as the new production method begins to spread, and there- 
by to furnish tangible proof that these commodities can actually 
be produced more cheaply, the capitalists working with the old 
methods of production must sell their product below its full price 
of production, because the value of this commodity has fallen, 
and because the labour-time required by them to produce it is 
greater than the social average. In one word—and this appears 
as an effect of competition—these capitalists must also intro- 
duce the new method of production, in which the proportion of 
variable to constant capital has been reduced. 

All the circumstances which lead to the use of machinery cheap- 
ening the price of a commodity produced by it, come down in 
the last analysis to a reduction of the quantity of labour absorbed 
by a single piece of the commodity; and secondly, to a reduction 
in the wear-and-tear portion of the machinery, whose value goes 
into a single piece of the commodity. The less rapid the wear 
of machinery, the more the commodities over which it is distrib- 
uted, and the more living labour it replaces before its term of 
reproduction arrives. In both cases the quantity and value of 
the fixed constant capital increase in relation to the variable. 

“All other things being equal, the power of a nation to save 
from its profits varies with the rate of profits: is great when they 
are high, less, when low; but as the rate of profits declines, all 
other things do not remain equal.... A low rate of profits is ordi- 
narily accompanied by a rapid rate of accumulation, relatively 
to the numbers of the people, as in England... a high rate of prof- 
it by a slower rate of accumulation, relatively to the numbers 
of the people.” Examples: Poland, Russia, India, ete. (Richard 
Jones, An Introductory Lecture on Political Economy, London, 
1833, p. 50 ff.) Jones emphasizes correctly that in spite of the fall- 
ing rate of profit the inducements and faculties to accumulate 
are augmented; first, on account of the growing relative over-pop- 
ulation; second, because the growing productivity of labour 
is accompanied by an increase in the mass of use-values represented 
by the same exchange-value, hence in the material elements of 
capital; third, because the branches of production become more 
varied; fourth, due to the development of the credit system, the 

INTERNAL CONTRADICTIONS OF TIIE LAW 261 

stock companies, etc., and the resultant case of converting money 
into capital without becoming an industrial capitalist; fifth, 
because the wants and the greed for wealth increase; and, sixth, 
because the mass of investments in fixed capital grows, etc. 

Three cardinal facts of capitalist production: 

1) Concentration of means of production in few hands, whereby 
they cease to appear as the property of the immediate |abourers 
and turn into social production capacities. Even if initially they 
are the private property of capitalists. These are the trustees of 
bourgeois society, but they pocket all the proceeds of this trus- 
teeship. 

2) Organization of labour itself into social labour: through 
co-operation, division of labour, and the uniting of labour with 
the natural sciences, 

In these two senses, the capitalist mode of production abolishes 
private property and private labour, even though in contradictory 
forms. 

3) Creation of the world-market. 

The stupendous productivity developing under the capitalist 
mode of production relative to population, and the increase, if 
not in the same proportion, of capital-values (not just of their 
material substance), which grow much more rapidly than the 
population, contradict the basis, which constantly narrows in 
Telation to the expanding wealth, and for which all this immense 
productiveness works. They also contradict the conditions under 
which this swelling capital augments its value. Hence the crises. 

i 

PART 1Y¥ 

CONVERSION OF COMMODITY-CAPITAL 
AND MONEY-CAPITAL 
INTO COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 
AND MONEY-DEALING CAPITAL 
(MERCHANT'S CAPITAL) 

CHAPTER XVI 
COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 

Merchant’s, or trading, capital breaks up into two forms or 
sub-divisions, namely, commercial capital and money-dealing 
capital, which we shall now define more closely, in so far as this 
is necessary for our analysis of capital in its basic structure. This 
is all the more necessary, because modern political economy, 
even in the persons of its best exponents, throws trading capi- 
tal and industrial capital indiscriminately together and, in eflect, 
wholly overlooks the characteristic peculiarities of the former. 

The movements of commodity-capital have been analysed in 
Book I]. To take the total capital of society, ane part of it— 
always made up of different elements and even changing in map- 
nitude—always exists in the form of commodilies on the market, 
to be converted into money. Another part exisls on the market 
in the form of money, to be converted into commodities. It is 
always in the process of this transition, of this formal metamorpho- 
sis. fnasmuch as this function of capital in the process of circu- 
lation is at all set apart as a special funclion of a special capital, 
as a function established by virtue of the division of labour to 
a special group of capitalists, commodity-capital becomes com- 
mercial capiial. 

We have explained (Book II, Chapter VI, “The Costs of Cir- 
culation,” 2 and 3) to what extent the transport industry, storage 
and distribution of commodities in a distributable form, may be 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 263 

regarded as production processes continuing within the process 
of circulation. These episodes incidental to the circulation of 
commodity-capital are sometimes confused with the distinct func- 
tions of merchant’s or commercial capital. Sometimes they are, 
indeed, practically bound up with these distinct, specific functions, 
although with the development of the social division of labour 
the function of merchant's capital evolves in a pure form, i.e., 
divorced from those real functions, and independent of them. 
Those functions are therefore irrelevant to our purpose, which 
is to define the specific difference of this special form of capital. 
In so far as capital solely employed in the circulation process, 
special commercial capital, partly combines those functions with 
its specific ones, it does not appear in its pure form. We obtain 
its pure form after stripping it of all these incidental functions. 

We have seen that the existence of capital as commodity-cap- 
ital and the metamorphosis it undergoes within the sphere of 
circulation in the market as commodity-capital—a metamorpho- 
sis which resolves itself into buying and selling, converting com- 
modity-capital into money-capital and money-capital into com- 
modity-capital—that this forms a phase in the reproduction 
process’ of industrial capital, hence in its process of production 
as a whole. We have also seen, however, that it is distinguished 
in its function as a capital of circulation from its function as pro- 
ductive capital. These are two different and separate forms of 
existence of the same capital. One portion of the total social cap- 
ital is continually on the market in the form of capital of cir- 
culation, passing through this process of transmutation, although 
for each individual capital its existence as commodity-capital, 
and its metamorphosis as such, merely represent ever-vanishing 
and ever renewed nodal points—i.e., stages of transition in 
the continuity of its production process, and although the ele- 
ments of commodity-capital in the market vary continuously for 
this reason, being constantly withdrawn from the commodity- 
market and equally periodically returned to it as new products 
of the process of production. 

Commercial capital is nothing but a transmuted form of a part 
of this capital of circulation constantly to be found in themar- 
ket, ever in the process of its metamorphosis, and always encom- 
passed by the sphere of circulation. We say a part, because a part 
of the selling and buying of commodities always takes place di- 
rectly between industrial capitalists. We leave this part entirely 
out of consideration in this analysis, because it contributes noth- 
ing to defining the conception, or to understanding the spe- 

264 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

cific nature of merchant’s capital, and because it has further- 
more been exhaustively treated for our purpose in Book Il. 

The dealer in commodities, as a capitalist generally, appears 
on the market primarily as the representative of a certain sum 
of money, which he advances as a capitalist, i.e., which he wants 
to turn from x (its original value) into x+dx (the original sum 
plus profit). But it is evident to him—not being just a capital- 
ist in general, but rather a special dealer in commodities— 
that his capital must first enter the market in the form of mon- 
ey-capital, for he does not produce commodities. He merely trades 
in them, expedites their movement, and to operate with them 
he must first buy them, and, therefore, must be in possession of 
money-capital. 

Suppose that a dealer in commodities owns £3,000 which he 
invests as a trading capital. With these £3,000 he buys, say, 
30.000 yards of linen from some linen manufacturer at 2s. per yard. 
He then sells the 30,000 yards. If the annual average rate of prol- 
it=10% and he makes an annual profit of 10% alter deducting 
all incidental expenses, then by the end of the year he has con- 
verted his £3,000 into £3,300. How he makes this profit is a ques- 
tion which we shall discuss later. At present, we intend ‘to con- 
sider solely the form of the movements of his capital. With his 
£3,000 he keeps buying linen and selling it; he constantly re- 
peats this operation of buying in order to sell, M—C—M’, 
the simple form of capital as it obtains entirely in the process 
of circulation, uninterrupted by the production process, which 
lies outside its own movement and function. 

What is now the relation of this commercial capital to com- 
modity-capital as a mere form of existence of industrial capital? 
So far as the linen manufacturer is concerned, he has realized 
the value of his linen with the merchant's money and thereby 
completed the first phase in the metamorphosis of his commod- 
ity-capital—its conversion into money. Other conditions being 
equal, he can now proceed to reconvert this money into yarn, coal, 
wages, etc., and into means of existence, etc., for the consumption 
of his revenue. Hence, leaving aside the revenue expenditure, he 
‘can go on with his process of reproduction. 

But while the sale of the linen, its metamorphosis into money, 
has taken place for him, as producer, it has not yet taken place 
for the linen itself. It is still on the market as commodity-capital 
awaiting to undergo its first metamorphosis—to be sold. Noth- 
ing has happened to this linen besides a change in the person 
-of its owner. As concerns its Purpose, as concerns its place in the 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 265 

process, it is still commodity-capital, a saleable commodity, with 
the only difference that it is now in the merchant’s hands instead 
of the manufacturer’s. The function of selling it, of eflecting the 
first phase of its metamorphosis, has passed from the manufac- 
turer to the merchant, has become the special business of the 
merchant, whereas previously it was a function which the pro- 
ducer had to perform himself after having completed the function 
of its production. 

Let us assume that the merchant fails to sell the 30,000 yards 
of linen during the interval required by the linen manufacturer 
to bring another 30,000 yards to market at a value of £3,000. The 
merchant cannot buy them again, because he still has in stock 
the unsold 30,000 yards which have not as yet been reconverted 
into money-capital. A stoppage ensues, i.e., an interruption of 
reproduction. The linen producer might, of course, have addition- 
al money-capital at his disposal, which he could convert into 
preductive capital, regardless of the sale of the 30,000 yards, in 
order to continue the production process. But this would not alter 
the situation. So far as the capital tied up in the 30,000 yards 
of linen is concerned, its process of reproduction is, and remains, 
interrupted. It is, indeed, easily seen here that the merchant's 
operations are really nothing but operations that must be per- 
formed at all events to convert the producer’s commodity-capital 
into money. They are operations which effect the [functions of 
commodity-capital in the circulation and reproduction processes. 
If it devolved upon the producer’s clerk to attend exclusively to 
the sale, and also the purchase, instead of an independent merchant, 
this connection would not be obscured for a single moment. 

Commercial capital is, therefore, nothing but the producer’s 
commodity-capital which has to undergo the process of conver- 
sion into money—to perform its function of commodity-capital 
on the market—the only difference being that instead of rep- 
resenting an incidental function of the producer, it is now the 
exclusive operation of a special kind of capitalist, the merchant, 
and is set apart as the business of a special investment of capital. 

This becomes evident, furthermore, in the specific form of cir- 
culation of commercial capital. The merchant buys a commodity 
and then sells it: M—C—M’. In the simple circulation of com- 
modities, or even in the circulation of commodities as it appears 
in the circulation process of industrial capital, C’—M—C, 
circulation is effected by each piece of money changing hands 
twice. The linen manufacturer sells his commodity—linen, con- 
verting it into money; the buyer’s money passes into his hands. 

266 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

With this same money he buys yarn, coal, labour, ete,—expends 
the money for reconverting the value of linen into the commodi- 
ties which make up its production elements. The commodity he 
buys is not thle same commodity, not the same kind of commodity 
which he sells. He has sold products and bought means of pro- 
duction. But it is different with respect to the movements of mer- 
chant’s capital. With his £3,000 the linen merchant buys 30,000 
yards of linen; he sells the same 30,000 yards of linen in order 
io retrieve his money-capital (£3,000 and the profit) from cir- 
culation. It is not the same pieces of money, but rather the same 
commodity which here changes places twice; the commodity passes 
from the seller into the hands of the buyer, and irom the hands 
of the buyer, who now becomes seller, into those of another buyer. 
It is sold twice, and may be sold repeatedly through the medium 
of a series of merchants. And it is precisely through this repeated 
sale, through this two-fold change of place of the same commodity, 
that the money advanced for its purchase by the first buyer is 
retrieved, its reflux to him effected. In one case, C’—M—C effects 
the two-fold change of place of the same money, the sale 
of a commodity in one form and the purchase of a commodity in 
another. In the other case, M—C—M’ effects the two-fold change 
of place of the same commodity, the withdrawal of advanced 
money from circulation. It is evident that the commodity 
has not been finally sold when it passes from the producer into 
the hands of the merchant, in that the latter merely carries on 
the operation of selling—or effects the function of commodity- 
capital. But at the same time it is evident that what is C—M, 
a mere function of his capital in its transient form of commodity- 
capital for the productive capitalist, is M—C—M’, a specific 
increase in the value of his advanced money-capital, for the mer- 
chant. One phase of the metamorphosis of commodities appears 
here in respect to the merchant in the form of M—C-—M’, hence 
as evolution of a distinct kind of capital. 

The merchant finally sells his commodity, that is, the linen, 
to the consumer, be it a productive consumer (for instance, a bleach- 
er), or an individual who acquires the linen for his private use. 
The merchant thereby recovers his advanced capital (with a prol- 
it), and can repeat his operation anew. Had the money served 
merely as a means of payment in purchasing the linen, so that 
the merchant would have had to pay only after six weeks, and had 
he succeeded in selling before this term was out, he could have 
paid the linen manulacturer without advancing any money-cap- 
ital of his own. Had he not sold it, he would have had to advance 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 267 

his £3,000 on the date of expiration, instead of on delivery of 
the linen. And if a drop in the market-prices had compelled him 
to sell below the purchase price, he would have had to make good 
the shortage out of his own capital. 

What is it, then, that lends to commercial capital the charac- 
ter of an independently operating capital, whereas in the hands 
of the producer who does his own selling it is obviously merely 
a special form of his capital in a specific phase of the reproduction 
process during its scjourn in the sphere of circulation? 

First: The fact that commodity-capital is finally converted 
into money, that it performs its initial metamorphosis, i.e., its 
appropriate function on the market qua commodity-capital while 
in the hands of an agent other than the producer, and that this 
function of commodity-capital is effected by the merchant in his 
operations, his buying and selling, so that these operations as- 
sume the appearance of a separate undertaking distinct from the 
other functions of industrial capital—and hence of an independent 
undertaking. It is a distinct form of the social division of labour, 
so that part of the function ordinarily performed as a special 
phase of the reproduction process of capital, in this case—cir- 
culation, appears as the exclusive function of specific circulation 
agent distinct from the producer. But this alone would by no 
means give this particular business the aspect of a function of 
a specific capital distinct from, and independent of, industrial 
capital engaged in the process of reproduction; indeed, it does 
not so appear in cases where trade is carried on by travelling 
salesmen or other direct agents of the industrial capitalist. There- 
fore, there must be a second element involved. 

Second: This arises fram the fact that in his capacity as an in- 
dependent circulation agent, the merchant advances money-cap- 
ital (his own or borrowed). The transaction which for industrial 
capital in the reproduction process amounts merely to C—M, 
i.e., converting commodity-capital into money-capital, or mere 
sale, assumes for the merchant the form of M—C—M’, or pur- 
chase and sale of the same commodity, and thus of a reflux of 
money-capital which leaves him in the purchase, and returns to 
him in the sale. 

It is always C—M, the conversion of commodity-capital into 
money-capital, which jor the merchant assumes the form of M— 
—C—M, inasmuch as he advances capital to purchase commodi- 
ties from their producers; it is always the first metamorphosis 
of commodity-capital, although for a producer, or for industrial 
capital in process of reproduction, the same transaction may 

268 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

amount to M—C, to a reconversion of money into commodities 
(means of production), to the second phase of the metamorphosis. 
For the linen producer, the first metamorphosis was C—M, the 
conversion of lis commodity-capital into money-capital. For 
the merchant the same act appears as M-—C, as a conversion 
of his money-capital into commodity-capital, Now, if he sells 
this linen to a bleacher, it will mean M—C, i.e., the conversion 
of money-capital into productive capital, this being the second me- 
tamorphosis of his commodity-capital for the bleacher, while for 
the merchant it means C—-M. the sale of the linen he had bought. 
But in fact it is only at this point that the commodity-capital 
produced by the linen manufacturer has been finally sold. In other 
words, this M—C—M of the merchant represents no more than 
a middleman’s function for C—M_ between two manufacturers. 
Or let us assume that the linen manufacturer buys yarn from 
a varn dealer with a portion of the value of the sold linen. This 
is M—C for him. But for the merchant selling the yarn it is 
C—M. the resale of the yarn. As concerning the yarn in its ca- 
pacity of commodity-capital, it is no more than its final sale, 
whereby it passes from the sphere of circulation into that of con- 
sumption; it is C—M, the consummation of its first metamorpho- 
sis. Whether the merchant buys, or sells to the industrial capi- 
talist, his M—C—M, the circuit of merchant’s capital, always 
expresses what is just C—M, or simply the completion of its 
first metamorphosis, with regard to the commodity-capital, a 
transient form of industrial capital in process of reproduction. 
The M—C of merchant's capital is C—M only for the industrial 
capitalist, not for the commodity-capital produced by him. It 
is but the transfer of commodity-capital from the industrial cap- 
italist to the circulation agent. It is not until the merchant’s 
capital closes C—M that functioning commodity-capital performs 
its final C—M. M—C—M amounts solely to two C—M’s 
of the same commodity-capital, two successive sales of it, which 
merely effect its last and final sale. 

Thus, commodity-capital assumes in commercial capital the 
form of an independent type of capital because the merchant ad- 
vances money-capital, which is realized and functions as capital 
only by serving exclusively to mediate the metamorphosis of com- 
modity-capital, its function as commodity-capital, i.e., its con- 
version into money, and it accomplishes this by the continual 
purchase and sale of commodities. This is its exclusive operation. 
This activity of effecting the circulation process of industrial cap- 
ital is the exclusive function of the money-capital with which 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAI 269 

the merchant operates. By means of this function he converts 
his money into money-capital, moulds his M into M—C—M’, 
and by the same process converts commodity-capital into commer- 
cial capital. 

So long and so far as commercial capital exists in the form of 
commodity-capital, it is obviously nothing else—from the stand- 
point of the reproduction process of the total social capital—but 
a portion of industrial capital in the market in process of metamor- 
phosis, which exists and functions as commodity-capital. It is 
therefore only the money-capital advanced by the merchant whicli 
is exclusively destined for purchase and sale and for this reason 
never assumes any other form but that of commodity-capital and 
money-capital, never that of productive capital, and is always 
confined to the sphere of circulation of capital—it is only this 
money-capital which is now to be regarded with reference to the 
entire reproduction process of capital. 

As soon as the producer, the linen manufacturer, has sold his 
30,000 yards to the merchant for £3,000, he uses the money so 
obtained to buy the necessary means of production, so that his 
capital returns to the production process. His process of produc- 
tion continues without interruption. So far as he is concerned, 
the conversion of his commodity into money is accomplished. But 
for the linen itself, as we have seen, its metamorphosis has not 
yet taken place. It has not yet been finally reconverted into money, 
has not yet passed as a use-value into either productive or indi- 
vidual consumption. It is now the linen merchant who represents 
on the market the same commodity-capital originally represented 
by the linen manufacturer. For the latter the process of transfor- 
mation has been curtailed, only to be continued in the merchant’s 
hands. 

Had the linen producer been obliged to wait until his linen 
had really ceased being a commodity, until it has passed into 
the hands of its ultimate buyer, its productive or individual con- 
sumer, his process of reproduction would have been interrupted. 
Or, to avoid interrupting it, he would have had to curtail his 
operations, to convert a smaller portion of his linen into yarn, 
coal, labour, etc., in short, into the elements of productive capi- 
tal, and to retain a larger portion of it as a money reserve, so 
that with one portion of his capital on the market in the shape of 
commodities, another would continue the process of production; 
one portion would be on the market in the form of commodities, 
while the other returned in the form of money. This division of 
his capital is not abolished by the merchant's intervention. But 

270 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

without it the portion of money reserve in the capital of circula- 
tion would always have to be greater in relation to the part employed 
in the form of productive capital, and the scale of reproduction 
would have to be restricted accordingly. Instead, however, the 
manufacturer is enabled to constantly employ a larger portion 
of his capital in the actual process of production, and a smaller 
portion as money reserve. : 

On the other hand, however, another portion of the social cap- 
ital, in the form of merchant’s capital, is kept continually within 
the sphere of circulation. It is employed all the time for the sole 
purpose of buying and selling. Hence there seerns to have been 
no more than a replacement of persons holding this capital in 
their hands. 

If, instead of buying £3,000 worth of linen with the purpose 
of selling it again, the merchant had applied these £3,000 pro- 
ductively, the productive capital of society would have increased. 
True, the linen manufacturer would then have been obliged to 
hold back a larger portion of his capital as money reserve, and 
likewise the merchant, now transformed into an industrial cap- 
italist. On the other hand, if the merchant remains merchant, 
the manufacturer saves time in selling, which he can devote to 
supervising the production process, while the merchant must apply 
all his time to selling. 

If merchant’s capital does not overstep its necessary propor- 
tions, it is to be inferred, 

1) that as a result of the division of labour the capital devoted 
exclusively to buying and selling (and this includes not only 
the money required to buy commodities, but also the money which 
must be invested in labour to maintain the merchant's establish- 
ment, and in his constant capital—the storehouses, transport, 
etc.) is smaller than it would be if the industrial capitalist were 
constrained to carry on the entire commercial part of his business 
on his own; 

2) inat because the merchant devotes all his time exclusively 
to this business, the producer is able to convert his commodities 
more rapidly into money, and, moreover, the commodity-capi- 
tal itself passes more rapidly through its metamorphosis than it 
would in the hands of the producer; 

3) that in viewing the aggregate merchant’s capita! in its re- 
lation to industrial capital, one turnover of merchant's capital 
may represent not only the turnovers of many capitals in one 
sphere of production, but the turnovers of a number of capitals 
in different spheres of production. The former is the case when, 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 271 

for instance, the linen merchant, alter buying the product of some 
linen manufacturer with his £3,000, sells it before the same manu- 
facturer brings another lot of the same quantity to market, and 
buys, and again sells, the product of another. or several other, 
Jinen manufacturers, thus effecting the turnovers of different cap- 
itals in the same sphere of production. The latter is the case if, 
for example, the merchant after selling his Jinen buys sitk, thus 
eflecting the turnover of acapital ina diflerent sphere of production. 

In general, it may be noted that the turnover of industrial cap- 
ital is limited not by the time of circulation alone, but also 
by the time of production. The turnover of merchant's capital 
dealing in one kind of commodity is not merely limited by the 
turnover of a single industrial capital, but by that of all industrial 
capitals in the same branch of production. After the merchant 
has bought and sold the linen of one producer he can buy and 
sel! that of another, before the first brings another lot to the 
market. The same merchant’s capital may, therefore, successively 
promote the different turnovers of capitals invested in a certain 
branch of production, with the effect that its turnover is not iden- 
tical with the turnovers of a sole industrial capital, and does 
not therefore replace just the single money reserve which that 
one industrial capitalist would have had to hold in petfo. The 
turnover of merchant’s capital in one sphere of production is 
naturally restricted by the total production of that sphere. But 
it is not restricted by the scale of production, or the period of 
turnover, of any one capital of the same sphere, so far as its period 
of turnover is qualified by its time of production. Suppose, A 
supplies a commodity requiring three months for its production. 
After the merchant has bought and sold it, say, in one month, 
he can buy and sell the same product of some olher manufacturer. 
Or after he has sold, say, the corn of one farmer, he can buy and 
sell that of another with the same money, etc. The turnover of 
his capital is restricted by the mass of corn he is able to buy and 
sell successively within a certain period, for instance, in one year, 
while the turnover of the farmer’scapital is, regardless of the time 
of iurnover, restricted by the time of production, which lasts 
one year. 

However, the turnover of the same merchant’s capital may equally 
well eflect the turnovers of capitals in different branches of pro- 
duction. 

In so far as the same merchant's capital serves in diflerent turn- 
overs to transform different commodity-capitals successively into 
money, buying and selling them one after another, it performs 

972 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

the same function in its capacity of money-capital with regard 
to commedity-capital, which money in general performs by means 
of the number of its turnovers in a given period with regard to 
commodities. 

The turnover of merchant’s capital is not identical with the 
turnover, or asingle reproduction, of an industrial capital of equal 
size; it is rather equal to the sum of the turnovers of anumber of 
such capitals, whether in the same or in different spheres of pro- 
duction. The more quickly merchant’s capital is turned over, 
the smaller the portion of total money-capital serving as mer- 
chant’s capital; and conversely, the more slowly it is turned over, 
the larger this portion. The less developed production, the larger 
the sum of merchant’s capital in its relation to the sum of the 
commodities thrown into circulation; but the smaller in absolute 
terms, or in comparison with more developed conditions, and 
vice versa. In such undeveloped conditions, therefore, the greater 
part of the actual money-capital is in the hands of merchants, 
whose fortune constitutes money wealth vis-a-vis the others. 

The velocity of circulation of the money-capital advanced by 
the merchant depends |) on the speed with which the process of 
production is renewed and the different processes of production 
are linked together; and 2) on the velocity of consumption. 

To accomplish the turnover we have examined above, merchant’s 
capital does not first have to buy commodities for its full amount 
of value, and then to sell them. Instead, the merchant performs 
both movements simultaneously. His capital then breaks up 
into two parts. One of them consists of commodity-capital, and 
the other of money-capital. He buys and converts his money into 
commodities at one place. Elsewhere, he sells and converts another 
part of his commodity-capital into money. On one side, his capital 
returns to him in the form of money-capital, while on the other 
he gets commodity-capital. The larger the portion in one form, 
the smaller the portion in the other. This alternates and balances 
itself. If the use of money as a medium of circulation combines 
with its use as a means of payment and the attendant develop- 
ment of the credit system, then the money-capital part of merchant's 
capital is reduced still more in relation to the volume of the transac- 
tions this merchant’s capital effects. If ] buy £3,000 worth of wine 
on three months’ credit and sell all the wine for cash before this 
term expires, 1 do not need to advance a single penny for these 
transactions. In this case it is also quite obvious that the mon- 
ey-capital, which here acts as merchant’s capital, is nothing 
more than industrial capital in its money-capital form, -in its 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 273 

process of reflux in the form of money. (The fact that the manu- 
factirer who sold £3,000 worth of wine on three months’ credit 
may discount his promissory note at the banker’s does not alter 
the matter at all and has nothing to do with the merchant’s cap- 
ital.) If market-prices should fall in the meantime by, say, a: 
the merchant, far from making a profit, would recover only £2,700 
instead of £3,000. He would have to put up £300 out of his own 
pocket. These £300 would serye merely as a reserve to balance 
the difference in price. But the same applies to the manufacturer. 
If he himself had sold at falling prices, he would likewise have 
lost £300, and would not be able to resume production on the 
same scale without reserve capital. 

The linen merchant buys £3,000 worth of linen [rom the manu- 
facturer. The latter pays, say, £2,000 of the £3,000 Jor yarn. 
He buys this yarn from a yarn dealer. The money which the man- 
ufacturer pays to the yarn dealer is not the linen dealer's money, 
for the latter has received commodities to this amount. It is the 
money-form of the manufacturer’s own capital. Now in the hands 
of the yarn dealer these £2,000 appear as returned money-capita!. 
But to what extent are they that as distinct from the £2,000 rep- 
resenting the discarded money-form of the linen and the assumed 
money-form of the yarn? If the yarn dealer bought on credit and 
sold for cash before the expiration of his term of payment, then 
these £2,000 do not contain one penny of merchant's capital as 
distinct from the money-form which the industrial capital itself 
assumes in the course of its circuit. In so far as commercial capi- 
tal is not, therefore, just a form of industrial capital in the mer- 
chant’s hands as commodity- or money-capital, it is nothing but 
that portion of money-capital which belongs directly to the mer- 
chant and circulates in the purchase and sale of commodities. 
On a reduced scale this portion represents that part of capital 
advanced for production which should always have to be in the 
hands of the industrialist as money reserve and means of purchase, 
and which should always have to circulate as his money-capital. 
This portion, on a reduced scale, is now in the hands of merchant 
capitalists and performs its functions as such in the process of 
circulation. It is that portion of the total capital which, aside 
from what is expended as reyenue, must continually circulate on 
the market as a means of purchase in order to maintain the con- 
tinuity of the process of reproduction. The more rapid the process 
of reproduction, and the more developed the function of money 
as a means of payment, i.e., the more developed the credit sys- 

274 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

tem,*® the smaller that portion is in relation to the total 
capital. : lane. 2 

Merchant's capital is simply capital functioning in the sphere 
of circulation. The process of circulation is a phase of the total 
process of reproduction. But no value is produced in the process 
of circulation, and, therefore, no surplus-value. Only changes of 
form of the same mass of value take place. In fact, nothing occurs 
there outside the metamorphosis of commodities, and this has 
nothing to do as such either with the creation or change of values. 
If a surplus-value is realized in the sale of produced commodities, 
then this is only because it already existed in them. In the second 
act, the re-exchange of money-capital against commodities (ele- 
ments of production), the buyer therefore does not realize any 
surplus-value either. He merely initiates the production of sur- 
plus-value through exchanging his money for means of production 
and labour-power. But so far as these melamorphoses require 
circulation time—time during which capita! does not produce 
at all, least of all surplus-value—it restricts the creation of 
values, and the surplus-value expresses itself through the rate of 
profit in inverse ratio to the duration of the circulation period. 
Merchant’s capital, therefore, does not create either value or sur- 

*® To be able to classify merchant’s capital as productive capital, Ramsay 
confounds it with the transportation industry and calls commerce “the transport 
of commodities from one place to another.” (An Essay on the Distribution of 
Wealth, p. 19.) The same confusion by Verré (Meditazioné sulla Economia Politica, 
§ 4) and by Say (Traile d’ Economie Politique, 1, 14,15). In his Elements of Political 
Economy (Andover and New York, 1835) S. P. Newman says: “In the existing eco- 
nomical arrangements olf society, the very act, which is performed by the merchant, 
of standing between the producer and the consumer, advancing to the former capi- 
tal and receiving products inreturn, and then handing over these products to the 
latter, receiving back capital in return, is a transaction which both [acititates 
{he economical processes of the community, and adds value to the products in 
relation to which it is performed” (p. 174). Producer and consumer thus save time 
and money {hrovgh the intervention of the merchant. This service requires an 
advance of capital and labour, and must be rewarded, “since it adds value to prad- 
ucts, for the same products in the hands of consumers are worth more than in 
the hands of producers.” And so commerce appears to him, as if does to M. Say, as 
“strictly an act of production” (p. 175). This Newman's view is fundamentally 
wrong. The use-talue of a commodity is greater in the hands of the consumer 
than in those of the producer, because it is first realized by the consumer. For 
the use-value of a commodity does not serve its end, does not begin to function 
until the commodity enters the sphere of consumption. So long as it is in the hands 
of the producer, it exists only in potential form. But one does not pay twice for a 
commodity—first for its exchange-value, and then for its use-value. By pay- 
ing for its exchange-value, I appropriate its use-value. And its exchange-value 
is not in the least augmented by transferring the commodity [rom the producer 
or middleman to the consumer. 

COMMERCIAL CAPITAL 275 

plus-value, at least not directly. In so far as it contributes to 
shortening the time of circulation, it may help indirectly to in- 
crease the surplus-value produced by the industrial capitalists. 
In so far as it helps to expand the market and effects the division 
of labour between capitals, hence enabling capital to operate on 
a larger scale, its function promotes the productivity of indus- 
trial capital, and its accumulation. In so far as it shortens circula- 
tion time, it raises the ratio of surplus-value to advanced capital, 
hence the rate of profit. And to the extent that it confines a smaller 
portion of capital to the sphere of circulation in the jorm of money- 
capital, it increases that portion of capital which is engaged 
directly in production. 

CHAPTER XVII 
COMMERCIAL PROFIT 

We have seen in Book II that the pure functions of capital 
in the sphere of circulation—the operations which the industri- 
al capitalist must perform, first, to realize the value of his commod- 
ities, and second, to reconvert this value into elements of produc- 
tion, operations effecting the metamorphosis of commodity-capi- 
tal, C—M—C, hence the acts of selling and buying—produce 
neither value nor surplus-value. It was rather seen that the time 
required for this purpose, objectively in regard to commodities and 
subjectively in regard to the capitalist, sets the limit to the pro- 
duction of value and surplus-value. What is true of the metamor- 
phosis of commodity-capital in general, is, of course, not in the 
least altered by the fact that apart of it may assume the shape of 
commercial capital, or that the operations, effecting the metamor- 
phosis of commodity-capital, appear as the special concern of a 
special group of capitalists, or as the exclusive function of a por- 
tion of the money-capital. If selling and buying commodities— 
and that is what the metamorphosis of commodity-capital C’— 
—M—C amounts to—by industrial capitalists themselves are not 
operations which create value or surplus-value, they will certain- 
ly not create either of these when carried out by persons other than 
the industrial capitalists. Furthermore, if that portion of the to- 
tal social capital, which must continually be on hand as money- 
capital, in order that the process of reproduction is not interrupt- 
ed by the process of circulation and proceeds continuously—if 
this money-capital creates neither value nor surplus-value, it 
cannot acquire the properties of creating them by being continu- 
ally thrown into circulation by some section of capitalists other 
than the industrial capitalists, to perform the same function. We 
have already indicated to what extent merchant’s capital may be 
indirectly productive, and we shall later discuss this point at 
greater length. 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 277 

Commercial capital, therefore—stripped of all heterogeneous 
functions, such as storing, expressing, transporting, distributing, 
retailing, which may be connected with it, and confined to its 
true function of buying in order to sell—creates neither value nor 
surplus-value, but acts as middleman in their realization and thereby 
simultaneously in the actual exchange of commodities, i.e., in their 
transfer from hand to hand, in the social metabolism. Nevertheless, 
since the circulation phase of industrial capital is just as much a 
phase of the reproduction process as production is, the capital oper- 
ating independently in the process of circulation must yield the 
average annual profit just as well as capital operating in the va- 
Tious branches of production. Should merchant’s capital yield a 
higher percentage of average profit than industrial capital, then 
a portion of the latter would transform itself into merchant's capi- 
tal. Should it yield a lower average profit, then the converse would 
result. A portion of the merchant's capital would then be trans- 
formed into industrial capital. No species of capital changes its 
purpose, or function, with greater ease than merchant’s capital. 

Since merchant’s capital does not itself produce surp]us-value, 
it is evident that the surplus-value which it pockets in the form of 
average profit must be a portion of the surplus-value produced by 
the total productive capital. But now the question arises: How 
does merchant's capital attract its share of the surplus-value or 
profit produced by the productive capital? 

It is just an illusion that commercial profit is a mere addition to, 
or a nominal rise of,the prices of commodities in excess of their 
value. 

It is plain that the merchant can draw his profit only out of the 
price of the commodities he sells, and plainer still that the profit 
he makes in selling his commodities must be equal to the difference 
between his purchase price and his selling price, i.e., equal 
to the excess of the latter over the former. 

It is possible that additional costs (costs of circulation) may 
enter into the commodities after their purchase and before their 
sale, and it is also possible that this may not happen. If such 
costs should occur, it is plain that the excess of the selling price 
aver the purchase price would not be all profit. To simplify the anal- 
ysis, we shal! assume at this point that no such costs occur. 

For the industrial capitalist the difference between the selling 
price and the purchase price of his commodities is equal to the differ- 
ence between their price of production and their cost-price, or, 
from the standpoint of the total social capital, equal to the differ- 
ence between the value of the commodities and their cost-price 

978 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

for the capitalists, which again comes down to the difference be- 
tween the total quantity of labour and the quantity of paid labour 
incorporated in them. Before the commodities bought by the in- 
dustrialcapitalist are thrown back on the market as saleable commod- 
ities, they pass through the process of production, in which alone 
the portion of their price to be realized as profit is created. 
But it is different with the merchant. The commodities are in his 
hands only so long as they are in the process of circulation. He 
merely continues their sale, the realization of their price which 
was begun by the productive capitalist, and therefore does not cause 
them to pass through any intermediate process in which they 
could again absorb surplus-value. While the industrial capitalist 
merely realizes the previously produced surplus-value, or profit, 
in the process of circulation, the merchant has not only to realize 
his profit during and through circulation, but must first make it. 
There appears to be no other way of doing this outside of selling 
the commodities bought by him from the industrial capitalist at 
their prices of production, or, from the standpoint of the total com- 
modity-capital, at their values in excess of their prices of produc- 
tion, making a nominal extra charge to their prices, hence, sell- 
ing them, from the standpoint of the total commodity-capital, 
above their value, and pocketing this excess of their nominal val- 
ue over their rea] value; in short, selling them for more than 
they are worth. 

This method of adding an extra charge is easy to grasp. For in- 
stance, one yard of linen costs 2s. If I want to make a 10% profit 
in reselling it, I must add '/,, to the price, hence sell the yard 
at 2s. 2°/,d. The difference between its actual price of production 
and its selling price is then=2*/,d., and this represents a profit 
of 10% on 2s. This amounts to my selling the yard to the buyer 
at a price which is in reality the price of 1'j,, yard. Or, what 
amounts to thesame, it is as though I sold to the buyer only 1°) ,, of 
a yard for 2s. and kept '/,, of a yard for myself. In fact ] can buy 
back '/,, of a yard for 2*/,d. at the price of 2s. 2*/,d. per yard. 
This would, therefore, be just a roundabout way of sharing in the 
surplus-value and surplus-product by a nominal rise in the price 
of commodities. 

This is realization of commercial profit by raising the price of 
commodities, as it appears at first glance. And, indeed, this whole 
notion that profit originates from a nominal rise in the price of 
commodities, or from their sale above their value, springs [rom the 
observations of commercial capital. 

But it is quickly apparent on closer inspection that this is mere 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 979 

illusion. Assuming capitalist production to be predominant, com- 
mercial profit cannot be realized in this manner. (It is here always 
a question of averages, not of isolated cases.) Why do we assume 
that the merchant can realize a profit of no more than, say, 10% 
on his commodities by selling them 10% above their price of pro- 
duction? Because we assume that the producer of these commodi- 
ties, the industrial capitalist (who appears as ‘he producer before 
the outside world, being the personification of industrial capital), 
had sold them to the dealer at their prices of production. If the 
purchase price of commodities paid by the dealer is equal to their 
price of production, or, in the last instance, equal to their value, 
so that the price of production or, in the last instance, the value, 
represent the merchant’s cost-price, then, indeed, the excess of 
his selling price over his purchase price—and this difference 
alone is the source of his profit—must be an excess of their com- 
mercial price over their price of production, so that in the final 
analysis the merchant sells all commodities above their values. But 
why was it assumed that the industrial capitalist sells his 
commodities to the merchant at their prices of production? Or rath- 
er, what was taken for granted in that assumption? It was that 
merchant’s capital did not go into lorming the general rate of prol- 
it (we are dealing with it as yet only in its capacity of commer- 
cial capital). We proceeded necessarily from this premise in dis- 
cussing the general rate of profit, first, because merchant’s capital 
as such did not exist for us at the time, and, second, because aver- 
age profit, and hence the general rate of profit, had first to be de- 
veloped as a levelling of profits or surplus-values actually produced 
by the industrial capitals in the different spheres of production. 
But in the case of merchant’s capital we are dealing with a capital 
which shares in the profit without participating in its production. 
Hence, it is now necessary to supplement our earlier exposition. 

Suppose, the total industrial capital advanced in the course 
of the year=720,+180,=900 (say million £), and that s’ =100%. 
The product therelore=720,+ 180,-|-180,. Let us call this product 
or the produced commodity-capital, C, whose value, or price of 
production (since both are identical for the totality of commodi- 
ties)=1,080, and the rate of profit for the total social capital of 
900=20%. These 20° are, according to our earlier analyses, the 
average rate of profit, since the surplus-value is not calculated here 
on this or that capital of any particular composition, but on the 
total industrial capital of average composition. Thus, C=1,080, 
and the rate of profit=20%. Let us now assume, however, that aside 
from these £900 of industrial capital, there are still £100 of 

280 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

merchant’s capital, which shares in the profit pro rafa to its mag- 
nitude just as the former. According to our assumption, it is */,, 
of the total capital of 1,000. Therefore, it participates to the extent 
of ',, in the total surplus-value of 180, and thus secures a profit 
of 18%. Actually, then, the profit to be distributed among the oth- 
er *,,, of the total capital is only=162, or on the capital of 900 
likewise=18%. Hence, the price at which C is sold by the owners 
of the industrial capital of 900 to the merchants=720,-+180,-+ 
+162,=1,062. If the dealer then adds the average profit of 18% 
to his capital of 100, he sells the commodities at 1,062--18= 
=1,080, i.e., at their price of production, or, from the standpoint 
of the total commodity-capital, at their value, although he makes 
his profit only during and through the circulation process, and only 
from an excess ol his selling price over his purchase price. Yet 
he does not sell the commodities above their value, or above their 
price of production, precisely because he has bought them [rom 
the industrial capitalist below their value, or below their price 
of production. 

Thus, merchant’s capital enters the Jormation of the general 
rate of profit as a determinant pro rata to its part in the total capi- 
tal. Hence, if wesay in the given case that the average rate o] profit— 
=18%, it would=20%, if it were not that */,, of the total capital 
was merchant’s capital and the general rate of profit thereby low- 
ered by '/,,. This leads to a closer and more comprehensive defini- 
tion of the price of production. By price of production we mean, 
just as belore, the price of a commodity =its costs (the value of the 
constant+-variable capital contained in it)+the average profit. 
Bui this average profit is now determined differently. It is deter- 
mined by the total profit produced by the total productive capi- 
tal; but not as calculated on the total productive capital alone, 

so that if this=900, as assumed above, and the profit=180, then 
the average rate of profit =. =20% But, rather, as calculated 
on the total productive+-merchant’s capital, so that with 9CO 

productive and 100 merchant's capital, the average rate of profit= 

as such sells his commodities, is thus smaller than the actual price 
of production of the commodity; or in terms of all commodities 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 281 

taken together, the prices at which the class of industrial capi- 
talists sell their commodities are lower than their value. Hence, 
in the above case, 900 (costs)+-18% on 900, or 900+162=1,062. 
It follows, then, that in selling a commodity at 118 for which he 
paid 100 the merchant does, indeed, add 18% to the price. But 
since this commodity, for which he paid 100, is really worth 118, 
he does not sell it above its value. We shall henceforth use the 
term price of production in this, its more precise, sense. It is 
evident, therefore, that the profit of the industrial capitalist 
equals the excess of the price of production of the commodity 
over its cost-price, and that commercial! profit, as distinct from 
this industrial profit, equals the excess of the selling price over 
the price of production of the commodity which, for the mer- 
chant, is its purchase price; but that the actual price of the commod- 
ity=its price of production+the commercial profit. Just as 
industrial capital realizes only such profits as already exist in 
the value of commodities as surplus-value, so merchant's capital 
realizes profits only because the entire surplus-value, or profit, has 
not as yet been fully realized in the price charged for the commod- 
ities by the industrial capitalist. ** The merchant’s selling 
price thus exceeds the purchase price not because the former exceeds 
the total value, but because the latter is below this value. 

Merchant's capital, therefore, participates in levelling surp!us- 
value to average profit, although it does not take part in its pro- 
duction. Thus, the general rate of profit contains a deduction from 
surplus-value due to merchant’s capital, hence a deduction from the 
profit of industrial capital. 

It follows from the foregoing: 

1) The larger the merchant’s capital in proportion to the indus- 
trial capital, the smaller the rate of industrial profit, and vice 
versa. y 

2) 11 was demonstrated in the first part that the rate of profit 
is always lower than the rate of the actual surplus-value, i-e., 
it always understates the intensity of exploitation, as in the above 
case, 720,-+180,+180,, the rate of surplus-value of 100% 
and a rate of profit of only 20%. And the difference becomes still 
greater, inasmuch as the average rate of profit appears smaller 
again, dropping [rom 20% to 18%, if the share falling to merchant's 
capital is also taken into account. The average rate of profit of 
the direct capitalist exploiter, therefore, expresses a rate of profit 
smaller than it actually is. 

*® John Bellers. 

282 MERCIIANT’S CAPITAL 

Assuming all other circumstances remaining the same, the rel- 
ative volume of merchant's capital (with the exception of the 
small dealer who represents a hybrid form) is in inverse proportion 
to the velocity of its turnover, hence in inverse proportion to the 
energy of the process of reproduction in general. In the course of 
scientific analysis, the formation of a general rate of profit ap- 
pears to result from industrial capitals and theircompetition, and 
is only later corrected, supplemented, and modified by the inter- 
vention of merchant’s capital. In the course of its historical devel- 
opment, however, the process is really reversed. It is the commer- 
cial capital which first determines the prices of commodities more 
or less in accordance with their values, and it is the sphere 
of circulation, the sphere that promotes the process of reproduc- 
tion, in which a general rate of profit initially takes shape. It 
is originally the commercial profit which determines the industri- 
al profit. Not until the capitalist mode of production has asserted 
itself and the producer himself has become merchant, is commer- 
cial profit reduced to that aliquot part of the total surplus-value 
falling to the share of merchant's capital as an aliquot part of the 
total capital engaged in the social process of reproduction. 

It was seen in the supplementary equalization of profit through 
the intervention of merchant’s capital that no additional element 
entered the value of commodities with the merchant's advanced 
money-capital, and that the extra charge to the price, whereby the 
merchant makes his profit, was merely equal to that portion of 
the value of the commodities, which productive capital had not 
calculated in the price of production, i.e., had left out. The case 
of this money-capital is similar to that of the industrial capital- 
ist’s fixed capital, since it is not consumed and its value, there- 
fore, does not make up an element of the value of commodity. It 
is in the purchase price of commodity-capital that the merchant 
replaces its price of production=M, in money. His own selling 
price, as previously shown, isM-+-AM, where AM stands for the 
addition to the price of commodities determined by the general 
rate of profit. Once he sells the commodities, his original money- 
capital, which he advanced for their purchase, returns to him to- 
gether with this 4M. We see once more that his money-capital is 
nothing but the industrial capitalist's commodity-capital trans- 
formed into money-capital, which affects the magnitude of the 
value of this commodity-capital no more than would a direct sale 
of the latter to the ultimate consumer, instead of to the merchant. 
It. actually, merely anticipates the payment of the consumer. How- 
ever, this is correct only on the condition hitherto assumed, that 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 283 

the merchant has no overhead expenses, or that aside from the 
money-capital which he must advance to buy commodities from the 
producer he need not advance any other capital, circulating or 
fixed, in the process of commodity metamorphosis, the process of 
buying and selling. But this is not so in reality, as we have seen 
in the analysis of the costs of circulation (Book Il, Chap. VI). 
These costs of circulation are partly expenses which the merchant 
has to reclaim [rom other agents of circulation. and partly ex- 
penses arising directly Irom his specific business. 

No matter what the nature of these costs of circulation—wheth- 
er they arise [rom the purely commercial nature of the merchant’s 
establishment as such and hence belong to the merchant’s specific 
costs of circulation, or represent items which are charges for sub- 
sequent processes of production added in the process of circula- 
tion, such as expressage, transport, storage, etc.—they always re- 
quire of the merchant, aside Irom his money-capital, advanced to the 
purchase of commodities, some additional capital for the purchase 
and payment of such means of circulation. As much of this element 
ol cost as consists ol circulating capital passes wholly as an addi- 
tional element into the selling price of the commodities; and as much 
of it as consists of fixed capital only to the extent of its wear and 
tear. But only as an element which forms a nominal value, even 
if as the purely commercial costs of circulation, it does not add any 
real value to the commodities. But whether fixed or circulating, 
this entire additional capital participates in forming the general 
rate ol profit. 

The purely commercial costs of circulation (hence, excluding 
costs of expressage, shipping, storage, etc.) resolve themselves in- 
to costs required to realize the value of commodities, to transform 
it Irom commodities into money, or [rom money into commodi- 
ties, to eflect their exchange. We leave entirely out of considera- 
tion all possible processes of production which may continue in 
the process of circulation, and from which the merchant’s busi- 
ness can be allogether separated; as, in fact, the actual transport 
industry and expressage may be, and are, industrial branches en- 
tirely distinct from commercial; and purchaseable and saleable 
commodities may be stored in docks or in other public premises, 
with the resultant cost ol storage being charged to the merchant 
by third persons inasmuch as he has to advance it. All this takes 
place in actual wholesale commerce, where mercliant’s capital ap- 
pears in its purest form, unmixed with other functions. The ex- 
press company owner, the railway director, and the shipowner, are 
not “merchants.” The costs which we consider here are those of 

284 MERCIUANT'S CAPITAL 

buying and selling. We have already remarked earlier that these 
resolve themselves into accounting, book-keeping, marketing, cor- 
respondence, etc. The constant capital required for this purpose 
consists of offices, paper, postage, etc. The other costs break up 
into variable capital advanced for the employment of mercantile 
wage-workers. (Expressage, i{ransport costs, advances for customs 
duties, etc., may partly be considered as being advanced by the 
merchant in purchasing commodities and thus enter the purchase 
price as far as le is concerned.) 

All these costs are not incurred in producing the use-value of 
commodities, but in realizing their value. They are pure costs 
ol circulation. They do not enter into the immediate process of 
production, but since they are part of the process of circulation they 
are also part of the total process of reproduction. 

The only portion of these costs of interest to us at this point 
is that advanced as variable capital. (The following questions 
should also be analysed: First, how does the law that orly necessary 
labour enters the value of commodities operate in the process of 
circulation? Second, how does accumulation obtain in merchant’s 
capital? Third, how does merchant’s capital function in the ac- 
tual aggregate reproduction process of society?) 

These costs arise due to the product having the economic form 
of a commodity. 

[f the labour-time which the industrial capitalists themselves 
lose while directly selling commodities to one another—hence, 
speaking objectively, the circulation time of the commodities— 
does not add value to these commodities, it is evident that this 
labour-time does not change its nature in the least by falling to 
the merchant instead of the industria] capitalist. The conversion 
of commodities (products) into money, and of money into commodi- 
ties (means of production) is a necessary function of industrial 
capital and, therefore, a necessary operation of the capitalist— 
who is actually but personified capital endowed with a conscious- 
ness of its own and a will. But these functions neither create val- 
ue, nor produce surplus-value. By performing these operations 
and carrying on the functions of capital in the sphere of circula- 
tion after the productive capitalist has ceased to be involved the 
merchant merely takes the place of the industrial capitalist. The 
labour-time required in these operations is devoted to certain nec- 
essary operations of the reproduction process of capital, but yields 
no additional value. If the merchant did not perform these opera- 
tions (hence, did not expend the labour-time entailed), he would 
not be applying his capital as a circulation agent of industrial cap- 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 285 

ital; he would not then be continuing the interrupted function of 
the industrial capitalist, and consequently could not participate 
as a capitalist pro rata tohis advanced capital, in the mass of prof- 
it produced by industrial capitalists. In order to share in the mass 
of surplus-value, to expand the value of his advance as capital, the 
commercial capitalist need not employ wage-workers. If his busi- 
ness and capital are small, he may be the only worker in it. He 
is paid with that portion of the profit which falls to him through 
the difference between the purchase price paid by him for commod- 
ities and their actual price of production. 

But, on the other hand, the profit realized by the merchant on 
a smal! amount of advanced capital may be no larger, or may 
even be smaller, than the wages of one of the better-paid skilled 
wage-workers. In fact, he brushes shoulders with many direct com- 
mercial agents of the productive capitalist, such as buyers, sellers, 
travellers, who enjoy the same or a higher income either in the form 
of wages, or in the form of a share in the profit (percentages, bo- 
muses) made from each sale. In the first case, the merchant pockets 
the mercantile profit as an independent capitalist; in the other, 
the salesman, the industrial capitalist’s wage-labourer, receives 
a portion of the profit either in the form of wages, or as a propor- 
tional share in the profit of the industrial capitalist, whose direct 
agent he is, while his employer pockets both the industrial and 
the commercial profit. But in all these cases, although his income 
may appear to the circulation agent as an ordinary wage, as pay- 
ment for work performed, and although, where it does not so ap- 
pear, the profit may be no larger than the wage of a better-paid 
labourer, his income is derived solely from the mercantile profit. 
This follows from his labour not being labour which produces 
value. 

The lengthening of the act of circulation represents for the in- 
dustrial capitalist 1} a personal loss of time, since it prevents him 
from performing in person his function as manager of the productive 
process; 2) a longer stay of his product in money- or commodity- 
form, in the circulation process, hence in a process where it does 
not expand value and where the direct production process is in- 
terrupted. If this process is not to be interrupted, production must 
either be curtailed, or more money-capital must be advanced to 
maintain the process of production on the same scale. This means 
that each time either a smaller profit is made on the capital hith- 
erto invested, or that additional money-capital must be advanced 
to make the previous profit. All this remains unchanged when the 
merchant takes the place of the industrial capitalist. Instead of 

286 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

the industrial capitalist devoting more lime to the process of cir- 
culation, it is the merchant who is so engaged; instead of the indus- 
trial capitalist if is the merchant who advances additional capital 
for circulation; or, what amounts to the same thing, instead ol a 
large portion of the industrial capital being continually divert- 
ed into the process of circulation, it is the merchant's capital which 
is wholly tied up in it; and instead of making a smaller profit, 
the industrial capitalist must yield a portion of his profit wholly 
to the merchant. So long as merchant’s capital remains within 
the bounds in which it is necessary, the only difference is that this 
division of the functions of capital reduces the time exclusively 
used up in the process of circulation, that less additional capital 
is advanced for this purpose, and that the loss in total profit, rep- 
resented by mercantile profit, is smaller than it would otherwise have 
been. If in the above example, 720,+180,+180,, assisted by a 
merchant's capital of 100, produces a profit of 162, or 18%, for the 
industrial capitalist, hence implying a deduction of 18, then, but 
for this independent merchant’s capital, the additional capital re- 
quired would probably be 200, and we should have a total advance 
by the industrial capitalist of 1,100 instead of 900, which, based 
upon a surplus-value of 180, would yield a rate of profit of 
only 16*;,,%. 

If the industrial capitalist who acts as his own merchant advances 
not only the additional capital to buy new commodities before his 
product in the process of circulation has been reconverted into 
money, but also capital (office expenses and wages for commercial 
employees) to realize the value of his commodity-capital, or, in 
other words, for the process of circulation, then these supplements 
form additional capital, but do not create surplus-value. They 
must be made good out of the value of the commodities, because 
a portion of the value of these commodities must be reconverted 
into these circulation costs. But no additional surplus-value is 
created thereby. So far as this concerns the total capital of society, 
it means in fact that a portion of it must be set aside for secondary 
operations which are no part of the self-expansion process, and that 
this portion of the social capital must be continually reproduced 
for this purpose. This reduces the rate of profit for the individual 
capitalist and for the entire class of industrial capitalists, an effect 
arising from every new investment of additional capital whenev- 
er such capital is required to set in motion the same mass of va- 
riable capital. 

In so far as these additional costs connected with the business 
of circulation are transferred from the industrial to the commer- 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 287 

cial capitalist, there takes place a similar reduction in the rate of 
profit, but to a lesser degree and in a different way. It now devel- 
ops that the merchant advances more capital than would be nec- 
essary if these costs did not exist, and that the profit on this addi- 
tional capital increases the amount of the commercial profit, so 
that more of the merchant's capital joins industrial capital in ley- 
elling the average rate of profit and thereby the average profit 
falls. If in our above example an additional capital of 50 is ad- 
vanced besides the merchant’s capital of 100 to cover the costs in 
question, then the total surplus-value of 180 is distributed with re- 
spect to a productive capital of 900 plus a merchant’s capital of 
150, together=1,050. The average rate of profit, therefore, sinks 
to 17°',%. The industrial capitalist sells his commodities to the 
merchant at 900+154*/,=1,0547/,, and the merchant sells them 
at 1,130 (1,080—50 for costs which he must recover). Moreover, 
it must be admitted that the division between merchant’s and in- 
dustrial capital is accompanied by a centralization of the commer- 
cial expenses and, consequently, by their reduction. 

The question now arises: What about the commercial wage- 
workers employed by the commercial capitalist, here the mer- 
chant? 

In one respect. such a commercial employee is a wage-worker 
like any other. In the first place, his labour-power is bought with 
the variable capital of the merchant, not with money expended 
as revenue, and consequently it is not bought ior private service, 
but for the purpose of expanding the value of the capital ad- 
vanced for it. In the second place, the value of his labour-pow- 
er, and thus his wages, are determined as those of other wage- 
workers, i.e., by the cost of production and reproduction of 
his specific labour-power, not by the product of his labour. 

However, we must make the same distinction between him and 
the wage-workers directly employed by industrial capital which 
exists belween industrial capital and merchant’s capital, and thus 
between the industrial capitalist and the merchant. Since the mer- 
chant, as a mere agent of circulation, produces neither value nor 
surplus-value (for the additional value which he adds to the com- 
modities through his expenses resolves itself into an addition of 
previously existing values, although the question here poses it- 
self, how he preserves this value of his constant capital?) it follows 
that the mercantile workers employed by him in these same func- 
tions cannot directly create surplus-value for him. Here, as in the 
case of productive labourers, we assume that wages are determined 
by the value of the labour-power, and that, hence, the merchant 

288 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

does not enrich himself by depressing wages, so that he does not 
enter into his cost account an advance for labour which he has 
paid only in part; in other words, that he does not enrich himself 
through cheating his clerks, etc. 

The difficulty as concerns mercantile wage-workers is by no 
means to explain how they produce direct profits for their employ- 
er without creating any direct surplus-value (of which profit is 
but a transmuted form). This question has, indeed, already been 
solved in the general analysis of commercial profits. Just as indus- 
trial capital makes profit by selling labour embodied and real- 
ized in commodities, for which it has not paid any equivalent, so 
merchant's capital derives profit from not paying in full to pro- 
ductive capital for all the unpaid labour contained in the commodi- 
ties (in commodities, in so far as capital invested in their produc- 
tion functions as an aliquot part of the total industrial capital), 
and by demanding payment for this unpaid portion still contained 
in the commodities when making a sale. The relation of merchant’s 
capital to surplus-value is different from that of industrial capital. 
The latter produces surplus-value by directly appropriating the 
unpaid labour of others. The former appropriates a portion of this 
surplus-value by having this portion transferred from indus- 
trial capital to itself. 

It is only through its function of realizing values that merchant’s 
capital acts as capital in the process of reproduction, and hence 
draws on the surplus-value produced by the total capital. The 
mass of the individual merchant’s profits depends on the mass of 
capital that he can apply in this process, and he can apply so much 
more of it in buying and selling, the more the unpaid labour of 
his clerks. The very function, by virtue of which the merchant’s 
money becomes capital, is largely done through his employees. 
The unpaid labour of these clerks, while it does not create sur- 
plus-value, enables him to appropriate surplus-value, which, in 
effect, amounts to the same thing with respect to his capital. It 
is, therefore, a source of profit for him. Otherwise commerce could 
never be conducted on a large scale, capitalistically. 

Just as the labourer’s unpaid labour directly creates surplus-value 
for productive capital, so the unpaid labour of the commercial 
wage-worker secures a share of this surplus-value for merchant’s 
capital. 7 

The difficulty lies here: Since the merchant’s labour-time and 
labour do not create value, although they secure for him a share 
of already produced surplus-value, how does the matter stand with 
the variable capital which he Jays out in purchasing commerciad 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 239 

labour-power? Is this variable capital to be included in the cost 
outlays of the advanced merchant's capital? If not, this appears 
to conflict with the law of equalization of the rate of profit; what 
capitalist would advance 150 if he could charge only 100 to advanced 
capital? Ifso, it seems to conflict with the nature of merchant’s 
capital, since this kind of capital does not act as capital by setting 
in motion the labour of others, as industrial capital does, but rath- 
er by doing its own work, j.e., performing the functions of buying 
and selling, this being precisely the means and the reason why 
it receives a portion ol the surplus-value produced by the indus- 
trial capital. 

(We must therefore analyse the following points: the merchant's 
variable capital; the law of necessary labour in the sphere of cir- 
culation; how the merchant’s labour maintains the value of his 
constant capital; the part played by merchant’s capital in the proc- 
ess of reproduction as a whole; and, finally, the duplication in com- 
modity-capital and money-capital, on the one hand, and in com- 
mercial capital and money-dealing capital on the other.) 

If every merchant had only as much capital as he himself were 
able to turn over by his own labour, there would be infinite frag- 
mentation of merchant's capital. This lragmentation would increase 
in the same proportion as productive capital raised production and 
operated with greater masses in the forward march of the capital- 
ist mode of production. Hence, an increasing disproportion of the 
two. Capital in the sphere of circulation would become decentral- 
ized in the same proportion as it became centralized in the sphere 
of production. The purely commercial business of the industrial 
capitalist, and thus his purely commercial expenses, would expand 
infinitely thereby, for he would have to deal with, say. 1.000 mer- 
chants, instead of 100. Thus, the advantages of independently oper- 
ating merchant’s capital would largely be lost. And not the 
purely commercial expenses alone, but also the other costs of cir- 
culation, such as sorting, expressage, etc., would grow. This, as far 
as the industrial capital is concerned. Now let us consider merchant’s 
capital. Firstly, the purely commercial operations. It does not 
take more time to deal with large figures than with small ones. 
It takes ten times as much time to make 10 purchases at £100 each 
as it does to make one purchase at £1,000. It lakes ten times as 
much correspondence, paper, and postage, to correspond with 10 
small merchants as it does with one large merchant. The clearly 
defined division of labour in a commercial! office, in which one 
keeps the books, another looks after money matters, a third has 
charge of correspondence, one buys, alother sells, a third travels, 

11 — 2757 

290 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

etc., saves immense quantities of labour-time, so that the number 
of workers employed in wholesale commerce are in no way related 
to the comparative size of the establishment. This is so, because 
in commerce much more than in industry the same function re- 
quires the same labour-time, whether performed on a large or a 
small scale. This is the reason why concentration appears earli- 
er historically in the merchant’s business than in the industrial 
workshop, Further, regarding outlays in constant capital. One hun- 
dred small offices cost incomparably more than one large olfice, 
100 small warehouses more than a large one, etc. The costs of 
transport, which enter the accounts of a commercial establishment 
at least as costs to be advanced, grow with the fragmentation, 

The industrial capitalist would have to lay out more in labour 
and in circulation costs in the commercial part of his business, 
The same merchant’s capital, when divided among many small 
capitalists, would, owing to this fragmentation, require more la- 
bourers to perform its functions, and more merchant's capital 
would, furthermore, be needed to turn over the same commodity- 
capital. 

Suppose B is the entire merchant’s capital directly applied in 
buying and selling commodities, and b the corresponding variable 
capital paid out in wages to the commercial employees. Then B-+-b 
is smaller than the total merchant’s capital, B, would be if every 
merchant had to get along without assistants, hence would invest 
nothing in b. However, we have not yet overcome the difficulty. 

The selling price of the commodities must suffice 1) to pay the av- 
erage profit on B+b. This is explained if only by the fact that B+b 
is generally a reduction of the original B, representing a smaller mer- 
chant’s capital than would be required without b. But this selling 
price must suffice 2) to cover not only the additional profit on b, 
but to replace also the paid wages, the merchant’s variable capi- 
tal=b. This last consideration gives rise to the difficulty. Does 
b represent a new constituent of the price, or is it merely a part of 
ihe profit made by means of B-++b, which appears as wages only so 
far as the mercantile wage-worker is concerned, and as concerns 
the merchant simply replaces variable capital? In the latter case, 
the merchant’s profit on his advanced capital B+b would just equal 
the profit due to B by virtue of the general rate, plus b, which 
he pays out in the form of wages, but which does not itself yield 
a profit. 

The crux of the matter is, indeed, to find the limits (mathemati- 
cally speaking) of b, Let us first accurately define the problem. 
Let B stand for capital invested directly in buying and selling com- 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 291 

modities, IK for the constant capital (actual handling costs) con- 
sumed in this function, and b for the variable capital invested by 
the merchant. 

Recovering B offers no dilficulties at all. For the merchant 
it is simply the realized purchase price, and the price of produc- 
{ion for the manufacturer. ]{ is the price paid by the merchant, 
and in reselling he recovers B as part of his selling price; in addi- 
tion to this B, he makes a profit on B, as previously explained. For 
example, let the commodity cost £100. Suppose the profit is 10%. 
In that case, the commodity is sold at 110. The commodity previ- 
ously cost 100, and the merchant’s capital of 100 merely adds 10 
to it. 

Now if we look at K, it is at most as large as, but in fact smaller 
than, the portion of constant capital which the producer would 
use up in buying and selling, but then it would form an addition 
to the constant capital he requires directly in production. This 
portion, nonetheless, must be continually recovered in the price 
of the commodity, or, what amounts to the same, a corresponding 
portion of the commodity must be continually expended in this 
form, or, from the standpoint of the total capital of society, must 
be continually reproduced in this form. This portion of the advanced 
constant capital would have a limiting effect on the rate of 
profit, just as the entire mass of it directly invested in production. 
In so [ar as the industrial capitalist leaves the comtnercial 
part of his business to the merchant, he need not advance this part 
of the capital. The merchant advances it in his stead. In a way, 
he does this but nominally, since a merchant neither produces, 
nor reproduces, the constant capital consumed by him (the actual 
handling costs). Its production appears a separate business, or at 
least a part of the business, of some industrial capitalists who thus 
play a role similar to those who supply constant capital to producers 
of necessities of life. First, therefore, the merchant has this con- 
stant capital recovered for him and, secondly, receives his profit 
on it. Through both of these, therefore, the industrial capitalist’s 
profit is reduced, But owing to economizing and concentration which 
are bound up with division of labour, it shrinks less than it would 
if he himself had to advance this capital. The reduction in the rate 
of profit is less, because the capital thus advanced is less. 

So far, then, the selling price is made up of B-+K-+the profit 
on B+K. This portion of it offers no further difficulties. But now 
b, the variable capital advanced by the merchant, enters into it. 

The resultant selling price is B+K-++b-+ the profit on B+-K+ 
+ the profit on b. 

11* 

999 MERCIIANT'S CAPITAL 

B merely recovers the purchase price and adds nothing to it 
but the profil on B. K adds the profit on K, and K itself, but K+ 
+-the profil on K, the part of the circulation costs advanced in the 
form of constant capital+-the corresponding average profit, would 
be larger in the hands of the industrial capitalist than in the 
merchant's. Theshrinking of the average profit appears in the form 
of the full average profit calculated after deducting B+K from 
the advanced industrial capital, with the deduction Jrom the aver- 
age profit on B+K paid to the merchant, so that this deduction 
appears as the profit ol a specific capital, merchant's capital. 

But the situation is different with respect to b+the profit on 
b, or, in the present case. where the rate of profit is assumed=10%, 
with b+? ., b. And the real dilficulty lies here. 

What the merchant buys with b is, according to our assump- 
tion, nothing but commercial Jabour, hence labour required to per- 
form the functions of circulating capital, C—M and M—C. But 
commiercia! labour is the labour generally necessary for a capital 
to operate as merchant’s capital, to help convert commodities 
into money and money into commodities. It is labour which real- 
izes, but d6es not create, values. And only in so far as a capital 
performs these functions—hence a capitalist performs these oper- 
ations, or this work with his capital—does it serve as merchant’s 
capital and participate in regulating the general rate of profit, 
i.e., draw its dividends out of the total profit. But (b+ the profit 
on b) appears to include, first, payment for labour (for it makes 
no difference whether the industrial capitalist pays the merchant 
for his own labour, or the labour of the clerks paid by the merchant), 
and, secondly, the profit on the payment for this labour, which 
the merchant would have to perform in person. First, merchant's 
capital gets its b relunded, and, secondly, he makes the profit on 
il. This arises from the fact, therefore, that, first, it requires pay- 
ment for the work whereby it operates as merchant's capital, and that, 
secondly, it demands the profit, because it operates as capital, 
i.e., because it performs. work for which profit is paid to it as func- 
tioning capital. This is, therefore, the question to be solved. 

Let us assume that B=100, b=10, and the rate oi profit=10%. 
We take it that K=0, in order to leave out of consideration this 
element o! the purchase price, which does not belong here and has 
already been accounted for. Hence, the selling price would=B-+ p++ 
-+b-+-p (=B+Bp’+b+bp’; where p’ stands lor the rate of profit) = 
=100+ 10+ 104+1=121. 

But if b werenot invested by the merchant in wages—since b is 
paid only for commercial labour, hence labour required to realize 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 293 

the value of the commodity-capital thrown on the market by in- 
dustrial capital—the matter would stand as follows: to buy or 
sell for B=100, the merchant would devote his time, and we wish 
to assume that this is the only time at his disposal. The commer- 
cial labour represented by b, or 10, if paid [or by profit instead of 
wages, would presuppose another merchant's capital=100, since 
at 10% this makes b=10. This second B=100 would not addition- 
ally go into the price of commodities, but the 10% would. There 
would, hence, be two operations at 100=200, that would buy com- 
modities at 200-+-20-220. 

Since merchant’s capital is absolutely nothing but an individu- 
alized form of a portion of industrial capital engaged in the process 
o! circulation, all questions referring to it must be solved by rep- 
resenting the problem primarily in a form, in which the phenomena 
peculiar to merchant’s capital do not yet appear independently, but 
still in direct connection with industrial capital, as a branch of it. 
As an office, distinct from a workshop, mercantile capital operates 
continually in the circulation process. It is here—in the olfice 
of the industrial capitalist himself—that we must first analyse 
the b now under consideration. 

The office is from the outset always infinitesimally small com- 
pared to the industrial workshop. As for the rest, it is clear that 
as the-scale of production is extended, commercial operations re- 
quired constantly for the circulation of industrial capital, in order 
to sell the product existing as commodity-capital, to reconvert tlie 
money so received into means of production, and to keep account 
of the whole process, multiply accordingly. Calculation of prices, 
book-keeping, managing funds, correspondence—al! belong under 
this head. The more developed the scale of production, the greater, 
even if not proportionately greater. the commercial operations 
of the industrial capital, and consequently the labour and other 
costs of circulation involved in realizing value and surplus-value. 
This necessitates the employment of commercial wage-workers 
who make up the actual office staff. The outlay for these, althougl 
made in the form of wages, diflers from the variable capital laid 
out in purchasing productive labour. lt increases the outlay of 
the industrial capitalist, the mass of the capital to be advanced, 
without directly increasing surplus-value. Because it is an outlay 
for labour employed solely in realizing value already created. Like 
every other outlay of this kind, it reduces the rateol profit because 
the advanced capital increases, but not the surplus-value. If sur- 
plus-value s remains constant while advanced capital C increases 

to C+AC, then the rate of profit = is replaced by the smaller 

294 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

s 
C+ 
fore, to cut these expenses of circulation down to a minimum, 
just as his expenses for constant capital. Hence, industri- 
al capital does not maintain the same altitude to its commer- 
cial wage-labourers as it does to its productive wage-labourers. 
The more productive wage-labourers it employs under otherwise 
equal circumstances, the greater the output, and thegreater the sur- 
plus-value, or profit. Conversely, however, the larger the scale of 
production, the greater the quantity of value and surplus-value 
to be realized, the greater the produced commodity-capital, the 
greater are the absolute, if not relative, office costs, giving rise 
to a kind of division of labour. To what extent profit is the pre- 
condition for these outlays, is seen, among other things, from the 
fact that with the increase of commercial salaries, a part 
of them is [requently paid by a share in the profit. It is in the na- 
iure of things that labour consisting merely of intermediate opera- 
tions connected partly with calculating values, partly with realiz- 
ing them, and partly with reconverting the realized money into 
means o! production, is a labour whose magnitude therefore depends 
on the quantity of the produced values that have to be realized, 
and does not act as the cause, like directly productive labour, but 
rather as an effect, of the respective magnitudes and masses of these 
values. The same applies to the other costs of circulation. To 
do much measuring, weighing, packing, and transporting, much 
must be on hand. The amount of packing, transporting, etc., de- 
pends on the quantity of commodities which are the objects of 
this activity, not vice versa. 

The commercial worker produces no surplus-value directly. 
But the price of his labour is determined by the value of his la- 
bour-power, hence by its costs of production, while the applica- 
tion of this labour-power, its exertion, expenditure of energy, and 
wear and tear, is as in the case of every other wage-labourer by no 
means limited by its value. His wage, therefore, is not necessarily 
proportionate to the mass of profit which he helps the capitalist 
to realize. What he costs the capitalist and what he brings in for 
him, are two different things. He creates no direct surplus-value, 
but adds to the capitalist’s income by helping him to reduce the 
cost of realizing surplus-value, inasmuch as he performs partly 
unpaid labour. The commercial worker, in the strict sense of the 
term, belongs to the better-paid class of wage-workers—to those 
whose labour is classed as skilled and stands above average labour. 
Yet the wage tends to fall, even in relation to average labour, with 

tale o! profit ee The industrial capitalist endeavours, there- 

COMMERCIAL PROFIT 295 

the advance of the capitalist mode of production. This is due part- 
ly tothe division of labour in the office, implying a one-sided devel- 
opment of the labour capacity, the cost of which does not fall en- 
tirely on the capitalist, since the labourer’s skill develops by it- 
self through the exercise of his function, and al] the more rapidly 
as division of labour makes it more one-sided. Secondly, because 
the necessary training, knowledge of commercial practices, lan- 
guages, etc., is more and more rapidly, easily, universally and cheap- 
ly reproduced with the progress of science and public education 
the more the capitalist mode of production directs teaching methods, 
etc., towards practical purposes. The universality of public edu- 
cation enables capitalists to recruit such labourers from classes 
that formerly had no access to such trades and were accustomed to 
a lower standard of living. Moreover, this increases supply, and 
hence competition. With few exceptions, the labour-power of these 
people is therefore devaluated with the progress of capitalist 
production. Their wage falls, while their labour capacity in- 
creases. The capitalist increases the number of these labourers when- 
ever he has more value and profits to realize. The increase of this 
labour is always a result, never a cause of more surplus-value.°*? 

There is duplication, therefore. On the one hand, the functions 
as commodity-capilal and money-capital (hence further designat- 
ed as merchant’s capital) are general definite forms assumed by 
industrial capital. On the other hand, specific capitals, and there- 
fore specific groups of capitalists, are exclusively devoted to these 
functions; and these functions thus develop into specific spheres 
of self-expansion of capital. 

In the case of mercantile capital, the commercial functions and 
circulation costs are found only in individualized form. That side of 
industrial capital which is devoted to circulation, continuously ex- 
ists not only in theshape of commodity-capital and money-capital, 
but also in the office alongside the workshop. But it becomes in- 

3°? How well this forecast of the fate of the commercial proletariat, written 
in 1865, has stood the test of time can be corroborated by hundreds of German 
clerks, who are trained in all commercial operations and acquainted with three 
or four languages, and offer their services in vain in London Cily at 25 shillings 
per week, which is far below the wages of a good machine. A blank of two pages 
in the manuscript indicates that this point was to have been treated at grealer 
length. For the rest, we refer the reader to Book II (Kap. VI, S.105-13) (‘The 
Costs of Circulation”) (English edition: Vol. I, Ch. VI, pp. 129-36.—E&d.], 
where various matters belonging under this head have already been dis- 
cussed.—F. E. 

296 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

dependent in the case of mercantile capital. In the latter’s case, the 
office is its only workshop. The portion of capital employed in 
the form of circulation costs appears much larger in the case of 
the big merchant than in that of the industrialist, because besides 
their own offices connected with every industrial workshop, that 
part of capital which would have to be so applied by the entire 
class of industrial capitalists is concentrated in the hands of a lew 
merchants, who in carrying out the functions of circulation also 
provide for the growing expenses incidental to their continuation. 

To industrial capital the costs of circulation appear as unpro- 
ductive expenses, and so they are. To the merchant they appear 
as a source of his profit, proportional, given the general rate of 
profit, to their size. The outlay to be made [or these circulation 
costs is, therefore, a productive investment for mercantile capital. 
And for this reason, the commercial labour which it buys is 
likewise immediately productive for it, 

CHAPTER XVIII 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL. 
PRICES 

The turnover of industrial capital is a combination of its period 
of production and time of circulation, and therefore embraces the 
entire process of production. The turnover of merchant’s capital, 
on the other hand, being in reality nothing but an alienated move- 
ment of commodity-capital, represents only the first phase in 
the metamorphosis of a commodity, C—M, as the refluent move- 
ment of a specific capital; M—C, C—M, is, from the mercantile 
point of view, the turnover of merchant's capital. The merchant 
buys, converting his money into commodities, then sells, convert- 
ing the latter back into money, and so forth in constant repeti- 
tion. Within circulation, the metamorphosis of industrial capital 
always presents itself in the form of C_—M—C,; the money real- 
ized by the sale of the produced commodity C, is used to purchase 
new means of production, C,. This amounts to a practical exchange 
of C, for C,, and the same money thus changes hands twice. Its 
movement mediates the exchange of two different kinds of com- 
modities, C, andC,. But in the case of the merchant, it is, con- 
versely, the same commodity which changes hands twice in M—C— 
—M’. It merely promotes the reflux of his money. 

If, for example, a certain merchant’s capital is £100, and for 
these £100 the merchant buys commodities and sells them for £110, 
then his capital of £100 has completed one turnover, and the num- 
ber of such turnovers per year depends on the number of times 
this movement M—C—M’ is repcated. 

We here leave entirely out of consideration the costs which may 
be concealed in the difference between the purchase price and the 
selling price, since these do not alter in any way the form, which 
we are now analysing. 

The number of turnovers of a given merchant’s capital, there- 
fore, is analogous in this case tothe repeated cycles of money as 

298 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL . 

a mere medium of circulation. Just as the same thaler buys ten 
times its value in commodities in making ten cycles, so the same 
money-capital of the merchant, when turned over ten times, buys 
ten times its value in commodities, or realizes a total commodity- 
capital of ten times its value; a merchant’s capital of 100, for 
instance, a ten-fold value=1,000. But there is this difference: 
In the cycle of money as a medium of circulation it is the same 
piece of money that passes through different hands, thus repeat- 
edly performing the same function and hence making up for the 
mass of the circulating pieces of money by its velocity. But in 
the merchant’s case it is the same money-capital, the same mon- 
ey-value, regardless of what pieces of money it may be composed, 
which repeatedly buys and sells commodity-capital to the amount 
of its value and which therefore returns to the same hands, the 
same point of departure as M+4M, i.e., value plus surplus-value. 
This characterizes its turnover as a capital turnover. It always 
withdraws more money from circulation than it throws in. It 
is self-evident, at any rate, that an accelerated turnover of mer- 
chant’s capital (given a developed credit system, the function 
of money as a means of payment predominates) implies a more 
rapid circulation of the same quantity of money. 

A repeated turnover of commercial capital, however, never con- 
notes more than repeated buying and selling; while a repeated 
turnover of industrial capital connotes the periodicity and re- 
novation of the entire reproduction process (which includes the 
process of consumption). For merchant’s capital this appears 
merely as an external condition. Industrial capital must contin- 
ually bring commodities to the market and withdraw them 
from it, in order that rapid turnover of merchant’s capital may 
remain possible. If the process of reproduction is slow, then so is 
the turnover of merchant’s capital. True, merchant’s capital 
promotes the turnover of productive capital, but only in so far as 
it shortens its time of circulation. It has no direct influence on 
the time of production, which is also a barrier to the period of 
turnover of industrial capital. This is the first barrier for the turn- 
over of merchant’s capital. Secondly, aside from the barrier formed 
by reproductive consumption, the turnover of merchant’s capital 
is ultimately limited by the velocity and volume of the total 
individual consumption, since all the commodity-capital which 
is part of the consumption-fund depends on it. 

_ However (aside from the turnovers in the world of commerce, 
in which one merchant always sells the same commodity to another, 
and this sort of circulation may appear highly prosperous in times 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 299 

of speculation), the merchant’s capital, in the first place, cur- 
tails phase C—M for productive capital. Secondly, under the 
modern credit system it disposes of a large portion of the total 
social money-capital, so that it can repeat its purchases even he- 
fore it has definitely sold what has previously been purchased. 
And it is immaterial in this case, whether our merchant sells 
directly to the ultimate consumer, or there are a dozen other in- 
termediate merchants between them. Owing to the immense elas- 
ticity of the reproduction process, which may always be pushed 
beyond any given bounds, it does not encounter any obstacle in 
production itself, or at best a very elastic one. Aside [rom the 
separation of C—M and M—C, which follows from the nature 
of the commodities, a fictitious demand is then created, In spite 
of its independent status, the movement of merchant’s capital 
is never more than the movement of industrial capital within 
the sphere of circulation. But by virtue of its independent status 
it moves, within certain limits, independently of the bounds of 
the reproduction process and thereby even drives the latter beyond 
its bounds. This internal dependence and external independence 
push merchant’s capital to a point where the internal connection 
is violently restored through a crisis. 

Hence the phenomenon that crises do not come to the surface, 
do not break out, in the retail business first, which deals with 
direct consumption, but in the spheres of wholesale trade, and 
of banking, which places the money-capital of society at the 
disposal of the former. 

The manufacturer may actually sell to the exporter, and the 
exporter, in his turn, to his foreign customer; the importer may 
sell his raw materials to the manufacturer, and the latter may 
sell his products to the wholesale merchant, etc. But at some par- 
ticular imperceptible point the goods lie unsold, or else, again, 
all producers and middlemen may gradually become overstocked. 
Consumption is then generally at its highest, either because one 
industrial capitalist sets a succession of others inmotion, or be- 
cause the labourers employed by them are fully employed and have 
more to spend than usual. The capitalists’ expenditures increase 
together with their growing income. Besides, as we have seen 
(Book 11, Part ILI), continuous circtlation takes place belween 
constant capital and constant capital (even regardless of accel- 
erated accumulation). It is at first independent of individual con- 
sumption because it never enters the latter. But this consumption 
definitely limits it nevertheless, since constant capital is never 
produced for its own sake but solely because more of it is needed 

300 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

in spheres of production whose products go into individual con- 
sumption. However, this may go on undisturbed for some time, 
stimulated by prospective demand, and in such branches, therefore, 
the business of merchants and industrialists goes briskly forth. 
The crisis cceurs wen the returns of merchants who sell in distant 
markets (or whose supplies have also accumulated on the home 
market) become su slow and meagre that the banks press for pay- 
ment, or promissory notes for purchased commodities become 
due belore the latter have been resold. Then forced sales take 
place, sales in order to meet payments. Then comes the crash, 
which brings the illusory prosperity to an abrupt end. 

But the superficiality and meaninglessness of the turnover 
of merchant’s capital are still greater, because the turnover of 
one and the same merchant’s capital may simultaneously or 
successively promote the turnovers of several productive 
capitals. 

The turnover of merchant’s capital does not just promote the 
turnovers of several industrial capitals, it can also expedite the 
opposite phases of the metamorphosis of commodity-capital. 
For instance. the merchant buys linen from the manufacturer and 
sells it to the bleacher. In this case, therefore, the turnover of 
the same merchant’s capital—in fact, the same C—M, a realiza- 
tion of the linen—represents two opposite phases for two differ- 
ent industrial capitals. Inasmuch as the merchant sells for pro- 
ductive consumption, his C—M is always M—C for one industrial 
capitalist, and his M—C always C—M for another industrial 
capitalist. 

If we leave out K, the circulation costs, as we do in this chap- 
ter, if, in other words, we leave aside that portion of capital which 
the merchant advances along with the money required to purchase 
commodities, it follows that we also omit AK, the additional profit 
made on this additional capital. This is thus the strictly logical 
and mathematically correct mode of analysis if we want to see 
how profit and turnover of merchant’s capital affect prices. 

If the price of production of | lb. of sugar were £1, the mer- 
chant could buy 100 Ibs. of sugar with £100. If he buys and sells 
this quantity in the course of the year, and if the average annual 
rate of profit is 15%, he would add £15 to the £100, and 3s. 
lo £1, the price of production of 1 Ib. of sugar. That is, he would 
sell 1 1b. of sugar at £1 3s. But if the price of production of IIb. 
of sugar should fall to Is., the merchant could buy 2,000 Ibs. 
of sugar with £100, and sell the sugar at Is. I*/,d. per Ib. The 
annual profit on capital invested in the sugar business would still 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 301 

be £15 on each £100. But the merchant has to sell 100 Ibs. in 
the first case, and 2,000 Ibs. in the second. The high or low level 
of the price of production has nothing to do with the rate of prof- 
it. But it would greatly and decisively affect that aliquot part 
of the selling price of each Ib. of sugar, which resolves itself in 
mercantile profit, i.e., the addition to the price which the mer- 
chant makes on a certain quantity of commodities or products. 
If the price of production of a commodity is small, so, too, the 
amount the merchant advances in its purchase price, i.e., for 
a certain quantity of it. Hence, with a given rate of profit, the 
amount of profit he makes on this quantity of cheap commodities 
is small as well. Or, what amounts to the same, he can then buy 
with a certain amount of capital, say, 100, a larger quantity of 
these cheap commodities, and the total profit of 15, which he 
makes per 100, breaks up into smal! fractions over each individual 
piece or portion belonging to this mass of commodities. If the 
opposite takes place, then the reverse is true. This depends entirely 
on the greater or smaller productivity of the industrial capital 
in whose products he trades. If we except the cases in which the 
merchant is a monopolist and simultaneously monopolizes pro- 
duction, as did the Dutch East India Company in its day, noth- 
ing can be more ridiculous than the current idea that it depends 
on the merchant whether he sells many commodities at a small 
profil or few commodilies at a large profit on each individual 
piece of the commodities. The two limits of his selling price are: 
on the one hand, the price of production of the commodities, 
over which he has no control; on the other hand, the average rate 
of profit, over which he has just as little control. The only thing 
up to him to decide is whether he wants to deal in dear or in cheap 
commodities, and even here the size of his available capital and 
other circumstances also have their effect. Therefore, it depends 
wholly on the degree of development of the capitalist mode of 
production, not on the merchant’s goodwill, what course he shall 
follow. A purely commercial company like the old Dutch Fast 
India Company, which had a monopoly of production, could 
fancy that it could continue a method adapted at best to the be- 
ginnings of capitalist production, under entirely changed con- 
ditions.*° 

*° “Profit, on the general principle, is always the same, whatever be price, 
keeping its place like an incumbent body on the swelling or sinking tide. As, 
therefore, prices rise, a tradesman raises price; as prices fall, a tradesman lowers 
price.” (Corbet, An Inquiry into the Causes, etc., of the Wealth of Individuals, 
London, 1841, p. 20.) Here, as in the text generally, it is only a matter of ordinary 

302 MERCITANT’S CAPITAL 

The following circumstances, among others, help. to maintain 
that popular prejudice, which, like all false conceptions of profit, 
etc., arises [rom the observation of pure commerce and merchants’ 
prejudice: 

Firstly: phenomena of competition, which, however, apply 
merely to the distribution of mercantile profit among individ- 
ual merchants, the shareholders of the total merchant's capital, 
if one, jor example, sells cheaper, in order to drive his competitors 
off the field. , 

Secondly: an economist of the calibre of Professor Roscher may 
still imagine in Leipzig that it was “common sense and humani- 
tarian” grounds, which produced the change in selling prices, 
and that it was not a result of a revolutionized mode of pro- 
duction. 

Thirdly: if production prices fal! due to greater productivity 
of labour, and selling prices fall for the same reason, the demand, 
and with it the market-prices, often rise even faster than the 
supply, so that selling prices yield more than the average profit. 

Fourthly. a merchant may reduce his selling price (which is 
never more than a reduction of the usual profit that he adds to 
the price) so as to turn over a larger capital more rapidly. All 
these are matters that only concern competition between the 
merchants themselves. 

We have already shown in Book I that high or low commodity- 
prices do not determine either the mass of surplus-value produced 
by a given capital, or the rate of surplus-value, although the price 
of-a commodity, and with it the share of surplus-value in this 
price, are greater or smaller, depending on the relative quantity 
of commodities produced by a given quantity of labour. The prices 
of every specified quantity of a commodity are, so far as they 
correspond ta the values, determined by the total quantity of 
labour incorporated in this commodity. If little labour is incorpo- 
rated in much commodity, the unit price of the commodity is low 
and the surplus-value in it is small. How this labour incorporated 
in a commodity breaks up into paid and unpaid labour and what 
portion of its price, therefore, represents surplus-value, has noth- 
ing to do with this total quantity of labour, nor, consequently, 
with the price of the commodity. But the rate of surplus-value 

commerce, not of speculation. The analysis of speculation, as well as everything 
else pertaining to the division of mercantile capital, falls outside the field of our 
inquiry. “The profit of trade is a value added to capital which is independent of 
price, the second” (speculation) “is founded onthe variation in the value of 
capital or in price itself” (I. c., p. 128). 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 303 

does not depend on the absolute magnitude of the surplus-value 
contained in the unit price of the commodity. It depends on its 
relative magnitude, its proportion to the wages contained in the 
same commodity. The rate of surplus-value may therefore be 
large, while the absolute magnitude of surplus-value in each 
unit of the commodity is small. This absolute magnitude of sur- 
plus-value in each piece of the commodity depends primarily on 
the productivity of labour, and only secondarily on its division 
into paid and unpaid labour. 

Now, in the case of the commercial selling price, the price of 
production is a given exiernal precondition. 

The high commercial commodity-prices in former times were 
due |) to the high prices of production, i. e., the unproductiveness 
of labour; 2) to the absence of a general rate of profit, with mer- 
chant’s capital absorbing a much larger quota of surplus-value 
than would have fallen to its share if capitals enjoyed greater 
general mobility. The ending of this situation, in both its aspects, 
is therefore the result of the development of the capitalist mode 
of production. 

The turnovers of merchant’s capital vary in duration, their 
annual number consequently being greater or smaller, in different 
branches of commerce. Within the same branch the turnover 
is more or less rapid in the different phases of the economic cycle. 
Yet there is an average number of turnovers, determined by ex- 
perience. 

We have already seen that the turnover of merchant's capital 
differs from that of industrial capital. This is in the nature of 
things. One single phase in the turnover of industrial capital 
appears as a complete turnover of an independently constituted 
merchant’s capital, or yet of its part. It also stands in a different 
relation to profit and price determination. 

In the case of industrial capital, its turnover expresses, on the 
one hand, the periodicity of reproduction, and, therefore, the 
mass of commodities thrown on the market in a certain period 
depends on it. On the other hand, its time of circulation creates 
a barrier, an extensible one, and exerls more or less of a restraint 
on the creation of value and surplus-value, because it aflects the 
volume of the production process. The turnover, therefore, acts 
as a determining element on the mass of annually produced sur- 
plus-value, and hence on the formation of the general rate of 
profit, but it acts as a limiting, rather than positive, element. 
For merchant's capital, on the contrary, the average rate of profit 
is a given magnitude. The mierchant’s capital does not directly 

304 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

participate in creating profit or surplus-value, and joins in shap- 
ing the general rate of profit only in so far as it draws a divi- 
dend proportionate to its share in the total capital, out of the 
mass of profit produced by industrial capital. ; 
The greater the number of turnovers of an industrial capital 
under conditions described in Book II, Part II, the greater the 
mass of profit it creates. True, through the formation of a general 
rate of profit, the total profit is distributed among the different 
capitals not in proportion to their actual part in its production, 
but in proportion to the aliquot part they make up of the total 
capital, i.e., in proportion to their magnitude. But this does 
not alter the essence of the matter. The greater the number of 
turnovers of the total industrial capital, the greater the mass 
of profits, the mass of annually produced surplus-value, and, there- 
fore, other circumstances remaining unchanged, the rate of profit. 
It is diflerent with merchant’s capital. The rate of profit is a given 
magnitude with respect to it, determined on the one hand by the 
mass of profit produced by industrial capital, and on the other 
by the relative magnitude of the total merchant's capital, by its 
quantitative relation to the sum of capital advanced in the proc- 
esses of production and circulation. The number of its turnovers 
does, indeed, decisively affect its relation to the total capital, or 
the relative magnitude of merchant’s capital required for the cir- 
culation, for it is evident that the absolute magnitude of the re- 
quired merchant's capital and the velocity of its turnovers stand 
in inverse proportion. But, all other conditions remaining equal, 
the relative magnitude of merchant’s capital, or the part it makes 
up of the total capital, is determined by its absolute magnitude. 
Ii the total capital is 10,000, and the merchant’s capital! ';,, of 
that sum, it is=1,000; if the total capital is 1,000, then ‘/,, of 
it=100. The absolute magnitude of merchant's capital varies, 
depending on the magnitude of the total capital, although its 
telative magnitude remains the same. But here we assume that 
its relative magnitude, say, '/,, of the total capital, is given. This 
relative magnitude, however, is again determined by the turn- 
over. If it is turned over rapidly, its absolute magnitude, for 
example, will=£1,000 in the first case,=100 in the second, and 
hence its relative magnitude='/,,. With a slower turnover its ab- 
solute magnitude is, say, =2,000 in the first case, and=200 in 
the second. Its relative magnitude will then have increased from 
*i19 to’/, of the total capital. Circumstances which reduce the aver- 
age turnover of merchant's capital, like the development of means 
of transportation, for instance, reduce pro /anto the absolute mag- 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 305 

nitude of merchant’s capital, and thereby increase the general 
rate of profit. If the opposite takes place, then the reverse is true. 
A developed capitalist mode of production, compared with earlier 
conditions, exerts a two-fold influence on merchant’s capital. 
On the one hand, the same quantity of commodities is turned over 
with a smaller mass of actually functioning merchant's ‘capital; 
owing to the more rapid turnover of merchant’s capital, and the 
more rapid reproduction process, on which this depends, the re- 
lation of merchant’s capital to industrial capital diminishes. On 
the other hand, with the development of the capitalist mode of 
production all production becomes the production of commodi- 
ties, which places all products into the hands of agents of circu- 
lation. It is to be added that under the previous mode of pro- 
duction, which produced on a small scale, a very large portion 
of the producers sold their goods directly to the consumers, or 
worked on their personal orders, save for the mass of products 
consumed directly, in kind, by the producer himself, and the 
mass of services performed in kind. While, therefore, under 
former modes of production commercial capital was greater in 
relation to the commodity-capital which it turned over, it was: 

1) absolutely smaller, because a disproportionately smaller 
part of the total product was produced as commodities, and passed 
as commodity-capital into circulation, falling into the hands 
of merchants. [t was smaller, because the commodity-capital was 
smaller. But at the same time it was proportionately larger, not 
only because its turnover was slower and not only in relation 
to the mass of commodities turned over by it. It was larger also 
because the price of this mass of commodities, and hence the mer- 
chant’s capital to be advanced for it, were greater than under 
capitalist production on account of a lower productivity of la- 
bour, so that the same value was incorporated in a smaller mass 
of commodities. 

2) It is not only that a larger mass of commodities is produced 
on the basis of capitalist production (taking into account also 
the reduced value of this mass of commodities), but the same 
mass ol products, for instance, of corn, also forms a greater commod- 
ity mass, i.e., more and more of it becomes an object of commerce. 
As a consequence, there is an increase not only of the mass of 
merchant’s capital, but of all capital applied in circulation, such 
as in marine shipping, railways, telegraph, etc. 

3) However, and this is an aspect which belongs to the dis- 
cussion of “competition among capitals”: idle or only half-function- 
ing merchant's capital grows with the progress of the capitalist 

306 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

mode of production, with the ease of entering retail trade, with 
speculation, and the redundance of released capital. 

But, assuming the relative magnitude of merchant’s capital 
to total capital to be given, the difference of turnovers in the var- 
ious branches of commerce does not affect either the magnitude 
of the total profit falling to the share of merchant’s capital, or the 
general rate of profit. The merchant's profit is not determined 
by the mass of commodity-capital turned over by him, but by 
the dimensions of the money-capital advanced by him to promote 
this turnover. If the general annual rate of profit is 15%, and 
{he merchant advances £100, which he turns over once a year, he 
will sell his commodities at 115. If his capital turns over five times 
a year, he will sell a commodity-capital he bought at 100 at 103 
five times a year, hence in a year a commodity-capital of 500 at 
515. This gives the same annual profit of 15 on his advanced cap- 
ital of 100. If this were not so, merchant’s capital would yield 
a much higher profit, proportionate to the number of its turnovers, 
than industrial capital, which would be in conflict with the law 
of the general rate of profit. 

Hence, the number of turnovers of merchant's capital in the 
various branches of commerce has a direct influence on the mer- 
cantile prices of commodities. The amount added to the mer- 
cantile price, the aliquot part of mercantile profit of a given cap- 
ital, which falls upon the price of production of a commodity, 
is in inverse proportion to the number of turnovers, or the ve- 
locity of turnover, of merchants’ capitals in the various lines 
of commerce. If a certain merchant’s capital is turned over five 
times a year, it will add to a commodity-capital of equal value 
but ’', of what another merchant's capital, which turns over just 
once a year, adds to a commodity-capital of equal value. 

The modification of selling prices by the average period of 
turnover of capitals in diflerent branches of commerce amounts 
lo this: The same mass of profits, determined for any given mag- 
nitude of merchant’s capital by the general annual rate ol prof- 
it, hence determined independently of the specific character of 
the commercial operations of this capital, is differently distributed— 
proportionately to the rate of turnover—over masses of commodi- 
ties of equal value, so that, for instance, if a merchant’s capital 
is turned over five times a year, zal 
15% is added to the price of the commodities, 

The same percentage of commercial profit in different branches 
of commerce, therefore, increases the selling prices of commodities 

=3%, and if once a year, 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 307 

by quite different percentages of their values, all depending on 
their periods of turnover. 

On the other hand, in the case of industrial capital, the period 
of turnover does not in any way affect the magnitude of the value 
of individual commodities produced, although it does affect the 
mass of values and surplus-values produced in a given time by 
a given capital, because it affects the mass of exploited labour. 
This is concealed, to be sure, and seems to be otherwise as soon 
as one turns to prices of production. But this is due solely to the 
fact that, according to previously analysed laws, the prices of 
production of various commodities deviate from their values. 
If we look upon the process of production as a whole, and upon 
the mass of commodities produced by the total industrial capital, 
we shall at once find the general law vindicated. 

While, therefore, a closer inspection of the influence of the 
period of turnover on the formation of values by industrial capi- 
tal leads us back to the general law and to the basis of political 
economy, that the values of commodities are determired by the 
labour-time contained in them, the influence of the turnovers 
of merchant’s capital on mercantile prices reveals phenomena 
which, without benefit of a very far-reaching analysis of the con- 
necting links, seem to point to a purely arbitrary determination 
of prices; namely, that they are fixed by a capital simply bent 
upon pocketing a cerlain quantity of profit in a year. Due partic- 
ularly to this influence of turnovers, it appears that within cer- 
tain limits the process of circulation as such determines commodi- 
ty-prices independently of the process of production. Al! super- 
ficial and false conceptions of the process of reproduction as a 
whole are derived from examinations of merchant’s capital and 
from the conceptions which its peculiar movements call forth 
in the minds of circulation agents. 

li, as the reader will have realized to his great dismay, the 
analysis of the actual intrinsic relations of the capitalist process 
of production is a very complicated matter and very extensive; 
if it is a work of science to resolve the visible, merely external 
Movement into the true intrinsic movement, it is self-evident that 
conceptions which arise ahcut the laws of production in the minds 
of agents of capitalist production and circulation will diverge 
drastically from these real laws and will merely be the conscious 
expression af the visible movements. The conceptions of the mer- 
chant, stockbroker, and banker, are necessarily quite distorted. 
Those of the manufacturers are vitiated by the acts of circula- 
lion lo which their capital is subject, and by the levelling of the 

398 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

general rate oi profit. * Competition likewise assumes a completely 
distorted role in their minds. If the limits of value and surplus- 
value are given, it is easy to grasp how competition of capitals 
transforms values into prices of production and [furiher into mer- 
cantile prices, and surplus-value into average profit. But without 
these limits, it is absolutely unintelligible why competition 
should reduce the general rate of profit lo on: level instead of 
another, e. g., make it 15% instead of 1,500%. Competition can 
at best only reduce the general rate of profit to one level. But 
it contains no eleinent by which it could determine this level 
itself. 

From the standpoint of merchant’s capital, therelore, it is 
the turnover which appears to determine prices. On the other 
hand, while the rate of turnover of industrial capital, in so far 
as it enables a certain capital to exploit more or less labour, exerts 
a determining and limiting influence on the mass of profit, and 
thus on the general rate of profit, this rate of profit obtains for 
merchant's capital as an external fact, its internal connection 
with the production of surplus-value being entirely obliterated. 
If, under otherwise equal circumstances and particularly the same 
organic composition, the same industrial capital is turned over 
four times a year instead of twice, it produces twice as much sur- 
plus-value and, consequently, profit. And this is apparent as soon, 
and as long, as this capital has a monopoly on an improved method 
of production, which makes this accelerated turnover possible. 
Conversely, differences in the periods of turnover in different 
branches of commerce manilest themselves in the lact that profit 
made on the turnover of a given commodity-capital is in inverse 
proportion to the number of times the money-capital turns over 
this commodity-capital. Small profits and quick returns appear 
to the shopkeeper to be the principle which he follows out of 
sheer principle. 

For the rest, it is self-evident that regardless of alternating. 
mutually compensating, speedier and slower turnovers, this law 
of turnover of merchant’s capital holds good in each branch of 
commerce only for the average turnovers made by the entire mer- 
chant’s capital invested in each particular branch. The capital 
of A, who deals in the same branch as B, may make more or less 

“| This is a very naive, but alsoa very correct remark: “Surely the lact t hat 
one and the same commodity may be had Irom dilferent sellers al considerably 
different prices is frequently due to mistakes of calculation.” (Feller and Oder- 
mann, Das Gunze der kaufmdnnischen Arithmetik, 7thed., 1859.) This shows how 
purely theoretical, that 15, abstract, becomes the determination of prices. 

THE TURNOVER OF MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 309 

than the average number of turnovers, In this case the others 
make Jess or more. This does not alter the turnover of the total 
mass of merchant’s capital invested in this line. But it is of de- 
cisive moment for the individual merchant or shopkeeper. In this 
case he makes an extra profit, just as industrial capitalists make 
extra profits if they produce under better than average conditions. 
If competition compels him, he can sel] cheaper than his compet- 
itors without lowering his profit below the average. If the condi- 
tions which would enable him to turn over his capital more rap- 
idly, are themselves for sale, such as a favourable shop location, 
he can pay extra rent for it, i.e., convert a portion of his sur- 
plus-profit into ground-rent. 

CHAPTER XIX 
MONEY -DEALING CAPITAL 

The purely technical movements performed by money in the 
circulation process of industrial, and, as we may now add, of 
commercial capital (since it takes over a part of the circulation 
movement of industrial capital as its own, peculiar movement), 
if individualized as a function of some particular capital per- 
forming just these, and only these, operations as its specific oper- 
ations, convert this capital into money-dealing capital. A portion 
of industrial capital, and, more precisely, also of commercial cap- 
ital, not only obtains al] the time in the form of money, as_money- 
capital in general, but as money-capital engaged precisely in 
these technical functions. A definite part of the total capital 
dissociates itself from the rest and stands apart in the form of 
money-capital, whose capitalist function consists exclusively in 
performing these operations for the entire class of industrial and 
commercial capitalists. As in the case of commercial capital, 
a portion of industrial capital engaged in the circulation proc- 
ess in the form of money-capital separates from the rest and per- 
forms these operations of the reproduction process for all the 
other capital. The movements of this money-capital are, therefore, 
once more merely movements of an individualized part of in- 
dustrial capital engaged in the reproduction process. 

It is only when, and in so far as, capital is newly invested— 
which alsa applies to accumulation—that capital in money- 
form appears as the starting-point and the end result of the 
movement. But for all capitals already engaged in the process, 
these first and last points appear merely as points of transit. Since, 
as already seen in the case of simple commodity-circulation, [rom 
the moment of leaving the sphere of production to the moment 
of iis re-entry industrial capital undergoes the metamorphosis 
C’—M—C, M in fact represents the end result of one phase 
of the metamorphosis, just to become the starting-point of the 
Teverse phase, which supplements it. And although the C—M 

MONEY-DEALING CAPITAL 311 

of industrial capital is always M—C—M for merchant's capital, the 
actual process for the latter is continually also C—M—C once it 
has begun to function. But it performs the acts C—M and M—C 
simultaneously. This is to say that there is not just one capital 
in the stage C—M while another is in the stage M—C, but that 
the same capital buys continually and sells continually at one 
and the same time because of the continuity of the production 
process. It is to be found always in both stages at one and the same 
time. While one of its parts turns into money, later to be reconverted 
into commodities, another turns simultaneously into commod- 
ities, to be reconverted into money. 

It all depends on the form of the commodity exchange whetlier 
the money serves here as a means of circulation or of payment. 
In both cases the capitalist has to pay out money constantly to 
many persons, and to receive money continually from many per- 
sons. This purely technical operation of disbursing and receiving 
money is in itself Jabour which, as long as the money serves as 
a means of payment, necessitates drawing up payment balances 
and acts of balancing accounts. This labour is a cost of circulation, 
j.e., not labour creating value. It is shortened in being carried 
out by a special section of agents, or capitalists, for the rest of the 
capitalist class. 

A definite portion of the capital must be on hand constantly 
as a hoard, as potential money-capital—a reserve o] means of 
Purchase, a reserve of means of payment, and idle capital in 
the form of money waiting to be put to work. Another portion 
streams back continually in this form. Aside from collecting, 
paying, and book-keeping, this entails safekeeping the hoard, 
which is an operation all in itself. It is, indeed, a continuous 
conversion of the hoard into means of circulation and means of 
payment, and its restoration by means of money secured through 
sales and from payments due. This constant movement of the part 
of capital existing as money, dissociated from tle function of 
capital itself, this purely technical function, causes its own la- 
bour and expense, classified as costs of circulation. 

The division of labour brings it about that these technical oper- 
ations, dependent upon the functions of capital, should be per- 
formed for the entire capitalist class as much as possible by a spe- 
cial section of agents or capitalists as their exclusive function— 
or that these operations should be concentrated in their hands. 
We have here, as in merchant's capital, division of Jabour in 
a two-fold sense. It becomes a specialized business, and because 
performed as a specialized business for the money-mechanism 

312 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

of the whole class, it is concentrated and conducted on a large 
scale. A further division of labour takes place within it, both 
through division into various independent branches, and through 
segmentation of work within these branches (large offices, nu- 
merous book-keepers and cashiers, and far-reaching division of 
labour). Paying and receiving money, settling accounts, keeping 
current accounts, storing money, etc.—all this, dissociated from 
the acts necessitating these technical operations, makes money- 
dealing capital of the capital advanced for these functions. 

The various operations, whose individualization into specific 
businesses gives rise to the money trade, spring [rom the different 
purposes of money itself and from its functions, which capital 
in its money-form must therefore likewise carry out. 

I] have pointed out earlier that finance developed originally 
from the exchange of products between different communities. 4” 

Trading in money, commerce in the money-commodity, first 
developed therefore out of international commerce. Ever since 
different national coins have existed merchants buying in foreign 
countries have had to exchange their national coins for local 
coins, and vice versa, or to exchange different coins for uncoined 
pure silver or gold—the world-money. Hence the exchange bus- 
iness which is to be regarded as one of the natural foundations 
of modern finance.** Out of it developed banks of exchange, in 

*? Zur Kritik der politischen Oekanomie, S. 27. 

* “The great differences among coins as concerns their grain and coinage by 
many princes and towns that were privileged to coin money, necessitated the crea- 
tion of business establishments ta enable merchants to use local maney wherever 
compensation for the different coins was required. To be able 10 make cash pay- 
ments, merchants who travelled to a foreign market provided themselves with 
uncoined pure silver, or gold. In the same way they exchanged money received 
in local markets for uncoined silver or gold when returning home. The business 
of exchanging money, the exchange of uncoined precious metals lor local coins, 
and vice versa, thus became a wide-spread and paying business.” (Hillmann, 
Siddtewesen des Mittelalicrs, Bonn, 1826-29, I, S. 437-38.) “Banks of exchange do 
not owe their name to the fact that they issue bills of exchange ... but to the fact 
that they used to exchange cains. Long before the establishment of the Amsterdam 
Bank of Exchange in 1609, there existed in the Dutch merchant towns money- 
changers and exchange houses, even exchange banks.... The business of these mon- 
ey-changers consisted in exchanging the numerous varieties of coin brought into 
the country by foreign traders for the currency of the realm. Gradually their circle 
of activity extended... They became the bankers and cashiers of their times. 
But the government of Amsterdam viewed as dangerous the combination of cash- 
ier and exchange businesses, and to meet this danger it was resolved to establish 
a large chartered institution able to perform both the cashier and exchange opera- 
tions. This institution was the famous Amsterdam Bank of Exchange of 1609. 
In like manner, the exchange banks of Venice, Genoa, Stockholm, Hamburg, owe 

MUNEY-DEALING CAPITAL 313 

which silver (or gold) serves as world-mmoney—now called bank 
money of commercial money—as distinct from currency. 
Exchange transactions, in the sense of mere notes of payment to trav- 
ellers from a money-changer in one country to a changer in another 
country, developed back in Rome and Greece out of the actual 
money-changing. 

Trading in gold and silver as commodities (raw materials for 
the making of luxury articles) is the natural basis of the bullion 
trade, or the trade which acts as a medium for the functions of 
money as universal money. These functions, as previously ex- 
plained (Buch I, Kap. III, 3, c),* are two-fold: currency move- 
ment back and forth between the various national spheres of cir- 
culation in order to balance international payments and in connec- 
tion with the migrations of capital in quest of interest; simulta- 
neously, flow of precious metals from their sources of production 
via the world-market and their distribution among the various 
national] spheres of circulation. Goldsmiths acted as bankers still 
during the greater part of the 17th century in England. We shall 
completely disregard the way in which the balancing of inter- 
national accounts developed further in the bill jobbing, etc., 
and everything referring to transactions in valuable papers; in 
short, we shall leave out of consideration all special forms of the 
credit systern, which do not as yet concern us here. 

National money discards its Iceal character in the capacily 
of universal money; one national currency is expressed in another, 
and thus all of them are finally reduced to their content of gold 
or silver, while the latter, being the two commodities circulating 
as world-money, are simultaneously reduced to their reciprocal 
value-ratio, which changes continually. It is this intermediate opera- 
tion which the money trader makes his special occupation. Money- 
changing and the bullion trade are thus the original forms of the 
money trade, and spring from the two-fold junctions of money— 
as national money and world-money. 

The capitalist process o] production, jusi as commerce in gen- 
eral, even under pre-capitalist methods, imply: 

First, the accumulation of money as a hoard, i.e., here as that 
part of capital which must always be on hand in the form of money 

their origin to the continual necessity of changing money. Of all these, the Ham- 
burg Exchange is the only one today slill doing business, because the need [or 
such an institution is still felt in that merchants’ town, which has no Mint of its 
own, etc.” (S. Vissering, Handboek van Praktische Staathuishoudkunde, Amsier- 
dam. 1860, I, 247.) 

* English edition: Ch. II, 3, ¢c.—£d. 

314 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

as a reserve [und of means of payment and purchase. This is the 
first iorm of a hoard, as it reappears under the capitalist mode of 
production, and as it appears generally with the development of 
merchant’s capital, at least for the purposes of this capital. Both 
remarks apply to national, as well as international, circulation. 
The hoard is in continuous flux, pours ceaselessly into circula- 
tion, and returns ceaselessly [rom it. The second form of a hoard 
is that of idle, temporarily unemployed capital in the shape of 
money, including newly accumulated and not yet invested mon- 
ey-capital. The functions entailed by this formation of a hoard 
are primarily those of safekeeping, book-keeping, etc. 

Secondly, however, this involves outlays of money for pur- 
chases, collecting money from sales, making and receiving pay- 
ments, balancing payments, etc. The money-dealer performs all 
these services at first as a simple cashier of the merchants and 

industrial capitalists.** 
The money trade becomes {ully developed, even in its first 
stages, as soon as its ordinary functions are supplemented by 

"The institution of cashier has probably nowhere preserved its original 
independent character so pure as in the Dutch merchant towns” (cf. on the origin 
of the cashier business in Amsterdam, E. Lusac, Holland’s Rykdom, Part III). 
“Its functions coincide in part with those of the old Amsterdam Bank of Exchange. 
The cashier receives [rom the merchants, who employ his services, acertain amount 
of money, for which he opens a ‘credit’ for them in his books. Later, they send 
him their claims, which he collects for them and credits to their account. At the 
same time, he makes payments on their dralts (kassiers briefjes) and charges the 
amounts to their account. He makes a small charge for these receipts and payments, 
which yields him a remuneration for his labours only corresponding to the size 
ol the turnover accomplished between the two parties.If payments are to be bal- 
anced between two merchants, who both deal with the same cashier, such pay- 
ments are settled very simply by mutual entries in the books, for the cashiers 
balance their mutual claims from day to day. The cashier’s actual business thus 
consists basically of this mediation in payments. Therefore, it excludes industrial 
enterprises, speculation, and opening of unlimited credits; for it must be the 
rule in this business that the cashier makes no payment over and above the credit 
of any one keeping an account with him.”(Vissering, doc. cit., p. 134.) Re the bank- 
ing associations of Venice: “The requirements and locality of Venice, where 
carrying bullion was less convenient than in other places, induced the large mer- 
chants of that city to found banking associations under due safeguards, super: 
vision and management. Members of such associations deposited certain sums, 
on which they drew dralts for their creditors, whereupon the paid sum was deduct- 
ed from the debtor’s account on the page of the book reserved lor that purpose 
and added to ihe sum credited in the same book to the creditor. This is the ear- 
liest_ beginning of the so-called giro banks. These associations are indeed ald. 
But if attributed to the 12th century, they are being confounded with the State 
Loan Institute established in 1171." (Hiilimann, foc. cit., pp. 453-54.) 

MONEY-DEALING CAPITAL 315 

lending and borrowing and by credit. Of this more in the next 
part, which deals with interest-bearing capital. 

The bullion trade itself, the transfer of gold or silver [rom one 
country to another, is merely the result of trading in commod- 
ities. It is determined by the rate of exchange which expresses 
the standing of international payments and the interest rates in 
the different markets. The bullion trader as such acts merely as 
an intermediary of the results. 

In discussing money and the way its movements and forms 
develop out of simple commodity-circulation, we saw (Buch 1, 
Kap. III) * that the movements of the mass of money circulating 
as means of purchase and payment depend on the metamorphosis 
of commodities, on the volume and velocity of this metamorphosis, 
which we now know to be but a phase in the entire process of re- 
production. As for securing the money materials—gold and sil- 
ver—from their sources of production, this resolves itself into 
a direct exchange of commodities, an exchange of gold and silver 
as commodities for other commodities. Hence, it is itself as much 
a phase of the exchange of commodities as the securing of iron 
or other metals. However, so far as the movement ol! precious 
metals on the world-inmarket is concerned (we here leave aside 
movements expressing the transfer of capital by loans—a type 
of transfer which also obtains in the shape of commodity-capital), 
it is quite as much determined by the international exchange 
of commodities as the movement of money as a national means 
of purchase and payment is determined by the exchange of commod- 
ities in the home market. The inflow and outflow of precious 
metals [rom one national sphere of circulation to another, inas- 
much as this is caused merely by a depreciation of the national 
currency, or by a double standard, are alien to money circulation 
as such and merely represent corrections of deviations brought 
about arbitrarily by state decrees. Finally, as concerns the for- 
mation of hoards which constitute reserve lunds for means of pur- 
chase and payment, be it for home or foreign trade, and which 
also merely represent a form of temporarily idle capital, they are 
in both cases necessary precipitates of the circulalion process. 

If the entire circulation of money is in volume, fourm and move- 
ment purely a result of commodity-circulation, which, in its 
turn, from the capitalist point of view, is only the circulation 
process of capital (also embracing the exchange of capital lor 
revenue, and of revenue for revenue, so far as oullay of revenue 

* English edilion; Ch. [lI.—-£d. 

316 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

is effected through retail trade), it is self-evident that dealing 
in money does not merely promote the circulation of money, a 
mere result and phenomenon of commodity-circulation. This cir- 
culation of money itself, a phase in commodity-circulation, is 
taken for granted in money-dealing. What the latter promotes is 
merely the technical operations of money circulation which it 
concentrates, shortens, and simplifies. Dealing in money does not 
form the hoards. It provides the technical means by which the 
formation of hoards may, so far as it is voluntary (hence, not 
an expression of unemployed capital or of disturbances in the 
reproduction process), be reduced to its economic minimum be- 
cause, if managed jor the capitalist class as a whole, the reserve 
junds of means of purchase and payment need not be as large as 
they would have to be if each capitalist were to manage his own. 
The money-dealers do not buy the precious metals. They merely 
handle their distribution as soon as the commodity trade has bought 
them. They facilitate the settling of balances, inasmuch as money 
serves as the means of payment, and reduce through the artificial 
mechanism of these settlements the amount of money required 
for this purpose. But they do not determine either the connec- 
tions, or the volume, of the mutual payments. The bills of ex- 
change and the cheques, for instance, which are exchanged for 
one another in banks and clearing houses, represent quite independ- 
ent transactions and are the results of given operations, and it 
is merely a question of a better technical settlement of these re- 
sults. So far as money circulates as a means of purchase, the vol- 
ume and number of purchases and sales have no connection what- 
ever with money-dealing. The latter can do no more than shorten 
the technical operations that go with buying and selling, and 
thus reduce the amount olf cash money required to turn over the 
commodities. 

Money-dealing in its pure form, which we consider here, i.e., 
set apart from the credit system, is thus concerned only with 
the technique of a certain phase of commodity-circulation, namely, 
that of money circulation and the different functions of money 
arising in its circulation. 

This substantially distinguishes dealing in money from the 
dealing in commodities, which promotes the metamorphosis of 
commodities and their exchange, or even gives this process of 
the commodity-capital the appearance of a process of a capital 
sel apart from industrial capital. While, therefore, commercial 
capital has its own form of circulation, M—C—M, in which 
the commodity changes hands twice and thus Provides a reflux 

MONEY-DEALING CAPITAL 317 

of money, as distinct from C—M—C, in which money changes 
hands twice and thus promotes commodity exchange, there is no 
such special form in the case of money-dealing capital. 

In so [ar as money-capital is advanced by a separate class of 
capitalists in this technical promotion of money circttlation— 
a capital which on a reduced scale represents the additional capi- 
tal the merchants and industrial capitalists would otherwise have 
to advance themselves for these purposes—the general form of 
capital, M—M’, occurs here as well. By advancing M, the advanc- 
ing capitalist secures M+-AM. But promotion of M—M’ does not 
here concern the material, but only the technical, processes of the 
metamorphosis. 

It is evident that the mass of money-capital with which the 
money-dealers operate is the money-capital of merchants and 
industrial capitalists in the process of circulation, and that the 
money-dealers’ operations are actually operations of merchants 
and industrial capitalists, in which they act as middlemen. 

It is equally evident that the money-dealers’ profit is nothing 
but a deduction from the surplus-value, since they operate with 
already realized values (even when realized in the form of cred- 
itors’ claims). 

Just as in the commodity trade, there is a duplication of func- 
tions, because a part of the technical operations connected with 
money circulation must be carried out by the dealers and pro- 
ducers of commodities themselves. 

CHAPTER XX 
HISTORICAL FACTS ABOUT MERCHANT’S CAPITAL 

The particular form in which commercial and money-dealing 
capital accumulate money will be discussed in the next part. 

It is self-evident from what has gone before that nothing could 
be more absurd than to regard merchant's capital, whether in 
the shape of commercial or of money-dealing capital, as a partic- 
ular variety of industrial capital, such as, say, mining, agricul- 
ture, cattle-raising, manufacturing, transport, ete., which are 
side lines of industrial capital occasioned by the. division of social 
labour, and hence different spheres of investment. The simple ob- 
servation that in the circulation phase of its reproduction proc- 
ess every industrial capital performs as commodity-capital and 
as money-capital the very functions which appear as the exclusive 
functions of the two forms of merchant’s capital, should rule out 
such a crude notion. On the other hand, in commercial and mon- 
ey-dealing capital the differences between industrial capital as 
productive capital and the same capital in the sphere of circulation 
are individualized through the fact that the definite forms and 
functions which capital assumes for the moment appear as inde- 
pendent jorms and functions of a separate portion of the capital 
and are exclusively bound up with it. The transmuted [orm of in- 
dustrial capital and the material differences between productive 
capitals applied in different branches of industry, which arise from 
the nature of these various branches, are worlds apart. 

Aside from the crudity with which the economist generally con- 
siders distinctions of form, which really concern him only from 
their substantive side, this misconception by the vulgar econo- 
mist is explained on two additional counts. Firstly, his inability 
to explain the peculiar nature of mercantile profit; and, secondly, 
his apologetic endeavours to deduce commodity-capital and mon- 
ey-capital, and Jater corimercial capital and money -dealing 
capital as forms arising necessarily from the process of production 
as such, whereas they are due to the specific form of the capitalist 

FACTS ABOUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 319 

mode of production, which above all presupposes the circulation 
of commodities, and hence of money, as its basis. 

If commercial capital and money-dealing capital do not differ 
from grain production any more than this differs from cattle- 
raising and manufacturing, it is plain as day that production 
and capitalist production are altogether identical, and that, among 
other things, the distribution of the social products among the 
members of a society, be it for productive or individual consump- 
tion, must just as consistently be handled by merchants and bank- 
ers as the consumption of meat by cattle-raising and that of 
clothing by their manufacture.** 

The great economists, such as Smith, Ricardo, etc., are per- 
plexed over mercantile capital being a special variety, since they 
consider the basic form of capital, capital as industrial capital, 
and circulation capital (commodity-capital and money-capital) 
solely because it is a phase in the reproduction process of every 
capital. The rules concerning the formation of value, profit, etc., 
immediately deduced by them from their study of industrial cap- 
ital, do not extend directly to merchant’s capital. For this reason, 
they leave merchant’s capital entirely aside and mention it only 
as a kind of industrial capital. Wherever they make a special 
analysis of it, as Ricardo does in dealing with foreign trade, they 
seek to demonstrate that it creates no value (and consequently no 
surplus-value). But whatever is true of foreign trade, is also true 

of home trade. 

Hitherto we have considered merchant’s capital merely from 
the standpoint, and within the limits, of the capitalist mode 

* The sage Mr. Roscher has figured out that, since certain people designate 
trade as mediation between producers and consumers, “one” might just as well 
designate production itself as mediation of consumption (between whom?), and 
this implies, of course, that merchant's capital is as much a part of productive 
capital as agricultural and industrial capital. In oller wards, because I ean say, 
that man can mediate his consumption only by means of production (and he has 
lo do this even without getting his educalion at Leipzig), or that labour is required 
for the appropriation of the products of Nature (which might be called media- 
tion), it follows, of course. that social mediation arising from a specific social form 
of production—éecause mediation—has the same absolute character of necessity, 
and the same rank. The word mediation settles everything. By the way, the mer- 
chants are not mediators between producers and consumers (consumers as distinct 
from producers, consumers, that is, who do not produce, are leit aside lor the 
moment), but mediators in the exchange of the products of these producers among 
themselves. They are but middletnen in an exchange, which in thousands of 
cases proceeds without them. 

320 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

of production. However, not commerce alone, but also merchant's 
capital, is older than the capitalist mode of production, is, in 
fact, historically the oldest free state of existence of capital. 

Since we have already seen that money-dealing and the capital 
advanced for it require nothing more for their development than 
the existence of wholesale commerce, and further of commercial 
capital, it is only the latter which we must occupy ourselves with 
here. 

Since merchant’s capital is penned in the sphere of circula- 
tion, and since its function consists exclusively of promoting 
the exchange of commodities, it requires no other conditions for* 
its existence—aside from the undeveloped forms arising from 
direct barter—outside those necessary for the simple circulation 
oi commodities and money. Or rather, the latter is the condition 
of ifs existence. No matter what the basis on which products are 
produced, which are thrown into circulation as commodities— 
whether the basis of the primitivecommunily, of slave production, 
of small peasant and petty bourgeois, or the capitalist basis, the 
character of products as commodities is not altered, and as com- 
modities they must pass through the process of exchange and 
its attendant changes of form. The extremes between which mer- 
chant’s capital acts as mediator exist for it as given, just as they 
are given for money and for its movements. The only necessary thing 
is that these extremes should be on hand as commodities, regard- 
less of whether production is wholly a production of commodi- 
ties, or whether only the surplus of the independent producers’ 
immediate needs, satisfied by their own production, is thrown on 
the markel. Merchant’s capital promotes only the movements 
of these extremes, of these commodities, which are preconditions 
of its own existence, 

The extent to which products enter trade and go through the 
merchants’ hands depends on the mode of production, and reaches 
its maximum in the ultimate development of capitalist produc- 
tion, where the product is produced solely as a commodity, and 
not as a direct means of subsistence. On the other hand, on the 
basis of every mode of production, trade facilitates the production 
of surplus-products destined for exchange, in order to increase the 
enjoyments, or the wealth, of the producers (here meant are the 
owners of the products). Hence, commerce imparts to production 
a character direcled more and more towards exchange-value. 

The metamorphosis of commodities, their movement, consists 
1) materially, of the exchange of different commodities for one 
another, and 2) formally, of the conversion of commodities into 

FACTS ABOUT MERCUANT'S CAPIRAL 32) 

money by sale, and of money into commodities by purchase. And 
the function of merchant's capital resolves itself into these very 
acts of buying and selling commodities. It therefore merely pro- 
motes the exchange of commodities; yet this exchange is not to be 
conceived at the outset as a bare exchange of commodities between 
direct producers. Under slavery, feudalism and vassalage (so far 
as primitive communities are concerned) it is the slave-owner, 
the feudal lord, the tribute-collecting state, who are the owners, 
hence sellers, of the products. The merchant buys and sells for 
many. Purchases and sales are concentrated in his hands and 
consequently are no longer bound to the direct requirements of 
the buyer (as merchant). 

But whatever the social organization of the spheres of produc- 
tion whose commodity exchange the merchant promotes, his 
wealth exists always in the form of money, and his money always 
serves as capital. Its form is always M—C—M’. Money, the 
independent form of exchange-value, is the point of departure, 
and increasing the exchange-value an end in itself. Commodity 
exchange as such and the operations eflecting it—separated from 
production and performed by non-producers—are just a means 
of increasing wealth not as mere wealth, but as wealth in its most 
universal social form, as exchange-value. The compelling motive 
and determining purpose are the conversion of M into M+1M. 
The transactions M—C and C—M’, which promote M—M’, 
appear merely as stages of transition in this conversion of M into 
M+ 4M. This M—C—M’, the characteristic movement of mer- 
chant’s capital, distinguishes it from C—M—C, trade in com- 
modities directly between producers, which has for its ultimate 
end the exchange of use-values. 

The less developed the production, the more wealth in money 
is concentrated in the hands of merchants or appears in the spe- 
cific form of merchants’ wealth. 

Within the capitalist mode of production—i.e., as soon as 
capital has established its sway over production and imparted 
to it a wholly changed and specific form—merchant's capital 
appears merely as a capital with a specific function. In all pre- 
vious modes AP production: and al! the more, wherever production 
ministers to the immediate wants of the producer, inerchant’s 
capital appears to perforin the function par excellence of capital. 

There is, therefore, not the least difficulty in understanding 
why merchant’s capital appears as the historical form of capital 
long before capital established its own domination over produc- 
tion. Its existence and development to a certain level are in them- 

12-2757 

422 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

selves historical premises for the development of capitalist pro- 
duction 1) as premises for the concentration of money wealth, 
and 2) because the capitalist node of production presupposes pro- 
duction for trade, selling on a large scale, and not to the individ- 
ual customer, hence also a mercliant who does not buy to satisly 
his personal wants but concentrates the purchases of many buyers 
in his one purchase. On the other land, all development of mer- 
chant’s capital tends to give production more and more the char- 
acter of production for exchange-value and to turn products 
more and inore into commodities. Yet its development, as we shall 
presently see, is incapable by itself of promoting and explaining 
the transition from one mode of production to another. 

Within capitalist production merchant's capital is reduced 
from its former independent existence lo a special phase in the 
investment of capital, and the levelling of profits reduces its 
rate of profit to the general average. It functions only as an agent 
of productive capital. The special social conditions that take 
shape with the development of merchant’s capital, are here no 
longer paramount. On the contrary, wherever merchant’s capital 
still predominales we find backward conditions. This is true even 
within one and the same country, in which, for instance, the spe- 
cifically merchant towns present Jar more striking analogies with 
past conditions than industrial towns.** 

The independent and predominant development of capital as 
merchant’s capital is tantamount to the non-subjeclion of pro- 
duction to capital, and hence to capital developing on the basis 
of an alien social mode of production which is also independent 
of it. The independent development of merchant's capital, there- 
fore, stands in inverse proportion to the general economic develop- 
ment of society. 

Independent mercantile wealth as a predominant form of cap- 
ital represents the separation of the circulation process from 
its extremes, and these extremes are the exchanging producers 
themselves. They remain independent of the circulation process, 

** Herr W. Kiesselbach (in his Der Gang des Welthandels im Mittelaller, 
1860) is indeed still enwrapped in the ideas of a world, in which merchant's capital 
is the general form of capital. He has not the least idea of the modern meaning 
of capital, any more than Mommsen when he speaks in his history of Rome of “cap- 
ital” and (he rule of capital. tn modern English history, the commercial estate 
proper and the merchant towns are also polilically reactionary and in league with 
the landed and moneyed interest against industrial capital. Compare, for instance, 
the political role of Liverpool with that of Manchester and Birmingham. The 
complete rule of industrial capital was not acknowledged by English merchant's 
capital and moneyed interest until alter the abolition of the corn tax, etc. 

FACTS ABOUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 323 

just as the latter remains’ independent of them. The product be- 
comes a commodity by way of commerce. It is commerce which 
here turns products into commodities, not the produced commodity 
which by its movements gives rise to commerce. Thus, capital 
appears here first as capital in the process of circulation. It is in the 
circulation process that money develops into capital. It is ‘in 
circulation that products first develop as exchange-values, as 
commodities and as money. Capital can, and must, form in the 
process of circulation, before it learns to control its extremes—the 
various spheres of production between which circulation mediates. 
Money and commodity circulation can mediate between spheres 
of production of widely different organization, whose internal 
structure is still chiefly adjusted to the output of use-values. This 
individualization of the circulation process, in which spheres 
of production are interconnected by means of a third, has a two- 
fold significance. On the one hand, that circulation has not as yet 
established a hold on production, but is related to it as to a given 
premise. On the other hand, that the production process has not 
as yet absorbed circulation as a mere phase of production. Both, 
however, are the case in capitalist production. The production 
process rests wholly upon circulation, and circulation is a mere 
transitional phase of production, in which the product created 
as a commodity is realized and its elements of production, like- 
wise created as commodities, are replaced. That form of capi- 
tal—merchant's capital—which developed directly out of cir- 
culation appears here merely as one of the forms of capital occurring 
in its reproduction process. 

The law that the independent development of merchant's cap- 
ital is inversely proportional to the degree of development of 
capitalist production is particularly evident in the history of 
the carrying trade, as among the Venetians, Genoese, Dutch, etc., 
where the principal gains were not thus made by exporting domestic 
products, but by promoting the exchange of products of commer- 
cially and otherwise economically undeveloped societies, and 
by exploiting both producing countries.’’ Here, merchant’s cap- 

4 *The inhabitants of trading cilies, by importing the improved manufac- 
tures and expensive luxuries of richer countries afforded some [oud to the vanity of 
the great preprietors, who eagerly purchased them with great quantities of the 
rude produce of their own lands. The commerce of a great part of Europe in those 
times, accordingly, consisted chiefly in the exchange of their own rude produce 
for the manufactured produce of more civilized nations... When this taste became 
so general as (0 occasion a considerable demand, the merchants, in order (o save 
the expense of carriage, naturally endeavoured to establish some manufactures 
of the same kind in their own country.” (Adam Smith, Book III, Ch. I.) 

12* 

324 MERCHANT'S CAPLLAL 

ital is in ifs pure form, separated [rom the extremes—the spheres 
of production between which it mediates. This is the main source 
of its development. But this monopoly of the carrying trade dis- 
integrates, and with it this trade itsell, proportionately to the 
economic development of the peoples, whom it exploits at both 
ends of its course, and whose lack of development was the basis 
oi its existence. In the case of the carrying trade this appears 
not only as the decline of a special branch of commerce, but z1so 
that of the predominance of the purely trading nations, and of 
their commercial wealth in general, which rested upon the carry- 
ing trade. This is but a special form, in which is expressed the 
subordination of merchants to industrial capital with the advance 
of capitalist production. The behaviour of merchant’s capital 
wherever it rules over production is strikingly illustrated not 
only by the colonial economy (the so-called colonia] system) in 
general, but quite specifically by the methods of the old Dutch 
East India Company. 

Since the movement of merchant’s capital is M—C—M’, 
the merchant’s profit is made, first, in acts which occur only within 
the circulation process, hence in the two acts of buying and sell- 
ing; and, secondly, it is realized in the last act, the sale. I1 is there- 
fore profit upon alienation. Prima facie, a pure and independent 
commercial profit seems impossible so long as products are sold 
at their value. To buy cheap in order to sell dear is the rule of 
trade. Hence, not the exchange of equivalents. The conception 
of value is included in it in so far as the various commodities 
are all values, and therefore money. In respect to quality they are 
all expressions of social labour. But they are not values of equal 
magnitude. The quantitative ratio in which products are exchanged 
is al first quile arbitrary. They assume the form ol commodities 
inasmuch as they are exchangeables, i.e., expressions of one and 
the same third. Continued exchange and more regular repro- 
duction for exchange reduces this arbitrariness more and more. 
But at first not lor the producer and consumer, but Jor their go- 
between, the merchant, who compares money-prices and pockets 
the difference. I1 is through his own movements that he establishes 
equivalence. 

Merchant’s capital is originally merely the intervening move- 
ment between extremes which it does not control, and between 
premises which it does not create. 

_dust as money originates from the bare form of commodity- 
circulation, C—M—C, not only as a measure of value and a 
medium of circulation, but also as the absolute form of commod- 

FACTS ABOUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 325 

ity, and hence of wealth, or hoard, so thal its conservation and 
accumulation as money becomes an end in itself, so. too, does 
money, the hoard, as something that preserves and increases it- 
self through mere alienation originale from the bare form of 
ihe circulation of merchant’s capital, M—C—M’. 

The trading nations of ancient times existed like the gods of 
Epicurus in the intermediate worlds of the universe, or rather like 
the Jews in the pores of Polish society. The trade of the first in- 
dependent flourishing merchant towns and trading nations rested 
as a pure carrying trade upon the barbarism of the producing 
nations, between whom they acted lhe middleman. 

In the pre-capitalist stages of society commerce ruled industry. 
In modern society the reverse is true. Of course, commerce will 
have more or less of a counter-eflect on the communities between 
which it is carried on. It will subordinate production more and 
more to exchange-value by making luxuries and subsistence 
more dependent on sale than on the immediate use of the prod- 
ucts. Thereby it dissolves the old relationships. It multiplies money 
circulation. It encompasses no longer merely the surplus of pro- 
duction, but bites deeper and deeper into the latter, and makes 
entire branches of production dependent upon it. Nevertheless this 
disintegraling effect depends very much on the nature of the 
producing community. 

So long as merchant’s capital promotes the exchange of prod- 
ucts between undeveloped societies, commercial profit not only 
appears as outbargaining and cheating, but also largely originates 
from them. Aside from the fact that it exploits the difference be- 
tween the prices of production of various countries (and in this 
respect it tends to level and fix the values of commodities), those 
modes of production bring it about that merchant's capital appro- 
priates an overwhelming portion of the surplus-product partly 
as a mediator between communities which still substantially pro- 
duce for use-value, and for whose economic organization the sale 
of the portion of their product entering circulation, or for that mat- 
ter any sale of products at their value, is of secondary importance; 
and partly, because under those earlier modes of production the 
principal owners of the surplus-product with whom the merchant 
dealt, namely, the slave-owner, the feudal lord, and the stale 
(for instance, the oriental despot) represent the consuming wealth 
and luxury which the merchant seeks to trap. as Adam Smith 
correctly scented in the passage on feudal times quoted earlier. 
Merchant's capital, when i! holds a position of dominance, stands 
everywhere for a system of robbery,'® so lhat ils development 

326 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

among the trading nations of old and modern times is always 
directly connected with plundering, piracy, kidnapping slaves, 
and colonial conquest; as in Carthage, Rome, and later among the 
Venetians, Portuguese, Dutch, etc. : ; 
The development of commerce and merchant's capital gives 
rise everywhere to the tendency towards production of exchange- 
values, increases its volume, multiplies it, makes it cosmopol- 
itan, and develops money into world-money. Commerce, there- 
fore, has a more or less dissolving influence everywhere on the 
producing organization, which it finds at hand and whose different 
forms are mainly carried on with a view to use-value. To what 
extent it brings about a dissolution of the old mode of produc- 
tion depends on its solidity and internal structure. And whither 
this process of dissolution will lead, in other words, what new 
mode of production will replace the old, does not depend on com- 
merce, but on the character of the old mode of production itself. 
In the ancient world the eflect of commerce and the development 
of merchant’s capital always resulted in a slave economy; de- 
pending on the point of departure, only in the transformation 
of a patriarchal slave system devoted to the production of im- 
mediate means of subsistence into one devoted to the production 

#8 “Now there is among merchants much complaint about the nobles, or rob- 
bers, because they must trade under great danger and run the risk of being kid- 
napped, beaten, blackmailed, androbbed. If they would suffer these things for 
the sake of justice, the merchants would be saintly people.... But since such great 
wrong and unchristian thievery and robbery are committed all over the world 
by merchants, and even among themselves, is it any wonder that God should pro- 
cure that such great wealth, gained by wrong, should again be lost or stolen, 
and they themselves be hit over the head or made prisoner?... And the princes 
should punish such unjust bargains with due rigour and take care that their sub- 
jects shall not be so outrageously abused by merchants. Because they fail to do so, 
God employs knights and robbers, and punishes the merchants through them for 
the wrongs they committed, and uses them as his devils, just as he plagues Egypt 
-and all ihe world with devils, or destroys through enemies. He thus pits one 
against the other, without thereby insinuating that knights are any the less robbers 
than merchants, although the merchants daily rob the whole world, while a knight 
may rob one or two once or twice a year.” “Go by the word of Isaiah: Thy princes 
have become the companions of robbers. For they hang the thieves, who have stol- 
ena gulden or a half gulden, but they associate with those, who rob al] the world 
and steal with greater assurance than all others, so that the proverb remains 
true: Big thieves hang little thieves; and as the Roman senator Cato said: Mean 
thieves lie in prisons and stocks, but public thieves are clothed in gold and silks. 
But what will God say finally? He will do as he said to Ezekiel; he will amalgamate 
princes and merchants, one thief with another, like lead and iron, as when a city 
burns down, leaving neither princes nor merchamts.” (Martin Luther, Von Kaujs 
hundlung und Wucher, 1624.) 

FACTS AROUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 327 

ol surplus-value. However, in the modern world, it results in the 
capitalist mode of production. It follows therefrom that these 
results spring in themselves from circumstances other than the 
development of merchant’s capital. 

It is in the nature of things that as soon as town industry as 
such separates from agricultural industry, its products are from the 
outset commodities and thus require the mediation of commerce 
for their sale. The leaning of commerce towards the development 
of towns, and, on the other hand, the dependence of towns upon 
commerce, are so far natural. However, it depends on altogether 
diferent circumstances to what measure industrial development 
will go hand in hand with this divelopment. Ancient Rome, in 
its later republican days, developed merchant’s capital to a higher 
degree than ever before in the ancient world, without showing 
any progress in the development of crafts, while in Corinth and 
other Grecian towns in Europe and Asia Minor the development 
of commerce was accompanied by highly developed crafts. On 
the other hand, quite contrary to the growth of towns and attend- 
ant conditions, the trading spirit and the development of mer- 
chant’s capital occur frequently among unsettled nomadic peoples. 

There is no doubt—and it is precisely this fact which has 
led to wholly erroneous conceplions—that in the 16th and 17th 
centuries the great revolutions, which tcok place in commerce 
with the geographical discoveries and speeded the development 
of merchant’s capital, constitute one of the principal elements 
in furthering the transition from feudal to capitalist mode of 
production. The sudden expansion of the world-market, the mul- 
tiplication of circulating commodities, the competitive zeal of 
the European nations to possess themselves of the products of 
Asia and the treasures of America, and the colonial system—all 
contributed materially toward destroying the feudal fetters on 
production. However, in its first period—the manufacturing 
period—the modern mode of production developed only where 
the conditions for it lad taken shape within the Middle Ages. 
Compare, for instance, Holland with Portugal.** And when in 

” How predominant fishery, manufacture and agriculture, aside from other 
circumstances, were as the hasis for Holland’s development, has already been 
explained by 18th-century writers, such as Massie. In contradistinction to the 
former view, which underrated the volume and importance of commerce in Asia, 
in Antiquity, and in the Middle Ages, it has now come to he the custom to ex- 
tremely overrate it. The best antidote against this conception is to study the 
imports and exports of England in the early 18th century and to compare them 
with modern imports and exports. And yet they were incomparably greater than 
those of any former trading nation. (See Anderson. History of Commerce.) 

328 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

the 16th, and partially still in the 17th, century the sudden expan- 
sion of cammerce and eniergence of a new world-marhet overwhelm- 
ingly contributed to the fall of the old mode of production and 
the rise of capitalist production, this was accomplished conversely 
on the basis of the already existing capitalist mode of production, 
The world-market itself forms the basis for this mode of production. 
On the other hand, the immanent necessity of this mode of 
production to produce on an ever-enlarged scale tends to extend 
the world-market continually, so that it is not commerce in this 
ease which revolutionizes industry, but industry which constantly 
revolutionizes commerce. Commercial supremacy itself is now 
linked with the prevalence to a greater or lesser degree of condi- 
tions for a large industry. Compare, for instance, England and 
Holland. The history of the decline of Holland as the ruling trading 
nation is the history of the subordination of merchant’s capital 
to industrial capital. The obstacles presented by ithe internal 
solidity and organization of pre-capitalistic, national modes of 
production to the corrosive influence of commerce are strikingly 
illustrated in the intercourse of the English with India and China. 
The broad basis of the mode of production here is formed by the 
unity of small-scale agriculture and home industry, to which 
in India we should add the form of village communities built 
upon the common ownership of land, which, incidentally, was 
the original form in China as well. In India the English lost no 
time in exercising their direct political and economic power, 
as rulers and landlords, to disrupt these small economic communi- 
ties.*” English commerce exerted a revolutionary influence on 
these communities and tore them apart only in so far as the low 
prices of its goods served to destroy the spinning and weaving in- 
dustries, which were an ancient integrating element of this unity 
of industrial and agricultural production. And even so this work 
of dissolution proceeds very gradually. And still more slowly 
in China, where it is not reinforced by direct political power. 
The substantial economy and saving in time afforded by the as- 
sociation of agriculture with manufacture put up a stubborn re- 
sistance to the products of the big industries, whose prices include 
the faux frais of the circulation process which pervades them. 

50, df any nation’s history, then the history of the English in India is a string 
of futile and really absurd (in pares infamous) economic experiments. In Ben- 
gal they created a caricature ol large-scale English landed estates, in south-east- 
ern India a caricature of small parcelled property; in the north-west they did al) 

they could fo transform the Indian economic community with n shi 
of the soil into a caricature of itself. See eager 

FACTS ABOUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 329 

Unlike the English, Russian commerce, on the other hand, leaves 
the economic groundwork of Asiatic production untouched. * 

The transition from the feudal mode of production is two-fold. 
The producer becomes merchant and capitalist, in contrast to 
the natural agricultural economy and the guild-bound handicrafts 
of the medieval urban industries. This is the really revolutionizing 
path. Or else, the merchant establishes direct sway over produc- 
tion. However much this serves historically as a stepping-stone— 
witness the English 17{h-century clothier, who brings the weavers, 
independent as they are, under his control by selling their wool 
to them and buying their cloth—it cannot by itself contribute 
to the overthrow of the old mode of production, but tends rather 
to preserve and retain it as ils precondition. The manulacturer 
in the French silk industry and in the English hosiery and lace 
industries, for example, was thus mostly but nominally a manu- 
facturer until the middle of the 19th century. In point of fact, 
he was merely a merchant, who let the weavers carry on in their 
old unorganized way and exerted only a merchant's control, for 
that was for whom they really worked.** This system presents 
everywhere an obstacle to the real capitalist mode of produc- 
tion and goes under with its development. Without revolutionizing 
ihe mode of production, it only worsens the condition of the di- 
rect producers, turns them into mere wage-workers and proletarians 
under conditions worse than those under the immediate control 
of capital, and appropriates their surplus-labour on the basis of 
the old mode of production. The same conditions exist in some- 
what modified form in part of the London handicraft furniture 
industry. It is practised notably in the Tawer Hamlets on a very 
large scale. The whole production is divided into very numerous 
separate branches of business independent of one another. One 
establishment makes only chairs, another only tables, a third only 
bureaus, ete. But these establishments themselves are run more 
or less like handicrafts by a single minor master and a few jour- 
neymen. Nevertheless, production is too large to work directly for 
private persons. The buyers are the owners of furniture stores. 

% Since Russia has heen making frantic exertions to develop its own capilal- 
ist production, which is exclusively dependent upon its domestic and the neigh- 
bouring Asiatic market, this is also beginning to change.—f. E. 

8% The same is true of the ribbon and basting makers and the silk weavers of 
the Rhine Even a railway has been huilt near Krefeld for the intercourse of these 
rural hand-weavers with the town “manufacturer” But this was later put oul of 
business, together with the hand-weavers, by the mechanical weaving industry.— 

OB. 

330 MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 

On Saturdays the master visits them and sells his product, the 
transaction being closed with as much haggling as in a pawn- 
shop over a loan. The masters depend on this weekly sale, if for 
no other reason than to be able to buy raw materials for the fol- 
lowing week and to pay out wages. Under these circumstances, 
thev are really only middlemen between the merchant and their 
own labourers. The merchant is the actual capitalist who pockets 
the lion’s share of the surplus-value.*’ Almost the same applies 
in the transition to manufacture of branches formerly carried 
on as handicrafts or side lines to rural industries. The transition 
to large-scale industry depends on the technical development of 
these small owner-operated establishments—wherever they employ 
machinery that admits of a handicralt-like operation. The ma- 
chine is driven by steam, instead of by hand. This is of late the 
case, for instance, in the English hosiery industry. 

There is, consequently, a three-fold transition. Firs¢, the mer- 
chant becomes directly an industrial capitalist. This is true in 
crafts based on trade, especially crafts producing luxuries and 
imported by merchants together with the raw materials and la- 
bourers from foreign lands, as in Italy from Constantinople in 
the 15th century. Second, tne merchant turns the small masters 
into his middlemen, or buys directly from the independent pro- 
ducer, leaving him nominally independent and his mode of pro- 
duction unchanged. Third, the industrialist becomes merchant 
and produces directly for the wholesale market. 

In the Middle Ages, the merchant was merely one who, as Poppe 
rightly says, “transferred” the goods produced by guilds or peas- 
ants. The merchant becomes industrialist, or rather, makes crafts- 
men, particularly the small rural producers, work for him. Con- 
versely, the producer becomes merchant. The master weaver, 
for instance, buys his wool or yarn himself and sells his cloth 
to the merchant, instead of receiving his wool from the merchant 
piecemeal and working for him together with his journeymen. 
The elements of production pass into the production process as 
commodities bought by himself. And instead of producing for 
some individual merchant, or for specified customers, he produces 
for the world of trade. The producer is himself a merchant. Mer- 
chant’s capital does no more than carry on the process of circula- 
tion. Originally, commerce was the precondition for the trans- 

** This system has been developed since 1865 on a stil! larger scale. For de- 
tails see the First Report of the Select Committee of the Houe f son 
Sweating System, London, 1888.—F. E. Sree etate 

FACTS ADOUT MERCHANT'S CAPITAL 331 

formation of the crafts, the rural domestic industries, and feudal 
agriculture, into capitalist enterprises. It develops the product 
into a commodity, partly by creating a market for it, and partly 
by introducing new commodity equivalents and supplying pro- 
duction with new raw and auxiliary materials, thereby opening 
new branches of production based from the first upon commerce, 
both as concerns production for the home and world-market, and 
as concerns conditions of production originating in the world- 
market. As soon as manufacture gains sufficient strength, and 
particularly large-scale industry, it creates in its turn a market 
lor itself, by capturing it through its commodities. At this point 
commerce becomes the servant of industrial production, for which 
continued expansion of the market becomes a vital necessity. 
Ever more extended mass production floods the existing market 
and thereby works continually for a still greater expansion of 
this market, for breaking out of its limits. What restricts this 
mass production is not commerce (in so far as it expresses the 
existing demand), but the magnitude of employed capital and 
the level of development of the productivity of labour. The 
industrial capitalist always has the world-market before him, 
compares, and must constantly compare, his own cost-prices with 
the market-prices at home, and throughout the world. In the 
earlier period such comparison fell almost entirely to the mer- 
chants, and thus secured the predominance of merchant’s capital 
over industrial capital. 

The first theoretical treatment of the modern mode of produc- 
tion—the mercantile system—proceeded necessarily from the 
superficial phenomena of the circulation process as individualized 
in the movements of merchant’s capital, and therefore grasped 
only the appearance of matters. Partly because merchant’s capital 
is the first free state of existence of capital in general. And partly 
because of the overwhelming influence which it exerted during 
the first revolutionizing period of feudal production—the genesis 
of modern production. The real science of modern economy only 
begins when the theoretical analysis passes from the process of 
circulation to the process of production. Interest-bearing capital is, 
indced, likewise a very old form of capital. But we shall see later 
why mercantilism does not take it as its point of departure, but 
rather carries on a polemic against it, 

eee 

PART V 

DIVISION OF PROFIT 
INTO INTEREST AND PROFIT 
OF ENTERPRISE. 
INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 

CHAPTER XXI 
INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 

In our first discussion of the general, or average, rate of prof- 
it (Part Il of this book) we did not have this rate before us in its 
complete forin, the equalization of profit appearing only as equali- 
zation between industrial capitals invested in different spheres. 
This was supplemented in the preceding part, which dealt with 
the participation of merchant's capital in this equalization, and 
also commercial profit. The general rate of profit and the aver- 
age profit now appeared in narrower limits than before. It should 
be remembered in the course of our analysis that in any [uture 
reierence to the general rate of profit or to average profit we mean 
this latter connotation, hence only the final form of average rate. 
And since this rate is the same for mercantile, as wel] as indus- 
trial, capital, it is no longer necessary, so far as this average 
profit is concerned, to make a distinction between industrial and 
commercial profit. Whether industria!ly invested in the sphere of 
production, or commercially in the sphere of circulation, capital 
yields the same average annual profit pro rata to its magnitude. 

Money—here taken as the independent expression of a certain 
amount of value existing either actually as money or as com- 
modities—may be converted into capital on the basis of capi- 
talist production, and may thereby be transformed from a given 
value to a self-expanding, or increasing, value. It produces 
profit, i.e., it enables ihe capitalist to extract a certain quantily 
of unpaid labour, surplus-product and surplus-value from the 
labourers, and to appropriate it. In this way, aside from its use- 
value as money, it acquires an additional use-value, namely that 
of serving as capital. Its use-value then consists precisely in the 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 343 

profit it produces when converted into capital. In this capacity 
of potential capital, as a means of producing profit, it becomes 
a commodity, but a commodity sui generis. Or, what amounts 
to the same, capital as capital becomes a commodity.** 

Suppose the annual average rate o! profit is 20%. in that case 
a machine valued at £100, employed as capital under average 
conditions and an average amount of intelligence and purposive 
effort, would yield a profit of £20. A man in possession of £100, 
therefore, possesses the power to make £120 out of £100. or to 
produce a profit of £20. He possesses a potential capital of £100. 
If he gives these £100 to another for one year, so the latter may 
use them as real capital, he gives him the power to produce a 
profit of £20—a surplus-value which costs this other nothing, 
and for which he pays no equivalent. If this other should pay, 
say, £5 at the close of the year to the owner of the £100 out of 
the profit produced, he would thereby pay the use-value of the 
£100—the use-value of its [unction as capital, the lunction 
of producing a profit of £20. The part of the profit paid to the 
owner is called interest, which is just another name, or special 
term, for a part of the profit given up by capital in the process 
of functioning to the owner of the capital, instead of putting it 
into its own pocket. 

It is plain that the possession of £100 gives their owner the power 
to pocket the interest—ihat certain portion of profit produced 
by means of his capital. If he had not given the £100 to the other 
person, the latter could not have produced any profit and could 
not at all have acted as a capitalist with reference to these £100.** 

To speak here of natural justice, as Gilbart does (see note), 
is nonsense. The justice of the transactions between agents of pro- 
duction rests on the fact that these arise as natural consequences 
out of the production relationships. The juristic forms in which 
these economic transactions appear as wilful acts of the parties 
concerned, as expressions of their common will and as contracts 
that may be enforced by law against some individual party, can- 
not, being mere forms, determine this content. They merely express 

5+ At this point certain passages may be quoled. in which the economists so 
conceive the malter.— “You cthe Bank of England) are very large dealers in the 
conunodity of capital?” is the question posed to a director of this hank when he 
was inlerrogated for the Report on Bask Acts on the wilmess stand (H. of C 
1857.) 

85 “That a man who borrows money with‘a view of making a profit by it, should 
give some portion of his profit to the lender, ix a sell evident principle of natural 
justice.” (Gilhart, The History and Principles of Banking, London, 1834, p. 163.) 

334 DIVISLON OF PROFIT 

it. This content is just whenever it corresponds, is appropriate, 
to the mode of production. It is unjust whenever it contradicts 
that mode. Slavery on the basis of capitalist production is un- 
just; likewise fraud in the quality of commodities. : 

The £100 produce the profit of £20 because they function as 
capital, be it industrial or mercantile. But the sine qua non of 
this function as capital is that they are expended as capital, ie., 
are expended in purchasing means of production (in the case of 
industrial capital) or commodities (in the case of merchant's 
capital). But to be expended, they must be available. If A, the 
owner of the £100, were either to spend them for personal con- 
sumption, or to keep them as a hoard, they could not have been 
invested as capital by B in his capacity of functioning capitalist. 
B does not expend his own capital, but A’s; however, he can- 
nol expend A’s capital without A’s consent. Therefore, it is really 
A who originally expends the £100 as capital, albeit his function 
as capitalist is limited to this outlay of £100 as capital. In respect 
to these £100, B acts as capitalist only because A lends him the 
£100, thus expending them as capital. 

Let us first consider the singular circulation of interest-bear- 
ing capital. We shall then secondly have to analyse the peculiar 
manner in which it is sold as a commodity, namely loaned instead 
of relinquished once and for all. 

The point of departure is the money which A advances to B. 
This may be done with or without security. The first-named form, 
however, is the more ancient, save advances on commodities or 
paper, such as bills of exchange, shares, elc. These special forms 
do not concern us at this point. We are dealing here with interest- 
bearing capital in its usual form. 

In B's possession the money is actually converted into capital, 
passes through M—C—M’ and returns to A as M’, as M+AM, 
where 4M represents the interest. For the sake of simplicity we 
shall not consider here the case, in which capital remains in B’s 
possession for a long term and interest is paid at regular intervals. 

The movement, therefore, is 

M—M—C—M’—M’, 

What appears duplicated here, is 1) the outlay of money as 
capital, and 2) its reflux as realized capilal, as M’ or M+AM. 
In the movement of merchant’s capital, M—C—M’, the 
same commodity changes hands twice, or more than twice, if 
merchant sells to merchant. But every such change of place of 
the same commodity indicates a metamorphosis, a purchase or 

INTEREST-REARING CAPITAL 335, 

sale of the commodity, no matter how often the process may be 
repeated, until it enters consumption. : 

On the other hand, the same money changes hands twice in C— 
M—C, but this indicates the complete metamorphosis of the com- 
modity, which is first converted into money and then from money 
back into another commodity. 

But in interest-bearing capital the first time M changes hands 
is by no means a phase either of the commodity metamorphosis, 
or of reproduction of capital. It first becomes one when it is ex- 
pended a second time, in the hands of the active capitalist who 
carries on trade with it, or transforms it into productive capital. 
M’s first change of hands does not express anything here, beyond 
its transfer from A to B—a transfer which usually takes place 
under certain legal forms and: stipulations. 

This double outlay of money as capital, of which the first is 
merely a transfer from A to B, is matched by its double reflux. 
As M‘, or M+AM, it flows back out of the process to B, the per- 
son acting as capitalist. The latter then transfers it back to A, 
but together with a part of the profit, as realized capital, as M+AM, 
in whiel: 4M is not the entire profit, but only a portion of the 
profii—the interest. It flows back to B only as what he had ex- 
pended, as functioning capital, but as the property of A. To make 
its reflux complete, B must consequently return it to A. But in 
addition to the capital, B must also turn over to A a portion of 
the profit, a part which goes under the name of interest, which 
he had made with this capital since A had given him the money 
only as a capital, t.e., as value which is not only preserved in 
its movement, but also creates surplus-value for its owner. It 
remains in B’s hands only so long as it is functioning capital. 
And with its reflux—on the stipulated date—it ceases to func- 
tion as capital. When no longer acting as capital, however, it 
must again be returned to A, who had never ceased being ils legal 
owner. 

The form of lending, which is peculiar to this commodity, to 
capital as commodity, and which also occurs in other transactions 
instead of that of sale, follows from the simple definition that 
capital obtains here as a commodity, or that money as capital 
becomes a commodity. 

A distinction should be made here. ; ; 

We have seen (Book II, Chap. I), and recall! briefly at this point, 
that in the process of circulation capital serves as commodity- 
capital and money-capital. But in neither form does capital be- 
come a commodity as capital. 

336 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

As soon as productive capital turns into commodity-capital 
it must be placed on the market to be sold as a commodity. There 
it acts simply as a commodity. The capitalist then appears only 
as the seller of commodities, just as the buyer is only the buyer 
of commodities. As a commodity the product must realize its 
value, must assume its transmuted form of money, in the proc- 
ess of circulation by its sale. It is also quite immaterial for this rea- 
son, whether this commodity is bought by a consumer as a necessity 
of life, or by a capitalist as means of production, i.e., as a com- 
ponent part of his capital. In the act of circulation commodity- 
capital acts only as a commodity, not as a capital. It is commod- 
ity-capital, as distinct from an ordinary commodity, 1) because 
it is weighted with surplus-value, the realization of its value, 
therefore, being simultaneously the realization of surplus-value; 
but this alters nothing about its simple existence as a commodity, 
as a product with a certain price; 2) because its function as a com- 
modity is a phase in its process of reproduction as capital, and 
therefore its movement as a commodity being only a partial move- 
ment of its process, is simultaneously its movement as capital. 
Yet it does not become that through the sale as such, but only 
through the connection of the sale with the whole movement of 
this specific quantity of value in the capacity of capital. 

In the same way as money-capital it really acts simply as money, 
i.e., aS a means of buying commodities (the elements of pro- 
duction). The fact that this money is simultaneously money-cap- 
ital, a form of capital, does not emerge from the act of buying, 
the actual function which it here performs as money, but [from 
the connection of this act with the total movement of capital, 
since this act, performed by capital as money, initiates the capi- 
talist production process. 

But in so far as they actually function, i.e., actually play 
a role in the process, commodity-capital acts here only as a com- 
modity and money-capital only as money. At no time during 
the metamorphosis, viewed by itself, does the capitalist sell his 
commodities as capital to the buyer, although to him they re- 
present capital; nor does he give up money as capital to the seller. 
In both cases he gives up his commodities simply as commodities, 
and money simply as money, i.e., as a means of purchasing com- 
modities. 

It is only in connection with the entire process, at the moment 
where the point of departure appears simultaneously as the point 
of return, in M—M’ or C—C’, that capital in the process of 
Circulation appears as capital (whereas in the process of produc- 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 337 

tion it appears as capital through the subordination of the la- 
bourer to the capitalist and the production of surplus-value). 
In this moment of return, however, the connection disappears. 
What we have then is M’, or M+-AM, a sum of money equa! to the 
sum originally advanced plus an increment—the realized sur- 
plus-value (regardless of whether the amount of value increased 
by AM exists in the form of money, or commodities, or elements 
of production). And it is precisely at this point of return where 
capital exists as realized capital, as an expanded value, that it 
never enters the circulation in this form—in so far as this point 
is fixed as a point of rest, whether real or imaginary—but rather 
appears to have been withdrawn from circulation as a result of 
the whole process. Whenever it is again expended, it is never given 
up to another as capifai, but is sold to him as an ordinary com- 
modity, or given to him as ordinary money in exchange for commod- 
ities. It never appears as capital in its process of circulation, only 
as commodity or money, and at this point this is the only form of 
its existence for o/hers. Commodities and money are here capital 
not because commodities change into money, or money into com- 
modities, not in their actual relations to sellers or buyers, 
but only in their ideal relations to the capitalist himself (subjec- 
lively speaking), or as phases in the process of reproduction (ob- 
jectively speaking). Capital exists as capital in actual move- 
ment, not in the process of circulation, but only in the 
process of production, in the process by which labour-power is 
exploited. 

The matter is different with interest-bearing capital, how- 
ever, and it is precisely this difference which lends it its specific 
character. The owner of money who desires to enhance his money 
as interest-bearing capital, turns it over to a third person, throws 
it into circulation, turns it into a commodity as capiéal, not just 
capital for himself, but also for others. It is not capital merely 
for the man who gives it up, but is from the very first given to 
the third person as capital, as a value endowed with the use- 
value of creating surplus-value, of creating profit; a value which 
preserves itself in its movement and returns to its original owner, 
in this case the owner of money, alter performing its function. 
Hence it leaves him only for a specified time, passes but tempo- 
rarily out of the possession of its owner into the possession of a [unc- 
tioning capitalist, is therefore neither given up in payment nor 
sold, but merely loaned, merely relinquished with the understand- 
ing that, first, it shall return to its point of departure alter a 
definite time interval, and, second, that it shall return as realized 

938 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

capital—a capital having realized its use-value, its power of 
creating surplus-value. 

Commodities loaned out as capital are loaned either as fixed 
or as circulating capital, depending on their properties. Money 
may be loaned out in either form. It may be loaned as fixed cap- 
ital, for instance, if it is paid back in the form of an annuity, 
whereby a portion of the capital flows back together with the in- 
terest. Certain commodities, such as houses, ships, machines, 
etc., can be loaned out only as fixed capital by the nature of their 
use-values. Yet all loaned capital, whatever its form, and no 
matter how the nature of its use-value may modify its return, 
is always only a specific form of money-capital. Because what 
is loaned out is always a definite sum of money, and it is this 
sum on which interest is calculated. Should whatever is loaned 
out be neither money nor circulating capital, it is also paid back 
in the way fixed capital returns. The lender periodically receives 
interest and a portion of the consumed value of the fixed capital 
itself, this being an equivalent for the periodic wear and tear. 
And at the end of the stipulated term the unconsumed portion 
of the loaned fixed capital is returned in kind. If the loaned 
capital is circulating capital, it is likewise returned in the man- 
ner peculiar to circulating capital. 

The manner of reflux is, therefore, always determined by the 
actual circuit described by capital in the act of reproduction and by 
its specific varieties. But as for loaned capital, its reflux assumes 
the form of return payments, because its advance, by which it is 
transferred, possesses the form of a loan. 

In this chapter we treat only of actual money-capital, from 
which the other forms of loaned capital are derived. 

The loaned capital flows back in two ways. In the process of 
reproduction it returns to the functioning capitalist, and then 
its return repeats itself once more as transfer to the lender, the 
money-capitalist, as return payment to the real owner, its legal 
point of departure. 

In the actual process of circulation, capital appears always 
as a commodity or as money, and its movement always is broken 
up into a series of purchases and sales. In short, the process of cir- 
culation resolves itself into the metamorphosis of commodities. 
It is different, when we consider the process of reproduction as 
a whole. If we start out with money (and the same is true if we 
start out with commodities, since we begin with their value, 
hence view them sub specie as money), we shall see that a certain 
sum of money is expended and returns after a certain period with 

INTERES T-BEARING CAPITAL 339 

an increment. The advanced sum of money returns together with 
a surplus-value. It has remained intact and increased in making 
a certain cycle. But now, being loaned out as capital, money is 
Joaned as just the sum of money which preserves and expands 
itself, which returns after a certain period with an increment, 
and is always ready to perform the same process over again. It 
is expended neither as money nor as a commodity, thus, neither 
exchanged against a commodity when advanced in the form of 
money, nor sold in exchange for money when advanced asa com- 
modity; rather, it is expended as capital. This relation to itsell, in 
which capital presents itself when the capitalist production 
process is viewed as a whole and as a single unity, and in which 
capilal appears as money that begets money, is here imparted to it 
as its character, its designation, without any intermediary move- 
ment. And it is relinquished with this designation when loaned 
out as money-capital. 

A queer conception of the role of money-capital is held by Prou- 
dhon (Gratuité du Crédit. Discussion enire M. F. Bastiat ef M. 
Proudhon, Paris, 1850). Loaning seems an evil to Proudhon be- 
cause it is not selling. Loaning for an interest is “the faculty of 
selling the same article over and over again, and of receiving its 
price again and again, without once relinquishing ownership of 
the object which is being sold” (p. 9). The object—money, a house, 
etc.—does not change owners as in selling and buying. But Prou- 
dhon does not see that no equivalent is received in return for 
money given away in the form of interest-bearing capital. True, the 
object is given away in every act of buying and selling, so far 
as there are processes of exchange at all. Ownership of the sold 
article is always relinquished. But its value is not given up. Jn 
a sale the commodity is given away, but not its value, which is 
returned in the form of money, or in what is here just another 
form of it—promissory notes, or titles of payment. When pur- 
chasing, the money is given away, but not its value, which is 
replaced inthe form of commodities. The industrial capitalist 
retains the same value in his hands throughout the process of 
reproduction (excluding surplus-value), but in different forms. 

Inasmuch as there is an exchange, i.e., an exchange of articles, 
there is no change in the value. The same capitalist always 
retains lhe same value. But so long as surplus-value is produced 
by the capitalist, there is no exchange. As soon as an exchange 
occurs, the surplus-value is already incorporated in the comt- 
modities. [f we view the entirecircuit made by capital, M—C—M’, 
rather than individual acts of exchange, we shall see that a def- 

340 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

inite amount of value is continually advanced, and that this same 
amount plus surplus-value, or profit, is withdrawn from circulation. 
The actual acts of exchange do not, at any rate, reveal how this 
process is promoted. And it is precisely this process of M as cap- 
ital, on which the interest of the money-lending capitalist rests, 
and from which it is derived. 

“In fact,” says Proudhon, “the hat-maker, who sells hats ... 
receives their value. neither more nor less. But the money-lend- 
ing capitalist ... does not recover jist his capital, he recovers more 
than his capital, more than he inrows into the exchange; he re- 
ceives an interest over and above his capital” (p. 69). Here the 
hatter represents the productive capitalist as distinct from the 
loan capitalist. Proudhon has obviously failed to grasp the secret 
of how the productive capitalist can sell commodities at their 
value (equalization through prices of production is here imma- 
terial to his conception) and receive a profit over and above the 
capital he flings into exchange. Suppose the price of production 
of 100 hats=£115, and that this price of production happens 
to coincide with the value of the hats, which means that the cap- 
ital producing the hats is of the same composition as the aver- 
age social capital. Should the profit=15%, the hatter makes 
a profit of £15 by selling his commodities at their value of #115. 
They cost him only £100. If he produced them with his own cap- 
ital, he pockets the entire surplus of £15 but if with borrowed 
capital, he may have to give up £5 as interest. This alters nothing 
in the value of the hats, only in the distribution among different 
persons of the surplus-value already contained in this value. 
Since, therefore, the value of the hats is not affected by the pay- 
ment of interest, it is nonsense on Proudhon's part to say: “As 
in commerce the interest on capital is added to the wages of la- 
bourers in making up the price of commodities, it is impossible 
for the labourer to buy back the product of his own labour. Vivre 
en travaillant is a principle which contains a contradiction under 
the rule of interest” (p. 105).°° 

How little Proudhon understood the nature of capital is shown 
in the following statement, in which he describes the movement 

‘° “A house,” “money,” etc., are not to be loaned as “capital” if Proudhon is 
to have his way, but are to he sold as “commodities ... at cost-price” (p. 44) Lu- 
ther stood somewhat above Proudhon. He knew that profit-making does not depend 
on the minner of lending or buying: “They turn buying also into usury. Bul this 
is really too much to bite off at once. We must first confine ourselves to ane thing, 
usury in lending, and alter we have stopped that (aller judgement-day), we shall 
nol fail to preach against usury in buying” (Martin Luther, An die Pharherrn 
wider den Wucher zu predigen, Wittenberg, 1540.) 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL , 34h 

of capital in general as a movement peculiar to interest-bearing 
capital: “Since money-capital returns to its source from exchange 
through the accumulation of interest, it follows that reinvestment 
always made by the same individual continually brings profit 
to the same person.” 

What is it that still puzzles him in the peculiar movement of 
interest-bea"ing capital? The categories: buying, price, giving up 
articles. and the immediate form in which surplus-value appears 
here; in sho't, the phenomenon that capital as such has become 
a comn.odity, that selling, consequently, has turned into lending 
and price into a share of the profit. 

The return of capital to its point of departure is generally the 
characteristic movement of capital in its total circuit. This 
is bv no means a feature of interest-bearing capital alone. What 
single: it out is rather the external form of its return without 
the intervention of any circuit. The loaning capitalist gives 
away his capital, transfers it to the industria! capitalist, without 
receiving any equivalent. His transfer is not an act belonging to 
the real circulation process of capital at all. It serves merely to 
introduce this circuit, which is effected by the industrial 
capitalist. This first change of position of money does not exp e3s 
any act of the metamorphosis—neither buying nor selling. Owner- 
ship is not relinquished, because there is no exchange and no 
equivalent is received. The return of the money from the hands 
of the industrial capitalist to those of the loaning capitalist merely 
supplements the first act of giving away the capital. Advanced 
in the form of money, the capital again returns to the industrial 
capitalist through the circular process in the form of money. 
But since it did not belong to him when he invested it, it cannot 
belong to him on its return. Passing through the process of repro- 
duction cannot by any means turn the capital into his property. 
He must therefore restore it to the lender. The first expenditure, 
which transfers the capital from the lender to the borrower, is 
a legal transaction which has nothing to do with the actual proc- 
ess of reproduction. It is merely a prelude to this process. The 
return payment, which again transfers the capital that has lowed 
back [rom the borrower to the lender is another legal transaction, 
a supplement of the first. One introduces the actual process. the 
other is an act supplementary to this process. Point of depar- 
ture and point of return, the giving away and the recovery of the 
loaned capital, thus appear as arbitrary movements promoted 
by legal transactions, which take place before and alter the actual 
movement of capital and have nothing to do with it as such. It 

312 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

would have been all the same as concerns this actual movement 
if the capital had from the first belonged to the industrial capi- 
talist and had returned to him, thereiore, as his own. 

In the first introductory act the lender gives his capital to the 
borrower. In the supplemental and closing act the borrower re- 
turns the capital to the lender. As concerns the transaction be- 
tween these two—and aside from the interest for the present— 
as concerns the movement of the loaned capital between lender 
and borrower, therefore, the two acts (separated by a longer or 
shorter time interval, during which the actual reproduction process 
of the capital takes place) embrace the entire movement. And this 
movement, disposing on condition of returning, constitutes per 
se the movement of lending and borrowing, that specific form 
of conditionally alienating money or commodities. 

The characteristic movement of capital in general, the return 
of the money to the capitalist, i.e., the return of capital to its 
point of departure, assumes in the case of interest-bearing capital 
a wholly external appearance, separated from the actual movement, 
of which it is a form. A gives away his money not as money, but 
as capital. No transformation occurs in the capital. It merely 
changes hands. Its real transformation into capital does not take 
place until it is in the hands of B. But for A it becomes capital 
as soon as he gives it to B. The actual reflux of capital from the 
processes of production and circulation takes place only for B. 
But for A the reflux assumes the same form as the alienation. The 
capital returns from B to A. Giving away, i.e., loaning money 
for a certain time and receiving it back with interest (surplus- 
value) is the complete form of the movement peculiar to interest- 
bearing capital as such. The actual movement of loaned money 
as capital is an operation lying outside the transactions between 
lender and borrower. In these the intermediate act is obliterated, 
invisible, not directly included. A special sort of commodity, 
capital has its own peculiar mode of alienation. Neither does its 
return, therefore. express itself as the consequence and result 
of some definite series of economic processes, but as the effect of 
a specific legal agreement between buyer and seller. The time 
of return depends on the progress of the process of reproduction; 
in the case of interest-bearing capital, its return as capital seems 
to depend on the mere agreement between lender and borrower. 
So that in regard to this transaction the return of capital no longer 
appears as a result arising out of the process of reproduction; 
it appears as if the loaned capital never lost the form of money. 
To be sure, these transactions are really determined by the ac- 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 343 

tual reproductive returns. But this is not evident in the transac- 
tion itself. Nor is it by any means always the case in practice. 
Tf the actual return does not take place in due time, the borrower 
must look for other resources to meet his obligations vis-a-vis the 
lender. The bare form of capital—money expended as a certain 

sum, A, which returns as sum A++A after a given lapse of time 

without any other intermediate act save this lapse of time— 
is only a meaningless form of the actual movement of capital. 

In the actual movement of capital its return is a phase in the 
process of circulation. The money is first converted into means 
of production; production transforms them into commodities; 
through sale of the commodities they are reconverted into money 
and return in this form into the hands of the capitalist who had 
originally advanced the capital in the form of money. But in the 
case of interest-bearing capital, the return, like alienation, is 
the result of a legal transaction between the owner of the capi- 
tal and a second party. We see only the alienation and the return 
payment. Whatever passes in the interim is obliterated. 

But since money advanced as capital has the property of re- 
turning to the person who advanced it, to the one who expended 
it as capital, and since M—C—M’ is the immanent form of 
the movement of capital, the owner of the money can, for this 
very reason, loan it out as capital, as something that has the prop- 
erty of returning to its point of departure, of preserving, and 
increasing, its value in the course of its movement. He gives it 
away as capital, because it returns to its point of departure after 
having been employed as capital, hence can be restored by the 
borrower after a certain period precisely because it has come 
back to him. 

Loaning money as capital—its alienation on the condition 
of it being returned after a certain time—presupposes, therefore, 
that it will be actually employed as capital, and that it actually 
flows back to its starting-point. The real cycle made by money 
as capital is, therefore, the premise for the legal transaction by 
which the borrower must return the money to the lender. If the 
borrower does not use the money as capital, that is his own busi- 
ness. The lender loans it as capital, and as such it is supposed 
to perform the functions of capital, which include the circuit 
of money-capital until it returns to its starting-point in the form 
of money. 

The acts of circulation, M—C and C—M’, in which a certain 
amount of value functions as money or commodities, are but 

344 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

intermediate processes, mere phases of the total movement. As 
capital, it performs the entire movement M—M’. It is advanced 
aS money or a sum of values in one form or another, and returns 
as a sum of values. The lender of money does not expend it in 
purchasing commodities, or, if this sum of values is in commad- 
ily-form, does not sell it for money. He advances it as capital, 
as M—M’, as a value, whicli returns to its point of departure alter 
a certain term. He lends instead of buying or selling. This lending, 
therefore, is the appropriate form of alienating value as capital, 
instead of alienating it as money or commodities. It does not 
follow, however, that lending cannot also take the form of trans- 
actions which have nothing’ to do with the capitalist process 
ol reproduction. 

We have so far only considered the movements of loaned cupi- 
tai between its owner and the industrial capitalist. Now we must 
inquire into snécrest. 

The lender expends his money as capital; the amount of value, 
which he relinquishes to another, is capital, and consequently re- 
turns to him. But the mere return of it would not be the reflux 
olf the loaned sum of value as capital, but merely the return ofa 
loaned sum of value. To return as capital, the advanced sum of 
value must not only be preserved in the movement but must also 
expand, must increase in value, i.e., must return with a surplus- 
value, as M--AM, the latter being interest or a portion of the aver- 
age profit, which does not remain in the hands of the operating 
capitalist, but falls to the share of the money-capitalist. 

The fact that the latter has relinquished it as capital implies that 
it must be restored to him as M+4M. Later, we shall also have to 
iurn our attention to the form in which interest is paid in the mean- 
time at fixed intervals, but without the capital, whose return follows 
at the end of a lengthy period. 

What does the money-capitalist give to the borrower, the indus- 
trial capitalist? What does he really turn over to him? It is only this 
act of handing over money which changes lending money into alie- 
nation of money as capital, i.e., alienation of capital as a commodity. 

It is only by this act of alienating that capital is loaned 
by the money-lender as a commodity, or that the commodity at his 
disposal is given to another as capital. 

What is alienated in an ordinary sale? Not the value of the sold 
commodity, for this merely changes its form.The value exists ideally 
in a commodity as its price hefore it actually passes as money into 

INTEREST-BKEARING CAPITAL 345 

the hands of the seller. The same value and the same amount of value 
merely change their form. In the one instance they exist in commod- 
ity-form, in the other in the form of money. What is really alie- 
nated by the seller, and, therefore, passes into the individual or 
productive consumption of the buyer, is the use-value of the com- 
modity—the commodity as a use-value. 

What, now, is the use-value which the money capitalist gives 
up for the period of the loan and relinquishes to the productive 
capitalist—the borrower? It is the use-value which the money 
acquires by being capable of becoming capital, of performing the 
lunctions of capital, and creating a definite surplus-value, the aver- 
age profit (whatever is above or below it appears here as a mere 
accident) during its process, besides preserving its original mag- 
nitude of value. In the case of the other commodities the use-value 
is ultimately consumed. Their substance disappears, and with it 
their value. In contrast, the commodity-capital is peculiar in that 
its value and use-value not only remain intact but also increase, 
through consumption of its use-value. 

Ii is this use-value of money as capital—this faculty of produc- 
ing an average profit—which the money-capitalist relinquishes 
to the industrial capitalist for the period, during which he places 
the loaned capital at the latter’s disposal. 

Mcney thus loaned has in this respect a certain similarity with 
labour-power in its relation to the industrial capitalist. With the 
diflerence that the jatter pays lor the value of labour-power, whereas 
he simply pays back the value of the loaned capital. The use-value 
of labour-power for the industrial capitalist is that labour-power 
creates more value (profit) in its consumption than it possesses it- 
self, and than it costs. This additional value is use-value for the 
industrial capitalist. And in like manner the use-value of loaned 
capital appears as its faculty of begetting and increasing value. 

The money-capitalist, in fact, alienates a use-value, and thus what- 
ever he gives away is given as a commiodity. It is to this extent that 
the analogy with a commodity per se is complete. In the first place, 
it is a value which passes from one hand to another. In the case of 
an ordinary commodity, a commodity as such, the same value re- 
mains in the hands of the buyer and seller, only in diflerent forms; 
both have the same value which they had before the transaction, 
and which they had alienated—the one in the form of a commodi- 
ty, the other in the form of money. The difference is that in a loan 
the money-capitalist is the only one in the transaction who gives away 
value; but he preserves it through the prospective return. In the loan 
transaction just one party receives value, since only one party Telin- 

346 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

quishes value.—In the second place, a real use-value is relinquished 
on the one side, and received and consumed on the other. But in con- 
trast to ordinary commodities this use-value is value in itself, 
namely the excess aver the original value realized through the use of 
money as capital. The profit is this use-value. 

The use-value of the loaned money lies in its being able to serve 
as capital and, as such, {o produce the average profit under average 
conditions. *? : 

What, now, does the industrial capitalist pay, and what is, there- 
fore, the price of the loaned capital? “That which men pay as in- 
terest for the use of what they borrow” is, according to Massie, “a 
part cf the profit it is capable of producings.” ** 

What the buyer of an ordinary commodity buys is its use-value; 
what he pays for is its value. What the borrower of money buys is 
likewise its use-value as capital; but what does he pay for? Surely not 
its price, or value, as in the case of ordinary commodities. No change 
of form occurs in the value passing between borrower and lender, 
as occurs between buyer and seller when it exists in one instance in 
the form of money, and in another in the form of a commodity. The 
sameness of the alienated and returned value is revealed here in an 
entirely different way. The sum of value, i.e., the money, is given 
away without an equivalent, and is returned after a certain period. 
The lender always remains the owner of the same value, even after 
it passes from his hands into those of the borrower. In an ordinary 
exchange of commodities money always comes from tlie buyer’s 
side; but in a loan it comes from the side of the seller. He is the one 
who gives away money for a certain period, and the buyer ol capital 
is the one who receives it as acommodity. But this is only possible 
as long as the money acts as capital and is therefore advanced. The 
borrower borrows money as capital, as a value producing more value. 
But at the moment when it is advanced it is still only potential 
capital, like any other capital at its starting-point, the moment it 
is advanced. It is only through its employment that it expands its 
value and realizes itself as capital, However, it has to be returned 
by the borrower as realized capital, hence as value plus surplus- 
value (interest). And the laller can only be a portion ol the realized 

“The equitableness of taking interest depends not upon a man's making 
or not making profit, but upon its"(the borrowed) « being capable of producing prof- 
it if rightly emplayed” (An Essay on the Governing Causes of the Natural Rate of 
Interest, wherein the sentiments of Sir W. Petty and Mr. Locke, on that head, are 
considered, London,1750, p. 49, The author of this anonymous work is J. Massie.) 

5@ “Rich pepe. instead of employing their money themselves ... let it out 
to other people lor them to make profit of, reserving for the owners a proportion 
of the profits so made” (I. c., pp. 23-24). 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 347 

profit. Only a portion, not all of it. For the use-value of the loaned 
capital to the borrower consists in producing profit for him. Otherwise 
there would not have been any alienation of use-value on the lender’s 
part. On the other hand, not all the profit can fall to the borrower’s 
share. Otherwise he would pay nothing for the alienated use-value, 
and would return the advanced money to the lender as ordinary 
money, not as capital, as realized capital, for it is realized capital 
only as M-- AM, 

Both of them, lender and borrower, expend the same sum of 
money as capital. But it is only in the hands of the latter that it 
serves as capital. The profit is not doubled by the double existence 
of the same sum of money as capital for two persons. It can serve 
as capital for both of them only by dividing the profit. The portion 
which falls to the lender is called interest. 

The entire transaction, as assumed, takes place between two kinds 
of capitalists—the money-capitalist and the industrial or mer- 
chant capitalist. 

It must always be borne in mind that here capital as capital is 
a commodity, or that the commodity here discussed is capital. All 
the relations in evidence here would therefore be irrational from the 
standpoint of an ordinary commodity, or from that of capital inso 
far as it acts as a commodity-capital in the process of reproduction. 
Lending and borrowing, instead of selling and buying, is a distinc- 
tion which here springs from thie specific nature of the commodity— 
capital. Similarly, the fact that it is interest, not the price of the 
commodity, which is paid here. If we want to call interest the price 
of money-capital, then it is an irrational form of price quite at 
variance with the conception of the price of commodities.** The 
price is here reduced to its purely abstract and meaningless form, 
signifying that it is a certain sum of money paid for something serv- 
ing in one way or another as a use-value; whereas the conception 
of price really signifies the value of some tuse-value expressed in 
money. 

Interest, signifying the price of capital, is from the outset quite 
an irrational expression. The commodity in question has a double 
value, first a value, and then a price different from this value, while 
price represents the expression of value in money. Money-capital 

* “The term ‘value,’ when applied to currency, has three several meanings ... 
2) currency, actually in hand... compared with the same amount of currency to 
be received upon a future day. In this case the value of currency is measured by 
the rate of intorest, and the rate of interest being deternined by the ratio be- 
tween the amount of liable capital and {he demand for it.” (Colonel R. Torrens, 
On the Gperation of the Bank Charter Act of 1844, etc., 2nd ed., 1847.) 

par DIVISION OF PROFIT 

is nothing but a sum of money, or the valueof a certain quantity of 
commodities fixed in a sum of money. If a commodity is loaned out 
as capital, it is only a disguised form of a sum of money. Because 
what is loaned out as capital is not so and so many pounds of cotton, 
hut so much and so much money existing in the form of cotton as 
its value. The price of capital, therefore, refers to it as to a sum of 
money, even il not currency, as Mr. Torrens thinks (see Footnote 59). 
How, then, can a sum of value have a price besides its own price, 
besides the price expressed in its own money-form? Price, alter all, 
is the value of a commodity (this is also true of the market-price, 
whose difference from value is not one of quality, but only one of 
quantity, referring only to the magnitude ol value) as distinct from 
ifs use-value. A price which differs from value in quality is an ab- 
surd contradiction. °° 

Capital manifests itself as capital through self-expansion. The 
degree of its self-expansion expresses the quantitative degree in 
which it realizes itself as capital. The surplus-value or profit pro- 
duced by it—its rate or magnitude—is measurable only by compar- 
ison with the value of the advanced capital. The greater or lesser 
self-expansion of interest-bearing capital is, therefore, likewise 
only measurable by comparing the amount of interest, its share in 
the total profits, with the value of the advanced capital. If, there- 
fore, price expresses the value of the commodity, then interest ex- 
presses the self-expansion of money-capital and thus appears as the 
price paid for it to the lender. This shows how absurd it is from the 
very first to apply hereto the simple relations of exchange through 
the medium of money in buying and selling, as Proudhon does. The 
basic premise is precisely thal money [functions as capital and may 
thus be transferred as such, i.e., as potential capital, to a third 
person. 

Capital, however, appears here as a commodity, inasmuch as it 
is offered on the market, and the use-value of money is actually 
alienated as capital. Its use-value, however, lies in producing profit. 
The value of money or of commodities employed as capital does 
not depend on their value as money or as commodities, but on the 
quantity of surplus-value {hey produce for their owner. The product 
of capital is profit. On the basis of capitalist production it is merely 

“° “The ambiguity of the ierm ‘value of money’ or ‘ol the currency," when 
employed indiscriminately as it is, to signify both value in exchange for commod- 
ities and value in use of capital, is a constant source of confusion.” (Tooke, Inquiry 
into the Currency Principle, p. 77.) The main contusion (implied in the matter 
eth that value as such (interest) becomes the use-value of capital, has escaped 
e. 

INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 349 

a different use of money—whether it is expended as money, or ad- 
vanced as capital. Money, or commodities, are in themselves po- 
tentially capital, just as labour-power is potential capital. Because, 
!) money may be converted into elements of production and is, as 
is, merely an abstract expression of them—their existence as value; 
2) the material elements of wealth have the property of potentially 
hecoming capital, because their supplementary opposite, which 
makes them into capital, namely wage-labour, is available on the 
basis of capitalist production. 

The contradictory social features of material wealth—its an- 
tagonism to labour as wage-labour—are expressed in capitalist prop- 
erty as such independently of the production process. This partic- 
ular fact, set apart from the process of capitalist production itself, 
from which it constantly results and as whose constant result it 
serves as a constant prerequisite expresses itself in that money and 
commodities alike are latent, potential, capital, so that they may 
be sold as capital, and in that they can in this form command the 
labour of others bestowing aclaim to appropriate the labour of oth- 
ers, and therefore represent self-expanding values. It also becomes 
clearly apparent that this relationship, and not the labour offered 
as an equivalent on the part of the capitalist, supplies the title and 
the means to appropriate the labour of others. 

Furthermore, capital appears as a commodity, inasmuch as the 
division of profit into interest and profit proper is regulated by sup- 
ply and demand, that is, by competition, just as the market-prices 
of commodities. But the difference here is just as apparent zs the 
analogy. If supply and demand coincide, the market-price of com- 
modities corresponds to their price of production, i.e., their price 
then appears to be regulated by the immanent laws of capitalist 
production, independently of competition, since the fluctuations 
of supply and demand explain nothing but deviations of market- 
prices from prices of production. These deviations mutually balance 
one another, so that in the course of certain longer periods the aver- 
age market-prices equal the prices of production. As soon as supply 
and demand coincide, these forces cease to operate, i.e., compen- 
sate one another, and the general law determining prices then also 
comes to apply to individual cases. The market-price then corre- 
sponds even in its immediate form, and not only as the average of 
market-price movements, to the price of production, which is regu- 
lated by the immanent laws of {he mode of production itself. The 
same applies to wages. If supply and demand coincide, they neutral- 
ize each other's eflect, and wages equal the value of labour-power. 
But it is different with the interest on money-capital. Competition 

850 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

does not, in this case, determine the deviations from the rule. 
There is rather no taw of division except that enforced by compe- 
tition, because, as we shall later see, no such thing as a “natural” 
rate ol interest exists. By the natural rate of interest people merely 
mean the rate fixed by [ree competition. There are no “natural’’ 
limits for the rate of interest. Whenever competition does not mere- 
ly determine the deviations and fluctuations, whenever, therefore, 
the neutralization of opposing forces puts a stop to any and all 
determination, the thing to be determined becomes something ar- 
bitrary and lawless. More on this in the next chapter. 

In the case of interest-bearing capital everything appears super- 
ficial: the advance of capital as mere transfer from lender to borrow- 
er; the reflux of realized capital as mere transfer back, as a return 
payment with interest, by borrower to lender. The same is true of 
the fact, immanent in the capitalist mode of production, that the 
rate of profit is not only determined by the relation of profit made in 
one single turnover to advanced capital-value, but also by the length 
of this period of turnover, hence determined as profit yielded by 
industrial capital within definite spans of time. In the case of inter- 
est-bearing capital this likewise appears on the surface to mean 
that a definite interest is paid to the lender for a definite time span. 

With his usual insight into the internal connection of things, 
the romantic Adam Miiller says (Elemente der Stautskunst, Berlin, 
1809, S. 138): “In determining the prices of things, time is not con- 
sidered; while in determining interest, time is the principal factor.” 
He does not see how the time of production and the time of circula- 
tion enter into the determination of commodity-prices, and how 
this is just what determines the rate of profit for a given period of 
turnover of capital, whereas interest is determined by precisely 
this determination of profit for a given period. His sagacity here, 
as elsewhere, consists in observing the clouds of dust on the surface 
and presumptuously declaring this dust to be something mysterious 
and important. 

CHAPTER XXII 

DIVISION OF PROFIT. RATE OF INTEREST. 
NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST 

The subject of this chapter, like all the other phenomena of cred- 
it we shall come across later on, cannot be analysed here in detail. 
The competition between lenders and borrowers and the resultant 
minor fluctuations of the money-market fall outside the scope of 
our inquiry. The circuit described by the rate of interest during the 
industrial cycle requires [or its presentation the analysis of this cycle 
itself, but this likewise cannot begiven here. The same applies to 
the greater or lesser approximate equalization of the rate of interest 
in the world-market. We are here concerned with the independent 
form of interest-bearing capital and the individualizalion of interest, 
as distinct from profit. 

Since interest is merely a part of profit paid, according to our 
earlier assumption, by (he industrial capitalist to the money-capi- 
talist, the maximum limit of interest is the profit itself, in which 
case the portion pocketed by the productive capitalist would=0. 
Aside from exceptional cases, in which interest might actually be 
larger than profit, but then could not be paid out of the profit, one 
might consider as the maximum limit of interest the total profit 
minus the portion (to be subsequently analysed) which resolves 
itself into wages of superintendence. The minimum limit of interest 
is altogether indeterminable. It may fall to any low. Yet in that case 
there will always be counteracting influences to raise it again above 
this relative minimum. 

“The relation between the sum paid for the use of capital and the 
capital expresses the rate of interest as measured in money.” “The 
rate of interest depends 1) on the rate of profit; 2) on the propor- 
tion in which the entire profit is divided between the lender and 
borrower." (Economist, January 22, 1853.) “If thal which men pay 
as interest for the use of what they borrow, be a part of the profits 

35% DIVISION OF PROFIT 
352 

il is capable ol producing, this interest must always be governed by 
those profits.” (Massie, 1, ¢., p. 49.) ; 

Let us first assume that there is a fixed relation between the total 
profit and that part of it which has to be paid as interest to the mon- 
ey-capitalist. It is then clear that the interest will rise or fall with 
the total profit, and the latter is determined by the general rate 
of profit and its fluctuations. For instance, if the average rate ol 
profit were—20% and the interest=';, of the profit, the rate of 
interest would=5%; if the average rate of profit were=16%, the 
rate of interest would=4%. With the rate of profit at 20%, the rate 
of interest might rise to 8%, and the industrial capitalist would 
still make the same profit as he would at a rate of profit—16% and 
arate ol interest =4%, namely 12% . Should interest rise only to 6% 
or 7%, he would still keep a larger share of the profit. If the interest 
amounted to a constant quota of the average profit, it would follow 
that the higher the general rate of profit, the greater the absolute 
difference between the total profit and the interest, and the greater 
the portion of the total profit pocketed by the productive capitalist, 
and vice versa. Take it that interest ="/, of the average profit. One- 
filth of 10 is 2; the difference between total! profit and interest =8. 
One-fifth of 20=4; difference=20—4=16; '/, of 25=5; difference= 
=25—5=20; '/, of 30=6, diflerence=30—6=24; '/, of 35=7; dil- 
ference=35—7=28. The different rates of interest of 4, 5, 6, 7% 
would here always represent no more than '/,, or 20% of the total 
profit. If the rates of profit are diflerent, therefore, different rates ol 
interest may represent the same aliquot parts of ihe total profit, 
or the same percentage of the total profit. With such constant pro- 
portions of interest, the industrial profit (the difference between 
the total profit and the interest) would rise proportionately to the 
general rate of profit, and conversely. 

All other conditions taken as equal, i.e., assuming the propor- 
tion between interest and total profit to be more or less constant, 
the functioning capitalist is able and willing to pay a higher or low- 
er interest directly proportional to the level of the rate of profit. 
Since we have seen that the rate of profit is inversely proportional to 
the development of capitalist production, it follows thal the higher 
or lower rate of interest in a country isin the same inverse propor- 
tion to the degree of industrial development, at least in so far as 
the difference in the rate of interest actually expresses the difference 
in the rates of profit. It shal] later develop that this need not always 

oL 

“The natural rate of interest is governed bh its icu- 
lars." (Massie, |. c., p. 51.) a eal a ca 

RAYE OF INTEREST. NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST 353 

be the case. In this sense it may be said that interest is regulated 
through profit, or, more precisely, the general rate of profit. And 
this mode of regulating interest applies even to its average. 

In any event the average rate of profit is to be regarded as the ul- 
timate determinant of the maximum limit of interest. 

The fact that interest is to be related to average profit will be con- 
sidered presently at greater length. Whenever a specified entity, 
such as profit, is to be divided between two parties, the matter nat- 
urally hinges above all on the magnitude of the entity which is to 
be divided, and this, the magnitude of the profit, is determined by 
its average rate. Suppose the general rate of profit, hence the mag- 
nitude of profit, for a capital of given size, say,=100, is assumed as 
given. Then the variations of interest will obviously be inversely 
proportional to those of the part of profit remaining in the hands 
of the producing capitalist, working with a borrowed capital. And 
the circumstances determining the amount of profit to be distributed, 
of the value produced by unpaid labour, differ widely from those 
which determine its distribution between these two kinds of capi- 
talists, and frequently produce entirely opposite effects.” 

If we observe the cycles in which modern industry moves— 
state of inactivity, mounting revival, prosperity, overproduction, 
crisis, stagnation, stale of inactivity, etc., which tall beyond 
the scope of our analysis—we shall find that a low rate of interest 
generally corresponds to periods of prosperity or extra profit, 
arise in interest separates prosperity and its reverse, and a maxi- 
mum of interest up to a point of extreme usury corresponds to 
thé period of crisis.** The summer of 1843 ushered in a period of 
remarkable prosperity; the rate of interest, still 442% in the spring 
of 1842, fell to 2% in the spring and summer of 1843;** in Septem- 
ber it fell as low as 1%% (Gilbart, I, p. 166); whereupon it rose to 
8% and higher during the crisis of 1847. 

® At this point the manuscript contains the following remark: “The course of 
this chapter shows that it is preferable, before analysing the laws of the distribu- 
tion of profits, to ascertain first the way in which the division of quantity becomes 
one of quality. To make a transition from the previous chapter, we need but 
assume that interest is a certain indefinite portion of profit.” . 

° “In the first period, immediately after pressure, money is abundant without 
speculation; in the second period, money is abundant and speculations abound; 
in the third period, speculation begins to decline and money is in demand; in the 
fourth period, money is scarce and a pressure arrives.” (Gilbart, A Practical Trea- 
tise on Banking, 5th ed., Vol. 1, London, 1849, p. 149.) 

“ Tooke explains this “by the accumulation of sunglus-tapital necessarily ac- 
companying the scarcity of profitable employment for it in previous years, by {he 
release of hoards, and by therevival of confidence in cumnnercial prospects.” 
(History of Prices from [839 tilt 1847, London, 1848, p. 54.) 

13 —2757 

354 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

It is possible, however, for low interest to go along with stag- 
nation, and for moderately rising interest to go along with revived 
activity. 

The rate of interest reaches its peak during crises, when money 
is borrowed at any cost to meet payments. Since a rise in interest 
implies a fall in the price of securities, this simultaneously offers a 
fine opportunity to people with available money-capital, to ac- 
quire at ridiculously low prices such interest-bearing securities as 
must, in the course of things, at least regain their average price as 
soon as the rate of interest [alls again.* 

However, the rate of interest also has a tendency to [all quite 
independently of the Nuctuations in the rate of profit. And, indeed, 
due to two main causes: 

I. “Were we even to suppose that capital was never borrowed 
with any view but to productive employment, I think it very pos- 
sible that interest might vary without any change in the rateol 
gross profits. For, as a nation advances in the career of wealth, a 
class of men springs up and increases more and more, who by the la- 
bours of their ancestors find themselves in the possession of funds 
sulficiently ample to afford a handsome maintenance from the interest 
alone. Very many also who during youth and middle age were ac- 
tively engaged in business, retirein their latter days to live quietly 
on the interest of the sums they have themselves accumulated. This 
class, as well as the former, has a tendency to increase with the in- 
creasing riches of the country, for those who begin with a tolerable 
stock are likely tomake an independence sooner than they who com- 
mence with little. Thus it comes to pass, that in old and rich coun- 
tries, the amount of national capital belonging to those wlioare 
unwilling to take the trouble of employing it themselves, bears a 
larger proportion to the whole productive stock of the society, than 
in newly settled and poorer districts. How much more numerous 
in proportion to the population is theclass of rentiers ... in Englandl 
As the class of rentiers increases, so also does that of lenders of cap- 
ital, for they are one and the same.” (Ramsay, An Essay on the 
Distribution of Wealth, pp. 201-02.) 

I]. The development of the credit system and the attendant ever- 
growing control of industrialists and merchants over the money 
savings of all classes of society that is effected through the bankers, 

* “An old customer of a banker was refused a loan upon a £200,000 bond; 
when about to leave to make known his suspension of payment, he was told 
eee As gi 80-000. ae eb ae the circumstances {he banker would 
uy the bond at £150,000.” ¢ Theory of the Exchanges. The Bank. Charter A 
of 1844, eic., London, 1869, p. 80.) ° i 

RATE OF INTEREST. NATURAL RATR OP INTEREST 355 

and the progressive concentration of these savings in amounts which 
can serve as money-capital, must also depress the rate of interest. 
More about this later. 

With reference to the delermination of the rate of interest, 
Ramsay says that it “depends partly upon the rate of gross profits, 
partly on the proportion in which these are separated into profits 
of capital and those of enterprise. This proportion again depends 
upon the competition between the lenders ot capital and the bor- 
rowers; which competition is influenced, though by no means entirely 
regulated, by the rate of gross profit expected to be realized. 
And the reason why competition is not exclusively regulated by 
this cause, is, because on the one hand many borrow without any 
view to productive employment; and, on the other, because the pro- 
portion of the whole capital to belent, varies with the riches of the 
country independently of any change in gross profits.” (Ramsay, 
l. c., pp. 206-07.) 

To determine the average rate of interest we must 1) calculate the 
average rate of interest during its variations in the major indus- 
trial cycles; and 2) find the rate of interest for investments which 
require long-term loans of capital. 

The average rate of interest prevailing in a certain country—as 
distinct from the continually fluctuating market rales—cannot be 
determined by any law. In this sphere there is no such thing as a 
natural rate of interest in the sense in which economists speak of a 
natural rate of profit and a natural rate of wages. Massie has rightly 
said in this respect (p. 49): “The only thing which any man can be 
in doubt about on this occasion, is, what proportion of these profits 
do of right belong to the borrower, and what to the lender; and 
this there is no other method of determining than by the opinions 
of borrowers and lenders in general; for right and wrong, in this 
respect, areonly what common consent makes so.” Equating supply 
and demand—assuming the average rate of profit as given—means 
nothing. Wherever else this formula is resorted to (and this is then 
practically correct), it serves as a formula to find the fundamental 
rule (the regulating limits or limiting magnitudes) which is in- 
dependent of, and rather determines, competition; notably as a for- 
mula for those who are held captive by the practice of competition, 
and by its phenomena and the conceptions arising out of them, to 
arrive at what is again but a superficial idea of the inner connection 

** Since {he rate of interest is on the whole determined by the average rate of 
profit, inordinate swindling is often bound up with a low rate of interest. For 

instance, the railway swindle in the summer of 1844, The rate of interest of the 
Bank of England was not raised to 3% until 16th October, 1844. 

13* 

356 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

of economic relations obtaining within competition. It is a method 
to pass from the variations that go with compelition to the limits 
of these variations. This is not the case with the average rate of in- 
{erest. There is no good reason why average conditions of competi- 
tion, the balance between lender and borrower, should give the lend- 
er an interest rate of 3, 4, 5%, etc., or elseacertain percentage of 
the gross profits, say 20% or 50%, on his capital. Wherever it is 
competition as such which determines anything, the determination 
is accidental, purely empirical, and only pedaniry or fantasy 
would seek to represent this accident as a necessity.°’ Nothing 
is more amusing in the reports of Parliament for 1857 and 1858 
concerning bank legislation and commercial crises than lo hear of 
“the real rate produced” as the direciors of the Bank of England, 
Lendon bankers, country bankers, and professional theorists 
chatter back and forth, never getting beyond such commonplaces 
as that “the price paid for the use of loanable capital should vary 
with the supply of such capital,” that “a high rate and a low profit 
cannot permanently exist,” and similar specious platitudes.** Cus- 
toms. juristic tradition, etc., have as much to do with determining 
the average rate of interest as competition itself, in so far as it exists 
not merely as an average, but rather as actual magnitude. In many 
law disputes, where interest has to be calculated, an average rate of 
interest has to be assumed as the legal rate. If we inquire further as 
to why the limits of a mean rate of interest cannot be deduced from 

*° J. G. Opdyke, for instance, in his Treatise on Political Economy (New York, 
1851) makes a very unsuccessful attempt 10 explain the universality of a 5% rate 
of interest by eternal laws. Mr. Kart Arnd is still more naive in Die nalurgemésse 
Volkswirthschaft gegendber dem Monopoliengeist und dem Kommunismus, etc., 
Hanau, 1845. It is stated there: “In the natural course of goods production there is 
just one phenomenon, which, in the fully settled countries, seems in some measure 
to regulate the rate of interest; this is the proportion, in which the timber in Euro- 
pean forests is augmented through their annual growth. This new growth occurs 
quite independently of their exchange-value, at the rate of 3 or 4 to 100." (How 
queer that trees should see to their new growth independently of their exchange- 
value!) “According to this a drop in the rate of interest below its present level in 
the richest countries cannot be expected” (p. 124). (He means, because the new 
growth of the trees is independent of their exchange-value, however much their 
exchange-value may depend on their new growth.) This deserves to be called 
“the primordial forest rate of interest.” Its discoverer makes a further laudable 
contribution in this work to “our science” as the “philosopher of the dog tax.” 

_ The Bank of England raises and lowers the rate of its discount, always, of 
course, with due consideration of the rate prevailing in the open market, in 
accordance with imports and exports of gold.“By which gambling in discounts, 
by anticipation of the alterations in the bank-rate, has now become hall the trade 
ol the great heads of the money centre’—i.e., of the London money- market. 
(The Theory of the Exchanges, etc., p. 113.) 

RATE OF [NTEREST, NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST 357 

general laws, we find the answer lies simply in thenature of interest. 
It is merely a part of the average profit. The samme capital appears 
in two roles—as loanable capital in the lender's hands and as in- 
dustrial, or commercial, capital in the hands of the functioning cap- 
italist: But it [unctions just once, and produces profit just once. 
In the production process itself the nature of capital as loanable 
capital plays no role. How the two parties who have claim to it di- 
vide the profit is in itself just as purely empirical a matter belong- 
ing to the realm of accident as the distribution of Percentage 
shares of a common profit in a business partnership. Two entirely 
different elements—labour-power and capital—act as determinants 
in the division between surplus-value and wages, which division 
essentially determines the rate of profit; these are functions of two 
independent variables, which limit one another; and it is their 
qualitative difJerence that is {he source of the quantitative division 
of the produced value. We shall see later that the same occurs 
in the splitting of surplus-value into rent and profit. Nothing of the 
kind occurs in the case of interest. Here the qualitative differen- 
tiation, as we shall presently see, proceeds rather from the purely 
quantitative division of the same sum of surplus-value. 

It follows from the aforesaid that there is no such thing as a “nat- 
ural” rate of interest. But if, unlike the general rate of profit, there 
is on the one hand no general law to determine the limits of the aver- 
age interest, or average rate of interest as distinct from the contin- 
ually fluctuating market rates of interest, because it is merely a 
question of dividing the gross profit between two owners of capital 
under different title: on the other hand, the rate of interest—be it 
the average or the market rate prevalent in each particular case— 
appears as a uniform, definite and tangible magnitude in a quite 
different way from the general rate of profit." 

The rate of interest is similarly related to the rate of profit as 
the market-price of a commodity is to its value. In so far as the rate 
of interest is determined by the rate of profit, this is always the gen- 
eral rate of profit and not any specific rate of profit prevailing in 
some particular branch of industry, and still less any extra profit 
which an individual capitalist may make in a particular sphere of 

6° “The price of commodities fluctuates’ continually; they are all made for 
different uses; the money serves for all purposes. The commodities, even those 
of the same kind, differ according to quale: cash money is always of the same 
value, or at least is assumed to be so. Thus it is that the price of money, which 
we designate by the term interest, hasa greater stability and uniformity than that 
of any other thing.” (J. Steuart, Principles of Political Economy, French trans- 
lation, 1789, IV, p. 27.) 

VISION OF PROFIT 
358 DISISTO 

business.’° It is a fact, therefore, that the general rate of profit ap- 

ears as an empirical, given reality in the average rale ol interest, 
although the latter is not a pure or reliable expression of the former. 

It is indeed true that the rate of interest itself varies in accord- 
ance with the different classes of securities offered by borrowers, 
and in accordance with the length of time for which the money is 
borrawed; but it is uniform in each of these classes at a given moment. 
This distinction, then, does not militate against a fixed and uniform 
appearance of the rate of interest.” ; 

The average rate of interest appears in every country over fairly 
long periods as a constant magnitude, because the general rate of 
profit varies only at longer intervals—in spite of constant varia- 
tions in specific rates of profit, in which a change in one sphere is 
offset by an opposite change in another. And its relative constancy 
is revealed precisely in this more or less constant nature of the aver- 
age, or common, rate of interest. 

70 “This rule of dividing profits is not, however, to be applied par uepbart 
to every lender and borrower, but to lenders and borrowers in general..,remarka- 
bly great and small gains are the reward of skill and the want of understanding, 
which lenders have nothing at all to do with; for as they will not sulfer by the one, 
they ought not to benefit by the other. What has been said of particular men in 
the same business is applicable to particular sorts of business; if the merchants 
and tradesmen employed in anyone branch ol trade get more by what they borrow 
than the common profits made by other merchants and tradesmen of the same 
country, the extraordinary gain is theirs, though it required only common skill 
and understanding to get it; and not the lenders’, who supplied them with money... 
for the lenders would not have lent their money to carry on any branch of trade 
upon lower terms than would admit of paying so much as the common rate of 
interest; and therefore they ought not to receive more than that, whatever advan- 
tages may be made by their money.” (Massie, |. c., pp. 50, 51.) 

* Bankrate... ee ee te he do eG 

Market rate of discount, 60 days’ drafts ....... 3°/,% 
Ditto, 3 months) .. 211! 31% 
Ditto, 6 month’ ,.,......, 35). % 

Loans to bill-brokers, day to day ,....., Dll 1 to 2% 
Ditto, for one week... . 2... 3% 

Last rate for fortnight, loans to stockbrokers... . . 4°J, to 5% 

Deposit allowance (banks)... .......,.024, 31/8 “ 
Ditto (discount houses) . 2.2... 2. 3 to 314% 

How large this difference may be for one and the same day is shown in the preced- 

ing figures of the rate of interest of the London money-market on December 9 
1889, taken from the City article of the Daily News of Poul niaia 
is 1%, the maximum 5%. [F. E.] ‘i December 10. The minimum 

RATE OF INTEREST. NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST 359 

As concerns the perpetually fluctuating market rate of interest, 
however, it exists al any moment as a fixed magnitude, just as the 
market-price of commodities, hecause in the money-market all 
loanable capital continually faces functioning capital as an aggregate 
mass, so that the relation between the supply of loanable capital on 
one side, and the demand for it on the other, decides the market 
level of interest at any given time. This is all the more so, the more 
the development, and the attendant concentration, of the credit 
system gives to loanable capital a general social character and throws 
it all at once on the money-market. On the other hand, the general 
rate of profit is never anything more than a tendency, a movement 
to equalize specific rates of profit. The competition between cap- 
italists: -which is itself this movement toward equilibrium— 
consists here of their gradually withdrawing capita! fromspheres 
in which profit is for an appreciable length of time below average, 
and gradually investing capital into spheres in which profit is 
above average. Or it may also consist in additional capital dis- 
tributing itself gradually and in varying proportions among these 
spheres, [t is continual variation in supply and withdrawal of 
capital in regard to these different spheres, and never a simultane- 
ous mass elfect, as in the determination of the rate of interest. 

We have seen that interest-bearing capital, although a calegory 
which differs absolutely [rom a commodity, becomes a commodity 
sui generis, so that interest becomes its price, fixed at all times by 
supply and demand like the market-price of an ordinary commodity. 
The market rate of interest, while fluctuating continually, appears 
therefore at any given moment just as constantly fixed and uniform 
as the market-price of a commodity prevailing in each individual 
case. Money-capitalists supply this commodity, and functioning 
capitalists buy it, creating the demand for it. This does not occur 
when equalization creates a general rate of profit. If prices ol com- 
modities in one sphere are below or above the price of production 
(wherein we deliberately leave aside the fluctuations attendant 
upon the various phases of the industrial cycle in each and every 
enterprise) the balance is effected through the expansion or curtail- 
ment of production, i.e., the expansion or curtailment of the masses 
of commodities thrown on the market by industrial capitals— 
caused by inflow or outflow of capital to and from individual spheres 
of production. It is by this equalization of the average market- 
prices of commodities to prices of production that deviations of 
specific rates of profit [rom the general, or average, rate of profit 
are corrected. It cannot be that in this process industrial or mer- 
cantile capital as such should ever assume the appearance of com- 

360 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

modities vis-a-vis the buyer, as in the case of interest-bearing 
capital. If perceptible at all, this process Is so only in the fluctua- 
tions and equalizations of market-prices of commodities to prices 
of production, not as a direct fixation of the average profit. The 
general rate of profit is, indeed, determined 1) by the surplus- 
value produced by the total capital, 2) by the proportion of this 
surplus-value to the value of the total capital, and 3) by compe- 
tition, but only in so far as this is a movement whereby capitals 
invested in particular production spheres seek to draw equal div- 
idends out of this surp!us-value in proportion to their relative 
magnitudes, The general rate of profit, therefore, derives actually 
from causes far different and far more complicated than the mar- 
ket rate of interest, which is directly and immediately determined 
by the proportion between supply and demand, and hence is not 
as tangible and obvious a fact as the rate of interest. The individ- 
ual rates of profit in various spheres of production are themselves 
more or less uncertain; but in so far as they appear, it is not their 
uniformity but their differences which are perceptible. The 
general rate ol profit, however, appears only as the lowest limit of 
profit, not as an empirical, directly visible form of the actual 
rate of profit. 

In emphasizing this difference between the rate of interest and 
the rate of profit, we still omit the following two points, which 
favour consolidation of the rate of interest: 1) the historical pre- 
existence of interest-bearing capital and the existence of a tra- 
ditional general rate of interest; 2) the far greater direct influence 
exerted by the world-market on establishing the rate of interest, 
irrespective of the economic conditions of a country, as compared 
with its influence on the rate of profit. 

The average profit does not obtain as a directly established fact, 
but rather is to be determined as an end result of the equalization 
of opposite fluctuations. Not so with the rate of interest. It is a 
thing fixed daily in its general, at least local, validity—a thing 
which serves industrial and mercantile capitals even as a prereq- 
uisite and a factor in the calculation of their operation. It becomes 
the general endowment of every sum of money of £100 to yield 2, 
3, 4, 5%. Meteorological reports never denote the readings of the 
barometer and thermometer with greater accuracy than stock ex- 
change reports denote the rate of interest, not for one or another 
capital, but for capital in the money-market, i.e., for loanable 
capital generally. 

In the money-market only lenders and borrowers [ace one an- 
other. The commodity has the same form—money. All specific 

RATE OF INTEREST, NATURAL RATE OF INTEREST 361 

forms of capital in accordance with its investment in particular 
spheres of production or circulation are here obliterated. It exists 
in the undifferentiated homogeneous form of independent value— 
money. The competition of individual spheres does not affect it. 
They are all thrown together as borrowers of money, and capital 
confronts them allina form, in which it is as yet indifferent to the 
prospective manner of its investment. It obtains most emphati- 
cally in thesupply and demand of capital as essentially the common 
capital of a class—something industrial capital does only in 
the movement and competition of capital between the various 
individual spheres. On the other hand, money-capital in the money- 
market actually possesses the form, in which, indifferent to its 
specific employment, it is divided as a common element among 
the various spheres, among the capitalist class, as the requirements 
of production in each individual sphere may dictate. Moreover, with 
the development of large-scale industry money-capital, so far as 
il appears on the market, is not represented by some individual cap- 
italist, not the owner of one or another fraction of the capital in 
the market, but assumes the nature of a concentrated, organized 
mass, which, quite different from actual production, is subject 
to the control of bankers, i.e., the representatives of social capital. 
So that, as concerns the form of demand, loanable capital is 
confronted by the class as a whole, whereas in the province of 
supply it is loanable capital which obtains en masse. 

These are some of the reasons why the general rate of profit ap- 
pears blurred and hazy alongside the definite interest rate, which 
may fluctuate in magnitude, but always confronts borrowers as 
given and fixed because it varies uniformly for all of them. Just 
as variations in the value of money do not prevent it from having 
the same value vis-a-vis all commodities. Just as the daily fluc- 
tuations in market-prices of commodities do not prevent them 
from being daily reported in the papers. So the rate of interest is 
regularly reported as “the price of money.” It is so, because capital 
itsell is being offered here in the form of money as a commodity. 
The fixation of its price is thus a fixation of its market-price, as 
with all other commodities. The rate of interest, therefore, always 
appears as the general rate of interest, as so much money for so 
much money, as a definite quantity. The rate of profit, on the other 
hand, may vary even within the same sphere for commodities 
with the same price, depending on different conditions under which 
diflerent capitals produce the same commodity; because the rate 
ol profit of an individual capital is not determined by the market- 
price of a commodity, but rather by the difference between mar- 

362 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ket-price and cost-price. And these different rates of profit can 
strike a balance—first within the same sphere and then between 
different spheres—only through continual fluctuation. 

(Note for later elaboration.) A specific form of credit: It is known 
that when money serves as a means of payment instead of a means 
of purchase, the commodity is alienated, but its value is realized 
only later. If payment is not made until after the commodity has 
again been sold, this sale does not appear as the result of the pur- 
chase; rather it is through this sale that the purchase is realized. 
In other words, the sale becomes a means of purchase. Secondly: 
titles to debts, bills of exchange, ete., become means of payment for 
the creditor. Thirdly: the compensation of titles to debts replaces 
money. 

CHAPTER XXII 
INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 

Interest, as we have seen in the two preceding chapters, appears 
originally, is originally, and remains in fact merely a portion of 
the profit, i.e., of the surplus-value, which the functioning capitalist, 
industrialist or merchant has to pay to the owner and lender 
of money-capital whenever he uses loaned capital instead ot his 
own. I{ he employs only his own capital, no such division of profit 
takes place; the latter is then entirely his. Indeed, as Jong as the 
owners of the capital employ it on their own in the reproduction 
process, they do not compete in determining the rate of interest. 
This alone shows that the category of interest—impossible with- 
out determining the rate of interest-—is alien to the movements 
of industrial capital as such, 

“The rate of interest may be defined to be that proportional sum 
which the lender is content to receive, and the borrower to pay, 
annually, or for any longer or shorter period, for the use of a cer- 
tain amount of moneyed capital.... When the owner of a capital 
employs it actively in reproduction, he does not come under the 
head of those capitalists, the proportion of whom, to the number 
of borrowers, determines the rate of interest.” (Th. Tooke, His- 
tory of Prices, London, 1838, II, pp. 355-56.) It is indeed only 
the separation of capitalists into money-capilalists and industrial 
capitalists that transforms a portion of the profit into interest, 
that generally creates the category of interest; and it is only the 
competition between these two kinds of capitalists which creates 
the rate of interest. 

As long as capital functions in the process of reproduction— 
assuming that it even belongs to the industrial capitalist and he 
has no need of paying it back to a lender—the capitalist, as a 
private individual, does not have at his disposal this capital it- 
self, but only the profit, which he may spend as revenue. As long 
as his capital functions as capital, it belongs to the process of re- 

, 2 7 Wy 
364 DIVISION OF PROT 

production, is tied up in it. He is, indeed, its owner, but this owner- 
ship does not enable him to dispose of it in any other way, so long 
as he uses it as capital for the exploitation of labour. The sarne is 
true of the money-capitalist. So long as his capital is loaned out 
and thereby serves as money-capital, it brings him interest, a 
portion of the profit, but he cannot dispose of the principal. This 
is evident whenever he loans out his capital for, say, a year, or 
more, and receives interest at certain stipulated times without 
the return of his principal. But even the return of the principal 
makes no difference here. If he gets it back, he must always loan 
it out again, so long as it is to function for him as capital—here 
as money-capilal. As long as he keeps it in his own hands, it does 
not collect interest and does not act as capital; and as long as it 
does gather interest and serve as capital, it is out of his hands. 
Hence the possibility of loaning out capital for all time. The follow- 
ing remarks by Tooke directed against Bosanquet are, therefore, 
entirely wrong. He quotes Bosanquet (Me/allic, Paper and Credit 
Currency, London, 1842, p. 73): “Were the rate of interest reduced 
as low as 1%, capital borrowed would be placed nearly on a par 
with capital possessed.” To this Tooke adds the following marginal 
note: “That a capital borrowed at that, or even a lower rate, should 
be considered nearly on a par with capital possessed, is a propo- 
sition so strange as hardly to warrant serious notice were it not 
advanced by a writer so intelligent, and, on some points of the 
subject, so well informed. Has he overlooked the circumstance, or 
does he consider it of little consequence, that there must, by the 
supposition, be a condition of repayment?” (Th. Tooke, An Inquiry 
into ihe Currency Principle, 2nd ed., London, 1844, p. 80.) If 
interest were=0, the industrial capitalist operating on borrowed 
capital would stand ona par with a capitalist using his own cap- 
ital. Both would pocket the same average profit, and capital, 
whether borrowed or owned, serves as capital only as long as it 
produces profit. The condition of return payment would alter noth- 
ing. The nearer the rate of interest approaches zero, falling, for 
instance, to 1%, the nearer borrowed capital is to being on a par 
with owner's capital. So long as money-capital is to exist as money- 
capital, it must always be loaned out, and indeed at the prevail- 
ing rate of interest, say of 1%, and always to the same class of in- 
dustrial and commercial capitalists. So long as these function as 
capitalists, the sole difference between the one working with bor- 
rowed capital and the other with his own is that the former must 
pay interest and the latter must not; the one pockets the entire 
profit p, and the other p—i, the profit minus the interest. The 

INTENEST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 365 

nearer interest approaches zero, the nearer p—i apor. 

and hence the nearer the two capitals are to bend oa pee. The 
one must pay back the capital and borrow anew: yet the other 
must likewise advance it again and again to the production proc- 
ess, so long as his capital is to function, and cannot dispose of it 
freely, independent of this process. The sole remaining difference 
between the two is the obvious difference that one is the owner of 
his capital, and the other is not. 

The question which now arises is this. How does this purely 
quantitative division of profit into net profit and interest turn 
into a qualitative one? Jn other words, how is it that a capitalist 
who employs solely his own, not borrowed capital, classifies a 
portion of his gross profit under the specific category of interest 
and as such calculates it separately? And, furthermore, how is it 
that all capital, whether borrowed or not, is differentiated as in- 
terest-bearing capital from itself as capital producing a net profit? 

It is understood that not every accidental quantitative division 
of profit turns in this manner into a qualitative one. For instance, 
some industrial capitalists join hands to operate a business and 
then divide the profit among themselves in accordance with some 
legal agreement. Others do their business, each on his own, without 
any partners. These last do not calculate their profit under two 
heads—one part as individual profit. and the other as company 
profit for their non-existent partners. In this case the quantitative 
division therefore does not become a qualitative one. This occurs 
whenever ownership happens to be vested in several juridical per- 
sons. It does not occur whenever this is not the case. 

In order to answer this question, we must dwell somewhat longer 
on the actual point of departure in the formation of interest; that 
is, we must proceed from the assumption that the money-capital- 
ist and industrial capitalist really confront one another not just 
as legally different persons, but as persons playing entirely differ- 
ent roles in the reproduction process, or as persons in whose hands 
the same capital really performs a two-lold and wholly different 
movement. The one merely loans it, the other employs it produc- 
tively. 

For the productive capitalis! who works on borrowed capital, 
the gross profit falls into two parts—the interest, which he is to 
pay the lender, and the surplus over and above the interest, which 
makes up his own share of the profit. 1f the general rate of profit is 
given, this latter portion is determined by the rate of interest; 
and if the rate of interest is given, then by the general rate of 
profit. And furthermore: however the gross profit, the actual 

1S1ON OF PROFIT 
366 DVIS) 

yalue of the total profit, may diverge in each individual case from 
the average profit, the portion belonging to the functioning capi- 
{alist is determined by the interest, since this is fixed by the gen- 
eral rale of interest (leaving aside any special legal stipulations) 
and assumed to be given beforehand, before the process ol produc- 
tion begins, hence before its result, the gross profit, is achieved. 
We have seen that the actual specific product of capital is surplus- 
value, or, more precisely, profit. But for the capitalist working 
on borrowed capital it is not profit, but profit minus interest, that 
portion of profit which remains to him afler paying interest. This 
portion of the profit, therefore, necessarily appearsto him to be the 
product of a capital as long as it is operative; and this it is, as far 
as he is concerned, because he represents capital only as function- 
ing capital. He is its personification as long as it functions, and 
it functions as long as it is profitably invested in industry or com- 
merce and such operations are undertaken with it through its em- 
ployer as are prescribed by the branch of industry concerned. As 
distinct from interest, which he has to pay to the lender out of 
the gross profit, the portion of profit which falls to his share neces- 
sarily assumes the form of industrial or commercial profit, or, to 
use a German term embracing both, the form of Unternehmergewinn 
(profit of enterprise). If the gross profit equals the average profit, 
the size of the profit of enterprise is determined exclusively by the 
rate of interest. If the gross profit deviates [rom the average profit, 
its difference [rom the average profit (alter interest is deducted 
from both) is determined by all the circumstances which causea 
temporary deviation, be it of the rate of profit in any particular 
sphere from the general rate of profit, or the profit of some individual 
capitalist in a certain sphere from the average profit of this sphere. 
We have seen however that the rate of profit within the production 
Process itself does not depend on surplus-value alone, but also on 
many other circumstances, such as purchase prices of means o! pro- 
duction, methods more productive than the average, on savings 
ol constant capital, etc, And aside from the price of production, 
it depends on special circumstances, and in every single business 
{transaction on the greater or lesser shrewdness and industrv of 
the capitalist, whether, and to what extent, he buys or sells above 
or below the price of production and thus appropriates a greater 
or smaller portion of the total surplus-value in the process of 
circulation. In any case, the quantitative division of the gross 
profit turns here into a qualitative one, and all the more so be- 
cause the quantitative division itself depends on xhaf is to be 
divided, the manner in which the active capitalist. manages his 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 367 

capital, and what gross profit it yields to him as a functioning 
capital, !.e,, In consequence of his functions as an active capitalist, 
The functioning capitalist is here assumed as a non-owner of capi- 
tal. Ownership of the capital is represented in relation to him by 
the money-capitalist, the lender. The interest he pays to the latter 
thus appears as that portion of gross profit which is due to the own- 
ership of capital as such. As distinct from this, that portion of 
profit which falls to the active capitalist appears now as profit 
of enterprise, deriving solely from the operations, or functions, 
which he performs with the capital in the process of reproduction, 
hence particularly those functions which he performs as entrepreneur 
in industry or commerce. In relation to him interest appears there- 
fore as the mere fruit of owning capital, of capital as such ab- 
stracted from the reproduction process of capital, inasmuch as it 
does not “work,” does not function; while profit of enterprise ap- 
pears to him as the exclusive fruit of the functions which he performs 
with the capital, as the fruit of the movement and performance 
of capital, of a performance which appears to him as his own ac- 
tivity, as opposed to the inactivity, the non-participation of the 
money-capitalist in the production process. This qualitative 
distinction between the two portions of gross profit that interest 
is the fruit of capital as such, of the ownership of capital irrespec- 
live of the production process, and that profit of enterprise is 
the fruit of performing capital, of capital functioning in the pro- 
duction process, and hence of the active role played by the em- 
ployer of the capital in the reproduction process—this qualitative 
distinction is by no means merely a subjective notion of the money- 
capitalist, on the one hand, and the industrial capitalist, on the 
other. It rests upon an objective fact, for interest flows to the 
money-capitalist, to the lender, who is the mere owner of capital, 
hence represents only ownership of capital before the production 
process and outside of it; while the profit of enterprise flows to the 
functioning capitalist alone, whois non-owner of the capital. 
The merely quantitative division of the gross profit between 
two different persons who both have different legal claims to the 
same capital, and hence to the profit produced by it, thus turns 
into a qualitative division for both the industrial capitalist in so 
far as he is operating on borrowed capital, and for the money- 
capitalist, in so far as he does not himself apply his capital. One 
portion of the profit appears now as fruit due as such to capital 
in one form, as interest; the other portion appears as a specific 
fruit of capital in an opposite form, and thus as profit of enter- 
prise. One appears exclusively as the fruit of operating with the 

368 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

capital, (he fruit of performing capital, or of the functions per- 
formed by tle active capitalist. And this ossification and individu- 
alization of the {wo parts of the gross profit in respect to one another, 
as though they originated from two essentially diflerent sources, 
now takes firm shape for the entire capitalist class and the total 
capital. And, indeed, regardless of whether the capital employed 
by the active capitalist is borrowed or not, and whether the capital 
belonging to the money-capitalist is employed by himself or not. 
The profit of every capital, and consequently also the average 
profit established by the equalization of capitals, splits, or is 
separated, into two qualitatively diflerent, mutually independent 
and separately individualized parts, to wit—interest and profit 
of enterprise—both of which are determined by separate laws. 
The capitalist operating on his own capital, like the one operating 
on borrowed capital, divides the gross profit into interest due to 
himself as owner, as his own lender, and into profit of enterprise due 
to him as to an active capitalist performing his function. As con- 
cerns this division, therefore, as a qualitative one, it is immate- 
rial whether the capitalist really has to share with another, or not. 
The employer of capital, even when working with his own capital, 
splits into two personalities—the owner of capital and the employ- 
er of capital; with reference to the categories of profit which it 
yields, his capital also splits into capital-property, capital outside 
the production process, and yielding interest of itself, and capital 
in the production process which yields a profit of enterprise 
through its function. 

Interest, therefore, becomes firmly established in a way that it 
no longer appears as a division of gross profit of indifference to 
production, which occurs occasionally when the industrial capital- 
ist happens to operate with someone else’s capital. His profit 
splits into interest and profit of enterprise even when he operates 
on his own capital. A merely quantitative division thus turns into 
a qualitative one. It occurs regardless of the fortuitous circumstance 
whether the industrial capitalist is, or is not, the owner of his 
capital. It is not only a matter of different quotas of profit assigned 
to different persons, but two different categories of profit which 
are difierently related to the capital, hence related to different 
aspects of the capital. 

_ Now that this division of gross profit into interest and prof- 
it of enterprise has become a qualitative one, it is easy to 
discover the reasons why it acquires this character ol a qualita- 

tive division for ihe total capital and the entire class of capi- 
talists. 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 369 

Firsily, this Jollows from the simple empirical circumstance 
that the majority of industrial capitalists, even if in different 
numerical proportions, work with their own and with borrowed 
capital, and that at different times the proportion between one’s 
own and borrowed capital changes. 

Secondly, the transformation of a portion of the gross profit into 
the form of interest converts its other portion into profit of enter- 
prise. The latter is, indeed, but the opposite form assumed by the 
excess of gross profit over interest assoon as this exists as an in- 
dependent category. The entire analysis of the problem how gross 
profit is differentiated into interest and profit of enterprise, re- 
solves itself into the inquiry of how a portion of the gross profit 
becomes universally ossified and individualized as interest. Yet 
historically interest-bearing capital existed as a completed tra- 
ditional form, and hence interest as a completed sub-division of 
surplus-value produced by capital, long before the capitalist mode 
of production and its attendant conceptions of capital and profit. 
Thus it is that to the popular mind money-capital, or interest- 
bearing capital, is still capital as such, as capital par excellence. 
Thus it is, on the other hand, that up to the time of Massie the 
notion prevailed that it is money as such which is paid in interest. 
The fact that loaned capital yields interest whether actually em- 
ployed as capital or not—even when borrowed only for consump- 
tion—lends strength to the idea that this form of capital exists 
independently. The best proof of the independence which interest 
possessed during the early periods of the capitalist mode of 
production in reference to profit, and which interest-bearing cap- 
ital possessed in reference to industrial capital, is that it was 
discovered by Massie and after him by Hume, as late as the middle 
of the 18th century, that interest is but a portion of the gross 
profit, and that such a discovery was at all necessary. 

Thirdly, whether the industrial capitalist operates on his own or 
on borrowed capital does not alter the fact that the class of money- 
capitalists confronts him as a special kind of capitalists, money- 
capital as an independent kind of capital, and interest as an inde- 
pendent form of surplus-value peculiar to this specific capital. 

Qualitatively speaking, interest is surplus-value yielded by the 
mere ownership of capital; it is yielded by capital as such, even 
though its owner remains outside the reproduction process. Hence 
it is surplus-value realized by capital outside of its process. 

Quantifatively speaking, that portion of profit which forms in- 
terest does not seem {o' be related to industrial or commercial cap- 
ital as such, but to money-capital, and the rate of this portion 

370 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

oi surplus-value, the rate of interest, reinforces this relation. Be- 
cause, in the first place, the rate of interest is independently deter- 
mined despite its dependence upon the general rate of profit, and, 
in the second place, like the market-price of commodities, it ap- 
pears in contrast to the intangible rate of profit as a fixed, uniform, 
tangible and always given relation for all its variations. If all 
capital were in the hands of the industrial capitalists there would 
be no such thing as interest and rate of interest. The independent 
form assumed by the quantitative division of gross profit creates 
the qualitative one. If the industrial capitalist were to compare 
himself with the money-capitalist, it would be his profit of enter- 
prise alone, the excess of his gross profit over the average interest — 
the latter appearing to be empirically given by virtue of the rate 
of interest—that would distinguish him from the other person. 
If, on the other hand, he compares himself with the industrial cap- 
italist working with his own, instead of borrowed, capital, the lat- 
ter differs from him only as a money-capitalist in pocketing the 
interest instead of paying it to someone else. The portion of gross 
profit distinguished [rom interest appears to him in either case as 
profit of enterprise, and interest itself as a surplus-value yielded by 
capital as such, which it would yield even i! not applied productively. 

This is correct in the practical sense for the individual capitalist. 
He has the choice of making use of his capital by lending it out as 
interest-bearing capital, or of expanding its value on his own by 
using it as productive capital, regardless of whether it exists as 
money-capital irom the very first, or whether it still has to be con- 
verted into money-capital. But to apply it to the total capital 
of society, as some vulgar economists do, and to go So far as to de- 
fine it as the cause of profit, is, of course, preposterous. The idea 
of converting all the capital into money-capital, without there 
being people who buy and put to use means of production, which 
make up the total capital outside of a relatively small portion of 
it existing in money, is, of course, sheer nonsense. It would. be 
still more absurd to presume that capital would yield interest on 
the basis of capitalist production without performing any produc- 
tive function, i.e., without creating surplus-value, of which 
interest is just a part; that thecapitalist mode of production would 
tun its course without capitalist production. If an untowardly 
large section of capitalists were to convert their capital into money- 
capital, the result would be a frightful depreciation of money- 
capital and afrightful fall in the rate of interest: many would at once 
face the impossibility of living on their interest, and would hence 
be compelled to reconvert into industrial capitalists, But we re- 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 371 

peat that it is a fact for the individual capitalist. For this reason, 
even when operating with his own capital, he necessarily consid- 
ers the part of his average profit which equals the average interest 
as fruit of his capital as such, set apart from the process of produc- 
tion; and as distinct from this portion singled oul as interest, he 
considers the surplus of the gross profit as mere profit of enterprise. 

Fourthly, [A blank in the manuscript}. 

We have seen, therefore, that the portion of profit which the 
functioning capitalist has to pay lo the owner of borrowed capi- 
tal is transformed into an independent form for a portion of ihe 
profit, which all capital as such, whether borrowed or not, yields 
under the name of inlerest. How large this portion is depends on 
the average rate of interest. Its origin is only still revealed in the 
fact thal the functioning capitalist, when owner of his capital, 
does not compete—at least not actively—in determining the 
interest rate. The purely quantitative division of the profit between 
two persons who have different legal titles to it has turned into a 
qualitative division, which seems to spring from the very nature 
of capital and profit. Because, as we have seen, as soon as a portion 
of profit universally assures the form of interest, the difference 
between average profit and interest, or the portion of profit over 
and above the inlerest, assumes a Jorm opposite to interest— 
the form of profit of enterprise. These two forms, interest and profit 
of enterprise, exist only as opposites. Hence, they are not related to 
surplus-value, of which they are but parts placed under different 
categories, heads or names, but rather to one another. It is because 
one portion of profit turns into interest, that the other appears 
as profit of enterprise. 

By profit we here always mean average profit, since variations 
do not concern us in this analysis, be they of individual profits 
or of profils in different spheres—hence variations caused by the 
competitive struggle and other circumstances affecting the distri- 
bution of the average profit, or surplus-value. This applies gener- 
ally lo this entire inquiry. 

Interest is then net profit, as Ramsay calls it, which the owner- 
ship of capital yields as such, either simply to the lender, who 
remains outside the reproduction process, or to the owner who 
employs his capital productively. But in the latter’s case, too, 
capital yields this net profit to him not in his capacity of produc- 
tive capitalist, but of money-capitalist, of lender of his own cap- 
ital as interest-bearing capital to himself as to a functioning cap- 
italist. Just as the conversion of money, and of value in general, 
into capital is the constant result of capitalist production, so is 

372 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

its existence as capital its constant precondition. By its ability 
{o be transformed into means of production it continually commands 
unpaid labour and thereby transforms the processes of production 
and circulation of commodities into the production of surplus- 
value for its owner. Interest is, therefore, the expression 
of the fact that value in general—materialized labour in its 
general social form—value which assumes the form of means 
of production in the actual process of production, confronts liv- 
ing labour-power as an independent power, and is a means of 
appropriating unpaid labour; and that it is such a power be- 
cause it confronts the*labourer as the property of another. But 
on the other hand, this antithesis to wage-labour is obliter- 
ated in the form of interest, because interest-bearing capital 
as such has not wage-labour, but productive capital for its apposite. 
The lending capitalist as such faces the capitalist performing his 
actual function in the process of reproduction, not the wage-worker, 
wilo, precisely under capitalist production, is expropriated of the 
means of production. Interest-bearing capital is capital as prop- 
erty as distinct [rom capital as a function. But so long as capital 
does not perform its function, it does not exploit labourers and does 
not come into opposition to labour. 

On the other hand, profit of enterprise is not related as an op- 
posite to wage-labour, but only to interest. 

Firstly, assuming the average profit to be given, the rate of the 
profit of enterprise is not determined by wages, but by the rate 
of interest. [t is high or low in inverse proportion to it.” 

Secondly, the functioning capitalist derives his claim to profits 
of enterprise, hence the profit of enterprise itself, not from his owner- 
ship of capital, but Irom the function of capital, as distinct from 
the definite form in which it is only inert property. This stands out 
as an immediately apparent contrast whenever he operates with 
borrowed capital, and interest and profit of enterprise therefore go 
to different persons. The profit of enterprise springs from the func- 
tion of capital in the reproduction process, hence as a result of 
the operations, the acts by which the functioning capitalist pro- 
motes this function of industrial and commercial capital. But to 
represent functioning capital is not a sinecure, like representing in- 
terest-bearing capital. On the basis of capitalist production, the 
capitalist directs the process of production and circulation. Ex- 
ploiting productive labour entails exertion, whether he exploits 

% “The profits of enterprise depend upon the net profits of capital, not the 

Jatter upon the former.” (Ramsay, Essay on the Distribution of Wealth, p. 214. 
For Ramsay net profits always mean interest.) 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 373 

it himself or has it exploited by someone else on his behalf. There- 
fore, his profit of enterprise appears to him as distinct from inter- 
est, as independent of the ownership of capital, but rather as the 
result of his function as a non-proprietor—a labourer. 

He necessarily conceives the idea for this reason that his profit 
of enterprise, far from being counterposed to wage-labour and far 
from being the unpaid labour of others, is itself rather a wage 
or wages of superintendence of labour, higher than a common la- 
bourer’s, 1) because the work is far more complicated, and 2) because 
he pays them to himself. The fact that his function as a capitalist 
consists in creating surplus-value, i.e., unpaid labour, and creat- 
ing it under the most economical conditions, is entirely Jost 
sight of in the contrast that interest falls to the share of {he capi- 
talist even when he does not perform the function of a capitalist and 
is merely the owner of capital; and that, on the other hand, profit 
of enterprise does fall to the share of the functioning capitalist even 
when he is not the owner of the capital on which he operates. He 
forgets, due to the antithetical form of the two parts into which 
profit, hence surplus-value, is divided, that both are merely parts 
of the surplus-value, and that this division alters nothing in the 
nature, origin, and way of existence of surplus-value. 

In the process of reproduction the functioning capitalist repre- 
sents capital as the property of another vis-a-vis the wage-labour- 
ers, and the money-capitalist, represented by the functioning capi- 
talist, takes a hand in exploiting labour. The fact that the invest- 
ing capitalist can perform his function of making the labourers 
work for him, or of employing means of production as capital, only 
as the personification of the means of production vis-a-vis the la- 
bourers, is forgotten in the contradiction between the function 
of capital in the reproduction process and the mere ownership of 
capital outside of the reproduction process. 

{n fact, the form of interest and profit of enterprise assumed 
by ihe two parts of profit, i.e., of surplus-value, expresses no 
telation to labour, because this relation exists only between 
labour and profit, or rather the surplus-value as a sum, a whole, 
the unity of these two parts. The proportion in which the 
profit is divided, and the different legal titles by which this 
division is sanctioned, are based on the assumption that profit 
is already in existence. If, therefore, the capitalist is the owner 
of the capital on which he operates, he pockets the whole profil, or 
surplus-value. It is absolutely immaterial to the labourer whether 
the capitalist does this, or whether he has to pay a part of it to a 
third person as ils legal proprietor. The reasons for dividing the 

374 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

profit among two kinds of capitalists thus turn imperceptibly into 
ihe reasons lor the existence of the profit, the surplus-value, that 
is to be divided, and which capital as such derives from the repro- 
duction process regardless of any subsequent division. Since in- 
terest is opposed to profil of enterprise, and profit of enterprise 
to interest, and since they are both counterposed to one another, 
but not to labour, it follows that profit of enterprise plus interest, 
ie.. profit, and further surplus-value, are derived—from what? 
From the antithetical form of ils two parts! But profit is produced 
before its division is undertaken, and before there can be any 
thought of it. 

Inlerest-bearing capital remains as such only so long as the 
loaned money is actually converted into capital and a surplus is 
produced with it, of which interest isa part. But this does not 
rule out that drawing interest, regardless of the process of pro- 
duction, is its organic property. So does labour-power preserve its 
property of producing value only so long as it is employed and ma- 
terialized in the labour-process; yet this does not argue against 
the jact that it is potentially, as a power, an activity which creates 
value. and that as such it does not spring from the process of pro- 
duction, but rather antecedes it. It is bought as such a capacity 
for creating value. One might also buy it without setting it to work 
productively; for purely personal] ends, for instance, for personal 
services, etc. The same applies to capital. It is the borrower's allair 
whether he employs it as capital, hence actually sets in motion 
its inherent property of producing surplus-value. What he pays 
for, is in either case the potential surplus-value inherently con- 
tained in capital as a commodity. 

Let us now consider profit ol enterprise in greater detail. 

Since the specific social altribute of capital under capitalist 
production—that of being property commanding the labour- 
power of anolher—becomes fixed, so that interest appears as a 
part of surplus-value produced by capital in this interrelation, 
the other part of surplus-value—profit of enterprise—must 
necessarily appear as coming not from capital as such, but from 
the process of production, separated from its specific social attri- 
bute, whose distinct mode of existence is already expressed by the 
term interest on capital. But the process of production, separated 
from capital, is simply a labour-process. Therefore, the industrial 
capitalist, as distinct from the owner of capital, does not appear 
as operating capital, but rather as a functionary irrespective of 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 375 

capital, or, asa simple agent of the labour-process in general, as a 
labourer, and indeed as a wage-labourer. 

Interest as such expresses precisely the existence of the condi- 
tions of labour as capital, in their social antithesis to labour, and 
in their transformation into personal power vis-a-vis and over 
labour. It represents the ownership of capital as a means of appro- 
priating the products of the labour of others. But it represents this 
characteristic of capital as something which belongs to it outside 
the production process and by no means is the result of the specif- 
ically capitalist attribute of this production process itself. In- 
terest represents this characteristic not as directly counterposed 
to labour, but rather as unrelated to labour, and simply as a rela- 
tionship of one capitalist to another. Hence, as an attribute out- 
side of and irrelevant to the relation of capital to labour. In in- 
terest, therefore, in that specific form of profit in which the anti- 
thetical character of capital assumes an independent form, this 
is done in such away that the antithesis is completely obliterated 
and abstracted. Interest is a relationship between two capitalists, 
not between capitalist and labourer. 

On the other hand, this form of interest lends the other portion 
of profit the qualitative form of profit of enterprise, and further of 
wages of superintendence. The specific functions which the capi- 
talist as such has to perform, and which fal! to him as distinct from 
and opposed to the labourer, are presented as mere functions of la- 
bour. He creates surplus-value not because he works as a capitalisé, 
but because he afso works, regardless of his capacity of capitalist, 
This portion of surplus-value is thus no longer surplus-value, but 
its opposite, an equivalent for labour performed. Due to the alie- 
nated character of capital, its antithesis to labour, being relegated 
to a place outside the actual process of exploitation, namely to 
the interest-bearing capital, this process of exploitation itsell 
appears as a simple labour-process in which the functioning capi- 
talist merely performs a different kind of labour than the labour- 
er. So that the labour of exploiting and the exploited labcur both 
appear identical as labour. The labour of exploiting is just as much 
labour as exploited labour. The social form of capital falls 1o 
interest, but expressed in a neutral and indifferent form. Tle 
economic function of capital falls to profit of enterprise, but ab- 
stracted from the specific capitalist character of this function. 

The same thing passes through the mind of the capitalist in this 
case as in the case of the reasons indicated in Part IJ of this book 
for compensation in the equalization to average profit. These 
reasons for compensation which enter the distribution of surplus- 

376 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

value as determinants are distorted in a capitalist’s mind to appear 
as hases of origin and the (subjective) justifications of profit itself. 

The conception of profit of enterprise as the wages of supervis- 
ing labour, arising from the antithesis of profit of enterprise to 
interest, is further strengthened by the fact that a portion of profit 
may, indeed, be separated, and is separated in reality, as wages, 
or rather the reverse, that a portion of wages appears under capi- 
talist production as integral part of profit. This portion, as Adam 
Smith correctly deduced, presents itself in pure form, independently 
and wholly separated from profit (as the sum of interest and profit 
oi enterprise), on the one hand, and on the other, from that por- 
tion of profit which remains, after interest is deducted, as profit of 
enterprise in the salary of management of those branches of busi- 
ness whose size, etc., permits of a sufficient division of labour to 
justily a special salary for a manager. 

The labour of supervision and management is naturally required 
wherever the direct process of production assumes the form of a 
combined social process, and not of the isolated labour of independ- 
ent producers.7? However, it has a double nature. 

On the one hand, all labour in which many individuals co-oper- 
ate necessarily requires a commanding will to co-ordinate and unily 
the process, and functions which apply not to partial operations 
but to the total activity of the workshop, much as that of an or- 
chestra conductor. This is a productive job, which must be per- 
formed in every combined mode of production. 

On the other hand—quite apart from any commercial depart- 
ment—this supervision work necessarily arises in all modes of 
production based.on the antithesis between the labourer, as the 
direct producer, and the owner of the means of production. The 
greater this antagonism, the greater the role played by supervi- 
sion. Hence it reaches its peak in the slave system.’* But it is in- 
dispensable also in the capitalist mode of production, since the 
production process in it is simultaneously a process by which the 
capitalist consumes labour-power. Just as in despotic states, su- 
pervision and all-round interference by the government involves 
both the performance of common activities arising from the nature 
of all communities, and the specific functions arising from the 

*? “Superintendence is here” (in the case of the farm owner) “completely dis- 
pensed with.” (J. E. Cairnes, The Slave Power, London, 1862, p- 48.) 

** “If the nature of the work requires that the workmen” (viz., the slaves) 
“should be dispersed over an extended area, the number of overseers, and, there- 
fore, the cost of the labour which requires this supervision, will be proportion- 
ately increased.” (Cairnes, 1. c.,p. 44.) 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 377 

antithesis between the government and the mass of the 
people. 

In the works of ancient writers, who had the slave system before 
them, both sides of the work of supervision are as inseparably com- 
bined in theory as they were in practice. Likewise in the works of 
modern economists, who regard the capitalist mode of production 
as absolute. On the other hand, as I shall presently illustrate with 
an example, the apologists of the modern slave system utilize the 
work of supervision quite as much as a justification of slavery, as 
the other economists do to justify the wage system. 

The vilticus in Cato’s time: “At the head of the estate with slave 
economy (familia rustica) stands the manager (villicus, derived 
from vita), who receives and expends, buys and sells, takes in- 
structions from the master, in whose absence he gives orders and 
metes out punishment.,.. The manager naturally had more free- 
dom of action than the other slaves; the Magonian books advise 
that he be permitted to marry, raise children, and have his own 
funds, and Cato recommends that he be married to the female man- 
ager; he alone probably had the prospect of winning his freedom 
from the master in the event of good behaviour. As for the rest, all 
formed a common household.... Every slave, including the man- 
ager himself, was supplied his necessities at his master’s expense at 
definite intervals and fixed rates, and had to get along on them.... 
The quantity varied in accordance with labour, which is why the 
manager, for example, whose work was lighter than the other 
slaves’, received a smaller ration than they.” (Mommsen, Rdmische 
Geschichte, 2nd ed., 1856, I, pp. 809-10.) ; 

Aristotle: “OQ yas Geonétys ix ay t xtaabar tds babiong, 
Ghd'éy th yersbae éodsov.” (“For the master’—the capitalist— 
“proves himself such not by obtaining slaves’—ownership of cap- 
ital which gives him power to buy labour-power—‘but in employ- 
ing slaves'—using labourers, nowadays wage-labourers, in 
the production process.) “Esti ¢& sit% 4 ématiy bd3y péys éysv92 
obf2 cepvéy” (“But there is nothing great or sublime about this 
science.”) “& yao tov dabhov enistazthat Get matstv, éxsivoy dei t2dtT% 
énistastat émtrdttey.” (“But whatever the slave must be able to 
perform, the master must be able to order,”) “Aro 3015 ekovata py 
ainoig xaxomately, émitomeg haptfiase: tautyy ty they, abtol Ge To- 
Litedovrat FH wihasowodsty.” (“Whenever the masters are not com- 
pelled to plague themselves with supervision, the manager assumes 
this honour, while the masters attend to aflairs of state or 
study philosophy.” (Aristotle, De republica, Bekker edition, 
Book I, 7.) 

378 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

Aristotle says in Just so many words that supremacy in the polit- 
ical and economic fields imposes the unctions of government upon 
the ruling powers, and hence that they must, in the economic field, 
know the art of consuming labour-power. And he adds that this 
supervisory work is not a matter of great moment and that for 
this reason the master leaves the “honour” of this drudgery to an 
overseer as soon as he can afford it. aed 

The work of management and supervision—so far as it is not a 
special function determined by the nature of all combined social 
labour, but rather by the antithesis between the owner of means 
of production and the owner of mere labour-power, regardless of 
whether this labour-power is purchased by buying the labourer 
himself, as it is under the slave system, or whether the labourer 
himself sells his labour-power, so that the production process also 
appears as a process by which capital consumes his labour—this 
function arising out of the servitude of the direct producers has 
all too offen been quoted to justily this relationship. And exploita- 
tion, the appropriation of the unpaid labour of others, has quite 
as citen been represented as the reward justly due to the owner of 
capital for his work; but never better than by a champion of slav- 
ery in the United States, a lawyer named O’Connor, at a meeting 
held in New York on December 19, 1859, under the slogan of “Jus- 
tice for the South.” “Now, gentlemen,” he said amid thunderous ap- 
plause, “to that condition of bondage the Negro is assigned by Na- 
ture.... He has strength, and has the power to labour; but the Na- 
ture which created the power denied to him either the intellect to 
govern, or willingness {o work.” (Applause.} “Both were denied to 
him. And that Nature which deprived him of the will to labour, 
gave him a master to coerce that will, and to make him a useful ,.. 
servant in the clime in which he was capable of living useful for 
himself and for the master who governs him.... | maintain that it 
is not injustice to leave the Negro in the condition in which Nature 
placed him, to give him a master to govern him... nor is it depriv- 
ing him of any of his rights to compel him to labour in return, and 
afford to that master just compensation for the labour and talent 
employed in governing him and rendering him useful to himself 
and to the society.” 

Now, the wage-labourer, like the slave, must have a master who 
puts him to work and rules over him. And assuming the existence 
o! this relationship of lordship and servitude, it is quite proper to 
compel the wage-labourer to produce his own wages and also the 
wages of supervision, as compensation for the labour of ruling and 
supervising him, or “just compensation for the labour and talent 

INTERFST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 379 

employed in governing him and rendering him useful to himself 
and to the society.” 

The Jabour of supervision and management, arising as it does 
out of an antithesis, out of the supremacy of capital over labour, 
and being therefore common to all modes of production based on 
class contradictions like the capitalist mode, is directly and insep- 
arably connected, also under the capitalist system, with productive 
functions which all combined social labour assigns to individuals 
as their special tasks. The wages of an epitropos, or régisseur, as he 
was called in feudal France, are entirely divorced from profit and 
assume the form of wages for skilled labour whenever the business 
is operated on a sufficiently large scale to warrant paying 
for such a manager, although, for all that, our industrial capi- 
talists are far from “attending to aflairs of state or studying 
philosophy.” 

It has already been remarked by Mr. Ure’ that it is not the in- 
dustrial capitalists, but the industrial managers who are “the soul 
of our industrial system." Whatever concerns the commercial part 
of an establishment we have already said all that is necessary in 
the preceding part. 

The capitalist mode of production has brought matters to a 
point where the work of supervision, entirely divorced from the 
ownership of capital, is always readily obtainable. It has, thereiore, 
come to be useless for the capitalist to perform it himself. An 
orchestra conductor need not own the instruments of his orchestra, 
nor is it within the scope of his duties as conductor to have anything 
to do with the “wages” of the other musicians. Co-operative facto- 
ties furnish proof that the capitalist has become no less redundant 
as a functionary in production as he himself, looking down from 
his high perch, finds the big landowner redundant. Inasmuch as 
the capitalist’s work does not originate in the purely capitalistic 
process of production, and hence does not cease on its own when 
capital ceases; inasmuch as it does not confine itself solely to the 
function of exploiting the labour of others; inasmuch as it therefore 
originates from the social form of the labour-process, from combina- 
tion and co-operation of many in pursuance of a common result, it 
is just as independent of capital as that form itself as soon as it 
has burst its capitalistic shell. To say that this labour is necessary 
as capitalistic labour, or as a function of the capitalist, only means 

* A. Ure, Philosophy of Manufactures, French translation, 1836, 1, p. 67, 
where this Pindar of the manufacturers at the same time testifies that most manu- 
facturers have not the slightest understanding of the mechanism which they set 
in) motion. 

380 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

thal the valgus is unable to conceive the forms developed in the 
lap of capitalist production, separate and free from their antitheti- 
cal capitalist character. The industrial capitalist is a worker, com- 
pared to the money-capitalist, but a worker in the sense of capitalist, 
i.e., an exploiter of the labour of others. The wage which he claims 
and pockets for this Iabour is exactly equal to the appropriated 
quantity of another’s labour and depends directly upon the rate of 
exploitation of this labour, in so far as he undertakes the effort re- 
quired for exploitation; it does not, however, depend on the degree 
ol exertion that such exploitation demands, and which he can shift 
to a manager for moderate pay. After every crisis there are enough 
ex-manufacturers in the English factory districts who will super- 
vise, for low wages, what were formerly their own factories in the 
capacity of managers of the new owners, who are frequently their 
creditors.”® 

The wages of management both for the commercial and industrial 
manager are completely isolated from the profits of enterprise in 
the co-operative factories of labourers, as well as in capitalist 
stock companies. The separation of wages of management from prol- 
its of enterprise, purely accidental at other times, is here constant. 
In a co-operative factory the antagonistic nature of the labour of 
supervision disappears, because the manager is paid by the labour- 
ers instead of representing capital counterposed to them. Stock 
companies in general—developed with the credit system—have an 
increasing tendency to separate this work of management as a func- 
tion from the ownership of capital, be it self-owned or borrowed. 
Just as the development of bourgeois society witnessed a separation 
of the functions of judges and administrators from landownership, 
whose attributes they were in feudal times. But since, on the one 
hand, the mere owner of capital, the money-capitalist, has to 
face the functioning capitalist, while money-capital itself assumes 
a social character with the advance of credit, being concentrated 
in banks and loaned out by them instead of its original owners, and 
since, on the other hand, the mere manager who has no title what- 
ever to the capital, whether through borrowing it or otherwise, 
performs all the real functions pertaining to the functioning capital- 
ist as such, only the functionary remains and the capitalist disap- 
pears as superfiuous from the production process. 

** In acase known to me, following the crisis of 1868, a bankrupt manufactur- 
er became the paid wage-labourer of his own former labourers. The factory was 
operated after the bankruptcy of its owner by a labourers’ co-operative, and its 
former owner was employed as manager.—F. £, 

INTEREST AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE 381 

It is manifest [rom the public accounts of the co-operative [acto- 
ries in England’ that—alter deducting the manager's wages, which 
form a part of the invested variable capital much the same as wages 
of otlier labourers—the profit was higher than the average profit, 
although at times they paid a much higher interest than did private 
manulacturers. The source of greater profits in all these cases was 
greater economy in the application of constant capital. What in- 
terests us in this, however, is the fact that here the average profit 
(=interest+-profit of enterprise) presents itself actually and pal- 
pably as a magnitude wholly independent of the wages of manage- 
ment. Since the profit was higher here than average profit, the 
profit of enterprise was also higher than usual. 

The same situalion is observed in relation to some capitalist 
stock companies, such as joint-stock banks. The London and West- 
minster Bank paid an annual dividend of 30% in 1863, while the 
Union Bank of London and others paid 15%. Aside [rom the di- 
tectors’ salary the interest paid for deposits is here deducted from 
gross profit. The high profit is to be explained here by the moderate 
proportion of paid-in capital to deposits. For instance, in the case 
of the London and Westminster Bank, in 1863: paid-in capital, 
£1,000,000; deposits, 14,540,275. As for the Union Bank of 
London, in 1863: paid-in capital, £600,000; deposits, £12, 384, 173. 

Profit of enterprise and wages of supervision, or management, 
were confused originally due to the antagonistic form assumed in 
respect to interest by the surplus of profit. This was further promoted 
by the apologetic aim of representing profit not as a surplus-value 
derived from unpaid labour, but as the capitalist’s wages for work 
performed by him. This was met on the part of socialists by a de- 
mand lo reduce profit actually to what it pretended to be theoret- 
ically, namely, mere wages of supervision. And this demand was 
all the more obnoxious to theoretical embellishment, the more 
these wages ol supervision, like any other wage, found their defi- 
nite level and definite market-price, on the one hand, with the de- 
velopment of a numerous class of iridustrial and commercial man- 
agers,’* and the more they fell, on the other, like all wages for skilled 
labour, with the general development which reduces the cost of 

7 The accounts quoled here go no (furlher (han 1864, since the above was 
wrillen in 1865.—F. #. 

78 “Masters are labourers as well as their journeymen. In this character (heir 
interest is precisely the same as that of their men.But they are also either capital- 
ists, or the agents of the capitalists, and in this respect their interest is decidedly 
opposed {o the interests of the workmen" (p. 27). “The wide spread of education 

“ISION PROFIT 
382 DIVISION OF 

production of specially trained labour-power.”* With the develop- 
ment of co-operation on the part of the labourers, and of stock enter- 
prises on the part of the bourgeoisie, even the last pretext for the 
coniusion of profit of enterprise and wages ol management was re- 
moved, and profit appeared also in practice as it undeniably ap- 
peared in theory, as mere surplus-value, a value for which no equiv- 
alent was paid, as realized unpaid labour. It was then seen that the 
functioning capitalist really exploits labour, and that the fruit of 
his exploitation, when working with borrowed capital, was divid- 
ed into interest and profit of enterprise, a surplus of profit over 
interest. 

On the basis of capitalist production a new swindle develops in 
stock enterprises with respect to wages of management, in that 
boards of numerous managers or directors are placed above the 
actual director, for whom supervision and management serve only 
as a pretext to plunder the stockholders and amass wealth. Very 
curious details concerning this are to be found in The City or the 
Physiology of London Business; with Sketches on ’Change, and the 
Coffee Houses, London, 1845. “What bankers and merchants gain 
by the direction of eight or nine different companies, may be seen 
from the following illustration: The private balance sheet of Mr. 
Timothy Abraham Curtis, presented to the Court of Bankruptcy 
when that gentleman failed, exhibited a sample of the income 
netted from directorship ... between £800 and £ 900 a year. Mr. 
Curtis having been associated with the Courts of the Bank of 
England, and the East India House, it was considered quite a 
plum for a public campany to acquire his services in the board- 
room” (pp. 81,82). The remuneration of the directors of such com- 
panies lor each weekly meeting is at least one guinea. The proceed- 
ings oi the Court of Bankruptcy show that these wages of super- 
vision were, as a rule, inversely proportional to the actua! super- 
vision performed by these nominal directors. 

among the journeymen mechanics of this country diminishes daily the value of 
the labour and skill of almost all masters and employers by increasing the number 
of persons who possess their peculiar knowledge” (p. 30, Hodgskin, Labour De- 
fended Against the Claims of Capital, etc., London, 1825). 

** “The general relaxation of conventional barriers, the increased facilities 
of education tend to bring down the wages of skilled labour instead of raising those 
ig aa St. Mill, Principles of Political Economy, 2nd ed., London, 

bh. 2p: E 

CHAPTER XXIV 

EXTERNALIZATION OF THE RELATIONS OF CAPITAL 
IN THE FORM OF INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 

The relations of capital assume their most externalized and most 
fetish-like form in interest-bearing capital. We have here M—M’, 
money creating more money, sell-expanding value, without the 
process that effectuates these two extremes. In merchant's capital, 
M—C—M’", there is at least the general form of the capitalistic 
movement, although it confines itself solely to the sphere of circu- 
lation, so that profit appears merely as profit derived from aliena- 
tion; but it is at least seen to be the product of a social relation, not 
the product of a mere (hing. The form of merchant's capital at least 
presents a process, aunity of opposing phases, a movement 
that breaks up into two opposite actions—the purchase and 
the sale of commodities. This is obliteraled in M—M’, the form 
of interest-bearing capital. For instance, if £1,000 are loaned 
out by a capitalist at a rate of interest of 5%, the value of 
£1,000 as a capital for one year=C+Ci’, where C is the capital 
and i’the rate of interest. Hence, 5% =*/45="/,., and 1,000+ 1,000 x 
x '!,,=£1,050. The value of £1,000 as capital =£1,050, i.e., capital 
is not a simple magnitude. It is a relationship of magnitudes, a re- 
lationship of the principal sum as a given value to itself as a self- 
expanding value, as a principal sum which has produced a surplus- 
value. And capital as such, as we have seen, assumes this forin of a 
directly self-expanding value for all active capitalists, whether 
they operate on their own or borrowed capital. 

M—M’. We have here the original starting-point of capital, money 
in the formula M—C—M’‘ reduced to its two extremes M—M’, in 
which M’=M+AM, money creating more money. It is the primary 
and general formula of capital reduced to a meaningless condensa- 
tion. It is ready capital, a unity of the process of production and 
the process of circulation, and hence capital yielding a definite sur- 
plus-value in a particular period of lime. In the form of interest- 

384 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

bearing capital this appears directly, unassisted by the processes of 
production and circulation. Capital appears as a mysterious and 
self-creating source of interest—the source of its own increase. The 
thing (money, commodity, value) is now capital even as a mere 
thing, and capital appears as a mere thing. The result of the entire 
process of reproduction appears as a property inherent in the thing 
itself. It depends on the owner of the money, i.e., of the commodity 
in its continually exchangeable form, whether he wants to spend it 
as money or loan it out as capital. In interest-bearing capital, there- 
fore, this automatic fetish, self-expanding value, money generating 
money, are brought out in their pure state and in this form it 
no longer bears the birth-marks of its origin. The social relation is 
consummated in the relation of a thing, of money, to itself. Instead 
of the actual transformation of money into capital, we see here 
only form without content. As in the case of labour-power, the use- 
value of money here is itscapacity of creating value—a value great- 
er than it contains. Money as money is potentially self-expanding 
value and is loaned out as such—which is the form of sale for this 
singular commodity. It becomes a property of money to generate 
value and yield interest, much as it is an attribute of pear-trees to 
bear pears. And the money-lender sells his money as just such an 
interest-bearing thing. But that is not all. The actually functioning 
capital, as we have seen, presents itself in such a light, that it seems 
to yield interest not as a functioning capital, but as capilal in 
itself, as money-capital. 

This, too, becomes distorted. While interest is only a portion of 
the profit, i.e., of the surplus-value, which the functioning capital- 
ist squeezes out of the labourer, it appears now, on the contrary, 
as though interest were the typical! product of capital, the primary 
matter, and profit, in the shape of profit of enterprise, were a 
mere accessory and by-product of the process of reproduction. 
Thus we get the fetish form of capital and the conception of fetish 
capital. In M—M’ we have the meaningless form of capital, the per- 
version and objectification of production relations in their highest 
degree, the interest-bearing form, the simple form of capital, in 
which it antecedes its own process of reproduction. It is the capacity 
of money, or of a commodity, to expand its own value independently 
of reproduction—which is a mystification of capital in its most 
flagrant form. 

For vulgar political economy, which seeks to represent capital 
as an independent source of value, of value creation, this form is 
naturally a veritable find, a form in which the source of profit 
is no longer discernible, and in which the result of the capitalist 

EXTERNALIZATION OF RELATIONS OF CAPITAL 385 

process of production—divorced from the process—acquires an 
independent existence. 

It is not until capital is money-capital that it becomes a commodi- 
ty, whose capacity for self-expansion has a definite price quoted 
every time in every prevailing rate of interest. 

As interest-bearing capital, and particularly in its direct form of 
interest-bearing money-capital (the other forms of interest-bearing 
capital, which do not concern us here, are derivatives of this form 
and presuppose its existence), capita! assumes its pure fetish form, 
M—M' being the subject, the saleable thing. Firséty, through its 
continua! existence as money, a form, in which all its specific attri- 
butes are obliterated and its real elements invisible. For money is 
precisely that form in which the distinctive features of commodities 
as use-values are obscured, and hence also the distinctive features 
of the industrial capitals which consist of these commodities and 
conditions of their production. It is that form, in which value—in 
this case capital—exists as an independent exchange-value. In 
the reproduction process of capital, the money-form is but tran- 
sient—a mere point ol transit. But in the money-market capital al- 
ways exists in this form. Secondly, the surplus-value produced by 
it, here again in the form of money, appears as an inherent part of 
it. As the growing process is to trees, so generating money (ts%2:) 
appears innate in capital in its form of money-capital. 

In interest-bearing capital the movement of capital is contracted. 
The intervening process is omitted. In this way, a capital—=1,000 
is fixed as a thing, which in itself=1,100, and which is transformed 
alter acertain period into L,100 just as wine stored in a cellar im- 
proves its use-value alter a certain period. Capital is now a thing, 
but as a thing it is capital. Money is now pregnant. As soon as it is 
loaned out, or invested in the reproduction process (inasmuch 
as it yields interest to the functioning capitalist as its owner, 
separate from profit of enterprise), interest on it grows, no matter 
whether it is awake or asleep, is at home or abroad, by day or by 
night. Thus interest-bearing money-capital (and all capital is 
money-capital in terms of its value, or is considered as tle expres- 
sion of money-capital) fulfils the most fervent wish of the 
hoarder. 

It is this ingrown existence of interest in money-capital as in a 
thing (this is how the production of surplus-value through capital 
appears here), which occupies Luther’s attention so thoroughly in 
his naive onslaught against usury. After demonstrating that inter- 
est may be demanded if the failure to repay a loan on a definite 
date to a_ lender who himself required it to make some payment, 

14 — 9757 

386 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

caused a loss to him, or resulted in his missing an opportunity to 
make a profit on a bargain, for instance, in buying a garden, Lu- 
ther continues: “Now that I have loaned you them (100 gulden), 
you cause me a double loss due to my not being able to pay on the 
one hand nor buy onthe other, so that I have to lose on both sides, 
and this is called duplex interesse, dumni emergentis et lucri cessan- 
fis.... On hearing that John sustained losses on his loan of 100 gul- 
den and demands just damages, they rush in and charge double on 
every 100 gulden, such double reimbursement, namely, for the 
loss due to non-payment and to inability to make a profit on a bar- 
gain, just as though these 100 gulden Aad the double loss grown on 
to them, so that whenever they have 100 gulden, they loan them out 
and charge for two losses, which they have not at all sustained... 
Therefore you area usurer, who takes damages out of his neighbour’s 
money for an imaginary loss that you did not sustain at all, and 
which you canneither prove nor calculate. This sort of loss is called 
by the jurists non verum, sed phaniasticum interesse. It is a loss 
which each conjures up for himself.... It will not do to say, there- 
fore, that there could have been losses because I could not have been 
able to pay or buy. Else it would mean ex contingente necessarium, 
which is making something out of a thing that is not, and a thing 
that is uncertain into a thing that is absolutely sure. Would 
not such usury devour the world in a few years?... If an un- 
happy accident befalls him against his will, and he must recover 
from it, he may demand damages for it, but it is different in trade 
and just the reverse. There they scheme to profit at the expense of 
their needy neighbours, how to amass wealth and get rich, to be lazy 
and idle and live in luxury on the labour of others, without any care, 
danger, and loss. To sit by the stove and let my 100 gulden gather 
wealth for me in the country and yet keep them in my pocket, be- 
cause they areonly loaned, without any danger or risk—my Iriend, 
who would not like that?” (Martin Luther, An die Pfarherrn wider 
den Wucher zu predigen, eic., Wittenberg, 1540.) 

The conception of capital as a self-reproducing and self- 
expanding value, lasting and growing eternally by virtue of its 
innate properties—hence by virtue of the hidden quality of scholas- 
ticists—has led to the fabulous fancies of Dr. Price, which outdo 
by far the fantasies of the alchemists; fancies, in which Pitt be- 
lieved in all earnest, and which he used as pillars of his financial 
administration in his laws concerning the sinking fund. 

“Money bearing compound interest increases at first slowly. But, 
the rate of increase being continually accelerated, it becomes in 
some time so rapid, as to mock all the powers of the imagination. 

EXTERNALIZATION OF RELATIONS OF CAPITAL 387 

One penny, put out at our Saviour’s birth to 5 per cent compound 
interest, would, before this time, have increased to a greater sum 
than would be contained in a hundred and fifty millions of earths, 
all solid gold. But if put out to simple interest, it would, in the same 
time, have amounted to no more than seven shillings and four pence 
half-penny. Our government has hitherto chosen to improve money 
in the last, rather than the first of these ways,”®° 

His fancy flies still higher in his Observations on Reversionary 
Payments, etc., London, 1772. There we read: “A shilling put out 
to 6% compound interest at our Saviour’s birth” (presumably in 
the Temple of Jerusalem) “would ... have increased to a greater sum 
than the whole solar system could hold, supposing it a spliere equal 
in diameter to the diameter of Saturn's orbit.” “A state need never 
therefore be under any difficulties; for with the smallest savings 
it may in as little time as its interest can require pay off the largest 
debts” (pp. XIII, XLV). What a pretty theoretical introduction to 
the national debt of England! 

Price was simply dazzled by the gargantuan dimensions obtained 
in a geometrical progression. Since he took no note of the condi- 
tions of reproduction and labour, and regarded capital as a self- 
regulating automaton, as a mere number thiat increases itself (just 
as Malthus did with respect to population in his geometrical pro- 
gression), he was struck by the thought that he had found the law 
of its growth in the formula s=c(1+i)", in which s=the sum of 

“0 Richard Price, An Appeal to the Public on the Subject of the National 
Debt, 2nd ed., London, 1774. He cracks the naive joke: “It is borrowing money 
at simple interest, in order to improve it at compound interest.” (R. Hamilton, 
An Inquiry into the Rise and Progress of the National Debt of Great Britain, 2nd 
ed., Edinburgh, 1814, p. 139.) According to this, borrowing would be the safest 
means also for private people to gather wealth. But if 1 borrow £100 at 5% annual 
interest, I have to pay £5 at the end of the year, and even if the loan lasts for 100 
milion years, | have meanwhile only £100 to loan every year and £5 to pay every 
year. I can never manage by this process to loan £105 when borrowing £100. 
And how am | going to pay 5%? By new laans, or, if it is the state, by new 
taxes. Now, if the industrial capitalist borrows money, and his profit amounls to, 
say, 15%, he may pay 5% interest, spend 5% for his private expenses (although 
his appetite grows with lis income), and capitalize 5%. In this case, 15% is the 
precondition for paying continually 5% interest. If this process continues, the 
tate of profit, for the reasons indicated in former chapters, will [all from 15% 
to, say, 10%. But Price entirely forgets that {he interest of 5% presupposes a 
rate of profit of 15%, and assumes it to continue with the accumulation of capital. 
He has nothing whatsoever to do with the actual process of accumulatian, but 
rather only wilh lending money and getting it back with compound interest. How 
that is accomplished is immaicrial to him, since it is the innate property of 
interest-bearing capital. 

14* 

388 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

capital+-compound interest, c=advanced capital, i=rate of inter- 
est (expressed in aliquot parts of 100) and n stands for the number 
of years in which this process takes place. 

Pitt takes Dr. Price’s mystification quite seriously. In 1786 the 
House of Commons had resolved to raise £1 million for the public 
weal. According to Price, in whom Pitt believed, there was, of course, 
no better way than to tax the people, so as to “accumulate” this 
sum after raising it, and thus to spirit away the national debt through 
ihe mystery of compound interest. The above resolution of the 
House of Commons was soon followed up by Pitt with a law which 
ordered the accumulation of £250,000,“until, with the expired annui- 
ties, the jund should lave grown to £4,000,000 annually.” (Act 26, 
George III, Chap. XXXI.) In his speech of 1792, in which Pitt 
proposed that the amount devoted to the sinking fund be increased, 
he mentioned machines, credit, etc., among the causes of England’s 
commercial supremacy, but as “the most wide-spread and enduring 
cause, that of accumulation.” This principle, he said, was completely 
developed in the work of Smith, that genius ... and this accumula- 
tion, he continued, was accomplished by laying aside at least a 
portion of the annual profit for the purpose of increasing the prin- 
cipal, which was to be employed in the same manner the following 
year, and which thus yielded a continual profit. With Dr. Price’s 
aid Pitt thus converts Smith's theory of accumulation into enrich- 
ment of a nation by means of accumulating debts, and thus arrives 
at the pleasant progression of an infinity of loans—loans to pay 
loans. 

It had already been noted by Josiah Child, the father of modern 
banking, that £100 at 10% would produce in 70 years by compound 
interest £102,400. (Trailé sur le commerce, etc., par J. Child, 
traduit, etc., Amsterdam et Berlin, 1754, p.115, Written 
in 1669.) 

How thoughtlessly Dr. Price’s conception is applied by modern 
economists, is shown in the following passage from the Economist; 
“Capital, with compound interest on every portion of capital saved, 
is so all-engrossing that all the wealth in the world from which in- 
come is derived, has long ago become the interest of capital..., All 
rent is now the payment of interest on capital previously invested 
in the land.” (Economist, July 19, 1859.) In its capacity of interest- 
bearing capital, capital claims the ownership of all wealth which 
can ever be produced, and everything it has’ received so far is but an 
instalment for its all-engrossing appetite. By its innate laws, all 

surplus-labour which the human race can ever perform belongs to 
it. Moloch, 

EXTERNALIZATION OF RELATIONS OF CAPITAL 389 

In conclusion, the following hodge-podge by the romantic Miil- 
ler: “Dr. Price’s immense increase of compound interest, or of the 
self-accelerating forces of man, presupposes an undivided, or uninter- 
rupted, uniform application for several centuries, if they are to 
produce such enormous eflects. As soon as capital is divided, cut 
up into several independently growing shoots, the total process of 
accumulating forces begins anew. Nature has distributed over a span 
of about 20 to 25 years the progression of energy which falls on an 
average to the share of every labourer (!). After the lapse of this time 
the labourer leaves his career and must transfer the capital accu- 
mulated by the compound interest of labour to a new labourer, 
mostly distributing it among several labourers or children. These 
must first learn to activate and apply their share of capital, before 
they can draw any actual compound interest on it. Furthermore, 
an enormous quantity of capital gained by civil society even in the 
most restless communities, is gradually accumulated over many 
years and not employed for any immediate expansion of labour. 
Instead, as soon as an appreciable sum is gathered together, it is 
transferred to another individual, a labourer, bank or state, under 
the head of a Joan. And the receiver then sets the capital into actu- 
al motion and draws compound interest on it, so that he can easily 
pledge to pay simple interest to the lender. Finally, the law of 
consumption, greed, and waste opposes those huge progressions, in 
which man’s powers and their products would multiply if the law 
of production, or thrift, were alone effective.” (A. Miller, Elemente 
der Staatskunst, III, pp. 147-49.) 

It is impossible to concoct a more hair-raising absurdity in so few 
lines. Leaving aside the droll confusion of Jabourer and capitalist, 
value of labour-power and interest on capital, etc., the charging of 
compound interest is supposed to be explained by the fact that capi- 
tal is loaned out to bring in compound interest. The method em- 
ployed by our Miller is thoroughly characteristic of the romanticism 
in all walks of life. It is made up of current prejudices, skimmed from 
the most superficial semblance of things. This incorrect and trite 
content should then be “exalted” and rendered sublime through a 
mystifying mode of expression. 

The process of accumulation of capital may be conceived as an 
accumulation of compound interest in the sense that the portion of 
profit (surplus-value) which is reconverted into capital, i.e, 
serves to absorb more surplus-labour, may be called interest. 
But: 

1) Aside from all incidental interference, a large part of available 
capital is constantly more or less depreciated in the course of the 

390 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

reproduction process, because the value of commodities is not deter- 
mined by the labour-time originally expended in their production, 
but by the labour-time expended in their reproduction, and this 
decreases continually owing to the development of the social pro- 
ductivity of labour. On a higher level of social productivity, all 
available capital appears, for this reason, to be the result of a rela- 
tively short period of reproduction, instead of a long process of ac- 
cumulation of capital.*' : 

9) As demonstrated in Part III of this book, the rate of profit de- 
creases in proportion to the mounting accumulation of capital and 
the correspondingly increasing productivity of social labour, which 
is expressed precisely in the relative and progressive decrease of 
the variable as compared to the constant portion of capital. To pro- 
duce the same rate of profit after the constant capital set in motion 
by one labourer increases ten-fold, the surplus labour-time would 
have to increase ten-fold, and soon the total labour-time, and finally 
the entire 24 hours of a day, would not suffice, even if whally appro- 
priated by capital. The idea that the rate of profit does not shrink 
is, however, the basis of Price’s progression and in general the basis 
of “all-engrossing capital with compound interest.”** 

The identity of surplus-value and surplus-labour imposes a qual- 
itative limit upon the accumulation of capital. This consists of the 
tofal working-day, and the prevailing development of the productive 
forces and of the population, which limits the number of simulta- 
neously exploitable working-days. But if one conceives of surplus- 
value in the meaningless form of interest, the limit is merely quanti- 
tative and defies all fantasy. 

Now, theconcept of capital as a fetish reaches its height in inter- 
est-bearing capital, being a conception which attributes to the 
accumulated product of labour, and at that in the fixed form of 
money, the inherent secret power, as an automaton, of creating 
surplus-value in geometrical progression, so that the accumulated 
product of labour, as the Economist thinks, has long discounted 
all the wealth of the world for all time as belonging to it and right- 
fully coming to it. The product of past labour, the past labour 
itself, is here pregnant in itself with a portion of present or future 

S See Mill and Carey, and Roscher’s mistaken commentary on this score. 

It isclear, that no labour, no productive power, no ingenuity, and 
no art, can answer the overwhelming demands of compound interest. But all 
saving is made from the revenue of the capitalist, so that actually these de- 
mands are constantly made and as constantly the productive power of labour 
refuses to satisfy them. A sort of balance is, therefore, constantly struck.” 
(Labour Defended Against the Claims of Capitat, p. 23. By Hodgskin.) 

EXTERNALIZATION OF RELATIONS OF CAPITAL 991 

living surplus-labour. We know, however, that in reality the preser- 
vation, and to that extent also the reproduction of the value of 
products of past labour is only the result of their contact with living 
labour, and secondly, that the domination of the products of past 
labour over living surplus-labour lasts only as long as the relations 
of capital, which rest on those particular social relations in which 
past labour independently and overwhelmingly dominates over liv- 
ing labour. 

CHAPTER XXV 
CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 

An exhaustive analysis of the credit system and of the instru- 
ments which it creates for its own use (credit-money, etc.) lies be- 
yond our plan. We merely wish to dwell here upon a few particular 
points, which are required to characterize the capitalist mode of 
production in general. We shall deal only with commercial and bank 
credit. The connection between the development of this form of 
credit and that of public credit will not be considered here. 

I have shown earlier (Buch I, Kap. III, 3, b)* how the function of 
money as a means of payment, and therewith a relation of creditor 
and debtor between the producer and trader of commodities, de- 
velop from the simple circulation of commodities. With the develop- 
ment of commerce and of the capitalist mode of production, which 
produces solely with an eye to circulation, this natural basis of the 
credit system is extended, generalized, and worked out. Money serves 
here, by and large, merely as a means of payment, i.e., commodi- 
ties are not sold Jor money, but for a written promise to pay for 
them at a certain date. For brevity’s sake, we may put all these prom- 
issory notes under the general head of bills of exchange. Such bills 
of exchange, in their turn, circulate as means of payment until the 
day on which they fall due; and they form the actual commercial 
money. Inasmuch as they ultimately neutralize one another through 
the balancing of claims and debts, they act absolutely as money, 
although there is no eventual transformation into actual money. 
Just as these mutual advances of producers and merchants make up 
the real foundation of credit, so does the instrument of their circu- 
lation, the bill of exchange, form the basis of credit-money proper, 
of bank-notes, etc. These do not rest upon the circulation of money, 
be it metallic or government-issued paper money, but rather upon 
the circulation of bills of exchange. 

* English edition: Ch. II], 3, b.—Ed. 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 393 

W. Leatham (banker of Yorkshire) writes in his Letéers on the Curren 
ed., London, 1840: “| find, then, the amount for the whole of the year of io 
to be $528,493,842" (he assumed that the foreign bills of exchange made up 
about one-filth of the total) “and the amount of bills out at one time in the above 
year, to be £132,123,460" (p. 56). The bills of exchange make up “one component 
part greater in amount than all the rest put together” (p. 3). “This enormous 
superstructure of bills of exchange rests (!) upon the base formed by the amount of 
bank-notes and gold, and when, by events, this base becomes too much nar- 
towed, its solidity and very existence is endangered” (p. 8).“If I estimate the whole 
currency” (he means ol the bank-notes) “and the amount ol the liabilities of the 
Bank and country bankers, payable on demand, | find a sum of 153 million, 
which, by law, can be converted into gold... and the amount of gold to meet this 
demand” only 14 million (p. 11). “The bills of exchange are not ... placed under 
any control, except by preventing the abundance of money, excessive and low 
rates of interest or discount, which create a part of them, and encourage their great 
and dangerous expansion. It is impossible to decide what part arises out of real 
bond fide transactions, such as actual bargain and sale, or what part is fictitious 
and mere accommodation paper, that is, where one bill of exchange is drawn to 
take up another running, in order to raise a fictitious capital, by creating so much 
currency. In times of abundance and cheap money this ] know reaches an enormous 
amount” (pp. 43-44). J. W. Bosanquet, Metallic, Paper and Credit Currency, 
London, 1842: “An average amount of payments to the extent of upwards of 
£3,000,000 is settled through the Clearing House (where the London bankers 
exchange due bills and filed cheques) every day of business in the year, and the 
daily amount of money required [or the purpose is little more than $200,000" 
(p. 86). (In 1889, the total turnover of the Clearing House amounted to £7,618°/, 
million, which, in roughly 300 business days, averages £25'/, million daily.— 
F. E.| "Bills of exchange act undoubtedly as currency, independent of money,” 
inasmuch as they transfer property from hand to hand by endorsement (p. 92). 
It may be assumed that “upon an average there are two endorsements upon every 
bill in circulation, and... each bill performs two payments before it becomes due. 
Upon this assumption it would appear, that by endorsement alone property 
changed hands, by means of bills of exchange, to the value of twice five hundred 
and twenty-eight million, or £1,056,000,000, being at the rate of more than 

3,000,000 per day, in the course of the year 1839. We may safely therefore con- 
-tlude, that deposits and bills of exchange together, periorm the functions of 
money, by transferring property [rom hand to hand without the aid of money, 
fo an extent daily of not less than $18,000,000” (p. 93). 

Tooke says the following about credit in general: “Credit, in its most simple 
expression, is the confidence which, well, or ill-founded, leads a person to en- 
trust another with a certain amount of capital, in money, or in goods computed 
_at a value in money agreed upon, and in each case payable at the expiration 
of a fixed term. In the case where the capital is lent in money, that is whether 
-in bank-notes, or in acash credit, or in an order upon a correspondent, an addition 
for the use of the capital of so much upon every $100 is made to the amount 
to be repaid. In the case of goods the value of which is agreed in terms of money, 
constituting a sale, the sum stipulated to be repaid includes a consideration 
for the use of the capital and for the risk, till the expiration of the period 
fixed for payment. Written obligations of payment at fixed dates mostly accom- 
pany these credits, and the obligations or promissory notes alter date being 
transferable, form the means by which the lenders, if they have occasion for 
the use of their capital, in the shape whether of money or goods, before the 
expiration of the term of the bills they hold, are mostly enabled to borrow or 
to buy on lower terms, by having their own credit strengthened by the names 

394 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

on the bills in addition to their own.” (/nqutry into the Currency Prin- 
ciple, p. 87.) ; 

Ch. Coquelin, Du Crédit et des Banques dans I'Industrie, Revue des Deux 
Mondes, 1842, Tame 31: “In every country the majority of credit transactions 
takes place within the circle of industrial relalions.... The producer of the 
raw material advances it to the proccssing manufacturer, and receives [rom the 
latter a promise to pay ona certain day. The manufacturer, having completed 
his share of the work, in his turn advances his product on similar terms to 
another manufacturer, who has to process it further, and in this way credit 
stre(ches on and on, from one to the other, right up to the consumer. 
The wholesale dealer gives the retailer commodities on credit, while receiving 
credit fram a manufacturer or commission agent. All borrow with one hand 
and lend with the other, sometimes money, but more frequently products. In 
this manner an incessant exchange of advances, which camibine and intersect 
in all directions, takes place in industrial relations. The development of credit 
consists precisely in this multiplication and growth of mutual advances, and 
therein is the real seat of its power.” 

The other side of the credit syslem is connecled with the develop- 
ment of money-dealing, which, of course, keeps step under capital- 
ist production with the development of dealing in commodity. 
We have seen in the preceding part (Chap. XIX) how the care of 
the reserve funds of businessmen, the technical operations of receiv- 
ing and disbursing money, of international payments, and thus 
of the bullion trade, are concentraled in the hands of the money- 
dealers. The other side of the credit system—the management of 
interest-bearing capital, or money-capital, develops alongside this 
money-dealing as a special function of the money-dealers. Borrow- 
ing and lending money becomes their particular business. They act 
as middlemen between the actual lender and the borrower of money- 
capital. Generally speaking, this aspect of the banking business 
consists of concentrating large amounts of the loanable money-capi- 
lal in the bankers’ hands, so that, in place of the individual money- 
lender, the bankers confront the industrial capitalists and commer- 
cial capitalists as representatives of all money-lenders. They become 
the general managers of money-capital. On the other hand by borrow- 
ing for the entire world of commerce, they concentrate all*he bor- 
rowers vis-a-vis al] the lenders. A bank represents a centralization 
of money-capital, of the lenders, on the one hand, and on the other 
a centralization of the borrowers. Its profit is generally made by 
borrowing at a lower rate of interest than it receives in loaning. 

The loanable capital which the banks have at their disposal streams 
to them in various ways. In the first place, being the cashiers 
of the industrial capitalists, all the money-capital which every 
producer and merchant must have as a reserve fund, or receives in 
Payment, is concentrated in their hands. These -[unds are thus con- 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 305 

verted into loanable money-capital. In this way, the reserve fund of 
the commercial world, because it is concentrated in a common treas- 
ury, is reduced to its necessary minimum, and a portion of the 
money-capital which would otherwise have to lie slumbering as a 
reserve fund, is loaned out and serves as interest-bearing capital. 
In the second place, the loanable capital of the banks is formed by 
the deposits of money-capitalists who entrust them with the busi- 
ness of loaning them out. Furthermore, with the development of the 
banking system, and particularly as soon as banks came to pay inter- 
est on deposits, money savings and the temporarily idle money of all 
classes were deposited with them. Small amounts, each in itself in- 
capable of acting in the capacity of money-capital, merge together 
into large masses and thus form a money power. This aggreyation 
of small amounts must be distinguished as a specific function of the 
banking system from its go-between activities between the money- 
capitalists proper and the borrowers. In the final analysis, the rev- 
enues, which are usually but gradually consumed, are also deposited 
with the banks. 

The loan is made (we refer here strictly to commercial credit) by 
discounting bills of exchange—by converting bills of exchange into 
money before they come due—and by advances of various kinds: 
direct advances on personal credit, loans against securities, such as 
interest-bearing paper, government paper, stocks of all sorts, 
and, notably, overdrafts against bills of lading, dock warrants, and 
other certified titles of ownership of commodities and overdrawing 
deposits, etc. 

The credit given by a banker may assume various forms, such as 
bills of exchange on other banks, cheques on them, credit accounts 
of the same kind, and finally, if the bank is entitled to issue notes— 
bank-notes of the bank itself. A bank-note is nothing but a draft 
upon a banker, payable at any time to the bearer, and given by the 
banker in place of private drafts. This last form of credit appears 
particularly important and striking to the layman, first, because 
this form of credit-money breaks out of the confines of mere commer- 
cial circulation into general circulation, and serves there as money; 
and because in most countries the principal banks issuing notes, 
being a peculiar mixture of national and private banks, actually 
have the national credit to back them, and their notes are more or 
less legal tender; because it is apparent here that the banker dea!s 
in credit itself, a bank-note being merely a circulating token of cred- 
it. But the banker also has to do with credit in all its other forms, 
even when he advances the cash money deposited with him. In fact, 
a bank-note simply represents the coin of wholesale trade, and it is 

396 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

= 

always the deposit which carries the most weight with banks. The 
best proof of this is furnished by the Scottish banks. 

Special credit institutions, like special forms of banks, need no 
further consideration for our purpose. 

“The business of bankers ... may be divided into two branches.... One branch 
of the banker's business is to collect capital from those who have not immediate 
employment for it, and to distribute or transfer it to those who have. The other 
branch is to receive deposits of the incomes of their customers, and to pay out 
the amount, as it is wanted forexpenditure by the latter in the objects of their 
consumption... The former being a circulation of capifa/, the latter of curren- 
cy....” One “relates to the concentration of capital on the one hand and the dis- 
tribution of it on the other,” the other “is employed in administering the cir- 
culation for local purpases of the district.” Tooke, {nguiry into the Currency 
ae pp. 36, 37. We shall revert to this passage later, im Chapter 
XXVIII. 

Reports of Committees, Vol. VIII. Commercial Distress, Vol. II, Part 1, 
1847-48, Minutes of Evidence. (Further quoted as Commercial Distress, 1847- 
48.) In the forties, when discounting bills of exchange in London, 21-day drafts 
of one bank on another were often accepted in lieu of bank-notes. (Testimony of 
J. Feas2, country banker, Nos. 4636 and 4645.) According to the same report ,kank- 
ers were in the habit of giving such bills of exchange regularly in payment 
to their customers whenever money was tight. If the receiver wanted bank-notes, 
he had to rediscount this bill. For the banks this amounted to a privilege of 
coining money. Messrs. Jones, Loyd and Co. made payments in this way “Irom 
time immemorial,” as soon as money was scarce and the rale of interest rose 
above 5%. The customer was glad to get such banker’s bills because bills 
from Jones, Loyd and Co. were easier discounted thanhis own; besides, they 
often passed through twenty {o thirly hands. (/did., Nos. 901 to 904, 905, 992.) 

All these forms serve to make the payments claim transferable.—“There is 
scarcely any shape into which credit can be cast, in which it will not at times be 
called to perform the functions of money; and whether that shape be a bank- 
note, or a bill of exchange, or a banker's cheque, the process is in every essential 
Particular {he same, and the result is the same.” Fullarton, On the Regulation of 
Currencies, 2nd ed., London, 1845, p. 38.—“Bank-notes are the small change 
of credit” (p. 51). 

The following from J. W. Gilbart’s The History and Principles of Bankin 
London, 1834: “The trading capital of a bank may be deldedants ts parte 
the invested capital, and the borrowed banking capital” (p. 117). “There are three 
ways of raising a banking or borrowed capital. First, by receiving deposits; second- 
ly, by the issuing of notes; thirdly, by the drawing of bills. If a person will 
lend me £100 for nothing, and ! lend that £100 to another person at four per 
cent interest, then, in the course of a year, [ shal! gain £4 by the transaction. 
Again, if a person will take my ‘promise to pay,’” ("l promise to pay” is the 
aoe formula for English bank-notes) “and bring it back to me at the end 
ii the year, and pay me four per cent forit, just the same as though I had 
ue him 100 sovereigns, then I shall gain £4 by that transaction; and again, 
if a person in a country town brings me £100 on condition that. twenty-one 
days afterwards, I shall pay the same amount to a person in London, then what- 
ever interest I can make of the money during lhe twenty-one days, will 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 397 

be my profit. This is a fair representation of the Operations of banking, and 
of the way in which a banking capital is created by means of deposits, notes, 
and bills” (p. 117). “The profits of a banker are generally in proportion 
to the amount of his banking or borrowed capital... To ascertain the rest 
profit of a bank, the interest upon the invested capital should be deducted 
from the gross profit, and what remains is the banking profit” (p.118). “The 
advances of bankers to their customers are made with other people's money" (p. 146). 
“Precisely those bankers who do not issue notes, create a banking capital by the 
discounting of bills. They render their discounts subservient ta the increase 
of their deposits. The London bankers will not discount except far those houses 
who have deposit accounts with them” (p. 119). “A party who has had bills dis 
counted, and has paid interest on the whole amount, must leave some portion 
of that amount in the hands of the banker without interest. By this means 
the banker oblains more than the current rate of interest on the money actually 
advanced, and raises a banking capital to the amount of the balance left in his 
hands” (pp. 119-20). Economizing on reserve funds, deposits, cheques: “Banks 
of deposit serve to economize the use of the circulating medium. This is done 
upon the principle of transfer of titles... Thus il is that banks of deposit ... 
are enabled to settle a large amount of transactions with a small amount 
of money. The money thus liberated, is employed by the banker in making 
advances, by discount or otherwise, to his customers. Hence tlie principle 
of transfer gives additional efficiency to the deposit system...” (p, 123). 
“It matters not whether the two parties, who have dealings with each other, 
keep their accounts with the same hanker or with different bankers; for, as 
the bankers exchange their cheques with each other at the clearing house... 
The deposit system might thus, by means of transfers, be carried to such an 
extent as wholly to supersede the use of a metallic currency. Were every man to 
keep a deposit account at a bank, and make all his payments by cheques, 
money might be superseded, and cheques become the sole circulating medium. 
In this case, however, it must be supposed that the banker has the money 
in his hands, or the cheques would have no value” (p. 124). Centralization of 
local transactions in the hands of the banks is effected 1) through branch banks. 
Country banks have branch establishments in the smaller towns of their dis- 
trict, and London banks in different districts of the city. 2) Through agencies. 
“Each country banker employs a London agent to pay his notes or bills ... 
and to receive sums that may he lodged by parties residing in 
London for the use of parties residing in the country” (p. 127). Each banker 
accepts the notes of others, but does not reissue them. In all larger 
cities they come together once or twice a week and exchange their noles. 
The balance is paid by a draft on London (p. 134). “It is the object of banking 
to give facilities to trade, and whatever gives facilities to trade gives fa- 
cilities to speculation. Trade and speculation are in some cases so nearly allied, 
that it is impossible to say at what precise point trade ends and speculation 
begins.... Wherever there are banks, capital is more readily ohtained, and at 
a cheaper rate. The cheapness of capital gives facilities to speculation, just 
in the same way as the cheapness of beef and of beer gives facilities to ety tory 
and drunkenness” (pp. 137, 138). “As banks of circulation always issuc their 
own notes, it would seem that their discounting business was carried on ex: 
clusively with this last description of capital, but it is nat so. It is very Poss 
ble for a banker to issue his own notes for all the bills he discounts, and ye 
nine-lenths of the bills in his possession shall represent real apital Oty 
although in the first instance, the banker’s notes are given for the H pat 
these notes may not stay in circulation until the bill becomes dve—the bi 

398 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

may have three months to run, the noles may return in three days” (p. 172). “The 
overdrawing of a cash credit account is a regular matter of business; il is, in fact, 
the purpose for which the cash credit has been granled.... Cash credits are granted 
not only upon personal securily, but also upon the security of the Public 
Funds" (pp. 174, 175). “Capital advanced, by way of loan, on the securities 
of merchandise, would produce the same effects as if advanced in the discounting 
of bills. Ifa party borrows £100 on the security of his merchandise, it is the same 
as though he had sold his merchandise for a £100 bill, and got il dis- 
counted with the banker. By obtaining this advance he is enabled to hold 
over this merchandise for a better market, and avoids a sacrifice which, other- 
wise, he might be induced lo make, in order to raise the money for urgent pur- 
poses” (pp. 180-81). ; ; 

The Currency Theory Reviewed, etc., pp. 62-63: “IL is unquestionably true thal 
the £1,000 which you deposil at A today may be reissued tomorrow, and Jorma 
deposit at B. The day afler that, reissued from B, it may Jorm a deposit atC... 
and so on lo infinitude; and that the same £1,000 in money may thus, by a 
succession of transfers, multiply itself into a sum of deposits absolutely 
indefinite, It is possible, therefore, thal néine-tenths of all the deposits in the 
United Kingdom may have no existence beyond their record in the Cooks of the bank- 
ers who are respectively accountable for them.... Thus in Scotland, for instance, 
currency (mostly paper money at (hat) has never exceeded £3 million, the de- 
posits in the banks are estimaled at £27 million.... Unless a run on the banks 
be made, the same £1,000 would, if sent back upon its travels, cancel with 
the same facility a sum equally indefinite. As the same £1,000 wilh which 
you cancel your debt to a tradesman today, may cancel his debt to the mer- 
Chant tomorrow, the merchant's debt to the bank the day Jollowing, and so on 
without end; so the same £1,000 may pass from hand to hand, and bank io 
bank, and cancel any conceivable sum of deposits.” 

[We have seen that Gilbart knew even in 1834 that “whatever 
gives lacilities to trade gives facilities to speculation. Trade and 
speculation are in some cases so nearly allied, that it is impossible 
{o say at what precise point trade ends and speculation begins.” 
The easier it is to obtain advances on unsold commodities, the more 
such advances are taken, and the greater the temptation to manu- 
lacture commodities, or dump already manufactured commodities 
in distant markets, just to obtain advances of money on them. 
To what extent the entire business world of a country may be 
seized by such swindling, and what it finally comes to, is amply illus- 
trated by the history of English business during 1845-47. It shows 
us what credit can accomplish. Before passing on to the [ollowing 
examples, a few preliminary remarks. 

At the close of 1842 the pressure which English industry suffered 
almost uninterruptedly since 1837, began to lilt. During the fol- 
lowing two years foreign demand for English manufactured goods 
increased still more, 1845 and 1846 marked a period of greatest 
prosperity. In 1843 the Opium War had opened China to English 
commerce. The new market gave a new impetus to the further ex- 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 399 

pansion of an expanding industry, particularly the cotton industry. 
“How can we ever produce too much? We have to clothe 300 mil- 
lion people,” a Manchester manufacturer said to this writer at the 
time. But all the newly erected factory buildings, steam -engines, 
and spinning and weaving machines did not suffice to absorb the 
surplus-value pouring in from Lancashire. With the same zeal as 
was shown in expanding production, people engaged in building 
railways. The thirst for speculation of manufacturers and merchants 
at first found gratification in this field, and as early as in the sum- 
mer of 1844. Stock was fully underwritten, i.e., so far as there was 
money to cover the initial payments. As for the rest, time would 
show! Bul when further payments were due—Question 1059, C. D. 
1848/57, indicates that the capital invested in railways in 1846-47 
amounted to £75 million—recourse had to be taken to credit, 
oe in most cases the basic enterprises of the firm had also to 
leed. 

And in most cases this basic enterprises were already overburdened, 
The enticingly high profits had led to Jar more extensive operations 
than justified by the available liquid resources. Yet there was cred- 
it—easy to obtain and cheap. The bank discount rate stood low: 
1°77, to 2°),% in 1844, less than 3% until October 1845, rising to 5% 
for'a while (February 1846), then dropping again to 3'/,% in De- 
cember 1846. The Bank of England had an unheard-of supply 
of gold in its vaults. All inland quotations were higher than ever 
before. Why then allow this splendid opportunity to escape? 
Why not go in for all one was worth? Why not send all one could 
manufacture to foreign markets which pined for English goods? 
And why should not the manufacturer himself pocket the double 
gain arising from selling yarn and fabrics in the Far East, and the 
return cargo in England? 

Thus arose the system of mass consignments to India and China 
against advance payments, and this soon developed into a system 
of consignments purely for the sake of getting advances, as cle- 
scribed in greater detail in the following notes, which led inevitably 
to overflooding the markets and a crash. 

The crash was precipitated by the crop failure of 1846. Eng- 
land, and particularly Ireland. required enormous imports of 
foodstuffs, notably corn and potatoes. But the countries which 
supplied them could be paid with the products of English in- 
dustry only to a very limited extent. Precious metals had to be 
given out. Gold worth at least nine million was sent abroad. 
Of this amount no less than seven and a half million came 
from the treasury of the Bank of England, whose freedom 

400 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

of action on the money-market was thereby considerably 
impaired. Other banks, whose reserves were deposited with the 
Bank of England and were practically identical with those 
of that Bank, were thus also compelled to curtail accommoda- 
tion of money. The rapid arid easy Now of payments was obstruct- 
ed, first here and there, then generally. The banking discount 
rate, still 3 to 3%% in January 1847, rose to 7% in April, 
when the first panic broke out. The situation eased somewhat 
in the summer (6% %, 6%), but when the new crop failed as well 
panic broke out afresh andeven more violently. The official minimum 
bank discount rose in October to 7 and in November to 10%; i.e., 
the overwhelming mass of bills of exchange was discountable only 
at outrageous rates of interest, or no longer discountable at all. 
The general cessation of payments caused the failure of several 
leading and very many medium-sized and small firms. The Bank itself 
was in danger due to the limitations imposed by the artful Bank 
Act of 1844. The government yielded to the general clamour and 
suspended the Bank Act on October 25, thereby eliminating the 
absurd legal fetters imposed on the Bank. Now it could throw its 
supply of bank-notes into circulation without hindrance. The cred- 
it of these bank-notes being in practice guaranteed by the credit 
of the nation, and thus unimpaired, the money stringency was thus 
instantly and decisively relieved. Naturally, quite a number of 
hopelessly enmeshed large and small firms failed nevertheless, but 
the peak of the crisis was overcome, the banking discount dropped 
to 5% in December, and in the course of 1848 a new wave of 
business activity began which took the edge off the revolutionary 
movements on the continent in 1849, and which inaugurated in the 
fifties an unprecedented industrial prosperity, but then ended 
again—in the crash of 1857.—F. E.] 

I. A document issued by the House of Lords in 1848 deals with the colossal 
depreciation of government paper and bonds during the 1847 crisis. According 

{o it the depreciation of October 23, 1847, compared with the level in February 
of the same year, amounted to: 

On English government bonds. . , £ 93,824,217 
On dock and canal stock , . . £ 1,358,288 
On railway stock .. £, 19,579,820 

Total . . £ 114,762,325 

I]. With reference to the swindle in East Indian {rade, in which drafts were 
no longer drawn because commodities were being bought, but rather commod- 
ities were bought to be able to make out discountable drafts convertible into 
money, the Manchester Guardian of November 24, 1847, remarks: 

Mr. A in London instructs a Mr. B to buy from the manufacturer C in Man- 
chester commodities for shipment to a Mr. D in East India. B pays C in six 
months’ drafts to be made out by C on B. B secures himself by six months’ drafts 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 401 

on A. As soon as the goods are shipped A makes out six months’ drafts on 
D against the mailed bill of lading. “The shipper and the ca-signee were 
thus both put in possession of funds—months before they actually paid for 
the goods: and, very commonly, these bills were renewed at maturity, on pre- 
lence of affording time for the returns in a ‘long trade.’ Unforlunalely, losses by 
such a trade, instead of leading to ils contraction, led directly to its increase. 
The poorer men became, the greater need they had {o purchase, in order lo 
make up, by new advances, the capital they had Jost on the past adventures. Pur- 
chases thus became, not a question of supply and demand, but the most impor- 
fant part of the finance operations of a firm labouring under difficullies. But 
this is only one side of the picture. What took place in reference to the export 
of goods at home, was taking place in the purchase and shipment of produce 
abroad, Houses in India, who had credit to pass their bills, were purchasers 
of sugar, indigo, silk, or cotton,—not because ihe prices advised [rom Lon- 
don by the last overland mail promised a profil on the prices current in 
India. but because former drafts upon the London house would soon fall due, 
and must be provided for. What way so simple as to purchase a cargo of 
sugar, pay Jor it in bills upon the London house at ten months’ date, transmit 
the shipping documents by the overland mail; and, in less than two months, 
the Lae on the high seas, or perhaps not yet passed the mouth of the 
Hoogly, were pawned in Lombard Street—putling the London house in funds 
eight months before the drafts against those goods fell due. And all this went 
on without interruption or difficulty, as long as bill-brokers had abundance 
of money ‘at call,’ to advance on bills of Jading and dock warrants, and to 
discount, without limit, the bills of India houses drawn upon the eminent 
firms in Mincing Lane.” 

[This fraudulent procedure remained in vogue so long as goods to and from 
India had to round the Cape in sailing vessels. But ever since they are 
being shipped in steamboals via the Suez Canal this method ol fabricat- 
ing fictitious capital has been deprived of ils basis—the long [freight voyage. 
And ever since the telegraph informs the English businessman about the indian 
market and the Indian merchant about the English market, on the same day 
this method has become totally impracticable.—F. E.] 

III. The following is taken from the quoted Report on Commercial Distress, 
1847-48: “In the last week of April, 1847, the Bank of England advised the 
Royal Bank of Liverpool! that it would thereafter reduce its discount business 
with the latler bank by one hali. The announcement operated with peculiar 
hardship on this account, that the payments into Liverpool had latterly been 
much more in bills than in cash; and the merchants who generally brought to the 
Bank a large proportion of cash with which to pay their acceptances, had lallerly 
been able to bring only bills which they had received for their colton and 
other produce, and thal increased very rapidly as the difficulties increased... 
The acceptances ... which the Bank had to pay for the merchants, were accept- 
ances drawn chiefly upon them [rom abroad, and they have been accustomed to 
meet those acceptances by whatever payment they received for their produce... 
The bills that the merchants brought ... in lieu of cash, which they ustially brought 
... were of various dates, and of various descriptions; a considerable number 
of them were bankers’ bills, of three months’ date, the large bulk being cotton 
bills. These bills of exchange, when bankers’ bills, were accepted by London 
bankers, and by merchants in every trade that we could mention—the Bra- 
zilian, the American, the Canadian, the West Indian.... The merchants did not 
draw upon each other; but the parties in the interior, who had purchased prod- 
uce from the merchants, remitted to the merchants bills on London bankers, 
or bills on various parties in London, or bills upon anybody. The announces 

402 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ment of the Bank of England caused a reduction of the maturity terms of bills 
drawn against sales of foreign products,frequently extending to over three months” 
(pp. 26, 27). vase 7 

The period of prasperity in England from 1844 to 1847 was, as described above, 
connected with the first great railway swindle. The above-named report makes 
the following reference to the elfect of this swindle on business in general: In April 
1847 “almost all mercantile houses had begun to starve their business more or 
less ... by taking part of their commercial capital for railways” (p. 42). “Loans 
were made on Cailway shares at a high rate of interest, say, 8%, by private 
individuals, by bankers and by fire-offices” (p. 66). “Loans to so great an extent 
by commercial houses ta railways induced them to lean too much upon 
banks by the discount of paper, whereby to carry cn ‘their commercial 
operations” (p. 67). (Questian:) “Should you say that the railway calls 
had had a great effect in producing the pressure which there was” (on the 
money-market) “in April and October" (1847) ?—(Answer:) “I should say that they 
had had hardly any effect at all in producing the pressure in April; I should imagine 
that up to April, and up, perhaps, to the summer, they had increased the power of 
bankers in some respects rather than diminished it; for the expenditure had 
nat been nearly so rapid as the calls; the consequence was, that most of the banks 
had rather a large amount of railway money in their hands in the beginning of 
the vear.” (This is corroborated in numerous statements made by bankers inC. D. 
1848 57)."In the summer that melted gradually away, and on the 31st of Decem- 
ber it was materially less. One cause ... of the pressure in October was the grad- 
ual diminution of the railway money in the bankers’ hands; between the 22nd 
of April and the 3lst of December the railway balances in our hands were reduced 
one-third; and the railway calls have also had this effect ... throughout the King- 
dom: they have been gradually draining the deposits of bankers” (pp. 43, 44).— 
Samuel Gurney (head of the ill-famed firm of Overend, Gurney and Co.) simi- 
larly says: “During the year 1846 ... there had been a considerable demand for 
capital, for the establishment of railways ... but it did not increase the value 
of money.... There was a condensation of small sums into large masses, and those 
large masses were used in our market; so that, upon the whole, the effect 
was to throw more muney into the money-market of the City than to take 
it out.” 

A. Hodgson, Director of the Liverpool Joint-Stock Bank, shows haw much 
bills of exchange may constitute a reserve for bankers: “It has been our habit to 
keep at least nine-tenths of all our deposits, and all maney we have of other 
persons, in our bill case, in bills that are falling due from day ta day ... so 
much so, that during the time of the run, the bills falling due were almost equal 
to the amount of the run upon us day by day” (p. 53). 

Speculative bills —“5092. Who were those bills (against sald cotton) generally 
accepted by?"—(R. Gardner, the cotton manufacturer repeatedly mentioned 
in this work:} “Produce brokers: a person buys cotton, and places it in the 
hands of a broker, and draws upon that broker, and gets the bills dis- 
counted.”—“5094. And they are taken to the banks at Liverpool, and dis- 
ccounted?— Yes, and in other parts besides... I believe if it had not been for the 
accommodation thus granted, and principally by the Liverpool banks, cotton 
would never have been so high last year as it was by I'/,d. or 2d. a 
pound.”—"600. You have stated that a vast amount of bills were put in circula- 
tion, drawn by speculators upon cotton brokers in Liverpool; does that system 
extend lo your advance on acceptances upon colonial and foreign produce as 
weli as on cotton?” (A. Hodgson, a Liverpool banker:) “It refers to all kinds of 
colonial produce, but to cotton most especially.”— “601. Do you, as a banker, 
discourage as far as you can that description of paper?—We do not; we consid- 

CREDIT AND FICTITIOUS CAPITAL 403 

er it a very legitimate description of i i i 
pg ey of paper is frecueritiy fenewed" heh Perce moderation. (Chia 

windling in the East Indian and Chinese Market — 3 
(head of one of the leading East Indian houses in iverpooh Weare ae sien 
the events which have taken place as regards the Mauritius trade ad ollie 
trades of that kind. The brokers have been in the habit ... nat onl of ads seine 
upon goods alter their arrival to meet the bills drawn against those good Merle 
is perfectly legitimate, and upon the bills of lading ... but ... they have fe 
vanced upon the produce before it was shipped, and in some cases ielore it was 
manufactured. Now, to speak ol my own individual instance: | have bought 
bills in Calcutta to the extent of six or seven thousand pounds in one arti - 
ular instance; the proceeds of the bills went down to the Mauritius to help 
in the growth of sugar; those bills came to England, and above half of them were 
protested; for when the shipments of sugar came forward, instead o! bein 
held to pay those bills, it had been martgaged to third parties ... before it aan 
shipped, in fact almost before it was boiled” (p. 78). “Now manufacturers are 
insisting upon cash, but it does not amount to much, because if a buyer has an 
credit in London, he can draw upon the house, and get the bill discounted: 
he goes to London, where discounts now are cheap; he gets the bill discounted, 
and pays cash to the manufacturer.... It takes twelve months, at least, for the 
shipper of goods to get his return from India... a man with ten or filteen thou- 
sand pounds would go into the Indian trade; he would open a credit with a 
house in London, to a considerable extent, giving that house one per cent; 
he, drawing upon the house in London, on the understanding that the proceeds 
of the goods that go out are to be returned to the house in London, but it 
being perfectly understoad by both parties that the man in London is to be 
kept out of a cash advance, thal is to say, in other words, the bills are ta he re- 
newed till the proceeds come home. The bills were discounted at Liverpool 
Manchester ... or in London ... many of them lie in the Scotch banks” (p. 79).— 
“786. There is one house which failed in London the other day, and in exain- 
ining their alfairs, a transaction of this sort was proved to have taken place; 
there is a house of business at Manchester, and another at Calcutta: they opened 
a credit account with a house in London to the extent of £200,000; that is to say, 
the [riends of this house in Manchester, who consigned goods to the East India 
House from Glasgow and from Manchester, had the power o! drawing upon the 
house in London to the extent of £200,000; at the same time, there was an 
understanding that the corresponding house in Calcutta were to draw upon the 
London house to the extent of £200,000; with the proceeds of those bills sold 
in Calcutta, they were to buy other bills, and remit them to the house in Lan- 
don, to take up the first bills drawn from Glasgow.... There would have been 
£600,000 of bills created upon thal transaction."—"97]. At present, if a house in 
Calcutta purchase a cargo” (for England),“and give their own bills upon their cor- 
respondent in London in payment, and they send the bills of lading home to 
this country, those bills of lading ... immediately become available to them 
in Lombard Street for advances, and they have eight months’ use of the money 
before their correspondents are called upon to pay.” 

1V. In 1848 a secret committee o! the House of Lords investigated the causes 
of the 1847 crisis. The evidence given to the committee was not published, 
however, until 1857 (Minutes of Evidence, taken before tlie Secret Committee 
of the H. of L. appointed to inquire into the Causes of Distress, etc., 1857; quoted 
as C. D. 1848/57). Here Mr. Lister, Director of the Union Bank of Liverpool, 
testified, among other things, to the following: e 

“2444, In the spring of 1844 (here was an undue extension of credit ... 
because a man transferred property [rom business into railways and was still 

404 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

anxious to carry on the same extent of business. He probably first thought 
that he could sell the railway shares at a profit and replace the money in his 
business. Perhaps he found that could not be done, and he then got credit in 
his business where formerly he paid in cash. There was an extension of 
credit from that circumstance.” ; 

“9500. Were those bills... upon which the banks had sustained a loss by hold- 
ing them, principally bills upon corn or bills upon cotton?—They were 
bills upon all kinds of produce, corn and cotton and sugar, all foreign prod- 
uce of all descriptions. There was scarcely any thing perhaps with the excep- 
tion of oil, that did not go down." —"2506. A broker who accepts a bill will 
not accept it without a good margin as to the value.” ; 

“9512. There are two kinds of bills drawn against produce; the first is the 
original bill drawn abroad upon the merchant, who imports it... The bills 
which are drawn against produce frequently fall due before the produce ar- 
rives. The merchant, therefore, when it arrives, if he has not sulficient capital, 
has to pledge that produce with the broker till he has time to sell ihat prod- 
uce. Then a new species of bill is immediately drawn by the merchant in 
Liverpool upon the broker, on the security of that produce.... Then it is the 
business of the banker to ascertain from the broker whether he has the prod- 
uce, and fo what extent he has advanced upon it. It is his business to see that 
the broker has property to protect himself if he makes a loss.” 

“2516. We also receive bills from abroad.... A man buys a bill abroad on Eng- 
land, and sends it to a house in England; we cannot tell whether that bill is 
drawn prudently or imprudently, whether it is drawn for produce or for 
wind.” 

“2533. You said that almost every kind of foreign produce was sold at 4 great 
loss. Do you think that that was in consequence of undue speculation in that 
produce?—It arose from a very large import, and there not being an equal 
consumption to take it off. It appears that consumption fell off a great deal."— 
“2534. In October produce was almost unsaleable.” 

How a general sauve qui peut develops at the height of a crisis is revealed in 
the same report by a first-rate expert, the esteemed cralty Quaker, Samuel! Gurney, 
of Overend, Gurney and Co.: “1262. ... When a panic exists a man does not 
ask himself what he can get Jor his bank-notes, or whether he shall lose one 
or two per cent by selling his exchequer bills. or three per cent. If he is under 
the influence of alarm he does not care for the profit or loss, but makes himself 
safe and allows the rest of the world to do as they please." 

V. Concerning the mutual satiation of the two markets Mr. Alexander, a 
merchant in the East India trade, testifies before the Committee of the Lower 
House on the Bank Act of 1857 (quoted as B. C. 1857): “4330. At the present 
moment, if 1 lay out 6s. in Manchester, I get 5s. back in India; if I lay 
out 6s. in India, I get 5s. back in London." So that the Indian market is, 
therefore, drugged by England, and the English by India. This was, indeed, 
eee in the summer of 1857, bately ten years alter the bitter experience 

CHAPTER XXVI 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL. 
ITS INFLUENCE ON THE INTEREST RATE 

“In England there takes place a steady accumulation of addition- 
al wealth, which has a tendency ultimately to assume the form of 
money. Now, next in urgency, perhaps, to the desire to acquire mon- 
ey, is the wish to part with it again for some species of investment 
that shall yield either interest or profit; for money itself, as money, 
yields neither. Unless, therefore, concurrently with this ceaseless 
influx of surplus capital, there is a gradual and sufficient exten- 
sion of the field for its employment, we must be subject to period- 
ical accumulations of money seeking investment, of more or less 
volume, according to the movement of events. For a long series of 
years, the grand absorbent of the surplus wealth of England was 
our public debt.... As soon as in 1816 the debt reached its maxi- 
mum, and operated no longer as an absorbent, a sum of at least 
seven-and-twenty million per annum was necessarily driven to 
seek other channels of investment. What was more, various return 
payments of capital were made.... Enterprises which entail a large 
capital and create an opening from time to time for the excess of 
unemployed capital ... are absolutely necessary, at least in our coun- 
try, so as to take care of the periodical accumulations of the super- 
fluous wealth of society, which is unable to find room in the usual 
fields of application.” (The Currency Theory Reviewed, London, 
1845, pp. 32-34.) Of 1845 the same work says: “Within a very re- 
cent period prices have sprung upwards from the lowest point of 
depression.... Consols touch par.... The bullion in the vaults of 
the Bank of England has ... exceeded in amount the treas- 
ure held by that establishment since its institution. Shares of 
every description range at prices on the average wholly unprecedent- 
ed, and interest has declined to rates which are all but nominal. If 
these be not evidences that another heavy accumulation of unem- 
ployed wealth exists at this hour in Englarid, that another period of 
speculative excitement is at hand.” (/bid., p. 36.) 

406 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

“Although ... the import of bullion is no sure sign of gain upon 
the foreign trade, yet, in the absence of any explanatory cause, it 
does prima facie represent a portion of it.” (J. G. Hubbard, The 
Currency and the Country, London, 1843 , pp. 40-41.) “Suppose ... 
that at a period of steady trade, fair prices ... and full, but not re- 
dundant circulation, a deficient harvest should give occasion for 
an import of corn, and an export of gold to the value of five million, 
The circulation [meaning, as we shall presently see, idle money- 
capital rather than means of circulalion—F. E.| would of course 
be reduced by the same amount. An equal quantity of the circula- 
tion might still be held by individuals, but the deposits of merchants 
at their bankers, the balances of bankers with their money-broker, 
and the reserve in their till, will all be diminished, and the imme- 
diate result of this reduction in the amount of unemployed capital 
will be a rise in the rate of interest. I will assume from 4 per cent 
to 6. Trade being in a sound state, confidence will not be shaken, 
but credit will be more highly valued.” (/béd., p. 42.)“But imagine... 
that all prices fall.... The superfluous currency returns to the bank- 
ers in increased deposits—the abundance of unemployed capital 
lowers the rate of interest to a minimum, and this state of things 
lasts until either a return of higher prices or a more active trade 
call the dormant currency into service, or until it is absorbed by 
investments in foreign stocks or foreign goods” (p. 68). 

The following extracts are also taken from the parliamentary 
Report on Commercial Distress, 1847-48.—Owing to the crop 
failure and famine of 1846-47 large-scale imports of foodstufis 
became necessary. “These circumstances caused the imports of the 
country to be very largely in excess over ... exports ... aconsiderable 
drain upon the banks, and an increased application to the 
discount brokers ... for the discount of bills.... They began 
to scrutinize the bills.... The facilities of houses then began to be 
very seriously curtailed, and the weak houses began to fail. Those 
houses which ... relied upon their credit ... went down. This in- 
creased the alarm that had been previously felt; and the bankers and 
others finding that they would not rely with the same degree of 
confidence that they had previously done upon turning their bills 
and other money securities into bank-notes, for the purpose of meet- 
ing their engagements, still further curtailed their facilities, and 
in many cases refused them altogether; they locked up their bank- 
notes, in many instances to meet their own engagements; they were 
afraid of parting with them.... The alarm and confusion were in- 
creased daily; and unless Lord John Russell... had issued the Jetter 
to the Bank ... universal bankruptcy would have been the issue” 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 407 

(pp. 74-75). Russell’s letter suspended the Bank Act.—The pre- 
viously mentioned Charles Turner testifies: “Sorne houses had large 
means, but not available. The whole of their capital was locked up 
in estates in the Mauritius, or indigo factories, or sugar factories, 
Having incurred liabilities to the extent of £500,000 or £600,000 
they had no available assets to pay their bills, and eventually it 
proved that to pay their bills they were entirely dependent upon 
their credit” (p. 81). The aforementioned S. Gurney said: “At pres- 
ent (1848) there is a limitation of transaction and a great super- 
abundance of money.”—“1763. I do not think it was owing to the 
want of capital; it was owing to the alarm that existed that the rate 
of interest got so high.” 

In 1847 England paid at least £9 million gold to foreign countries 
for imported ioodstuffs, Of this amount £7'% million came from the 
Bank of England and 1% million from other sources (p. 245).— 
Morris, Governor of the Bank of England: “The public stocks in 
the country and cana! and railway shares had already by the 23rd 
of October 1847 been depreciated in the aggregate to the amount of 
£114,752,225" (p. 312). Again Morris, when questioned by Lord G. 
Bentinck: “Are you not aware that all property invested in stocks and 
produce of every description was depreciated in the same way; 
that raw cotton, raw silk and ummanulactured wool were sent to 
the continent at the same depreciated price... and that sugar, coflee 
and tea were sacrificed as at forced salesP—It was ... inevitable 
that the country should make a considerable sacrifice for the pur- 
pose of meeting the efflux of bullion which had taken place in con- 
sequence ol the large importation of food.”—“Do not you think it 
would have been better to trench upon the £8,000,000 lying in 
the coffers of the Bank than to have endeavoured to get the gold 
back again at such a sacrifice?—No, [ do nof.”—Now to the com- 
mentaries on such heroism, Disraeli questions Mr. W. Colton, a 
Director and former Governor of the Bank of England: “What was 
the rate of dividend paid to the Bank proprietors in 1844>—It 
was 7 per cent for the year.”—“What is the dividend ... for 1847?— 
Nine per cent.”—“Does the Bank pay the income tax for its pro- 
prietors in this year?—It does.”—"Did it do soin 18442—It did 
not.”** —“Then this Bank Act (of 1844) has worked very well for 
the proprietors?... The result is, that since the passing of the Act, 

61 In other words, formerly they first fixed the dividend, and then deducted 
the income tax as the dividend was paid to the individual stockholder; after 1844, 
however, the Bank first paid the income tax on its total profit, and then paid the 
dividend “free of income tax.” The same nominal percentages are, therefore, 
higher in the latter case by the amount of the tax.—F. &, 

408 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

the dividend to the proprietors has been raised from 7 per cent to 
9 per cent. and the income tax, that previously to the Act was paid 
by the proprietors, is now paid by the Bank?—IJ¢ fs so.” (Nos. 
4356-61.) . 

Mr, Pease, a country banker, had the following to say concerning 
hoarding in banks during the crisis of 1847: “4605, As the Bank was 
obliged still to raise its rate of interest, every one seemed apprehen- 
sive; country bankers increased the amount of bullion in their hands, 
and increased their reserve of notes, and many of us who were in 
the habit of keeping, perhaps, a few hundred pounds of gold and 
bank-notes, immediately laid up thousands in our desks and draw- 
ers, as there was an uncertainty about discounts, and about our 
bills being current in the market, a general hoarding ensued.” 
A member of the Committee remarks: “4691. Then, whatever may 
have been the cause during the last 12 years, the result has been 
rather in favour of the Jew and money-dealer, than the productive 
classes generally.” 

How much a money-dealer lakes advantage of times of crisis 
is revealed by Tooke: “In the hardware districts of Warwickshire and 
Staffordshire, a great many orders for goods were declined to be ac- 
cepted in 1847, because the rate of interest which the manufacturer 
had to pay for discounting his bills more than absorbed all his 
profit” (No. 5451). 

Let us now take another parliamentary report cited earlier: 
Report of Select Committee on Bank Acts, communicated from the 
Commons to the Lords, 1857 (quoted further as B. C. 1857). In it 
Mr. Norman, Director of the Bank of England and a leading figure 
among the champions of the Currency Principle, is interrogated as 
follows: 

“3635, You stated, that you consider that the rate of interest de- 
pends, not upon the amount of notes, but upon the supply and de- 
mand of capital. Will you state what you include in ‘capital,’ 
besides notes and coin?—I believe that the ordinary definition 
of ‘capital’ iscommodities or services used in production."—"3636. 
Do you mean to include all commodities in the word ‘capital’ when 
you speak of the rate of interest?—AII commodities used in produc- 
tion.”—"3637. You include all that inthe word ‘capital,’ when you 
speak of what regulates the rate of interest?—Yes. Supposing a 
cotton manufacturer to want cotton for his factory, the way in 
which he goes to work to obtain it is, probably, by getting an ad- 
vance from his banker, and with the notes so obtained he goes to 
Liverpool, and makes a purchase. What he really wants is the cot- 
ton; he does not want the notes or the gold, except as a means of 

ACCUMULATION OF MUONEY-CAPITAL 409 

getting the cotton. Or he may want the means of paying his work- 
men; then again, he borrows the notes, and he pays the wages of 
the workmen with the notes; and the workmen, again, require food 
and lodging, and the money is the means of paying for those.”— 
“3638. But interest is paid for the money?—It is, in the first 
instance; but take another case. Supposing he buys the cotton on 
credit, without going to the bank for an advance, then the difference 
between (he ready-money price and the credit price at the time 
at which he is to pay for it is the measure of the interest. Interest 
would exist if there was no money at all.” 

This self-complacent rubbish is quite fitting for this pillar of the 
Currency Principle. First, the brilliant discovery that bank-notes 
or gold are means of buying something, and that they are not bor- 
rowed for their own sake. And this is advanced to explain that the 
rate of interest is regulated—but by what? By the demand and sup- 
ply of commodities, which heretofore was known to regulate only 
the market-prices of commodities. However, very different rates of in- 
terest are compatible with the same market-prices of commodities.— 
But now this cunning. He is conironted with the correct remark: 
“But interest is paid for the money,” whicli, of course, contains the 
implication: “What has interest received by the banker, who does 
not deal in commodities at all, to do with these commodities? And 
do not manufacturers receive money at the same rate of inlerest, 
although they invest it in widely different markets, hence in mar- 
kets with widely different conditions of demand and supply for the 
commodities used in production?” All that this celebrated genius 
has to say in reply to these questions is that if the manufacturer 
buys cotton on credit “the difference between the ready-money price 
and the credit price at the time at which he is to pay [or it is the 
measure ol the interest.” Quite the contrary. The prevailing rate of 
interest whose regulation the great intellect Norman was asked to 
explain is the measure of the diflerence between the cash price and 
the credit price until payment is due. First the cotton is to be sold 
at its cash price, and this is determined by the market-price, it- 
self regulated by the state of supply and demand. Say the price 
=£1,000. This concludes the transaction between the manufactur- 
er and the cotton broker so far as buying and selling is concerned. 
Now comes a second transaction. This is one between lender and bor- 
rower. The value of $1,000 is advanced to the manufacturer in 
cotton, aid he has to repay it in money, say, in three months. And 
three months’ interest for £1,000, determined by the market rate of 
interest, makes up the extra charge over and above the cash price. 
The price of cotton is determined by supply and demand. But tle 

410 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

price of the advanced value of cotton, of £1,000 advanced for three 
months, is determined by the rate of interest. And this fact, that 
cotton is thus transiormed into money-capital, proves to Mr. Nor- 
man that interest would exist even if there had been no, money. 
If there were no money at all, there would certainly be no general 
rate of interest. 

There is, {o begin with, a vulgar conception of capital as “com- 
modities used in production.” In so far as these commodities serve 
as capital, their value as capital, as distinct from their value as 
commodities, is expressed in the profit which is derived from their 
productive or mercantile employment. And the rate of profit un- 
der all circumstances has something to do with the market-price of 
the purchased commodities and with their supply and demand, but 
is determined by entirely different circumstances. And there is no 
doubt that the interest rate is generally limited by the rate of profit. 
But Mr. Norman should tell us just how this limit is determined. 
And it is determined by the supply and demand of money-capital 
as distinguished from the other forms of capital. It could be fur- 
ther asked: How are demand and supply of money-capital deter- 
mined? It is doubtlessly true that a tacit connection exists between 
the supply of material capital and the supply of money-capital, 
and, likewise, that the demand of industrial capitalists for. money- 
capital is determined by conditions of actual production. Instead of 
enlightening us on this point, Norman offers us the sage opinion that 
the demand for money-capital is not identical with the demand 
for money as such; and this sagacity alone, because he, Over- 
stone, and the other Currency prophets, constantly have pricks of 
conscience since they are striving to make capital out of means 
of circulation as such through the artificial! intervention of legisla- 
tion, and to raise the interest rate. 

Now to Lord Ovcrstone, alias Samuel Jones Loyd, as he is asked 
to explain why he takes 10% for his “money” because “capital” is 
so scarce in his country. 

“3653. The fluctuations in the rate of interest arise from one of 
two causes: an alteration in the value of capital” (excellent! Value 
of capital, generally speaking, signifies precisely the rate of inter- 
est! A change in the rate of interest is thus made to spring Irom a 
change in the rate of interest. “Value of capital,” as we have shown 
elsewhere, is never conceived otherwise in theory. Or else, if Lord 
Overstone means the rate of profit by the phrase “value of capital,” 
then the profound thinker returns to the notion that the interest 
rate is regulated by the rate of profit!) “or an alteration in the amount 
of money in the country. All great fluctuations of interest, great ei- 

ACCUMULATION OF MONBY-CAPITAL 4i] 

ther in their duration or inthe extent of the fluctuation, may be dis- 
tinctly traced to alterations in the value of capital. Two more strik- 
ing practical illustrations of that fact cannot be furnished than 
the rise in the rate of interest in 1847 and during the last two years 
(1855-56); the minor fluctuations in the rate of interest, which 
arise from an alleration in the quantity of money, are small both in 
extent and in duration. They are frequent, and the more rapid and 
frequent they are, the more effectual they are for accomplishing their 
destined purpose,” which is to enrich bankers like Overstone. Friend 
Samuel Gurney expresses it very naively before the Committee of 
Lords, C. D. 1848: “1324. Do you think that the great Auctuations in 
the rate of interest which have taken place in the last year are ac- 
vantageous or not to bankers or dealers in money?—! think they 
are advantageous to dealers in money. All fluctuations in trade are 
advantageous to the knowing man.”—‘1325. May not the banker 
suffer eventually from the high rates of interest, by impoverishing 
his best customers?—No; I do not think it has that effect per- 
ceptibly."—Voila ce que parler veut dire.* 

We shall eventually return to the influence of the quantity of 
available money on the rate of interest. But it is to be noted right 
here that Overstone again makes a quid pro quo. The demand for 
money-capital in 1847 (before October there was no anxiety aver 
money stringency, or the “quantity of money,” as he called it) 
increased for various reasons, such as rising prices for carn and cot- 
ton, lack of buyers of sugar due to over-production, railway specu- 
lation and the crash, overcrowding of foreign markets with cotton 
goods, and the forced export to, and import from, India for the pur- 
pose of speculation in bills of exchange, which was described above. 
All these things, over-production in industry and under-production 
in agriculture—in other words, greaily differing causes—gave 
rise to an increased demand for money-capital, i.e., for credit 
and money. The increased demand for money-capital had its ori- 
gin in the course of the productive process itself. But whatever may 
have been the cause, it was the demand for money-capital which 
made the interest rate, the value of money-capital, climb. If Over- 
stone means to say that the value of money-capital rose because 
it rose, then it is tautology. But il, by “value of capital,” he means 
a rise in the rateof profit as the cause of the rise in the rate of inter- 
est, we shall immediately see that this is wrong. The demand lor 
money-capital, and consequently the “value of capital,” may rise 
even though the profit may decrease; as soon as the relative supply 

* This is what had to be said.—£d. 

4)2 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

of money-capital shrinks, its “value” increases. What Overstone 
wished lo prove is that the crisis of 1847, and the attendant high in- 
lerest rate, had nothing to do with the “quantity of money,” i.e., 
with the regulations of the Bank Act of 1844 which he had inspired; 
although it was, indeed, connected with them, inasmuch as 
the fear of exhausting the bank reserve—-a creation of Overslone— 
contributed a money panic lo the crisis of 1847-48. But this is not 
the issue here. There was a dearth of money-capital, caused by the 
excessive volume of operations compared to the available means 
and precipitated by the disturbance in the reproduction process due 
to a crop failure, over-investment in railways, over-production, 
particularly of colton goods, swindling operations in trade with 
India and China, speculation, superfluous sugar imports, etc. What 
the people, who had bought corn at 120 shillings per quarter, 
lacked when it fell to 60 shillings, were the 60 shillings which they 
had overpaid and thecorresponding credit for that amount in Lom- 
bard Street advances on the corn. It was by no means a lack of bank- 
notes that prevented them from converting their corn into money 
at its old price of 120 shillings. The same applied to those who had 
imported an excess of sugar, which became almost unsaleable. It ap- 
plied likewise to the gentlemen who had tied up their floating capi- 
tal in railways and relied on credit to replace it in their “legitimate” 
business. To Overstone all this signifies a “moral sense of the en- 
hanced value of his money.” But this enhanced value of money-capital 
corresponded directly on the other hand to the depreciated money- 
value of real capital (commodity-capital and productive capital). 
The value of capital in the one form rose because the value of capi- 
tal in the other fell. Overstone, however, seeks to identily these 
two values of different sorts of capital in a single value of capital 
in general, and he tries to do so by opposing both of them to a scar- 
city of the medium of circulation, of available money. But the same 
amount of money-capital may be loaned with very different quanti- 
ties of the circulation medium. 

Take his example of 1847. The official bank-rate stood al 3 to 
3%% in January; 4 to 4%% in February. [n March it was generally 
4%. April (panic) 4 to7%4%. May 5 to544%, June, on the whole, 5%. 
July 5°),. August 5to5%%. September 5%with trifling variations 
of 5*/,, 542,6%. October 5,5%, 7%. November 7-10%. December 7 
to 5% .—In this case the interest rose because profits decreased and 
the money-values of commodities fell enormously. If, therefore, 
Overstone says here that the rate of interest rose in 1847 because the 
value of capital rose, he cannot mean anything by value of capital 
but the value of money-capital, and the value of money-capital is 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 413 

the rate of interest, and nothing else. But later he showed the clo- 
ven hoof and identified the value of capital with the rate of profit. 

As for the high rate of interest paid in 1856, Overstone was in- 
deed ignorant of the fact that this was partially a symptom that 
the credit jobbers were coming to the fore, who paid interest not 
from their profit, but with the capital of others; he maintained 
just few months before the crisis of 1857 that “business is quite 
sound.” 

He testified furthermore: “3722. That idea of the profits of trade 
being destroyed by a rise in the rate of interest is most erroneous. 
In the first place, a rise in the rate of interest is seldom of any long 
duration; in the second place,il it is of long duration, and of great 
extent, it is really a rise in the value of capital, and why does val- 
ue of capital rise? Because the rate of profit is increased.—‘Here, 
then, we learn, at last, what the meaning of “value of capital” is. 
Furthermore, the rate of profit may be high for a lengthy period, 
and yet the profit of enterprise may fall and the rate of interest 
rise to a point where it swallows the greater portion of the profit. 

“3724. The rise in the rate of interest has been in consequence of 
the great increase in the trade of the country, and the great rise in 
the rate of profits; and to complain of the rise in the rate of inter- 
est as being destructive of the two things, which have been its 
own cause, is a sort of logical absurdity, which one does not know 
how to deal with.”"—This is just as logical as if he were to say: 
The rise in the rate of profit has been in consequence of the risein 
commodity-prices by speculation, and to complain that the rise 
in prices destroys its own cause, namely, speculation, is a logical 
absurdity, etc. That anything can ultimately destroy its own cause 
is a logical absurdity only for the usurer enamoured of the high 
interest rate. The greatness of the Romans was the cause of their 
conquests, and their conquests destroyed their greatness. Wealth 
is the cause of luxury and luxury has a destructive effect on wealth. 
The wiseacre! The idiocy of the present-day bourgeois world cannot 
be better described than by the respect, which the “logic” of the 
millionaire—the dunghill aristocrat—inspired in al! England. Fur- 
thermore, il a high rate of profit and an expansion of business may 
be causes of a high interest rate, a high rate of interest is by no 
means therefore a cause of high profit. The question is precisely 
whether such a high interest (as was actually discovered during the 
crisis) continued or, what is more, reached its climax after the 
high rate of profit had long gone the way of all flesh. 

“3718, With regard to a great rise in the rate of discount, that is 
acircumstance entirely arising {rom the increased value ol capital, 

414 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

and the cause of that increased value of capital I think any person may 
discover with perfect clearness. I have already alluded to the fact 
that during the 13 years this Act has been in operation, the trade 
al this country has increased [rom £45,000,000 to £120,000,000. 
Let any person reflect upon all the events which are involved in 
that short statement; let him consider the enormous demand upon 
capital for the purpose of carrying on such a gigantic increase of 
trade, and let himconsider at the same time that the natural source 
from which that great demand should be supplied, namely, the 
annual savings of this country, has for the last three or four years 
been consumed in the unprofitable expenditure of war. [ confess 
that my surprise is, that the rate of interest is not much higher than 
it is; or, in other words, my surprise is, that the pressure for capi- 
tal to carry on these gigantic operations, is not far more stringent 
than you have [ound it to be.” 

What an amazing jumble of words by our logician of usury! Here 
he comes again with his increased value of capilal! He seems to 
think that this enormous expansion of the reproduction process, 
hence accumulation of real capital, took place on one side, and that 
on the other there existed a “capital,” for which there arose an “enor- 
mous demand,” in order to accomplish this giganlic increase of com- 
merce! Was not this enormous increase of production an increase of 
capital itself, and if it created a demand, did it not also create the 
supply, and, simultaneously, an increased supply of money-capi- 
tal? If (he interest rate rose very high, then merely because the de- 
mand for money-capital increased still more rapidly than its sup- 
ply, which implies, in other words, that with the expansion of in- 
dustrial production its operation on a credit basis expanded as well. 
That is losay, the actual industrial expansion caused an increased 
demand for “accommodation,” and the laller demand is evidently 
what our banker means by the “enormous demand for capital.” 
{t was surely not the expansion of this demand for capital alone, 
which raised the export business from £45 to £120 million. And fur- 
thermore, what does Overstone mean when he says that the country’s 
annual savings swallowed by the Crimean War form the natural 
source of supply for this big demand? In the first place. how did 
England achieve accumulation in 1792-1815, which was a far 
different war from the little Crimean one? In the second place, if 
the natural source was dry, from what source did capital flow at 
all? It is well known that England did not request loans from foreign 
countries. Yet if there is an artificial source besides the natural one, 
it would have been best for a nation to utilize the natural source in 
war and the artificial one in business. But if only the old money- 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 415 

capital was available, could it double its effectiveness through a 
high rate of interest? Mr. Overstone evidently thinks that the coun- 
try’s annual savings (which, however, were supposed to have been 
consumed in this case) are converted only into money-capital, But 
if no real accumulation, ij.e., expansion of production and augmen- 
tation of the means of production, had taken place, what good would 
there be from the accumulation of debtor's money claims on this 
production? 

The increase in the “value of capital” springing from a high rate 
of profit is identified by Overstone with an increase caused by a 
greater demand for money-capital. This demand may climb for rea- 
sons quite independent of the rate of profit. He himself cites the 
example of its rise in 1847 as aresull of the depreciation of real capi- 
tal. Depending on what suits his purpose, he ascribes the value of 
capital to real capital or money-capital. 

The dishonesty of our banking lord, and his narrow-minded bank- 
er’s point of view with its didactic flavouring are further revealed 
in the following: (3728. Question:) “You have staled that the rate of 
discount is of no material moment you think to the merchant; will 
you be kind enough to state what you consider the ordinary rate of 
profit?’—Mr. Overstone declares that it is “impossible” to answer 
this question.—"3729. Supposing the average rate of profit to be, 
say, from 7 lo 10%, a variation of [rom 2 lo 7 or 8% in the rate of 
discount must materially affect the rale of profit, must it nol?” 
(This question itself lumps togelher the rate of profit of enterprise 
with the rate of profit, and passes over the fact that the rate of prof 
it is the common source of interest and profit of enterprise. The in- 
terest rate may leave the rate of profit untouched, but not the prof- 
it of enterprise. Overstone replied:) “In the first place parties will 
not pay a rate of discount which seriously interrupts their profits; 
they will discontinue their business rather than do that.” (Yes, 
if they can do so without ruining themselves. So long as their proiit 
is high, they pay the discount because they wish to, and when it is 
low, because they have lo.) “What is the meaning of discount? 
Why does a person discount a bill?... Because he wants lo obtain 
the command olf a greater quantity of capital.” (Halte-la/ because 
he wants to anticipate the return in money ol his tied-up capital 
and to prevent his business from stopping, because he must meet 
payments due. He demands more capital only when business is 
good, or when he speculates on another’s capital, though business 
may be bad. The discount is by no means simply a device to expand 
business.) “And why does he want to obtain the command ol a great- 
er quantity of capital? Because he wants to employ that capital; 

416 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

and why does he want to employ that capital? Because it is profit- 
able to him to do so; it would not be profitable to him to do so if 
the discount destroyed his profit.” ; 

This smug logician assumes that bills of exchange are discounted 
cnly for the purpose of expanding business, and that business is 
expanded because it is profitable. The first assumption is wrong. 
The ordinary businessman discounts, in order to anticipate the mon- 
ey-form of his capital and thereby to keep his process of reproduc- 
tion in flow; not in order to expand his business or secure additional 
capital, but in order to balance the credit he gives by the credit he 
teceives. And if he wants to expand his business on credit, discount- 
ing bills will do him little good because it is merely conversion of 
the money-capital which he already has in his hands from one form 
into another; he will rather take a direct loan for a longer period. 
The credit swindler will get his accommodation bills discount- 
ed to expand his business activity, to cover one squalid business 
deal by another; not to make profits but to obtain possession of 
another’s capital. 

Alter Mr. Overstone has thus identified discounting with borrow- 
ing additional capital (instead of with converting bills represent- 
ing capital, into hard cash), he beats an instant retreat as soon as 
the screws are applied to him.—(3730. Question:) “Merchants being 
engaged in business, must they not for a certain period carry on 
their operations in despite of any temporary increase in the rate of 
discount?”—{Overstone:) “There is no doubt that in any particular 
transaction, if a person can get his command of capital at a lowrate 
of interest rather than at a high rate of interest, taken in that lim- 
ited view of the matter, that is convenient to him.”—But it is a 
very unlimited point of view, on the other hand, which enables Mr. 
Overstone quite suddenly to understand only his, banker’s capital, 
as “capital,” and to assume that the man who discounts a bill of ex- 
change with him is a man without capital, just because his capital 
exists in the form of commodities, or because the money-form of his 
capital is a bill of exchange, which Mr. Overstone converts into 
another money-form. 

3732. “With reference to the Act of 1844, can you state what has 
been about the average rate of interest in proportion to the amount 
of bullion in the Bank; would it be a fact that when the amount of 
bullion has been about £9,000,000 or $10,000,000 the rate of inter- 
est has been 6 or 7 per cent, and that when it has been £16,000,000, 
the rate of interest has been, say, from 3 to 4 per cent?” (The exam- 
iner wishes to press him to explain the rate of interest, so far as it is 
influenced by the amount of bullion in the Bank, on the basis of 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CADITAL 417 

the rate of interest ,so far as it is influenced by the value of capital.)— 
“I do not apprehend that that is so... but if it is, then I think we 
must take still more stringent measures than those adopted by the 
Act of 1844, because if it be true that the greater the store of bul- 
lion, the lower the rate of interest, we ought to set to work, accord- 
ing to that view of the matter, to increase the store of bullion to an 
indefinite amount, and then we should get the interest down to noth- 
ing."—The examiner, Cayley, unmoved by this poor joke, contin- 
ues: “3733. If that be so, supposing that 5,000,000 of bullion 
was to be restored to the Bank, in the course of the next six months 
the bullion then would amount, say, to 216,000,000, and supposing 
that the rate of interest was thus to fall to 3 or 4 per cent, how could 
it be stated {hat that fall in the rate of interest arose from a great 
decrease of the trade of the country?—I said that the recent rise 
in the rate of interest, not that the fall in the rate of interest, was 
closely connected with the great increase in the trade of the country.” 
— But what Cayley says is this: If a rise of interest rate together 
with a contraction of the gold reserve, is an indication of an expan- 
sion in business, then a fall of the interest rate together with an 
expansion of the gold reserve, must be an indication of a contrac- 
tion of business. Overstone las no answer to this.—(3736. Question:) 
“I observed you” (in ihe text always “Your Lordship”) “to say that 
money was tlie instrument for obtaining capital.” (Precisely this 
is the mistake, to conceive money as an instrument; it is a fotm 
of capital.) “Under a drain of bullion (of the Bank of England) is 
not the great strain, on the contrary, for capitalists to obtain mon- 
ey?”—(Overstone:) “No, it isnot the capitalists, it is those who are 
not capitalists, who want to obtain money and why do they want 
to obtain money?... Because through the money they obtain the 
command of the capital of the capitalist to carry on the business of 
the persons who are not capitalists."—Here he declares point-blank 
that manufacturers and merchants are not capitalists, and that the 
capitalist’s capital is only money-capital.—‘3737. Are not the par- 
ties who draw bills of exchange capitalists?—The parties who 
draw bills of exchange may be, and may not be, capitalists.”—Here 
he is stuck. 

He is then asked whether merchants’ bills of exchange represent 
commodities which have been sold or shipped. He denies that 
these bills represent the value of commodities in the same way 
that a bank-note represents gold. (3740, 3741.) This is somewhat in- 
solent. 

“3742. Is it not the merchant’s object to get money?—No, 
getting money is not the object in drawing the bill; getting money 

15 —2757 

418 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

is the object in discounting the bill."—Drawing bills of exchange 
is converting commodities into a form of credit-money, just as dis- 
counting bills of exchange is converting this credit-money into an- 
other, namely bank-notes. At any rate, Mr. Overstone admits here 
that the purpose of discounting is to obtain money. A while ago he 
said that discounting was a way not of converting capital {rom one 
jorm into another, but of obtaining additional capital. 

“3743. What is the great desire of the mercantile community un- 
der pressure of panic, such as you state to have occurred in 1825, 
1837 and 1839: is their object to get possession of capital or the le- 
gal tender?—Their object is to get the command of capital to 
support their business."—Their purpose is to obtain means of pay- 
ment for due bills of exchange on themselves, on account of the pre- 
vailing lack of credit, so that they will not have to let their commodi- 
ties go belaw price. If they have no capital at all themselves, they 
receive it along with the means of payment, because they receive 
value without an equivalent. The urge to obtain money as such con- 
sists always in the wish to convert value from the form of commodi- 
ties or creditor’s claims into the form of money. Hence, even aside 
from the crises, the great difference between borrowing capital and 
discount, the latter being a mere conversion of money claims from 
one form into another, or into real money. 

[I take the liberty at this point in my capacity of editor to inter- 
polate a few remarks. 

With respect to Norman, as well as Loyd-Overstone, the banker 
is always the one who “advances capital” to others, and his custom- 
ers are those who demand “capital” from him. Thus, Overstone 
says that people have bills of exchange discounted through him, 
“because they wish to obtain the command of capital” (3729), and 
that it is pleasant for such people if they can “get command of capi- 
tal at a low rate of interest” (3730). “Money is the instrument for 
obtaining capital” (3736), and during a panic the great desire of the 
mercantile community is to "get the command of capital” (3743). 
For all of Loyd-Overstone’s confusion over what capital is, it is 
ai least clear that he designates what the banker gives to his client 
as capital, as a capital which the client did not formerly possess, 
but which was advanced to him to supplement what he already 
possessed. 

The banker has become so accustomed to act as distributor 
(through loans) of the social capital available in money-form that he 
considers every function whereby he hands out money, as loaning. 
All the money he pays out appears to him as a loan. If the money is 
directly loaned, this is literally true. If it is invested in the bill- 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 419 

discounting business, it is in fact advanced by himself until the bill 
becomes due. The notion thus grows on him that all the payments 
he makes are advances; furthermore, that they are advances not 
merely in the sense that every investment of money with the object 
of deriving interest or profit, is economically considered an advance 
of money which the owner of money concerned, in his capacity of 
private individual, makes to himself in his capacity as entrepreneur, 
but advances in the definite sense that the banker lends his client a 
sum of money which augments the capital already at the latter's 
disposal. 

It is this conception, which, transferred from the banker’s office 
to political economy, has created the confusing controversy, wheth- 
er that which the banker places at his client’s disposal in hard cash 
is capital or mere money, a medium of circulation, or currency. To 
decide this—fundamentally simple—controversy, we must put 
ourselves in the place of a bank client. It all depends on what this 
customer requests and receives. 

If the bank allows its client a loan simply on -his personal 
credit, without any security on his part, then the matter is clear. 
He then certainly receives an advance of definite value as a sup- 
plement to the capital he has already invested. He receives it in the 
form of money; hence, not merely money, but also money-capital. 

If, on the ofher hand, he receives the advance against securities, 
etc., then it is an advance in the sense of money paid to him on 
condition that he pay it back. But it is not an advance ol capital. 
For the securities also represent capital, and a larger amount at 
that than the advance. The recipient therefore receives less capital- 
value than he deposits as security; this represents for him no acqui- 
sition of additional capital. He does not enter into the transaction 
because he needs capital—he has that in his securities—but because 
he needs money. Here we, therefore, have an advance of nioney, not 
of capital. 

If the loan is granted by discounting bills, then even the form 
of an advance disappears. Then it is purely a matter of buying and 
selling. The bill passes by endorsement into the possession of the 
bank, while the money passes into the possession of the client. There 
is no question of any return payment on his part. If the client 
buys hard cash with a bill of exchange or some similar instrument 
of credit, it is no more and no less an advance than were he to buy 
cash money with his other commodities, such as cotton, iron, or 
corn. Still less can this be called an advance of capital. Every pur- 
chase and sale between one merchant and another is a transfer of 
capital. But an advance of capital occurs only when the transfer. 

15* 

420 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ol capital is not reciprocal, but unilateral and for a period of time. 
An advance of capital through discount can, therefore, only occur 
when a bill is a speculative one, which does not represent any sold 
commodities, and no banker will take such a bill! if he is aware of 
its nature. In the regular discounting business the bank client does 
not. therefore, receive an advance, either of capital or of money. 
What he receives is money for sold commodities. 

The cases in which the customer demands and receives capital 
from a bank are thus clearly distinguished from those, in which 
he merely receives an advance of money, or buys money from the 
bank. And since least of al! Mr. Loyd-Overstone ever advanced his 
funds without collateral except on the rarest occasions (he was the 
banker of my firm in Manchester), it is likewise evident that his 
lyric descriptions of the great quantities of capital loaned by gener- 
ous bankers to manufacturers in need of capital are gross inventions, 

By the way, in Chapter XXXII Marx says essentially the same 
thing: “The demand for means of payment is a mere demand for 
convertibility into money, so far as merchants and producers have good 
securities to offer; it is a demand for money-capital whenever there is 
nocollateral, so that an advance of means of payment gives them not 
only ihe form of money but also the equivalent they lack, whatever 
its form, with which to make payment.”—And again in Chapter 
XXXIII: “Under a developed system of credit, with the money 
concentrated in the hands of bankers, it is they, at least nominally, 
who advance it. This advance refers only to money in circulation. 
It is an advance of circulation, not an advance of capitals which it 
circulates.” Mr. Chapman, who should know, likewise corroborates 
this conception of the discounting business: B. C. 1857: “The bank- 
er has the bill, the banker has bought the bill.” Evid. Question 5139. 

a however, return to this subject in Chapter X XVIII.— 

Fok: 
“3744. Will you be good enough to describe what you actually mean 
by the term ‘capital’?”—(Overstone:) “Capital consists of various 
commodities, by means of which trade is carried on; there is fixed 
capital and there is circulating capital. Your ships, your docks, 
your wharves ... are fixed capital; your provisions, your clothes, 
etc., are circulating capital.” 

“3745. Is the country oppressed under a drain of bullion?— 
Not in the rational sense of the word.” (Then comes the old Ricar- 
dian theory of money.) ...“In the natural state of things the money 
of the world is distributed amongst the different countries of the 
world in certain proportions, those proportions being such that un- 
der that distribution (of money) the intercourse between any one 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 421 

country and all the other countries of the world jointly will be an 
intercourse of barter; but disturbing circumstances will arise to 
aflect that distribution, and when those arise, a certain portion 
of the money of any given country passes to other countries."— 
“3746. Your Lordship now uses the term ‘money.’ | understood you 
before to say that it was a loss of capital.—That what was a loss 
of capital?’—“3747. The export of bullion?—No, I did not say 
so. If you treat bullion as capital, no doubt it is a loss of capital; 
it is parting with a certain proportion of those precious metals 
which constitute the money of the world.”—“3748. I understood 
Your Lordship to say that an alteration in the rate of discount was 
a mere sign of an alteration in the value of capital?—I did.”— 
“3749. And that the rate of discount generally alters with the state 
of the store of bullion in the Bank of England?—Yes, but I have 
already stated that the fluctuations in the rate of interest, which 
arise from an alteration in the quantity of money” (what he therefore 
means here is the quantity of actually existing gold) “in a country, 
are very small.” 

“3750. Then, does Your Lordship mean that there is a less capi- 
tal than there was, when there is a more continuous yet temporary 
increase in the rate of discount than usual?—Less, in one sense 
of the word. The proportion between capital and the demand for 
it is altered; it may be by an increased demand, not by a diminution 
of the quantity of capital.” (But a moment ago it was capital= 
money or gold, and a little before that he had explained the rise in 
interest rate by a high rate of profit, due to an expansion rather 
than a contraction of business or capital.) 

“3751. What is the capital which you particularly allude to?— 
That depends entirely upon what the capital is which each person 
wants. It is the capital which the country has at its command for 
conducting its business, and when that business is doubled, there 
must be a great increase in the demand for the capital with which it 
is to be carried on.” (This shrewd banker doubles first the business 
activity and then the demand for capital with which it is tobe dou- 
bled. All he sees is his client, who asics Mr. Loyd for more capital by 
which to double the volume of his business.)\—'Capital is like 
any other commodity” (but according to Mr. Loyd capital is 
nothing but the totality of commodities), “it will vary in its price” 
(hence, commodities change their price twice, one time as commodi- 
ties and the second as capital), “according to the supply and demand.” 

“3752, The changes in the rate of discount are generally connect- 
ed with the changes in the amount of gold which there is in the 
coffers of the Bank. Is it that capital to which Your Lordship re- 

422 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

fers?—No.”—"3753. Can Your Lordship point to any instance 
in which there lias been a large store of capital in the Bank of Eng- 
land connected with a high rate of discount?—The Bank of 
England is not a place for the deposit of capital, it is a place for 
the deposit of money.”—°3754. Your Lordship has stated that the 
rate of interest depends upon the amount of capital; will you be 
kind enough to state what capital you mean, and whether you can 
point to any instance in which there lias been a large store of bul- 
lion in the Bank and at the same time a high rate of interest?— 
It is very probable (aha!) that the accumulation of bullion in the 
Bank may be coincident with a low rate of interest, because a pe- 
riod in which there is a diminished demand for capital” (namely, 
money-capital; the period to whicli reference is made here, 1844 and 
1845, was a period of prosperity) “is a period, during which, of 
course, the means or instrument through which you command capital 
may accumulate.”—“3755. Then you think that there is no connec- 
tion between the rate of discourit and the amount of bullion in the 
coffers of the Bank?—There may be a connection, but it is not a 
connection of principle” (his Bank Act of 1844, however, made it 
a principle of the Bank of England to regulate the interest rate by 
the quantity of bullion in its possession), “there may be a coinci- 
dence of time.” —“3758. Do I rightly understand you to say, that the 
difficulty of merchants in this country, under a state of pressure, 
in consequence of a high rate of discount, is in getting capital, and 
not in getting money?—You are putting two things together 
which I do not join in that form; their difficulty is in getting capi- 
tal, and their difficulty also is in getting money.... The difficulty 
of getting money and the difficulty of getting capital is the same 
difficulty taken in two successive stages of its progress.”—Here 
the fish is caught in the net again. The first difficulty is to dis- 
count a bil! of exchange, or to obtain a loan against the security of 
commodities. It is the difficulty of converting capital, or a commer- 
cial token of capital into money. And this difficulty is manifested, 
among other things, in a high rate of interest. But as soon as the 
money is obtained, what is the second difficulty? Does anyone ever 
find any difficulty in getting rid of his money when it is merely a 
matter of paying? And if it is a matter of buying, has anyone ever 
had any difficulty in purchasing during times of crisis? And, for 
the sake of argument, should this refer to a specific dearth in corn, 
cotton, etc., this difficulty could only appear in the price of these 
commodities, not in the value of money-capital, i.e., not in the 
rate of interest; and this dilficulty is overcome, in the final analysis, 
dy tlie fact that our man now has the money to buy them,” 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 493 

“3760. But a higher rate of discount is an increased difficulty of 
getting money?—It is an increased difficulty of getting money, 
but it is not because you want to have the money; it is only the form” 
(and this form brings profit into the banker’s pocket) “in which 
the increased difficulty of getting capital presents itself according 
to the complicated relations of a civilized state.” 

“3763. (Overstone’s reply:) The banker is the go-between who re- 
ceives deposits on the one side, and on the other applies those depos- 
its, entrusting them, in the form of capital, to the hands of persons, 
who, etc.” 

At last we have what he means by capital. He converts money into 
capital by “entrusting” it, less euphemistically, by loaning it at 
interest. 

Aiter Mr. Overstone has stated that a change in the rate of dis- 
court is not essentially connected with a change in quantity of {he 
gold reserve in a bank, or in the quantity of available money, but 
that there is at best only a coincidence in time, he repeats: 

“3805. When the money in the country is diminished by a drain, 
its value increases, and the Bank of England must conform to that 
alteration in the value of money” (hence, the value of money as 
capital; in other words, the rate of interest, for the value of money 
as money, compared with commodities, remains the same), “which 
is meant by the technical term of raising the rate of interest.” 

“3819. I never confound those two.”—Meaning money and capi- 
tal, and for the simple reason that he never diflerentiated between 
them. 

“3834. The very large sum, which had to be paid” (for corn in 
1847), “which was in point of fact capital, for the supply of the 
necessary provisions of the country.” 

“3841. The variations in the rate of discount have no doubt a 
very close relation to the state of the reserve” (of the Bank of Eng- 
Jand), “because the state of the reserve is {he indicator of the increase 
or the decrease of the quantity of money in the country; and in 
proportion as the money in the country increases or decreases, the 
value of that money will increase or decrease, and the bank-rate of 
discount will conform to that change.”—-Thus, Overstone admits 
here what he emphatically denied in No. 3755.—‘3842. There is 
an intimate connection between them.” Meaning the quantity of 
bullion in the issue department, on the one hand, and the reserve 
of notes in the banking department, on the other. Here he exolains 
the change in the rate of interest by the change in the quanlily of 
money. But this statement is wrong. The reserve may shrink be- 
cause the circulating money in the country increases. This is tne case 

424 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

when the public takes more notes and the hoard of metal does not 
decrease. But in such case the interest rate rises, because then the 
banking capital of the Bank of England is limited by the Act 
of 1844.But he dare not mention this, because due to this law the 
two departments have nothing to do with one another, 

“3959. A high rate of profit will always create a great demand for 
capital; a great demand for capital will raise the value of it.”— 
Here, at last, we have the connection between a high rate of profit 
and a demand for capital as Overstone conceives it. Now, a high rate 
of profit prevailed in, for example, 1844-45 in the cotton industry, 
because raw cotton was cheap, and remained so, whereas the demand 
for cotton goods was strong. The value of capital (and in an earlier 
statement Overstone calls capital that which everyone needs in 
his business), in this case therefore the value of raw cotton, was not 
increased for the manulacturer,... The high rate of profit may have 
induced some cotton manufacturer to obtain money on credit for 
the purpose of expanding his business. Thereby his demand rose for 
money-capital, but for nothing else. 

“3889. Bullion may or may not be money, just as paper may or 
may not be a bank-note.” 

“3896. Do I correctly understand Your Lordship that you give 
up the argument, which you used in 1840, that the fluctuations in 
the notes out of the Bank of England ought to conform to the fluctu- 
ations in the amount of bullion?—1] give it up so far as this ... 
that now with the means of information which we possess, the notes 
out of the Bank of England must have added to them the notes 
which are in the banking reserve of the Bank of England.”—This 
is superlative. The arbitrary provision that the Bank may make 
out as many paper notes as it has gold in the treasury and 14 mil- 
lion more, implies, of course, thal its issue of notes fluctuates with 
the fluctuations of the gold reserve. But since the present “means 
of information which we possess” clearly showed that the mass of 
notes, which the Bank can thus manufacture (and which the issue 
department transfers to the banking department)—that this cir- 
culation between the two departments of the Bank of England, fluc- 
tuating with the fluctuations of the gold reserve, does not determine 
the fluctuations in the circulation of bank-notes outside the Bank 
of England, then the Jatter—the real circulation—becomes a mat- 
ter of indifference to the bank administration, and the circulation 
between the two departments of the Bank, whose difference from the 
real circulation is mirrored in the reserve, alone becomes decisive. 
To the outside world this internal circuJation is significant only be- 
cause the reserve indicates how close the Bank is approaching the 

ACCUMULATION OF MONEY-CAPITAL 425, 

legal maximum of its note issue, and how much its clients can still 
receive from the banking department. 

The following is a brilliant example of Overstone’s mata fides: 

“4243. Does the quantity of capital, do you think, oscillate from 
month to month to such a degree as to alter its value in the way 
exhibited of late years in the oscillations in the rate of discount ?— 
The relation between the demand and the supply of capital may 
undoubtedly fluctuate, even within short periods.... If France to- 
morrow put out a notice that she wishes to borrow a very large loan, 
there is no doubt that it would immediately cause a great alteration 
in the value of money, that is to say, in the value of capital, in this 
country.” 

“4945, If France announces, that she wants suddenly, for any pur- 
pose, 30 millions’ worth of commodities there will be a great de- 
mand for capital, to use the more scientific and the simpler term.” 

“4246. The capital, which France would wish to buy with her 
loan, is one thing, and the money with which she buys it is another, 
is it the money, which alters in value, or not?—We seem to be 
reviving the old question, which I think is more fit for the chamber 
of a student than for this committee room.”—And with this he 
retires, but not into the chamber of a student.** 

* More on Overstone’s confusion of terms in matters concerning capital at 
the close of Chapter XXXII. 

CUAPTER XXVIII 
THE ROLE OF CREDIT IN CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 

The general remarks, which the credit system so far elicited from 
us, were the following: 

I. Its necessary development to eflect the equalization of the rate 
oi profit, or the movements of this equalization, upon which the 
entire capitalist production rests. 

II. Reduction of the costs of circulation. 

1) One of the principal costs of circulation is money itself, being 
value in itself. It is economized through credit in three ways. 

A. By dropping away entirely in a great many transactions. 

B. By the accelerated circulation of the circulating medium**. 
This corresponds in part with what is to be said under 2). On the one 
hand, the acceleration is technical; i.e., with the same magnitude 
and number of actual turnovers of commodities for consumption, a 
smaller quantity of money or money tokens performs the same 
service. This is bound up with the technique of banking. On the 
other hand, credit accelerates the velocity of the metamorphoses of 
commodities and thereby the velocity of money circulation. 

“8 “The average of notes in circulation during the year was, in 1812, 
106,538,000 francs; in 1818, 101,205,0U0 Iranes: whereas the movement of the cur- 
rency, or the annual aggregate of disbursements and receipts upon all accounts, 
was, in 1812, 2,837,712,000 francs; in 1818, 9,665,030,000 francs. The activity of 
the currency in France, therefore, during the year 1818, as compared wilh its 
activity in 1812, was in the proportion of three to one. The great regulator 
of the velocity of circulation is credit... This explains, why a severe pressure 
upon the money-markel is generally coincident with a full circulation.” 
(The Currency Theory Reviewed, etc., p. 65.)—“Between September 1833 
and September 1843 nearly 300 banks were added to the various issuers of notes 
throughout the United Kingdom; the result was a reduction in the circulation to 
the extent of two million and a half; it was £36,035,244 at Ihe close of Septem- 
ber 1833, and £33,518,554 at the close of September 1843." (L.c., p. 53.)—"The 
prodigious activity of Scottish circulation enables il, with £100, toeffect the 
same quantity of monetary transactions, which in Englandit requires £420 to 
accomplish.” (L. c., p. 55. This last refers only to the technical side of the 
operation.) 

THE ROLE OF CREDIT 427 

C. Substitution of paper for gold money. 

2) Acceleration, by means olf credit, of the individual phases of 
circulation or of the metamorphosis of commodities, later the meta- 
morphosis of capital, and with it an acceleration of the process of 
reproduction in general. (On the other hand, credit helps to keep 
the acts of buying and selling longer apart and serves thereby as a 
basis for speculation.) Contraction of reserve funds, which may be 
viewed in two ways: as a reduction of the circulating medium, on 
the one hand, and, on the other, as a reduction of that part of capi- 
tal which must always exist in the form of money.** 

III. Formation of stock companies. Thereby: 

1) An enormous expansion of the scale of production and of enter- 
prises, that was impossible for individual capitals. At the same time, 
oe that were formerly government enterprises, become pub- 

ic. 

2) The capital, which in itself rests on a social mode of production 
and presupposes a social concentration of means of production and 
labour-power, is here directly endowed with the form ol social cap- 
ital (capital of directly associated individuals) as distinct from 
private capital, and its undertakings assume the form of social 
undertakings as distinct [rom private undertakings. It is the aboli- 
tion of capital as private property within the framework of capi- 
talist production itself. 

3) Transformation of the actually functioning capitalist into a 
mere manager, administrator of other people's capital, and of the 
owner of capital into a mere owner, a mere money-capilalist. Even 
if the dividends which they receive include the interest and the 
profit of enterprise, i.e., the total profit (for the salary of the man- 
ager is, or should be, simply the wage of a specific type of skilled 
labour, whose price is regulated in the labour-market like that of 
any other labour), this total profit is henceforth received only in 
the form of interest, i.e., as mere compensation for owning capi- 
tal that now is entirely divorced from the function in the actual 
process of reproduction, just as this function in the person of the 
manager is divorced from ownership of capital. Profit thus appears 
(no longer only that portion of it, the interest, which derives its 
justification from the profit of the borrower) as a mere appropria- 
tion of the surplus-labour of others, arising from the conversion of 
means of production into capital, i.e., [rom their alienation vis- 
4-vis the actual producer, from their antithesis as another’s property 

* “Belore the establishment of the banks... the amount ol capital withdrawn 

lor the purposes of currency was greater, at all times, than the actual circulation 
of commodities required.” (Economist, 1845, p. 238.) 

428 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

to every individual actually at work in production, from manager 
down to the last day-labourer. In stock companies the function is 
divorced from capital ownership, hence also labour is entirely di- 
vorced fram ownership of means of production and surplus-labour. 
This result of the ultimate development of capitalist production 
is a necessary transitional phase towards the reconversion of capi- 
tal into the property of producers, although no longer as the pri- 
vate property of the individual producers, but rather as the property 
of associated producers, as outright social property. On the other 
hand, the stock company is a transition toward the conversion of 
all functions in the reproduction process which still remain linked 
with capitalist property, into mere functions of associated producers, 
into social functions. 

Before we go any further, there is still the following economically 
important fact to be noted: Since profit here assumes the pure form 
of interest, undertakings of this sort are still possible if they yield 
bare interest, and this is one of the causes, stemming the fall of the 
general rate of profit, since such undertakings, in which the ratio 
of constant capital to the variable is so enormous, do not necessarily 
enter into the equalization of the general rate of profit. 

{Since Marx wrote the above, new forms of industrial enterprises 
have developed, as we know, representing the second and third 
degree of stock companies. The daily growing speed with which 
production may be enlarged in all fields of large-scale industry to- 
day, is offset by the ever-greater slowness with which the market for 
these increased products expands. What the former turns out in 
months, can scarcely be absorbed by the latter in years. Add to 
this the protective tariff policy, by which every industria] country 
shuts itsel! off from all others, particularly from England, and also 
artificially increases domestic production capacity. The results are 
a general chronic over-production, depressed prices, falling and 
even wholly disappearing profits; in short, the old boasted freedom 
ol competition has reached the end of its tether and must itself 
announce its obvious, scandalous bankruptcy. And in every country 
this is taking place through the big industrialists of a certain branch 
joining in a cartel for the regulation of production. A committee 
fixes the quantity to be produced by each establishment and is the 
final authority for distributing the incoming orders. Occasionally 
even international cartels were established, as between the English 
and German iron industries. But even this form of association in 
production did not suffice. The antagonism ol interests between the 
individual firms broke through it only too often, restoring compe- 
tition. This led in some branches, where the scale of production 

TIE ROLE OF CREDIT 429 

permitted, to the concentration of the entire production of that 
branch of industry in one big joint-stock company under single 
management. This has been repeatedly effected in America: in 
Europe the biggest example so far is the United Alkali Trust, which 
has brought all British alkali production into the hands of a sin- 
gle business firm. The lormer owners of the more than thirty individ- 
ual plants have received shares for the appraised value of their en- 
tire establishments, totalling about £5 million, which represent the 
fixed capital of the trust. The technical management remains in 
the same hands as before, but business control is concentrated in 
the hands of the general management. The floating capital, total- 
ling about £1 million, was offered to the public for subscription. 
The total capital is, therefore, £6 million. Thus, in this branch, 
which forms the basis of the whole chemical industry, competition 
has been replaced by monopoly in England, and the road has been 
paved, most gratifyingly, for future expropriation by the whole of 
society, the nation.—F. E.] 

This is the abolition of the capitalist mode of production with- 
in the capitalist mode of production itself. and hence a self-dis- 
solving contradiction, which prima facie represents a mere phase 
of transition to a new form of production. It manifests itself as 
such a contradiction in its eflects. It establishes a monopoly in 
certain spheres and thereby requires slate interference. It repro- 
duces a new financial aristocracy, a new variety of parasites in the 
shape of promoters, speculators and simply nominal directors; 
a whole system of swindling and cheating by means of corporation 
promotion, stock issuance, and stock speculation. It is private 
production without the control of private property. 

IV. Aside from the stock-company business, which represents 
the abolition of capitalist private industry on the basis of the cap- 
italist system itself and destroys private industry as it expands 
and invades new spheres of production, credit offers to the individ- 
ual capitalist, or to one who is regarded a capitalist, absolute con- 
trol within certain limits over the capital and property of others, 
and thereby over the labour of others.*? The control over social 

*? See, for instance, in the Times the list of business bankruptcies in a crisis 
year such as 1857 and compare the private property of those bankrupt with the 
amount of their debts. “The truth is that the power of purchase by persons having 
capital and credit is much beyond anything that those who are unacquainted prac- 
tically with speculative markets have any idea of.” (Tooke, /nguéry into the Cur- 
rency Principle, p. 79.) “A person having the reputation of capital enough for 
his regular business, and enjoying good credit in his trade, if he takes a sanguine 
view of the prospect of arise of price of the article in which he deals, and is fa- 
voured by circumstances in the outset and progress of his speculation, may elTect 

430 NIVISION OF PROFIT 

capital, nol the individual capital of his own, gives him control 
of social labour. The capital itself, which a man really owns or is 
supposed to own in the opinion of the public, becomes purely a 
basis for the superstructure of credit. This is particularly true of 
wholesale commerce, through which the greatest portion of the so- 
cial product passes. All standards of measurement, all excuses more 
or less still justified under capitalist production, disappear here. 
What the speculating wholesale merchant risks is social proper- 
ty, not his own. Equally sordid becomes the phrase relating the 
origin of capital to savings, for what he demands is that others 
should save for him. [Just as all France recently saved up one and 
a half billion francs for the Panama Canal swindlers. In fact, a 
description of the entire Panama swindle is here correctly antici- 
pated, fully twenty years before it occurred.—F. E.] The other 
phrase concerning abstention is squarely refuted by his luxury, 
which is now itself a means of credit. Conceptions which have some 
meaning on a less developed stage of capitalist production, become 
quite meaningless here. Success and failure both lead here to a 
centralization of capital, and thus to expropriation on the most 
enormous scale. Expropriation extends here from the direct pro- 
ducers to the smaller and the medium-sized capitalists themselves. 
It is the point of departure for the capitalist mode of production; 
its accomplishment is the goal of this production. In the last in- 
stance, it aims at the expropriation of the means of production from 
all individuals. With the development of social production the 
means of production cease to be means o! private production and 
products of private production, and can thereafter be only means of 
production in the hands of associated producers, i.e., the latter’s 
social property, much as they are their social products. However, 
this expropriation appears wilhin the capitalist system in a con- 
tradictory form, as appropriation of social property by a lew; and 
credit lends the Jatter more and more the aspect of pure adventur- 
ers. Since property here exists in the form of stock, its movement 
and transfer become purely a result of gambling on the stock ex- 
change, where the little fish are swallowed by the sharks and the 
lambs by the stock-exchange wolves. There is antagonism against 
the old form in the stock companies, in which social means of pro- 
duction appear as private property; but the conversion to the form 

purchases to an extent perfectly enormous compared with his capital” (ibid., 
p- 136). “Merchants, manufacturers, eic., carry on operations much beyond those 
which the use of their own capital alone would enable them to do.... Capital is 
rather the foundation upon which a good credit is built than ihe IImit of the 
transactions of any commercial establishment.” (Economisi, 1847, p. 333.) 

TIE ROLE OF CREDIT 431 

of stack still remains ensnared in the trammels of capitalism; 
hence, instead of overcoming the antithesis between the charac. 
ter of wealth as social and as private wealth, the stock companies 
merely develop it in a new form. 

The co-operative factories of the labourers themselves represent 
within the old form the first sprouts of the new, although they nat- 
urally reproduce, and must reproduce, everywhere in their actual 
organization all the shortcomings of the prevailing system. But 
the antithesis between capital and labour is overcome within them, 
if at first only by way of making the associated Jabourers into their 
own capitalist, i.e., by enabling them to use the means of produc- 
tion for the employment of their own labour. They show how a 
new mode of production naturally grows out of an old one, when 
the development of the material forces of production and of the cor- 
responding forms of social production have reached a particular 
stage. Without the factory system arising out of the capitalist mode 
of production there could have been no co-operative factories. Nor 
could these have developed without the credit system arising out 
of the same mode of production. The credit system is not only the 
principal basis for the gradual transformation of capitalist private 
enterprises into capitalist stock companies, but equally offers the 
means for the gradual extension of co-operative enterprises on a 
more or less national scale. The capitalist stock companies, as 
much as the co-operative factories, should be considered as tran- 
sitional forms Irom the capitalist modeof production to the asso- 
ciated one, with the only distinction that the antagonism is resolved 
negatively in the one and positively in the other. 

So far we have considered the development of the credit system— 
and the implicit latent abolition of capitalist property—mainly 
with reference to industrial capital. In the following chapters we 
shall consider credit with reference to interest-bearing capital 
as such, and to its eflect on this capital, and the form it thereby 
assumes; and there are generally a few more specifically economic 
remarks still to be made. 

But first this: 

The credit system appears as the main lever of over-production 
and over-speculation in commerce solely because the reproduction 
process, which is elastic by nature, is here forced to its extreme lim- 
its, and is so forced because a large part of the social capital is 
employed by people who do not own it and who consequently tackle 
things quite differently than the owner, who anxiously weighs 
the limitations of lis private capital in so far as he handles it him- 
self. This simply demonstrates the fact that the self-expansion of 

432 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

capital based on the contradictory nature of capitalist production 
permits an actual free development only up to acertain point, so that 
in fact it constitutes an immanent fetter and barrier to production, 
which are continually broken through by the credit system.°* Hence, 
the credit system accelerates the material development of the nro- 
ductive forces and the establishment of the world-market. It is 
the historical mission of the capitalist system of production to raise 
these material foundations of the new mode of production to a cer- 
tain degree of perfection. At the same, time credit accelerates the 
violent eruptions of this contradiction—crises—and thereby the 
elements of disintegration of the old mode of production. 

The two characteristics immanent in the credit system, are, on 
the one hand, to develop the incentive of capitalist production, en- 
Tichment through exploitation of the labour of others, to the purest 
and most colossal form of gambling and swindling, and to reduce 
more and more the number of the few who exploit the social wealth; 
on the other hand, to constitute the form of transition to a new mode 
of production. It is this ambiguous nature, which endows the 
principal spokesmen of credit from Law to Isaac Pereire with the 
pleasant character mixture of swindler and prophet. 

“" Th, Chalmers. 

CHAPTER XXVIII 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL; 
VIEWS OF TOOKE AND FULLARTON 

The distinction between currency and capital, as Tooke,” Wil- 
son, and others draw it, whereby the differences between medium 
ol circulation as money, as money-capital generally, and as inter- 
est-bearing capital (moneyed capital in the English sense) are 
thrown together pell-mell, comes down to two things. 

Currency circulates on the one hand as coin (money), so lar as it 
promotes the expenditure of revenue, hence the traffic between the 

* We here give the related passage from Tooke in the original, which was cit- 
ed in German on p. 390 [present edition: p. 396]: “The business of bankers, 
setting aside the issue of promissory notes payable on demand, may be divided 
into two branches, corresponding with the distinction pointed out by Dr. (Adam) 
Smith of the transactions between dealers and dealers, and between dealers and 
consumers. One branch of the bankers’ business is to collect capital from those 
who have not immediate employment for it, and to distribute or transfer it to 
those who have. The other branch is to receive deposits of the incomes of their 
customers, and to pay out the amount, as it is wanted for expenditure by the latter 
in the objects of their consumption... the former being a circulation of capital, 
the latter of currency." (Tooke, Inquiry into the Currency Principle, London, 
36.) The first is “the concentration of capital on the one hand and the distribu- 
tion of it on the other”; the latter is “administering the circulation for loca) pur- 
poses of the district.” (/béd., p. 37.) A far more correct conception is outlined in 
the following passage by Kinnear: “Money ... is employed to perform two upera- 
tions essentially distinct... As a medium of exchange between dealers and deal- 
ers, it is the instrument by which transfers of capital are effected; that is, the 
exchange of a certain amount of capital in money lor an equal ainount of capital 
in commodities. But money employed in the payment of wages and in purchase 
and sale between dealers and consumers is not capital, but income; that portion 
of the incomes of the community, which is devoted to daily expenditure. It cir- 
culates in constant daily use, and is that alone which can, with strict propriety, 
be termed currency. Advances of capital depend entirely on the will of the Bank 
and other possessors of capital, for borrowers are always to be found; but the 
amount of the currency depends on the wants of the community, among whom the 
money circulates, for the purposes of daily expenditure.” (J. G. Kinnear, The 
Crisis and the Currency, London, 1847.) 

434 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

individual consumers and the retail merchants, to which category 
belong all merchanis who seil to the consumers—to the individ- 
ual consumers as distinct from productive consumers or producers. 
Here money circulates in the function of coin, although it contin- 
ually replaces capital. A certain portion of money in a particular 
country is continually devoted to this Tunction, although this por- 
tion consists of perpetually changing individual coins. In so far as 
money promotes the /rans/er of capital, however, either as a means 
of purchase (medium of circulation) or as a means of payment, it is 
capital, It is, therefore, neither its function as a means ol purchase, 
nor that as a means of payment, which distinguishes it from coin, 
for it may also act as a means of purchase between one dealer and 
another so far as they buy from one another in hard cash, and also 
as a means of payment between dealer and consumer so far as credit 
is given and the revenue consumed before it is paid. The difference 
is, therefore, that in the second case this money not only replaces’ 
the capital for one side, the seller, but is expended, advanced, by’ 
the other side, the buyer, as capital. The difference, then, is in 
fact that between fhe money-Jorm of revenue and the money-jorm 
of capital, but not that between currency and capital, for a certain 
quantity of money circulates in the transactions between dealers 
as well as in the transactions between consumers and dealers. It is, 
therefore, equally currency in both functions. Tooke’s conception: 
introduces confusion into this question in various ways: ‘ 

1) By confusing the functional distinctions; 

2) By introducing the question of the quantity of money circu- 
lating together in both functions; 

3) By introducing the question of the relative proportions of the 
quantities of currency circulating in the two functions and thus in’ 
the two spheres of the process of reproduction. 

Ad 1) Confusing the functional distinctions that money in one: 
form is currency, and capital in the other. In so far as money serves 
in one or another function, be it to realize revenue or transfer capi- 
tal, it functions in buying and selling, or in paying, as a means of: 
purchase or a means of payment, and, in the wider sense of the 
word, as currency. The further purpose which it has in the calcu- 
lations of its spender or recipient, of being capital or revenue for him, 
alters absolutely nothing, and this is doubly demonstrated. Although 
the kinds of money circulating in the two spheres are different, the 
same piece of money, for instancea five-pound note, passes from one 
sphere into the other and alternately performs both functions; 
which is inevitable, if only because the retail merchant can give his 
capital the form of money only in the shape of the coin which he re- 

MEDLUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 435 

ceives from his customers. It may be assumed that the actual small 
change has its circulation centre of gravity in the domain ol retail 
trade; the retail dealer needs it continually to make change and re- 
ceives it back continually in payment from his customers. But he 
also receives money, i.e., coin, in that metal which serves as a 
standard of value, hence in England one-pound coins, or even bank- 
notes, particularly notes of small denominations, such as live- and 
ten-pound notes. These gold coins and notes, with whatever small 
change he has to spare, are deposited by the retail dealer every day, 
or every week, in his bank, and he pays for his purchases by drawing 
cheques on his bank deposit. But the same gold coins and bank- 
notes are just as steadily withdrawn from the bank, directly or 
indirectly (for instance, small change by manufacturers for the 
payment of wages). as the money-form of its revenue by the entire 
public in its capacity of consumer, and flow continually back to 
the retail dealers, for whom they thus again realize a portion of 
their capital, but at the same time also a portion of their revenue. 
This last circumstance is important, and is wholly overlooked by 
Tooke. Only where money is expended as money-capital, early in 
the reproduction process (Book II, Part 1), does capital-value exist 
Purely as such. For the produced commodities contain not merely 
capital, but also surplus-value; they are not only capital in 
themselves, but already capital realized as capital, capital with 
the source of revenue incorporated in it. What the retail dealer 
gives away for the money returning to him, his commodities, 
therefore, is for him capital plus profit, capital plus revenue. 3 

Furthermore, in returning to the retailer, circulating money re- 
stores the money-form of his capital. 

To reduce the difference between circulation as circulation of 
revenue and circulation of capital into a difference between cur- 
rency and capital is, therefore, altogether wrong. This mode of 
expression is in Tooke’s case due to his simply assuming the stand- 
point of a banker issuing his own bank-notes. Those of his notes 
which are continually in the public's hands (even if consisting of 
ever different notes) and serving as currency cost him nothing, save 
the cost of the paper and the printing. They are circulating cer- 
tificates of indebtedness (bills of exchange) made out in his own 
name, but they bring him money and thus serve as a means ol ex- 
panding his capital. They differ from his capital, however, wheth- 
er it be his own or borrowed. That is why there is a special distinc- 
tion for him between currency and capital, which, however, has 
nothing to do with the definition of these terms as such, least of 
all with that made by Tooke. 

436 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

The distinct attribute—whether it serves as the money-form of 
revenue or of capital—changes nothing in the character of money 
as a medium of circulation; it retains this character no matter 
which of the two functions it performs. True, money serves more 
as an actual mediuin of circulation (coin, means of purchase) when 
acting as the money-form of revenue, due to the dispersion of pur- 
chases and sales, and because the majority of disbursers of revenue, 
the labourers, can buy relatively little on credit; whereas in the 
traflic of the business world, where the medium of circulation is 
the money-form of capital, money serves mainly as a means of pay- 
ment, partly on account of the concentration, and partly on account 
of the prevailing credit system. But the distinction between money 
as a means of payment and money as a means of purchase (means 
of circulation) is a distinction that refers to the money itself. It 
is not a distinction between money and capital. More copper and 
silver circulate in the retai! business, and more gold in the whole- 
sale business. Yet the distinction between silyer and copper on 
the one hand, and gold on the other, is not the distinction between 
circulation and capital. 

Ad 2) Introducing the question of the quantity of money circu- 
lating together in both functions: So far as money circulates, be 
it as a means of purchase or as a means of payment—no matter 
in which of the two spheres and independently of its function of 
realizing revenue or capital—the quantity of its circulating mass 
comes under the laws developed previously in discussing the simple 
circulation of commodities (Buch I, Kap. III, 2, b).* The velocity 
of circulation, hence the number of repetitions of the same function 
as means of purchase and means of payment by the same pieces of 
money in a given term, the mass of simultaneous purchases and 
sales, of payments, the sum of the prices of the circulating commod- 
ities, and finally the balances of payments to be settled in the same 
period, determine in either case the mass of circulating money, of 
currency. Whether money so employed represents capital or reve- 
nue jor the payer or receiver, is immaterial, and in no way alters 
the matter. Its mass is simply determined by its function as a 
medium of purchase and payment. 

Ad 3) On the question of the relative proportions of the amounts 
of currency circulating in both functions and thus in both spheres 
of the reproduction process. Both spheres of circulation are con- 
nected internally, for, on the one hand, the mass of revenues to 
be spent expresses the volume of consumption, and, on the other, 

* English edition: Ch. II!, 2, b.—Ed. 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 437 

the magnitude of the masses of capital circulating in production 
and commerce expresses the volume and velocity of the reproduction 
process. Nevertheless, the same circumstances have a different 
eflect, working even in opposite directions, upon the quantities 
of money circulating in both functions or spheres, or on the amount 
of currency, as the English put it in banking parlance. And this 
gives new cause for Tooke’s vulgar distinction between capital 
and currency. The fact that the gentlemen of the Currency-Theory 
confuse two different things is no reason to present them as two 
different concepts. 

In times of prosperity, intense expansion, acceleration and vig- 
our of the reproduction process, labourers are fully employed. 
Generally, there is also a rise in wages which makes up in some 
measure for their fal] below average during other periods of the 
business cycle. At the same time, the revenues of the capitalists 
grow considerably. Consumption increases generally. Commodity- 
prices also rise regularly, at least in the various vital branches 
of business. Consequently, the quantity of circulating money grows 
at least within definite limits, since the greater velocity of circu- 
lation, in turn, sels up certain barriers to the growth of the amount 
of currency. Since that portion of the social revenue which consists 
of wages is originally advanced by the industrial capitalist in the 
form of variablecapital, and always in money-form, it requires more 
money for its circulation in times of prosperity. But we must not 
count this twice—first as money required for the circulation of 
variable capital, and then as money required for the circulation of 
the labourers’ revenue. The money paid to the Jabourers as wages 
is spent in retail trade and returns about once a week to the banks as 
the retailers’ deposits, alter negotiating miscellaneous intermediary 
transactions in smaller cycles. In times of prosperity the reflux of 
money proceeds smoothly for the industrial capitalists, and thus 
the need for money accommodation does nol increase because more 
wages have to be paid and more money is required for the circula- 
lion of their variable capital. 

The total result is that the mass of circulating media serving the 
expenditure of revenue grows decidedly in periods of prosperity. 

As concerns the circulation required for the transfer of capital, 
hence required exclusively between capitalists, a period of brisk 
business is simultaneously a period of the most elastic and easy 
credit. The velocity of circulation between capitalist and capital- 
ist is regulated directly by credit, and the mass of circulating 
medium required to settle payments, and even in cash purchases, 
decreases accordingly. It may increase in absolute terms, but de- 

438 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

creases relatively under all circumstances compared to the expan- 
sion of the reproduction process. On the one hand, greater mass 
payments are settled without the mediation of money; on the other, 
owing to the vigour of the process, there is a quicker movement of 
the same amounts of money, both as means of purchase and of pay- 
ment. The same quantity of money promotes the reflux of a 
greater number of individual capitals. 

On the whole, the currency of money in such periods appears 
full, although its Department II (transfer of capital) is, at least 
relatively, contracted, while its Department | (expenditure of rev- 
enue) expands in absolute terms. 

The refluxes express the reconversion of commodity-capital into 
money, M—C—M’, as we have seen in the discussion of the repro- 
duction process, Book II, Part I. Credit renders the reflux in money- 
form independent of the time of actual reflux both for the indus- 
trial capitalist and the merchant. Both of them sell on credit; their 
commodities are thus alienated before they are reconverted into 
money for them, hence before they flow back to them in money- 
form. On the other hand, they buy on credit, and in this way the 
value of their commodities is reconverted, be it into productive 
capital or commodity-capital, even before this value has really 
been transformed into money, i.e., before the commodity-price 
is due and paid for. In such times of prosperity the reflux passes 
off smoothly and easily. The retailer securely pays the whole- 
saler, the wholesaler pays the manufacturer, the manufacturer 
pays the importer of raw materials, etc. The appearance of rapid 
and reliable refluxes always keeps up lor a longer period alter they 
are over in reality by virtue of the credit that is under way, since 
credit refluxes take the place of the real ones. The banks scent dan- 
ger as soon as their clients deposit more bills of exchange than 
money. See the testimony of the Liverpool bank director, p. 398.* 

To insert what | have noted earlier: “In periods of predominant 
credit, the velocity of the circulation of money increases faster 
than commodity-prices, whereas in times of declining credit 
commodity-prices drop slower than the velocity of circulation.” 
(ZunKritik der politischen Oekonomie, 1859, S. 83, 84.) 

The reverse is true in a period of crisis. Circulation No. | con- 
tracts, prices fall, similarly wages; the number of employed labour- 
ers is reduced, the mass of transactions decreases. On the contrary, 
the need for money accommodation increases in circulation No. 11 

* Present edition: pp.403-04 —£d, 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 439 

with the contraction of credit. We shall examine this point in 
greater detail immediately. 

There is no doubt that with the decrease of credit which goes 
hand in hand with stagnation in the reproduction process, the cir- 
culation mass required for No. I, the expenditure of revenue, con- 
tracts, while that required for No. II, the transfer of capital, expands. 
But to what extent this statement coincides with what is main- 
tained by Fullarton and others still remains to be analysed: “A de- 
mand for capital on loan and a demand for additional circulation 
are quite distinct things, and not often found associated.” (Fullar- 
ton, l. c., p. 82, title of Chapter 5.)°° 

In the first place it is evident that in the first of the two cases 
mentioned above, during times of prosperity, when the mass of the 
circulating medium must increase, the demand for it increases. But 
it is likewise evident that, when a manulacturer draws more or less of 
his deposit out of a bank in gold or bank-notes because he has to 
expend more capital in the form of money, his demand for capital 
does not thereby increase. What increases is merely his demand for 
this particular form in which he expends his capital. The demand 
refers only to the technical form, in which he throws his capital 
into circulation. Just as in the case of a different development of 

" “It is a great error, indeed, to imagine that the demand for pecuniary accom- 
modation” (that is, for the loan of capital) “is identical with a demand [or addition- 
al means olf circulation, or even that the lwo are Irequently associated. Each 
demand originates in circumstances peculiarly affecting itself, and very distinct 
from eacli other. It is when everything looks prosperous, when wages are high, 
prices on the rise, and factories busy, that an additional supply of currency is 
usually required to perform the additional functions inseparable from the necessi- 
ty of making larger and more numerous payments; whereas it is chiefly ina more 
advanced stage of the commercial cycle, when difficulties begin to present them- 
selves, when markets are overstocked, and returns delayed, that interest rises, 
and a pressure comes upon the Bank for advances of capital. It is true that there 
is no medium through which the Bank is accustomed to advance capital except 
that of its promissory notes; and that to refuse the notes, iherefore, is to refuse 
the accammodation. But the accommodation once granted, everything adjusts 
itself in conformity with the necessities of [he market; the loan remains, and the 
currency, if not wanted, finds its way back to the issuer. Accordingly, a very slight 
examination of the Parliamentary Returns may convince any one, that the se- 
curities in the hands of the Bank of England fluctuate more frequently in an oppo- 
site direction to its circulation than in concert with it, and that the example, 
therefore, of that great establishment furnishes no exception to the doctrine so 
strongly pressed by the country bankers, to the effect that no bank can enlarge 
ils circulation, if thal circulation be already adequate to the purposes to which 
a bank-note currency is commonly applied; but that every addition to its advances, 
after that limit is passed, must be made from its capital, and supplied by the sale 
of some of its securities in reserve, or by abstinence from [urther investment in 
such securities. The table compiled from the Parliamentary Returns for the interval 

440 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

the credit system, the same variable capital, for example, or the 
same quantity of wages, requires a greater mass of means of circu. 
lation in one country than in another; in England more than in 
Scotland, for instance, and in Germany more than in England. 
Likewise in agriculture, the same capital active in the reproduction 
process requires different quantities of money in different seasons 
for the performance of its function. 

But the contrast drawn by Fullarton is not correct. It is by no 
means the strong demand for loans as he says, which distinguishes 
the period of depression from that of prosperity, but the ease with 
which this demand is satisfied in periods of prosperity, and the 
difficulties which it meets in periods of depression. It is precisely 
the enormous development of the credit system during a prosperity 
period, hence also the enormous increase in the demand for loan 
capital and the readiness with which the supply meets it in such 
periods, which brings about a shortage of credit during a period of 
depression. It is not, therefore, the diflerence in volume of demand 
jor loans which characterizes both periods. 

As we have previously remarked, both periods are primarily 
distinguished by the fact that the demand for currency between 

between 1833 and 1840, to which I have referred in a preceding page, furnishes 
continued examples of this truth; but two of these are so remarkable that it will 
be quite unnecessary for me to go beyond them. On the 3rd of January, 1837, when 
the resources of the Bank were strained to the uttermost to sustain credit and 
meet the difficulties of the money-market, we find its advances on loan and dis- 
count carried to the enormous sum of £17,022,000,an amount scarcely known since 
the war, and almost equal to the entire aggregate issues which, in the meanwhile, 
remain unmoved at so low a point as £17,076,000! On the other hand, we have on 
the 4th of June, 1833, a circulation of $18,892,000, with a return of private secu- 
rities in hand, nearly, if not the very lowest on record for the last half-century, 
amounting to no more than £972,000!” (Fullarton,|. c., pp. 97, 98.) That a demand 
for pecuniary accommodation need not be identical by any means with a demand 
for gold (what Wilson, Tooke and others call capital) is seen from the following 
testimony of Mr. Weguelin, Governor of the Bank of England: “The discounting 
of bills to that extent” (one million daily for three successive days) “would not 
reduce the reserve” (of bank-notes), “unless the public demanded a greater amount 
of active circulation. The notes issued on the discount of bills would be 
returned through the medium of the bankers and through deposits. Unless these 
transactions were for the purpose of exporting bullion, and unless there were an 
amount of internal panic which induced people to lock up their notes, and not 
to pay them into the hands of the bankers ... the reserve would not be affected by 
the magnitude of the transactions."— “The Bank may discount a million and a 
half a day, and that is done constantly, without its reserve being in the slightest 
degree affected, the notes coming back again as deposits, and no other alteration 
taking place than the mere transfer from one account to another.” (Report on Bank 
Acts, 1857. Evidence Nos. 241,500.) The notes therefore serve here merely as 
means of transferring credits. 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 44] 

consumers and dealers predominates in periods of prosperity, and 
the demand for currency between capitalists predominates in pe- 
riods of depression. During a depression the former decreases, and 
the latter increases. 

What strikes Fullarton and others as decisively important is 
the phenomenon that in such periods when securities in possession 
of the Bank of England are on the increase, its circulation of notes 
decreases, and vice versa. The level of the securities, however, ex- 
presses the volume of the pecuniary accommodation, the volume of 
discounted bills of exchange and of advances made against market- 
able collateral. Thus Fullarton says in the above passage 
{Footnote 90, p. 435)* that the securities in the hands of the Bank of 
England fluctuate mostly in an opposite direction to its circula- 
tion, and this corroborates the view Jong held by private banks 
that no hank can increase its ussue of bank-notes beyond a certain 
point determined by the needs of its public; but if a bank wants 
to make advances beyond this limit, it must make them out of its 
capital, hence it must either realize on securities or utilize deposits 
which it would otherwise have invested in securities. 

This, however, reveals also what Fullarton means by capital. 
What does capital signify here? That the Bank can no longer make 
advances with ils own bank-notes, or promissory notes, which, of 
course, cost it nothing. Bul what does it make advances with in 
that case? With the sums realized [rom the sale of securities held 
in reserve, i.e., government bonds, stocks, and other interest-bear- 
ing paper. And what does it get in payment for the sale of such 
paper? Money—gold or bank-notes, so far as the latter are legal! 
tender, such as those of the Bank of England. What the bank ad- 
vances, therefore, is under all circumstances money. This money, 
however, now constitutes a part of its capital. If it advances gold, 
this is understandable. If it advances notes, then these notes repre- 
sent capital, because it has given up some actual value for them, 
such as interest-bearing paper. In the case of privale banks the 
notes secured by them through ihe sale of securities cannot be any- 
thing else, in the main, but Bank of England notes or their own 
notes, since others would hardly be taken in payment for securities. 
If it is the Bank of England itself, then its own notes, which it 
receives in return, cost it capital, that is, interest-bearing paper. 
Besides, it thereby withdraws its own notes {rom circulation. Should 
it reissue these notes, or issue new notes in their stead to the 
same amount, they now represent capital. And they do so equally 

* Present edition: pp. 439-40.—£d. 

442 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

well, when used for advances to capitalists, or when used later, 
when the demand for such pecuniary accommodation decreases, for 
reinvestment in securities. In all these cases the term capital is 
employed only from the banker’s point of view, and means that the 
banker is compelled to loan more than his mere credit. 

As is known, the Bank of England makes all its advances in 
its own notes. Now, if despite this, as a rule, the bank-nole circu- 
lation of the Bank decreases in proportion as the discounted bills 
of exchange and collateral in its hands, and thus its advances in- 
crease—what becomes of the notes thrown into circulation? How 
do they return to the Bank? 

To begin with, if the demand for money accommodation arises 
from an unfavourable national balance of payments and thereby 
implies a drain of gold, the matter is very simple. The bills of ex- 
change are discounted in bank-notes. The bank-notes are exchanged 
for gold by the Bank itself, in its issue department, and this 
gold is exported. It is as though the Bank paid out gold directly, 
without the mediation of notes, on discounting bills. Such an in- 
creased demand, which may in certain cases be £7 to £10 million, 
naturally does not add a single five-pound note to the country’s 
domestic circulation. If it is now said that the Bank advances cap- 
ital, and not currency, this means two things. First, that it does 
not advance credit, but actual values, a part of its own capital or 
of capital deposited with it. Secondly, that it does not advance mon- 
ey for inland, but for international circulation, that it advances 
world-money; and for this purpose money must always exist in its 
form of a hoard, in its metallic stale; in the form in which it is not 
merely a form of value, but value itself, whose money-form it is. 
Although this gold now represents capital, both for the Bank and 
the exporting gold-dealer, i.e., banking or commercial capital, 
the demand for it is not for capital, but for the absolute form of 
money-capital. This demand arises precisely at the moment when 
foreign markets are overcrowded with unsaleable English commodi- 
ty-capital. What is wanted, therefore, is capital, not as capétal, 
but capital as money, in the form in which money serves as a uni- 
versal world-market commodity; and this is its original form of 
precious meta]. The drain of gold is not, therefore, as Fullarton, 
Tooke, etc., claim, “a mere question of capital.” Rather, it is a 
“question of money,” even if in a specific function. The fact that 
it isnot a question of inland circulation as the advocates of the 
Currency-Theory maintain, does not prove at all, as Fullarton and 
others think, thal it ismerely a question of capital. It is a question 
of money in the form in which money is an international means of 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 443 

payment. “Whether that capital” (the purchase price for the mil- 
lion of quarters of foreign wheat after a crop failure in the home 
country) “is transmilted in merchandise or in specie, is a point which 
in no way affects the nature of the transaction.” (Fullarton, I. c., 
p. 131.) But it significantly affects the question, whether there is 
a drain of gold, or not. Capital is transferred in the form of precious 
metal, because it either cannot be transferred at all, or only at 
agreat loss in the shape of commodities. The fear which the modern 
banking system has of gold drain exceeds anything ever imagined 
by the monetary system, which considered precious metals as the 
only true wealth. Take, for instance, the following evidence of the 
Governor of the Bank of England, Morris, before the Parliamentary 
Committee on the crisis of 1847-48; (3846. Question:) “When I 
spoke of the depreciation of stocks and fixed capital, are you not 
aware that all property invested in stocks and produce of every 
description was deprecialed in the same way; that raw cotton, 
raw silk, and unmanulactured wool were sent to the continent at 
the same depreciated price, and that sugar, coffee and tea were 
sacrificed as at forced sales?—It was inevitable that the country 
should make a consideruble sacrifice for the purpose of meeting the 
efflux of bullion which had taken place in consequence of the large 
importation of food.”-—-"3848. Do not you think it would have 
been better to trench upon the £8 million lying in the coffers of 
the Bank, than to have endeavoured to get the gold back again at 
such a sacrifice?—No, | do not."—It is gold which here stands 
for the only true wealth. 

Fullarton quotes the discovery by Tooke that “with only one or 
two exceptions, and those admitting of satisfactory explanation, 
every remarkable fall of exchange, followed by a drain of gold, 
that has occurred during the last half-century, has been coincident 
throughout with a comparatively low state of the circulating me- 
dium, and vice versa.” (Fullarton, p. 121.) This discovery proves 
that such drains of gold occur generally after a period of animation 
and speculation, as “the signal of a collapse already commenced ... 
an indication of overstocked markets, of a cessation of the foreign 
demand for our productions, of delayed returns, and, as the nezes- 
sary sequel of all these, of commercial discredit, manulactories 
shut up, artisans starving, and a general stagnation of industry and 
enterprise” (p. 129). This, naturally, is at once the best refutation 
of the claim of the advocates of the Currency-Theory, that “a full 
circulation drives out bullion and a low circulation attracts it.” 
On the contrary, while the Bank of England generally carries a 
strong gold reserve during a period of prosperity, this hoard is 

444 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

generally formed during the slack period, which follows after 
a storm. 

All this sagacity concerning the drain of gold, then, amounts 
to saying that the demand for inéernational media of circulation and 
payment differs from the demand for inéernal media of circulation 
and payment (and it goes without saying, therefore, that “the exist- 
ence of a drain does not necessarily imply any diminution of the 
internal demand for circulation,” as Fullarton has it on page 112 
of his work) and that the export of precious metal and its being 
thrown into international circulation is not the same as throwing 
notes or specie inlo internal circulation. As for the rest, 1 have 
shown on a previous occasion that the movements of a hoard con- 
centrated as a reserve fund for international payments have as such 
nothing to do with the movements of money as a medium of circu- 
lation. At any rate, tle question is complicated by the fact that the 
different [unctions of a hoard, which I have developed from the na- 
ture of money—such as its function as a reserve fund of means of 
payment to cover due bills in domestic business; the function of a 
reserve fund of currency; and finally, the function of a reserve fund 
of world-money—are here attributed to one sole reserve fund. It 
also follows from this that under certain circumstances a drain of 
gold from the Bank to the home market may combine with a drain 
abroad. The question is further complicated however by the fact 
that this hoard is arbitrarily burdened with the additional func- 
tion of serving as a fund guaranteeing the convertibility of bank- 
notes in countries, in which the credit system and credit-money 
are developed. And in addition to all this comes 1) the concentra- 
tion of the national reserve fund in one single central bank, and 2) 
its reduction to the smallest possible minimum. Hence, also, Ful- 
larton’s complaint (p. 143): “One cannot contemplate the perfect 
silence and facility with which variations of the exchange usually 
pass off in continental countries, compared with the state of fever- 
ish disquiet and alarm always produced in England whenever the 
treasure at the Bank seems to be at all approaching to exhaustion, 
without being struck with the great advantage in this respect which 
a metallic currency possesses.” 

However, if we now leave aside the drain of gold, how can a bank 
that issues notes, like the Bank of England, increase the amount 
of money accommodation granted by it without increasing its issue 
of bank-notes? 

So far as the bank itself is concerned, all the notes outside its 
walls, whether circulating or in private hoards, are in circulation, 
i.e., are out of its hands. Hence, if the bank extends its discounting 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 445 

and money-lending business, its advances on securities, all the bank- 
notes issued by it for that purpose must return, for otherwise they 
would increase the volume of circulation, something which is not 
supposed to happen. This return may take place in two ways. 

First: The bank pays A notes against securities; A uses them to 
pay lor bills of exchange due to B, and B deposits notes once more 
in the bank. This brings to a close the circulation of these notes, 
but the loan remains. (“The loan remains, and the currency, if not 
wanted, finds its way back to the issuer.” Fullarton, p. 97.) The 
notes, which the bank advanced to A, have now returned to it; 
but it is the creditor of A, or whoever may have been the drawer 
of the bill discounted by A, and the debtor of B for the amount 
of value expressed in these notes, and B thus disposes of a corre- 
sponding portion of the capital of the bank. 

Secondly: A pays to B, and B himself, or C, to whom he pays the 
notes, uses these notes to pay bills due to the bank, directly or in- 
directly. In that case the bank is paid in its own notes. This con- 
cludes the transaction (pending A's return payment to the bank). 

To what extent, now, shall the bank’s advance to A be regarded 
as an advance of capital, or as a mere advance of means of payment ?°* 

[This depends on the nature of the loan itself. Three cases must 
be distinguished, 

First case.—A receives from the bank amounts loaned on his 
own personal credit, wilhout giving any security for them. In this 
case he does not merely receive means of payment, but also unques- 
tionably a new capital, which he may employ in his business and 
Tealize as an additional capital until the maturity date. 

Second case.—A has given to the bank securities, national bonds, 
or stocks as collateral, and received for them, say, up to two-thirds 
of their momentary value asa cash loan. In this case he has received 
the means of payment he needed, but no additional capital. for 
he entrusted to the bank a larger capital-value than he received 
from it. But this larger capital-value was, on the one hand, unavail- 
able for his momentary needs (means of payment), because invested 
in a particular interest-bearing form; on the other hand, A had his * 
own reasons for not wanting to convert this capital-value directly 
into means of payment by selling it. His securities served, among 
other things, as a reserve capital, and he set them in motion as 
such. The transaction between A and the bank, therefore, consists 

* The passage that follows in the original is unintelligible in this context and 
has been rewritten by the editor to the end of the brackets. In another context 
this point has already been touched upon in Chapter XXVI.—F. &. 

446 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

in a temporary mutual transfer of capital, so that A does not receive 
any additional capital (quite the contrary!) although lle receives 
the desired means of payment. For the bank, on the other hand, 
this transaction constitutes a temporary lodgement of money-capi- 
tal in the form of a loan, a conversion of money-capital from one 
form into another, and this conversion is precisely the essential 
function of the banking business. 

Third case.—A had the bank discount a bill of exchange and 
received its value incash aller the deduction of discount. In this case 
he sold a non-convertible money-capital to the bank for the amount of 
value in convertible form.He soldhis still running bill forcash money. 
The bill is now the property of the bank. It does not alter the matter 
that A as last endorser of the bill is responsible for it to the bank 
in default of payment. He shares this responsibility with the other 
endorsers and with the drawer of the bill, all of whom are duly re- 
sponsible to him. In this case, therefore, we do not have a loan, but 
only an ordinary purchase and sale. For this reason, A has nothing 
to pay hack to the bank. It reimburses itself by cashing the bill 
when it becomes due. Here, too, a transfer of capital has taken 
place between A and the bank, and in exactly the same manner as 
in the sale and purchase of any other commodity, and for this very 
reason A did not receive any additional capital. What he needed and 
received were means of payment, and he received them by having 
the bank convert one form of his money-capital—his bill—into 
another—money. 

It is therefore only in the first case that there is any question ofa 
real advance ol capital; in the second and third cases, the matter can 
be so regarded only in the sense that every investment of capital im- 
plies an “advance of capital.” In this sense the bank advances money- 
capital to A; but for A it is money-capital at best in the sense that 
it is a portion of his capital in general. And he requires it and 
uses it not specifically as capital, but rather as specifically a 
means of payment. Otherwise, every ordinary sale of commodities 
by which means of payment are secured might be considered as re- 
ceiving an advance of capital.—F. E.] 

In the case of private banks which issue their own notes we have 
this difference, that if their notes remain neither in local circulation, 
nor return to them in the form of deposits, or in payment for due bills 
of exchange, they fall into the hands of persons who compel the 
private bank to cash these notes in gold or in notes of the Bank of 
England. In this event, therefore, its Ioan in fact represents an ad- 
vance of notes of the Bank of England, or, what amounts to the same 
thing for the private bank, of gold, hence a portion of its bank cap~ 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 447 

ital. The same holds good in case the Bank of England itself, or 
some other bank, which has a fixed legal maximum for its issue of 
notes, must sell securities to withdraw its own notes from circulation 
and then issue them once more in the shape of advances; in that 
case, ve bank’s own notes represent a portion of its mobilized bank 
capital. 

Even if the circulation were purely metallic, it would be Possi- 
ble 1) for a drain of gold [Marx evidently refers here to a drain of 
gold that would, at least partially, go abroad—F. £.] ta empty the 
treasury, and 2) since gold would be chiefly wanted by the bank to 
make payments (in settlement of erstwhile transactions), the advance 
against collateral could grow considerably, but would flow back 
to it in the form of deposits, or in payment of due bills of exchange; 
so that, on one side, the total treasure of the bank would decrease 
with an increase of the securities in its hands, while on the other, 
it would now be holding the same amount, which it possessed formerly 
as owner, as debtor of its depositors, and finally the total quantity 
ef currency would decrease. 

Our assumption so far has been that the loans are made in notes, 
so that they carry with them at least a fleeting, even if instantly 
disappearing, increase in the issue of notes. But this is not neces- 
sary. Instead of a paper note, the bank may open a credit account 
for A, in which case this A, the bank’s debtor, becomes its imaginary 
depositor. He pays his creditors with cheques on the bank, and the 
recipient of these cheques passes them on to his own banker, who 
exchanges them for the cheques outstanding against him in the clear- 
ing house. In this case no mediation of notes takes place at all, and 
the entire transaction is confined to the fact that the bank settles 
its own deht with a cheque drawn on itself, and its actual recompense 
consists in its claim on A. In this case the bank has loaned a 
portion of its own bank capital, because its own debt claim, to A. 
. Inso far as this demand for pecuniary accommodation is a demand 
for capital, it is so only for money-capital. It is capital only from 
the standpoint of the banker, namely gold (in the case of gold ex- 
ports abroad) or notes of the National Bank, which a private bank 
can obtain only by purchase against an equivalent, and which, there- 
fore, represent capital for it. Or, again, it is a case of interest- 
bearing papers, government bonds, stocks, etc., which must be 
sold in order to obtain gold or bank-notes. Such papers, however, 
if in government bonds, are capital only for the buyer, for whom 
they represent the purchase price, the capital he invested in them. 
In themselves they are not capital, but merely debt claims. If mort- 
gages, they are mere titles om future ground-rent. And if they are 

448 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

shares of stock, they are mere titles of ownership, which entitle 
the holder to a share in future surplus-value. All of these are not 
teal capital. They do not form constituent parts of capital, nor are 
they values in themselves. By way of similar transactions money 
belonging to the bank may be transformed into deposits, so that the 
bank becomes the debtor instead of owner of this money, and holds 
it under a different title of ownership. However important this may 
be to the bank, it alters nothing in the mass of reserve capital, or 
even of money-capital available in a particular country. Capital, 
therefore, represents here only money-capital, and, if not available 
in the actual form of money, it represents a mere title on capital. 
This is very important, since a scarcity of, and pressing demand 
for, banking capital is confounded with a decrease of acfual capital, 
which conversely is in such cases rather abundant in the form of 
means of production and products, and swamps the markets. 

It is, therefore, easy to explain how the mass of securities held 
by a bank as collateral increases, hence how the growing demand for 
pecuniary accommodation can be satisfied by the bank, while the 
total mass of currency remains the same or decreases. This total 
mass is held in check during such periods of money stringency in 
two ways: 1) byadrain of gold; 2) by a demand for money in its 
capacity as a mere means of payment, when the issued bank-notes 
return immediately; or when the transactions take place wilhout 
the mediation of notes by means of book credit; when, therefore, 
payments are made simply through a credit transaction, the set- 
tlernent of these payments being the sole purpose of the operation. It 
is a peculiarity of money, when it serves merely to settle accounts 
(and in times of crises Joans are taken up to pay, rather than to buy; 
to wind up previous transactions, not to initiate new ones), that 
its circulation is no more than fleeting, even where balances are not 
settled by mere credit operations, without the mediation of money, 
so that, when there is a strong demand for pecuniary accommodation, 
an enormous quantity of such transactions can take place without 
expanding the circulation. But the mere fact that the circulation 
of the Bank of England remains stable or even decreases simulta- 
neously with an extensive accommodation of money on its part, 
does not prima facie prove, as Fullarton, Tooke and others assume 
(owing to their erroneous notion that pecuniary accommodation is 
identical with receiving capital on loan as additional capital), that 
the circulation of money (of bank-notes) in its function as a means 
of payment is not increased and extended. Since the circulation of 
notes as means of purchase decreases during a business depression, 
when such extensive accommodation is necessary, their circulation 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION AND CAPITAL 449 

as means of payment may increase, and the aggregate amount of 
the circulation, the sum of notes functioning as means of purchase 
and payment, may remain stable or may even decrease. The circu- 
lation as a means of payment of bank-notes immediately returning 
to the bank that issues them is simply not circulation in the eyes 
of those economists. 

Should circulation as a means of payment increase at a higher 
rate than it decreases as a means of purchase, the aggregate circu- 
lation would increase, although the money serving as a means of 
purchase would decrease considerably in quantity. And this actual- 
ly occurs in certain periods of crisis, namely, when credit col- 
lapses completely and when not only commodities and securities are 
unsaleable but bills of exchange are undiscountable and nothing 
counts any more but money payment, or, asthe merchant puts it. 
cash. Since Fullarton ef af. do not understand that the circulation 
of notes as means of payment is the characteristic feature of such 
periods of money shortage, they treat this phenomenon as acciden- 
tal. “With respect again to those examples of eager competition 
for the possession of bank-notes, which characterize seasons of 
panic and which may sometimes, as at the close of 1825, lead to a 
sudden, though only temporary, enlargement of the issues, even 
while the efflux of bullion is still going on, these, I apprehend, are 
not to be regarded as among the natural or necessary concomitants 
of a low exchange; the demand in such cases is not for circulation” 
(read circulation as a means of purchase),“but for hoarding, a demand 
on the part of alarmed bankers and capitalists which arises general- 
ly in the last act of the crisis” (hence, lor a reserve of means of pay- 
ment), “after a long continuation of the drain, and is the precursor 
of its termination.” (Fullarton, p. 130.) 

In the discussion of money as a means of payment (Buch I, Kap. 
III, 3, b)* we have already explained, in what manner, when the 
chain of payments is suddenly interrupted, money turns from its 
ideal form into a material and, at the same time, absolute form of 
value vis-a-vis the commodities. This was illustrated by some 
examples (footnotes 100 and 101).** This interruption itself is part- 
ly an effect, partly a cause of the instability of credit and of the cir- 
cumstances accompanying it, such as overstocking of markets. de- 
preciation of commodities, interruption of production, etc. 

It is evident, however, that Fullarton transforms the distinction 
between money as a means of purchase and money as a means of 

* English edition: Ch. Ill, 3, b.—E&d. 
** English edition: Buok I, pp. 138-39, notes 2 and 3.—E&d. 

16 —2757 

, P 
450 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

payment into a false distinction between currency and capital. 
This is again due to the narrow-minded banker’s conception of 
circulation. Jc. 

It might yet be asked: which is it, capital or money in its spe- 
cific [unction as a meansof payment that is in short supply in such 
periods of stringency? And this is a well-known controversy. 

In the first place, so far as the stringency is marked by a drain 
oi goid, it is evidently international means of payment that are de- 
manded. But money in its specific capacity of international means 
of payment is gold in its metallic actuality, as a valuable substance 
in itself, as a quantity of value. It is at the same time capital, not 
capilal as commodity-capital, but as money-capital, capital not in 
the form of commodities but in the form of money (and, at that, of 
money in the eminent sense of the word, in which it exists as uni- 
versal world-market commodity). It is not a contradiction here 
between a demand for money as a means ol payment anda demand 
for capital. The contradiction is ratlier between capital in its mon- 
ey-iorm and capital in its commodity-form; and the form which is 
here demanded and in which alone it can function, is its money- 
form. 

Aside irom this demand for gold (or silver) it cannot be said that 
there is any dearth whatever of capital in such periods of crisis. 
Under extraordinary circumstances, such as rise in the price of 
corn, or a cotton famine, etc., this may be the case; bul these 
phenomena are not necessary or regular accompaniments o! such 
periods; and the existence of such a lack of capital cannot be as- 
sumed beforehand without further ado from the mere Sact that there 
isa heavy demand for pecuniary accommodation. On the contra- 
ry. The markets are overstocked, swamped with commodity-capital. 
Hence, it is not, in any case, a lack of commodify-capital which 
causes the stringency. We shall return to this question later. 

Book III 
THE PROCESS 
OF CAPITALIST PRODUCTION 
AS A WHOLE 
ll 

Cnn 

PART V 

DIVISION OF PROFIT INTO INTEREST 
AND PROFIT OF ENTERPRISE. 
INTEREST-BEARING CAPITAL 

(CONTINUED) 

CHAPTER XXIX 
COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 

It is now necessary to examine the component parts of bank 
capital in greater detail. 

We have just seen that Fullarton and others transform the distine- 
tion between money as a medium of circulation and money as a 
means of payment —also universal money in so far as it concerns 
a drain o! gold—irito a distinction between currency and capital. 

The peculiar role played by capital in this instance is the rea- 
son why bankers’ economics teaches that money is indeed capital 
par excellence as insistently as enlightened economics taught that 
money is not capital. 

In subsequent analyses, we shall demonstrate that money-capi- 
tal is being confused here with moneyed capita! in the sense of in- 
terest-bearing capital, while in the former sense, money-capital is 
always merely a transient form of capital—in contradistinction 
to the other forms of capital, namely, commodity-capital and 
productive capital. 

Bank capital consists of 1) cash money, gold or notes; 2) securi- 
ties. The latler can be subdivided into two parts: commercial paper 
or bills of exchange, which run for a period, become due irom time to 
time, and whose discounting constitutes the esseritial business of the 
banker; and public securities, such as government bonds, treasury 
notes, stocks of all kinds, in short, interest-bearing paper which is 
however significantly different from bills of exchange. Mortgages 
may also be included here. The capital composed of these tangible 
component parts can again be divided into the banker’s invested 
capital and into deposits, which constitute his banking capital. or 
borrowed capital. In the case of banks which issue notes, these must 

ns ° PP PL 
454 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

also he included. We shall leave the deposits and notes out of con- 
sideration for the present. It is evident at any rate that the actual 
component parts of the banker’s capital (money, bills of exchange, 
deposit currency) remain unaffected whether the various elements 
represent the banker's own capital or deposits, i.e., the capital 
of other people. The same division would remain, whether he were 
to carry on his business with only his own capital or only with de- 
posited capital. : 

The form of interest-bearing capital is responsible for the fact 

that every definite and regular money revenue appears as interest 
on some capital, whether it arises [rom some capital or not. The 
money income is first converted into interest, and from the interest 
one can determine the capital from which it arises. In like manner, 
in the case of interest-bearing capital, every sum of value appears 
as capital as long as it is not expended as revenue; that is, it appears 
as principal in contrast to possible or actual interest which it may 
yieid. 
“ The matter is simple. Let the average rate of interest be 5% an- 
nually. A sum of £500 would then yield £25 annually if converted 
into interest-bearing capital. Every fixed annual income of £25 may 
then be considered as interest on a capital of £500. This, however, is 
and remains a purely illusory conception, except in the case where 
the source of the £25, whether it be a mere title of ownership or 
claim, or an actual element of production such as real estate, is 
directly transferable or assumes a form in which it becomes Lrans- 
ferable. Let us take ihe national debt and wages as illustra- 
tions. 

The state has to annually pay its creditors a certain amount of 
interest for the capital borrowed from them. In this case, the cred- 
itor cannot recall his investment from his debtor, but can only sell 
his claim, or his title of ownership. The capital itself has been con- 
sumed, i.e., expended by the state. It no longer exists. What the 
creditor of the state possesses is 1) the state’s promissory note, 
amounting to, say, £100; 2) this promissory note gives the creditor 
aclaim upon the annual revenue of the state, that is, the annual 
tax proceeds, fora certain amount, e.g., £5 or 5%; 3) the creditor 
can sell this promissory note of £100 at his discretion to some other 
person. If the rate of interest is 5%, and the security given by the 
state is good, the owner A can sell this promissory note, as a rule, 
to B for £100; for it is the same to B whether he lends £100 at 5% 
annually, or whether he secures for himself by the payment of 
£100 an annual tribute from the state amounting to £5. But in all 
these cases, the capital, as whose offshoot (interest) state payments 

COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 455 

are considered, is illusory, fictitious capital. Not only that the 
amount loaned to the state no longer exists, but it was never in- 
tended that it be expended as capital, and only by investment as 
capital could it have been transformed into a self-preserving value. 
To the original creditor A, the share of annual taxes accruing to him 
tepresents interest on his capital, just as the share of the spend- 
thrift’s fortune accruing to the usurer appears to the latter, although 
in both cases the loaned amount was not invested as capital. The 
possibility of selling the state’s promissory note represents for A 
the potential means of regaining his principal. As for B, his capital 
is invested, from his individual point of view, as interest-bearing 
capital. So far as the transaction is concerned, B has simply taken 
the place of A by buying the Jatter’s claim on the state’s revenue. 
No matter how often this transaction is repeated, the capital of 
the state debt remains purely fictitious, and, as soon as the prom- 
issory notes become unsaleable, the illusion of this capital disap- 
pears. Nevertheless, this fictitious capital has its own laws of mo- 
tion, as we shall presently see. 

We shall now consider labour-power in contrast to the capital of 
the national debt, where a negative quantity appears as capital— 
just as interest-bearing capital, in general, is the fountain-head of 
all manner of insane forms, so that debts, for instance, can appear 
1o the banker as commodities. Wages are conceived here as inter- 
est, and therefore labour-power as the capital yielding this inter- 
est. For example, if the wage for one year amounts to £50 and the 
rate of interest is 5%, the annual labour-power is equal to a capital 
of £1,600. The insanity of the capitalist mode of conception 
teaches its climax here, lor instead of explaining the expansion of 
capital on the basis of the exploitation of labour-power, the matter 
is reversed and the productivity of labour-power is explained by 
attributing this mystical quality of interest-bearing capital to la- 
bour-power itself. In the second half of the 17th century, this used 
to be a lavourite conception (for example, of Petty}, but it is used 
even nowadays in all seriousness by some vulgar economists and 
more particularly by some German statisticians.’ Unfortunately 
two disagreeably frustrating facts mar this thoughtless conception. 
In the first place, the labourer must work inorder to obtain this in- 

' “The labourer possesses capital-value, which jis arrived at by considering 
the money-value of his annual wage as income from interest.... Capitalizing... 
the average daily wage at 4%, we obtain the average value of a male agricultural 
labourer {o be: German Austria, 1,500 taler; Prussia, 1,500; England, 3,750; 
France. 2,000; inner Russia, 750 taler.” (Von Reden, Vergleichende Kultursiatis- 
tik, Berlin, 1848, p. 434.) 

456 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

terest. In the second place, he cannot transform the capital-value of 
his labour-power into cash by transferring it. Rather, the annual 
value of his labour-power is equal to his average annual wage, and 
what he has to give the buyer in return through his labour is this 
same value plus a surplus-value, i.e., the increment added by his 
labour. In a slave society, the labourer has a capital-value, namely, 
his purchase price. And when he is hired out, the hirer must pay, in 
the first place, the interest on this purchase price, and, in addition, 
replace the annual wear and tear on the capital. 

The formation of a fictitious capital is called capitalization. 
Every periodic income is capitalized by calculating it on the basis 
of the average rate of interest, as an income which would be real- 
ized by a capital loaned at this rate of interest. For example, if the 
annual income is £100 and the rate of interest 5%, then the £100 
would represent the annual interest on £2,000, and the £2,000 is 
regarded as the capital-value of the legal title of ownership on the 
£100 annually. For the person who buys this title of ownership, 
the annual income of £100 represents indeed the interest on his 
capital invested at 5%. All connection with the actual expansion 
process of capital is thus completely lost, and the conception of 
capital as something with automatic self-expansion properties is 
thereby strengthened. 

Even when the promissory note—the security —does not rep- 
resent a purely fictitious capital, as it does in the case of state debts, 
the capital-value of such paper is nevertheless wholly illusory. We 
have previously seen in what manner the credit system creates 
associated capital. The paper serves as title of ownership which 
represents this capital. The stocks of railways, mines, navi- 
gation companies, and the like, represent actual capital, namely, 
the capital invested and functioning in such enterprises, or ‘the 
amount of money advanced by the stockholders for the purpose of 
being used as capital in such enterprises. This does not preclude 
the possibility that these may represent pure swindle. But this 
capital does not exist twice, once as the capital-value ol titles of 
ownership (stocks) on the one hand and on the other hand as_ the 
actual capital invested, or to be invested, in those enterprises. It 
exists only in the latter form, and a share of stock is merely a title 
of ownership to a corresponding portion of the surplus-value to be 
realized by it. A may sell this title to B, and B may sell it toC. 
These transactions do not alter anything in the nature of the 
problem. A or B then has his title in the form of capital, but C has 
transformed his capital into a mere title of ownership to the 
anticipated surplus-value from the stock capital. 

COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 457 

The independent movement of the value of these titles of owner- 
ship, not only of government bonds but also of stocks, adds weight 
to the illusion that they constitute real capital alongside of the cap- 
ital or claim to which they may have title. For they become com- 
modities, whose price has its own characteristic movements and is 
established in its own way. Their market-value is determined differ- 
ently from their nominal value, without any change in the value 
(even though the expansion may change) of the actual capital. On 
the one hand, their market-value fluctuates with the amount and re- 
liability of the proceeds to which they afford legal title. If the nom- 
inal value of a share of slock, that is, the invested sum originally 
represented by this share, is £100, and the enterprise pays 10% 
instead of 5%, then its market-value, everything else remaining 
equal, rises to £200, as long as the rate of interest is 5%, for when 
capitalized at 5%, it now represents a fictitious capital of £200. 
Whoever buys it for £200 receives a revenue of 5% on this invest- 
ment of capital. The converse is true when the proceeds from the 
enterprise diminish. The market-value of this paper is in part 
speculative, since it is determined not only by the actual income, 
but also by the anticipated income, which is calculated in advance. 
But assuming the expansion of the actual capital as constant, or 
where no capital exists, as in the case of state debts, the annual 
income to be fixed by law and otherwise sulficiently secured, the 
price of these securities rises and falls inversely as the rate of in- 
terest. If the rate of interest rises from 5% to10%, then securities 
guaranteeing an income of £5 will now represent a capital of only 
£50. Conversely, if the rate of interest falls to 2%%, the same se- 
curities will represent a capital of £200. Their value is always 
merely capitalized income, that is, the income’calculated on the basis 
ol a fictitious capital at the prevailing rate of interest. Therefore, 
when the money-market is tight these securities will fall in price 
for two reasons: first, because the rate of interest rises, and secondly, 
because they are thrown on the market in large quantities in order 
to convert them into cash. This drop in price takes place regardless 
of whether the income that this paper guarantees its owner is con- 
stant, as is the case with government bonds, or whether the expan- 
sion of the actual capital, which it represents, as in industrial en- 
terprises, is possibly affected by disturbances in the reproduction 
process. In the latter event, there is only still another depreciation 
added to that mentioned above. As soon as the storm is over, 
this paper again rises to its former level, in so far as it does 
nol represent a business failure or swindle. Its depreciation 

458 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

in limes of crisis serves as a potent means of centralizing 
fortunes.’ ; . 

To the extent that the depreciation or increase in value of this 
paper is independent of the movement of value of the actual capi- 
tal that it represents, the wealth of the nation is just as great before 
as after its depreciation or increase in value. “The public stocks aad 
canal and railway shares had already by the 23rd of Octoher, 1847, 
been depreciated in the aggregate to the amount of £114,752,225.” 
(Morris, Governor of the Bank of England, teslimony in the 
Report on Commercial Distress, 1847-48.) Unless this depreciation 
reflected an actual stoppage of production and ol traffic on canals 
and railways, or a suspension of already initiated enterprises, or 
squandering capital in positively worthless ventures, the nation 
did not grow one cent poorer by the bursting of this soap bubble of 
nominal money-capital. 

All this paper actually represents nothing more than accumulat- 
ed claims, or legal titles, {o future production whose money or 
capital value represents either no capital at all, as in the case of 
state debts, or is regulated independently of the value of real 
capital which it represents. 

In all countries based on capitalist production, there exists in 
this form an enormous quantity of so-called interest-bearing capital, 
of moneyed capital. And by accumulation of money-capital noth- 
ing more, in the main, is connoted than an accumulation of these 
claims on production, an accumulation of the market-price, (he 
illusory capital-value of these claims. 

A part of the banker’s capital is now invested in this so-called in- 
terest-bearing paper. This is itself a portion of the reserve capital, 
which does not perform any function in the actual business of bank- 
ing. The most important portion of this paper consists of bills of 
exchange, that is, promises to pay made by industrial capitalists or 
merchants. For the money-lender these bills of exchange are interest- 
bearing, in other words, when he buys them, he deducts interest jor 
the time which they still have to run. This is called discounting. 

> [Immediately after the February Revolution, when commodities and secu- 
rities were extremely depreciated and ulterly unsaleable, a Swiss merchant in 
Liverpool, Mr. R. Zwilchenbart—who told this to my father—cashed all his 
belongings, travelled with cash in hand to Paris and sought out Rothschild, of- 
Jering to participate in a joint enterprise with him. Rothschild looked al him 
fixedly, rushed towards him, grabbed him by his shoulders and asked: “Avez-rous 
de Vargent sur vous??—"Qui, M. le baron."—“Alors vous écs mon homme!" 
(“Have you money in your possession?’—“Yes, Baron."—"“Then you are my 
man.")—And they did a thriving business together.—f. E | 

COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 459 

It depends on the prevailing rate of interest, how much of a deduc- 
tion is made from the sum represented by the: bill of exchange. 

Finally, the last part of the capital of a banker consists of his 
money reserve in gold and notes. The deposits, unless tied up by 
agreement for a certain time, are always at the disposal of the de- 
positors. They are in a state of continual fluctuation. But while one 
depositor draws on his account, another deposits, so that the gen- 
eral average sum total of deposits fluctuates little during periods of 
normal business. 

The reserve funds of the banks, in countries with developed cap- 
italist production, always express on the average the quantity of 
money existing in the form of a hoard, and a portion of this hoard in 
turn consists of paper, mere drafts upon gold, which have no val- 
ue in themselves. The greater portion of banker’s capital is, there- 
fore, purely fictitious and consists of claims (bills of exchange), gov- 
ernment securities (which represent spent capital), and stocks 
(drafts on future revenue). And it should not be forgotten that the 
money-value of the capital represented by this paper in the sales of 
the banker is itself fictitious, in so far as the paper consists of drafts 
on gitaranteed revenue (e.g., government securities), or titles of 
ownership to real capital (e.g., stacks), and that this value is 
regulated differently froni that of the real capital, which the paper 
tepresents at least in part, or, when it represents mere claims an 
Tevenue and no capital, the claim on the same revenue is expressed 
in continually changing fictitious money-capital. In addition to 
this, it must be noted that this fictitious banker’s capital repre 
sents largely, not his own capital, but that of the public, which 
makes deposits with him, either interest-bearing or not. 

Deposils are always made in money, in gold or notes, or in drafts 
upon these. With the exception of the reserve fund, which contracts 
or expands in accordance with the requirements of actual circula- 
tion, these deposits are in fact always in the hands of the indus- 
trial capitalists and merchants, on the one hand, whose bills of ex- 
change are lhereby discounted and who thus receive advances; 
on the other hand, they are in the hands of dealers in securities (ex- 
change brokers), or in the hands of private parties who have sold 
their securities, or in the hands of the government (in the case of 
treasury notes and new loans). The deposits themselves play a double 
role. On the one hand, as we have just mentioned, they are loaned 
out as interest-bearing capital and are, therefore, not in the sales of 
the banks, but figure merely on their books as credits of the deposi- 
tors. On the other hand, they function merely as such book entries, 
in so far as the mutual claims of the depositors are balanced by 

eEBTNS 7 m1 
460 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

cheques on their deposits and can be written off against each other. 
In this connection, it is immaterial whether these deposits are en- 
trusted to the same banker, whocan thus balance the various ac- 
counts against each other, or whether this is done in different banks, 
which mutually exchange cheques and pay only the balances to one 
another. ; ; : 

With the development of interest-bearing capital and the credit 
system, all capital seems to double itself, and sometimes treble it- 
self, by the various modes in which the same capital, or perhaps 
even the same claim on a debt, appears in diflerent forms in differ- 
ent hands.’ The greater portion of this “money-capital” is purely 
fictitious. All the deposits, with the exception of the reserve fund, 
are merely claims on the banker, which, however, never exist as 
deposits. To the extent that they serve in clearing-house transac- 
tions, they perform the function of capital for the bankers— 
alter the latter have loaried them out. They pay one another their 
mutual drafts upon the non-existing deposits by balancing their 
mutual accounts. 

Adam Smith says with regard to the role played by capital in 
the loaning of money: “Even in the moneyed interest, however, the 
money is, as it were, but the deed of assignment which conveys from 
one hand to another those capitals which the owners do not care to 
employ themselves. Those capitals may be greater in almost any 
proportion than the amount of the money, which serves as the in- 
strument of their conveyance, the same pieces of money successively 

>| This doubling and trebling of capital has developed considerably further 
in recent years, for instance, through financial trusts, which already occupy a head- 
ing of their own in the report of the London Stock Exchange. A company is 
organized [or the purchase of a certain class of interest-bearing paper, e.g., of 
foreign government securities, English municipal or American public bonds, 
railway stocks, etc. The capital, for example, £2 million, is raised by stock sub- 
scriptions. The Board of Directors buys up the values in question or speculates 
more or less actively therein, and after deducting the expenses distributes among 
the stockholders the annual interest as dividends. Furthermore, some stock com- 
panies have adopted the custom of dividing the common stock into two classes, 
preferred and delerred. The preferred receive a fixed rate of interest, say, 5%, pro- 
vided that the total profit permits it; if there is anything left alter that, the de 
ferred receive it. In this manner, the “solid” investment of capital in preferred 
shares is more or less separated from actual speculation—with deferred shares. 
Since a few large enterprises have been unwilling to adopt this new custom, the 
expedient has been resorted to of organizing new companies which invest a million 
or several million pounds sterling in shares of the former companies and Lhen issue 
new shares amounting to the nominal value of the purchased shares, but half of 
them are issued as preferred and the other hall as deferred. In such cases the orig- 

panes are doubled, since they serve as a basis for a new issue of shares.— 

COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 461 

serving for many different loans, as well as for many different 
purchases. A, for example, lends to W £1,000, with which W im- 
mediately purchases of B £1,000 worth of goods. B, having no occa- 
sion for the money himself, lends the identical pieces to X, with 
which X immediately purchases of C another £1,000 worth of 
goods. C, in the same manner, and for the same reason, lends them 
to Y, who again purchases goods with them of D. In this manner 
the same pieces, either of coin or of paper, may, in the course of a 
few days, serve as the instrument of three different loans, and of 
three different purchases, each of which is, in value, equal to the 
whole amount of those pieces. What the three moneyed men, A, B 
and C, assign to the three borrowers, W, X and Y, is the power of 
making those purchases. In this power consist both the value and 
the use of the loans. The stock lent by the three moneyed men is 
equal to the value of the goods which can be purchased with it, and 
is three times greater than that of the money with which the pur- 
chases are made. Those loans, however, may be all perfectly well 
secured, the goods purchased by the different debtors being so em- 
ployed, as, indue time, to bring back, with a profit, an equal value 
either of coin or of paper. And as the same pieces of money can thus 
serve as the instrurnent of different loans to three, or for the same 
reason, to thirty times their value, so they may likewise suc- 
cessively serve as the instrument of repayment.” (Book I, 
Chap. IV.) 

Since the same piece of money can be used for various purchases, 
corresponding to its velocity of circulation, it can similarly be 
used for various loans, since the purchases take il from one person 
to another, and a loan is but a transfer from one person to another 
without the mediation of a purchase. To every seller, money rep- 
resents the transformed shape of his commodities. Nowadays, when 
every value is expressed as capital-value, it represents in the various 
loans various capitals in succession. This is simply another way of 
expressing the earlier statement thal it can successively realize var- 
ious commodity-values. At the same time it serves as a medium of 
circulation, in order to transfer the real capilals [rom person to 
person. In the case of loans, it does not pass fram person to person 
as a medium of circulation, As long as it remains in the hands of 
the lender, it is in his hands not a medium of circulation, but lhe 
value existence of his capital. And in this form he transfers it when 
lending it to another. If A had lent the money to B, and B toC, 
without the mediation of purchases, the same money would not rep- 
resent three capitals, but only one—a single capital-value. The 
number of capitals which it actually represents depends on the 

462 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

number of times that it functions as the value-form of various com- 
modity-capitals. . 

The same thing that Adam Smith says about loans in general also 
applies to deposits, which are merely another name for the loans 
which the public makes to the bankers. The same pieces of money 
mav serve as the instruments for any number of deposits. : 

“It is unquestionably true that the £1,000 which you deposit at 
A today may be reissued tomorrow, and form a deposit at B. The 
day after that, reissued from B, it may form a deposit at C . . . and 
so on to infinitude; and that the same £1,000 in money may, thus, 
by a succession of transfers, multiply itself into a sum of deposits 
absolutely indefinite. It is possible, therefore, that nine-tenths of all 
the deposits in the United Kingdom may have no existence beyond 
their record in the books of the bankers who are respectively account- 
able for them.... Thus in Scotland, for instance, currency has never 
exceeded £3 million, the deposits in the banks are estimated at 
£97 million. Unless a run on the banks be made, the same £1,000 
would. if sent back upon its travels, cancel with the same facility 
a sum equally indefinite. As the same £1,000, with which you can- 
cel your debt to a tradesman today, may cancel his debt to the mer- 
chant tomorrow, the merchant’s debt to the bank the day following, 
and so on without end; so the same £1,000 may pass from hand to 
hand, and bank to bank, and cancel any conceivable sum of depos- 
its.” (The Currency Theory Reviewed, pp. 62-63.) 

Just as everything in this credit system is doubled and trebled 
and translormed into a mere phantom of the imagination, so it is 
with the “reserve fund,” where one would at last hope to grasp on to 
something solid. 

Let us listen once more to Mr. Morris, Governor of the Bank of 
England: “The reserves of the private bankers are in the hands of 
the Bank of England in the shape of deposits.... An export of gold 
acts exclusively, in the first instance, upon the reserve of the Bank 
of England; but it would also be acting upon the reserves of the bank- 
ers, inasmuch as it is a withdrawal of a partion of the reserves 
which they have in the Bank of England. It would be acting upon 
the reserves of all the bankers throughout the country.” (Commer- 
cial Distress, 1847-48.) Ultimately, then, the reserve iunds actual- 
ly merge with the reserve fund of the Bank of England.‘ 
However, this reserve fund also has a double existence. The reserve 

a 

: {To what extent this has intensified since then is shown by the following 
official tabulation of the bank reserves of the fifteen largest London banks in 
November 1892, taken from the Daily News of December 5, 1892: 

COMPONENT PARTS OF BANK CAPITAL 463 

fund of the banking department is equal to ihe surplus of notes 
which the Bank is authorized to issue over and above the notes 
in circulation, The legal maximum of the note issue is £14 mil- 
lion (for which no bullion reserve is required; it is the approximate 
amount owed by the state to the Bank) plus the amount of the Bank’s 
supply of precious metal. If the supply of precious metal in the 
Bank amounts to £14 million, the Bank can thus issue £28 million 
in notes, and if £20 million of these are in circulation, the reserve 
fund of the banking department is £8 million. These £8 million 
worth of notes is then legally the banker's capital at the disposal 
af the Bank, and at the same time the reserve fund for its deposits. 
Now, if a drain of gold takes place, whereby the supply of precious 
metal in the Bank is reduced by £6 million—requiring the de- 
struction of an equivalent number of notes—the reserve of the bank- 
ing department would fall from £8 million to £2 million. On the 
one hand, the Bank would raise its rate of interest considerably; 
on the other hand, the banks having deposits with it, and the other 
depositors, would observe a Jarge decrease in the reserve [und cov- 
ering their own credits in the Bank. In 1857, the four largest stock 

Name of Bank Liabilities oes pay 
Cit yet salt sede a8 as £9 ,3L7 629 £746,551 8.01 
Capital and Counties 11,392, 744 1,307,483 11.47 
Imperial. 2... 3,987,400 447,157 11.22 
Lloyds. .-.--e. 23, 800,937 2,966, 806 12.46 
Lon. and Westminster 24,671,559 3,818,885 15.50 
Lon. and S. Western 5,570,268 812,353 14.58 
London Joint Stock. . 12,127,993 1, 288,977 10.62 
London and Midland 8,814,499 1,127,280 12.79 
London and Counly. . 37,111,035 3,600, 374 9.70 
National. ...... 11,163,829 1,426,225 12.77 
National Provincial. . 4) ,907 , 384 4,614,780 11.0l 
Parrs and the Alliance 12,794,489 1,532,707 11.98 
Prescott uCo. ... . 4,041,058 538,517 13.07 
Union of London. . . 15,502,618 2,300 ,O84 14.84 
Williams, Deacon u 

Manchester u Co. . 10,452,381 1,317,628 12.60 
TOtalisses aie ean £232, 655,823 $27,845, 807 11.97 

Of this total reserve of almost 28 million, at least 25 million are deposited in 
the Bank of England, and at most 3 million are in cash in the safes of the 15 banks 
themselves. But the cash reserve of the banking department of the Bank of Eng: 
land amounted to less than [6 million during (hat same month of November 
1892.—F. E}. ‘ 

464 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ee EE 

banks of London threatened to call in their deposits, and thereby 
bankrupt the banking department, unless the Bank of England 
would secure a “government letter” suspending the Bank Act of 
1844.5 In this way the banking department could fail, as in 1847, 
while any number of millions (e.g., 8 million in 1847) are held in 
its issue department to guarantee the convertibility of the circulat- 
ing notes. But this is again illusory. 

“That large portion (of deposits) for which the bankers them- 
selves have no immediate demand passes into the hands of the bill- 
brokers, who give to the banker in return commercial bills already 
discounted by them for persons in London and in different parts of 
the country asa security for the sum advanced by the banker. The 
bill-broker is responsible to the banker for payment of this money 
at call; and such is the magnitude of these transactions, that 
Mr. Neave, the present Governor of the Bank [of England], stated 
in evidence, ‘We know that one broker had 5 million, and we were 
led to believe that another had between 8 and 10 million; there 
was one with 4, another with 3%, andathird with above 8. I speak 
ol deposits with the brokers.’” (Report of Committee on Bank 
Acts, 1857-58, p. 5, section 8.) 

“The London bill-brokers carried on their enormous transactions 
without any cash reserve, relying on the run off of their bills fall- 
ing due, or in extremity, on the power of obtaining advances from 
the Bank of England on the security of bills under discount. Two 
bill-broking houses in London suspended payment in 1847; both 
afterwards resumed business. In 1857, both suspended again. The 
liabilities of one house in 1847 were, in round numbers, £2,683,000, 
with a capital of £180,000; the liabilities of the same house, in 
1857, were £5,300,000, the capital probably not more than one- 
fourth of what it was in 1847. The liabilities of the other firm were 
between £3,000,000 and £4,000,000 at each period of stoppage, 
with a capital not exceeding £45,000." (/bid., p. XXI, Section 52.) 

_* The suspension of the Bank Act of 1844 permits the Bank to issue any quan- 
tity of bank-notes regardless of the gold reserve backing in its possession; thus 
to create an arbitrary quantity of fictitious paper money-capital, and to use it 
for the purpose of making loans to banks, exchange brokers, and through them to 
commerce. 

CHAPTER XXX 
MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I 

The only difficult questions, which we are now approaching in 
connection with the credit system, are the following: 

First: The accumulation of the actual money-capital. To what 
extent is it, and to what extent is it not, an indication of an actual 
accumulation of capital, i.e., of reproduction on an extended scale? 
Is the so-called plethora of capital—an expression used only 
with reference to the interest-bearing capital, i.e., moneyed capi- 
tal—only a special way of expressing industrial over-production, 
or does it constitute a separate phenomenon alongside of it? Does 
this plethora, or excessive supply of money-capital, coincide with 
the existence of stagnating masses of money (bullion, gold coin and 
bank-notes), so that this superabundance of actual money is the ex- 
pression and external form of that plethora of loan capital? 

Secondly: To what extent does a scarcity of money, i.e., a short- 
age of loan capital, express a shortage of real capital (commodity- 
capital and productive capital)? To what extent does it coincide, 
on the other hand, with a shortage of money as such, a shortage of 
the medium of circulation? 

In so far as we have hitherto considered the peculiar form of 
accumulation .of money-capital and of money wealth in general, it 
has resolved itself into an accumulation of claims of ownership 
upon labour. The accumulation of the capital of the national debt 
has been revealed to mean merely an increase in a class of state 
creditors, who have the privilege of a firm claim upon a certain 
portion of the tax revenue.® By means of these facts, whereby 

* The public fund is nothing but imaginary capital, which represents that 
portion of the annual revenue, which is set aside to pay the debt. An equivalent 
amount of capital has been spent; it is this which serves as a denominator for the 
loan, but it is not this which is represented by the public fund; for the capital no 
longer exists. New wealth must be created by the work of industry; a portion of 
this wealth is annually set aside in advance for those who have loaned that wealth 
which has been spent; this portion is taken by means of taxes from those who pro- 

465 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

even an accumulation of debts may appear as an accumulation of 
capital, the height of distortion taking place in the credit system 
becomes apparent. These promissory notes, which are issued for 
the originally loaned capital long since spent, these paper dupli- 
cates of consumed capital, serve for their owners as capital to the 
extent that they are saleable commodities and may, therefore, be 
reconverted into capital. 

Titles of ownership to public works, railways, mines, etc., are 
indeed, as we have also seen, titles to real capital. But they do not 
place this capital at one’s disposal. It is not subject to withdrawal. 
They merely convey legal claims to a portion of the surplus-value 
to be produced by it. But these titles likewise become paper du- 
plicates of the real capital; it is as though a bill of lading were to 
acquire a value separate from the cargo, both concomitantly and 
simultaneously with it. They come to ncminally represent non- 
existent capital. For the real capital exists side by side with them 
and does not change hands as a result of the transfer of these dupli- 
cates [rom one person to another. They assume the form of interest- 
bearing capital, not only because they guarantee a certain income, 
but also because, through their sale, their repayment as capital- 
values can be obtained. To the extent that the accumulation of this 
Paper expresses the accumulation of railways, mines, steamships, 
etc., to that extent does it express the extension of the actual re- 
production process—just as the extension of, for example, a (ax list 
on movable property indicates the expansion of this property. But 
as duplicates which are themselves objects of transactions as com- 
modities, and thus able to circulate as capital-values, they are illu- 
sory, and their value may fall or rise quite indenendently of the 
movement of value of the real capital for which they are titles. 
Their value, that is, their quotation on the Stock Exchange, neces- 
sarily has a tendency to rise with a fall in the rate of interest—in 
so far as this fall, independent of the characteristic movements of 
money-capital, is due merely to the tendency for the rate of profit 
to fall; therefore, this imaginary wealth expands, if for this rea- 
son alone, in the course of capitalist production in accordance with 
the expressed value for each of its aliquot parts of specific original 
nominal value.’ 

duce it, and is given to the creditors of the state, and, according to the customary 
proportion between capital and interest in the country, an imaginary capital is 
assumed equivalent to that which could give rise to the annual income which 
these creditors are fo receive. (Sismondi, Nouveaux principes, II, p. 230.) 

A portion of the accumulated loanable money-capital is indeed merely an 
expression of industrial capital. For instance, when England, in 1857, had invest: 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAT. CAPITAL. 1 467 

Gain and loss through fluctuations in the price of these titles of 
ownership, and their centralization in the hands of railway kings, 
etc., become, by their very nature, more and more a matter of gam- 
ble, which appears to take the place of labour as the original method 
of acquiring capital wealth and also replaces naked Iorce. This type 
of imaginary money wealth not only constitutes a very considerable 
part of the money wealth of private people, but also of banker’s 
capital, as we have already indicated. 

In order to quickly settle this question, let us point out that one 
could also mean by the accumulation of money-capital the aceumu- 
lation of wealth in the hands of bankers (money-lenders by proles- 
sion), acting as middlemen between private money-capitalists on the 
one hand, and the state, communities, and reproducing borrowers 
on the other. For the entire vast extension of the credit system, and 
all credit in general, is exploited by them as their private capital. 
These fellows always possess capital and incomes in money-lorm 
or in direct claims on money. The accumulation of the wealth of 
this class may take place completely differently than actual ac- 
cumulation, but it proves at any rate that this class pockets a good 
deal of the real accumulation. ; 

Let us reduce the scope of the problem before us. Government 
securities, like stocks and other securities of all kinds, are spheres of 
investment for loanable capital—capital intended for bearing inter- 
est. They are forms of loaning such capital. But they themselves 
are not the loan capital, which isinvested in them. On the other 
hand, in so far ascredit plays a direct role in the reproduction proc- 
ess, what the industrialist or merchant needs when he wishes to have 
a bill discounted or a loan granted is neither stocks nor govern- 
ment securities. What he needs is money. He, therefore, pledges 
or sells those securities if he cannot secure money in any other 
way. It is the accumulation of thés loan capital with which we have 
to deal here, and more particularly accumulation of loanable money- 
capital. We are not concerned here with loans of houses, machines, 
or other fixed capital. Nor are we concerned with the advances 
industrialists and merchants make to one another in commodities 
and within the compass of the reproduction process; although we 

ed £80 million in American railways and other enterprises, this investment was 
transacted almost completely by the export of English commodities for which 
ihe Americans did not have to make payment in return. The English exporter 
drew bilts of exchange for these commodities on America, which the English 
stock subscribers bought up and which were sent to America for purchasing the 
slock subscriptions. 

: N OF Fir 
468 DIVISION OF PRO 

must also investigate this point beforehand in more detail. We are 
concerned exclusively with money loans, which are made by bank- 
ers, as middlemen, to industrialists and merchants. 

Let us then, to begin with, analyse commercial credit, that is, 
the credit whicl the capitalists engaged in reproduction give to one 
another. It forms the basis of the credit system. It is represented by 
the bill of exchange, a promissory note with a definite term of pay- 
ment, i.e., a document of deferred payment. Everyone gives credit 
with one hand and receives credit with the other. Let us completely 
disregard, for the present, banker’s credit, which constitutes an en- 
tirely different sphere. To the extent that these bills of exchange 
circulate among the merchants themselves as means of payment 
again, by endorsement from one to another—without, however, the 
mediation of discounting—it is merely a transfer of the claim from 
A to B and does not change the picture in the least. It merely re- 
places one person by another. And even in this case, the liquidation 
can take place without the intervention of money. Spinner A, for 
example, has to pay a bill to cotton broker B, and the latter to 
importer C. Now, if Calso exports yarn, which happens often enough, 
he may buy yarn from A ona bill of exchange and thespinner A 
may pay the broker B with the broker’s own bill which was received 
in payment from C. At most, a balance will have to be paid in 
money. The entire transaction then consists merely inthe exchange 
of cotton and yarn. The exporter represents only the spinner, and 
the cotton broker, the cotton planter. 

Two things are now to be noted in the circuit of this purely com- 
mercial credit. 

First: The settlement of these mutual claims depends upon the 
return flow of capital, that is, on C—M, which is merely deferred. 
If the spinner has received a bill of exchange from a cotton goods 
manufacturer, then manufacturer can pay if the cotton goods which 
he has on the market have been sold in the interim. If the corn 
speculator has a bill of exchange drawn upon his agent, the agent 
can pay the money if the corn has been sold in the interim at the 
expected price. These payments, therefore, depend on the fluidity 
of reproduction, that is, the production and consumption proc- 
esses. But since the credits are mutual, the solvency of one depends 
upon the solvency of another; for in drawing his bill of exchange, 
one may have counted either on the return flow of the capital in 
his own business or on the return flow of the capital in a third par- 
ty’s business whose bill of exchange is due in the meantime. Aside 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. T 469 

from the prospect of return flow of capital, payment can only be 
possible by means of reserve capital at the disposal of the person 
drawing the bill of exchange, in order to meet his obligations in 
case the return flow of capital should be delayed. 

Secondly: This credit systern does not do away with the necessity 
for cash payments. For one thing, a large portion of expenses must 
always be paid in cash, e.g., wages, taxes, etc. Furthermore, capi- 
talist B, who has received from Ca bill of exchange in place of cash 
payment, may have to pay a bill of his own which has fallen due 
to D before C’s bill becomes due, and so he must have ready cash. 
A complete circuit of reproduction as that assumed above, i.e., 
from cotton planter to colton spinner and back again, can only con- 
stitute an exception; it will be constantly interrupted at many points. 
We have s2en in the discussion of the reproduction process (Book II, 
Part I]I) that the producers of constant capital excharige, in part, 
constant capital among themselves. As a result, the bills of exchange 
can, more or less, balance each other out. Similarly, in the ascending 
line of production, where the cotton broker draws on the cotton 
spinner, the spinner on the manufacturer of cotton goods, the manu- 
facturer on the exporter, the exporter on the importer (perhaps of 
cotton again). But the circuit of transactions, and, therefore, the 
turn about of the series of claims, does not take place al the same 
time. For example, the claim of the spinner on the weaver is not 
settled by the claim of the coal-dealer on the machine-builder. The 
spinner never has any counter-claims on the machine-builder, in his 
business, because his product, yarn, never enters as an element 
in the machine-builder’s reproduction process. Such claims must, 
therefore, be settled by money. 

The limits of this commercial credit, considered by themselves, 
are 1) the wealth of the industrialists and merchants, that is, their 
command of reserve capital in case of delayed returns; 2) these re- 
turns themselves. These returns may be delayed, or the prices of 
commodities may fall in the meantime or the commodities may he- 
come momentarily unsaleable due to a stagnant market. The longer 
the bills of exchange run, the larger must be the reserve capital, and 
the greater the possibility of a diminution or delay of the returns 
through a fall in prices or a glut on the market. And, furthermore, 
the returns are so much less secure, the more the original transac- 
tion was conditioned upon speculation on the rise or [all of commodi- 
ty-prices. But it is evident that with the development of the pro- 
ductive power of labour, and thus of production on a large scale: 
1) the markets expand and become more distant [rom the place of 
production; 2) credits must, therefore, be prolonged; 3) the specu- 

470 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

lative element must thus more and more dominate the transactions. 
Production on a large scale and for distant markets throws the to- 
tal product into the hands of commerce; but it is impossible that 
ithe capital of a nation should double itself in such a manner that 
commerce should itself be able to buy up the entire national prod- 
uct with its own capital and to sell it again. Credit is, therefore, 
indispensable here; credit, whose volume grows with the growing 
volume of value of production and whose time duration grows with 
the increasing distance of the markets. A mutual interaction takes 
place here. The development of the production process extends the 
credit, and credit leads to an extension of industrial and commercial 
operations. 

When we examine this credit detached from banker’s credit, it 
is evident that it grows with an increasing volume of industrial cap- 
ital itself. Loan capital and industrial capital are identical here. 
The loaned capital is commodity-capital which is intended either 
for ultimate individual consumption or lor the replacement of the 
constant elements of productive capital. What appears here as loan 
capital is always capital existing in some definite phase of the re- 
production process, but which by means of purchase and sale passes 
from one person to another, while its equivalent is not paid by the 
buyer until some later stipulated time. For example, cotton is 
transferred to the spinner for a bill of exchange, yarn to the manu- 
facturer of cotton goods for a bill of exchange, cotton goods to the 
merchant Tor a bill, from whose hands they go to the exporter for a 
bill, and then, for a bill to some merchant in India, who sells the 
goods and buys indigo instead, etc. During this transfer from hand 
to hand the transformation of cotton into cotton goods is effected, 
and the cotton goods are finally transported to India and exchanged 
for indigo, which is shipped to Europe and there enters into the re- 
production process again. The various phases of the reproduction 
process are promoted here by credit, without any payment on the 
part of the spinner for the cotton, the manufacturer of cotton goods 
for the yarn, the merchant for the cotton goods, etc. In the first stages 
of the process, the commodity, cotton, goes through its various 
production phases, and this transition is promoted by credit. But 
as soon as the cotton has received in production its ultimate form as 
a commodity, the same commodity-capital passes only through 
the hands of various merchants who promote its transportation to 
distant markets, and the last of whom finally sells these commodi- 
ties to the consumer and buys other commodities in their stead, 
which either become consumed or go into the reproduction proc- 
ess. It is necessary, then, to differentiate between two stages here: 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I 47] 

in the first stage, credit promotes the actual successive phases in 
the production of the same article; in the second, credit merely pro- 
motes the transfer of the article, including its transportation, from 
one merchant to another, in other words, the processC—M. But here 
also the commodity is at least in the process of circulation, that is, 
in a phase of the reproduction process. 

It follows, then, that it isnever idle capital which is loaned here, 
but capital which must change its form in the hands of its owner; 
it exists in a form that for him is merely commodity-capital, i.e., 
capital which must be retransformed, and, to begin with, at least 
converted into money. It is, therefore, the metamorphosis of commod- 
ities that is here promoted by credit; not merely C—M, but also 
M—C and the actual production process. A large quantity of credit 
within the reproductive circuit (banker's credit excepted) does not 
signily a large quantity of idle capital, which is being offered for 
loan and is seeking profitable investment. It means rather a large 
employment of capital in the reproduction process. Credit, then, 
promotes here 1) as far as the industrial capitalists are concerned, 
the transition of industrial capital from one phase into another, 
the connection of related and dovetailing spheres of production; 
2) as far as the merchants are concerned, the transportation and 
transition of commodities [rom one person to another until their 
definite sale for money or their exchange for other commodities. 

The maximum of credit is here identical with the fullest em- 
ployment of industrial capital, that is, the utmost exertion of its 
reproductive power without regard to the limits of consumption. 
These limits of consumption are extended by the exertions of the 
reproduction process itself. On the one hand, this increases (he con- 
sumption of revenue on the part of labourers and capitalists, on the 
other hand, it is identical with an exertion of productive consump- 
tion. 

As long as the reproduction process is continuous and, therefore, 
the return flow assured, this credit exists and expands, and its ex- 
pansion is based upon the expansion of the reproduction process 
itself. As soon as a stoppage takes place, asa result of delayed re- 
turns, glutted markets, or fallen prices, a superabundance of indus- 
trial capital becomes available, but in a form in which it cannot per- 
form its functions. Huge quantities of commodity-capital, but un- 
saleable. Huge quantities of fixed capital, but largely idle due to 
stagnant reproduction. Credit is contracted 1!) because this capital 
is idle, i.e., blocked in one of its phases of reproduction because it 
cannot complete its metamorphosis; 2) because confidence in the 
continuity of the reproduction process has been shaken; 3) because 

472 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

the demand for this commercial credit diminishes. The spinner, who 
curtails his production and has a large quantity of unsold yarn in 
stock, does not need to buy any cotton on credit; the merchant 
does not need to buy any commodities on credit because he has more 
than enough of them. 

Hence, if there is a disturbance in this expansion or even in the 
normal flow of the reproduction process, credit also becomes scarce; 
it is more difficult to obtain commodities on credit. However, the 
demand for cash payment and the caution observed toward sales on 
credit are particularly characteristic of the phase of the industrial 
cycle following a crash. During the crisis itself, since everyone has 
products to sell, cannot sell them, and yet must sell them in order 
to meet payments, it is not the mass of idle and invest ment-seeking 
capital, but rather the mass of capital impeded in its reproduction 
process, that is greatest just when the shortage of credit is most acute 
(and therefore the rate of discount highest for banker’s credit). 
The capital already invested is then, indeed, idle in large quantities 
because the reproduction process is stagnant. Factories are closed, 
taw materials accumulate, finished products flood the market as 
commodities . Nothing is more erroneous, therefore, than to blame a 
scarcity of productive capital for such a condition. It is precisely 
at such times that there is a superabundance of productive capital, 
partly in relation to the normal, but temporarily reduced scale of 
reproduction, and partly in relation to the paralysed consumption. 

Let us suppose that the whole of society is composed only of in- 
dustrial capitalists and wage-workers. Let us lurthermore disregard 
price fluctuations, which prevent large portions of the total capital 
from replacing themselves in their average proportions and which, 
owing to the general interrelations of the entire reproduction proc- 
ess as developed in particular by credit, must always call] forth 
general stoppages of a transient nature. Let us also disregard the 
sham transactions and speculations, which the credit system fa- 
vours. Then, a crisis could only be explained as the result of a dis- 
proportion of production in various branches of the economy, and as 
a result of a disproportion between the consumption of the capital- 
ists and their accumulation. But as matters stand, the replacement 
of the capital invested in production depends largely upon the 
consuming power of the non-producing classes; while the consuming 
power of the workers is limited partly by the laws of wages, partly 
by the fact that they are used only as long as they can be profitably 
employed by the capitalist class. The ultimate reason for all real 
crises always remains the poverty and restricted consumption of 
the masses as opposed to the drive of capitalist production to de- 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. 1 473 

velop the productive forces as though only the absolute consuming 
power of society constituted their limit. 

A real lack of productive capital, at least among capitalisti- 
cally developed nations, can be said toexist only in times of gener- 
al crop failures, either in the principal foodstufls or in the princi- 
pal industrial raw materials. 

However, in addition to this commercial credit we have actual 
money credit. The advances of the industrialists and merchants 
among one another are amalgamated with the money advances made 
to them by the bankers and money-lenders. In discounting bills of 
exchange the advance is only nominal. A manufacturer sells his 
product Jor a bill of exchange and gets this bill discounted by some 
bill-broker. In reality, the latter advances only the credit of his 
banker, who in turn advances to the broker the money-capital of 
his depositors. The depositors consist of the industrial capitalists 
and merchants themselves and also of workers (through savings- 
banks)—as well as ground-rent recipients and other unproductive 
classes. In this way every individual industrial manufacturer and 
merchant gets around the necessily of keeping a large reserve fund 
and being dependent upon his actual returns. On the other hand, the 
whole process becomes so complicated, partly by simply manipu- 
lating bills of exchange, partly by commodity transactions for the 
sole purpose of manufacturing bills of exchange, that the sem- 
blance of a very solvent business with a smooth flow of returns can 
easily persist even long after returns actually come in only at the ex- 
pense partly of swindled money-lenders and partly of swindled pro- 
ducers. Thus business always appears almost excessively sound right 
on the eve of acrash. The best proof of this is furnished, for instance, 
by the Reports on Bank Acts of 1857 and 1858, in which all bank 
directors, merchants, in short all the invited experts with Lord 
Overstone at their head, congratulated one another on the prosper- 
ity and soundness of business—just one morith before the outbreak 
of the crisis in August 1857. And, strangely enough, Tooke in his 
History of Prices succumbs to this illusion once again as historian 
for each crisis. Business is always thoroughly sound and the cam- 
paign in full swing, until suddenly the debacle takes place. 

We revert now to the accumulation of money-capital. 

Not every augmentation of loanable money-capital indicates a 
real accumulation of capital or expansion of the reproduction proc- 
ess. This becomes most evident in the phase of the industrial cycle 
immedialely following a crisis, when loan capital lies around idle 

474 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

in great quantities. At such times, when the production process is 
curtailed (production in the English industrial districts was re- 
duced by one-third alter the crisis of 1847), when the prices of 
commodities are at their lowest level, when the spirit of enterprise 
is paralysed, the rate of interest is low, which in this case indicates 
nothing more than an increase in loanable capital precisely as a re- 
sult of contraction and paralysation of industrial capital. It is 
quite obvious that a smaller quantity of a circulation medium is 
required when the prices of commodities have fallen, the number of 
transactions decreased, and the capital laid out for wages reduced; 
that, on the other hand, no additional money is required to function 
as world-money alter foreign debts have been liquidated either by 
the export of gold or as a result of bankruptcies; that, finally, the 
volume of business connected with discounting bills of exchange di- 
minishes in proportion with the reduced number and magnitudes 
of the bills of exchange themselves. Hence the demand for loanable 
monev-capital, either to act as a medium of circulation or as a means 
of payment (the investment of new capital is still out of the ques- 
tion), decreases and this capital, therefore, becomes relatively abun- 
dant. Under such circumstances, however, the supply of loanable 
money-capital also increases, as we shall later see. 

Thus, the situation after the crisis of 1847 was characterized by 
“a Jimitation of transaction and a great superabundance of money.” 
(Commercial Distress, 1847-48, Evidence No. 1664.) The rate of 
interest was very low because of the “almost perfect destruction of 
commerce and the almost total want of means of employing money” 
(foc. cit.. p. 45, testimony of Hodgson, Director of the Royal Bank 
of Liverpool). What nonsense these gentlemen concocted (and Hodg- 
son is, moreover, one ol the best of them) in order to explain these 
facts, can be seen [rom thefollowing remark: “The pressure (1847) 
arose from the real diminution of the moneyed capital of the coun- 
try, caused partly by the necessity of paying in gold for imports 
from all parts of the world, and partly by the absorption of floating 
into fixed capital.” How the conversion of floating capital into fixed 
capital reduces the money-capital of a country is unintelligible. 
For, in the case of railways, e.g., in which capital was mainly in- 
vested at that time, neither gold nor paper is used for viaducts and 
rails, and the money for the railway stocks, to the extent that 
it had been deposited solely in payment, performed exactly the 
same functions as any other money deposited in banks and even in- 
creased the Joanable money-capital temporarily, as already shown 
above, but to the extent that it had actually been spent for con- 
struction, it circulated in the country as a medium of pur- 

MONBEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I 475 

chase and of payment. Only in so far as fixed capital cannot 
be exported, so that with the impossibility of its export the avail- 
able capital secured from returns for exported articles also drops 
out of the picture—including the returns in cash or bullion—only 
to that extent could the money-capital be affected. But at that time 
English export articies were also piled up in huge quantities on 
the foreign markets without being able to be sold. It is true, the 
floating capital of the merchants and manufacturers of Manchester, 
etc., who liad a portion of their normal business capital tied up 
in railway stocks and were therefore dependent upon borrowed capi- 
tal for running their business, had become fixed, and they, there- 
fore, had to sufler the consequences. Bul il would have been the 
same, if the capital belonging to their business, but withdrawn 
from it, had been invested, say, in mines instead of railways—min- 
ing products like iron, coal, copper being themselves in turn 
floating capital. The actual reduction of available money-capilal 
through crop failures, corn imports, and gold exports constituted, 
naturally, an event that had nothing to do with the railway swin- 
dle.—“Almost all mercantile houses had begun tostarve their busi- 
ness more or less... by taking part ol their commercial capital for rail- 
ways."—"Loans to sogreat an extent by commercial houses to rail- 
ways induced them to Jean too muclt upon ... banks by the discount 
of paper, whereby to carry on their commercial operations” (the sane 
Hodgson, foe. cit., p. 67). “In Manchester there have been immense 
losses in consequence of the speculation in railways” (R. Gardner, 
previously cited in Buch 1, Kap. XII}, 3, c,* and in several other 
places; Evidence No. 4884, doc. cit.). 

One of the principal causes of the crisis of 1847 was the colossal 
flooding of the market and the fabulous swindle in the East Indian 
trade with commodities, But there were also other circumstances 
which bankrupted very rich firms in this line: “They had large 
means, but not available. The whole of their capital was locked up 
in estates in the Mauritius, or indigo factories, or sugar factories. 
Having incurred liabilities to the extent of £500,.000-600.000, 
they had no available assets to pay their bills, and eventually 
it proved that to pay their bills they were entirely dependent upon 
their credit.” (Ch. Turner, big East Indian merchant in Liverpool, 
No. 730, foc. cif.) See also Gardner (No. 4872, foc. cit.): “Immedi- 
ately alter the China treaty, so great a prospect was held out to the 
country of a great extension of our commerce with China, that there 
were many large mills built with a view to that trade exclusively, 

* English edition: Ch. XV, 3, ¢.--Ed. 

476 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

in order {o manufacture that class of cloth which is principally tak- 
en jor the China market, and our previous manulactures had the 
addition of all those.”—“4874. How has that trade turned out?— 
Most ruinous, almost beyond description; [ do not believe, that of 
the whole of the shipments that were made in 1844 and 1845 to 
China, above two-thirds of the arnount have ever been returned; 
in consequence of tea being the principal article of repayment and 
of the expectation that was held out, we, as manufacturers, fully 
calculated upon a great reduction in the duty on tea.”—And now, 
naively expressed, comes the characteristic credo of the English 
manufacturer: “Our commerce with no foreign market is limited 
by their power to purchase the commodity, but it is limited in this 
country by our capability of consuming that which we receive in 
return for our manufactures.” (The relatively poor countries, with 
whom England trades, are, of course, able to pay for and consume 
any amount of English products, but unfortunately wealthy England 
cannot assimilate the products sent in return.)—“4876. I sent out 
some goods in the first instance, and the goads sold at about 15 per 
cent loss, from the full conviction that the price, at which my agents 
could purchase tea, would leave so great a profit in this country as 
to make up the deficiency ... but instead of profit, I lost in some in- 
stances 25 and up to 50 per cent.”—"4877. Did the manufacturers 
generally export on their own account?—Principally; the mer- 
chants, I think, very soonsaw that the thing would not answer, and 
they rather encouraged the manufacturers to consign than take a 
direct interest themselves.”—-In 1857, on the other hand, the losses 
and failures jell mainly upon the merchants, since the manufac- 
turers left them the task of flooding the foreign markets “on their 
own account.” 

An expansion of money-capital, which arises out of the fact that, 
in view of the expansion of banking (see, below, the example of 
Ipswich, where in the course of a few years immediately preceding 
1857 the deposits of the capitalist farmers quadrupled), what was 
formerly a private hoard or coin reserve is always converted into 
loanable capital for a definite time, does not indicate a growth in 
productive capital any more than the increasing deposits with the 
London stock banks when the latter began to pay interest on depos- 
its. As long as the scale of production remains the same, this ex- 
pansion leads only to an abundance of loanable money-capital as 
compared with the productive. Hence the low rate of interest. 

After the reproduction process has again reached that state of 
prosperity which precedes that of over-exertion, commercial credit 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I 477 

becomes very much extended; this forms, indeed, the “sound” basis 
again lor a ready flow of returns and extended production. In 
this state the rate of interest is still low, although it rises above its 
minimum. This is, in fact, the ony time that it can be said a low 
rate of interest, and consequently a relative abundance of loanable 
capital, coincides with a real expansion of industrial capital. The 
ready flow and regularity of the returns, linked with extensive 
commercial credil, ensures the supply of loan capital in spite of 
the increased demand for it, and prevents the level of the rate of 
interest from rising. On the other hand, those cavaliers who work 
without any reserve capital or without any capita! at all and who 
thus operate completely on a money credit basis begin to appear for 
the first time in considerable numbers. To this is now added the great 
expansion of fixed capital in all forms, and the opening of new en- 
terprises on a vast and far-reaching scale. The interest now rises 
to its average level. It reaches its maximum again as soon as the 
new crisis sets in. Credit suddenly stops then, payments are suspend- 
ed, the reproduction process is paralysed, and with the previously 
mentioned exceptions, a superabundance of idle industrial capi- 
tal appears side by side with an almost absolute absence of loan 
capital. 

On the whole, then, the movement of loan capital, as expressed in 
the rale of interest, is in the opposite direction lo that of industri- 
al capital. The phase wherein a low rate of interest, but above the 
minimum, coincides with the “improvement” and growing confidence 
after acrisis, and particularly the phase wherein the rate of inter- 
est reaches its average level, exactly midway between its mini- 
mum and maximum, are the only two periods during which an abun- 
dance of loan capital is available simultaneously with a great 
expansion of industrial capital. But at the beginning of the indus- 
trial cycle, a low rate of interest coincides with a contraction, and 
at the end of the industrial cycle, a high rate of interest coincides 
with a superabundance of industrial capital. The low rate of inter- 
est that accompanies the “improvement” shows that the commer- 
cial credit requires bank credit only lo a slight exlent because it 
is still self-supporting. 

The industrial cycle is of such a nature thal the same circuit 
must periodically reproduce itself, once the first impulse has been 
given.* During a period of slack, production sinks below the level, 

® [As I have already stated elsewhere, a change has taken place here since the 
last major general crisis. The acute form of the periodic process, with its former 
ten-year cycle, appears to have given way to a more chronic, long drawn out, 
alternation between a relatively short aud slight business improvement and a 

478 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

which it had attained in the preceding cycle and for which the 
technical basis lias now been laid. During prosperity—the middle 
period—it continues to develop on this hasis. In the period of over- 
production and swindle, it strains the productive forces to the 
utmost, until it exceeds the capitalistic limits of the production 
process. ; 

It is clear that there is a shortage of means of payment during a pe- 
ricd of crisis. The convertibility of bills of exchange replaces the 
metamorphosis of commodities themselves, and so much more so 
exactly at such times the more a portion of the firms operates on 
pure credit. Ignorant and mistaken bank legislation, such as that 
of 1844-45, can intensify this money crisis. But no kind of bank 
legislation can eliminate a crisis. 

In a system of production, where the entire continuity of the 
reproduction process rests upon credit, a crisis must obviously oc- 
cur—a (remendous rush for means of payment—when credit sud- 
denly ceases and only cash payments have validity. At first glance, 
therefore, the whole crisis seerns to be merely a credit and money 
crisis. And in fact it is orily a question of the convertibility of bills 
ol exchange into money. But the majority of these bills represent 
actual sales and purchases, whose extension far beyond the needs 
oi society is, alter all, the basis of the whole crisis. At the same 
time, an enormous quantity of these bills of exchange represents 
plain swindle, which now reaches the light of day and collapses; 

relatively long, indecisive depression—taking place in the various industrial coun- 
tries at different times. But perhaps it is only a matter of a prolongation of the 
duration of the cycle. In the early years of world commerce, 1815-47, it can be 
shown that crises occurred ahout every five years; [rom 1847 to 1867 the cycle is 
clearly ten years; isit possible that we are now in the preparatory stage of a new 
wort!d crash of unparalleled velhemence? Many things seem to point in this direc- 
tion. Since the last general crisis of 1867 many profound changes have taken place. 
The colossal expansion of the means of transportation and communication—ocean 
liners, railways, electrical telegraphy, the Suez Canal—has made a real world- 
market a fact. The former monopoly of England in industry has been challenged 
by a number of competing industrial countries; infinitely greater and varied fields 
have been opened in all parts of the world for the investment of surplus European 
capital, so that it is far more widely distributed and local over-speculation may 
be more easily overcome. By means ol all this, most of the old breeding-grounds 
of crises and epperunitiee for their development have been eliminated or strongly 
Teduced. At the same time, competition in the domestic market recedes before 
the cartels and trusts, while in the foreign market it is restricted by protective 
tarifls, with which all major industrial countries, England excepted, surround 
themselves. But these prslertive tariffs are nothing but preparations for the ulti- 
mate general industrial war, which shall decide who has supremacy on the world-- 
market. Thus every factor, which works against a repetition of the old crises, car- 
* ries within itself the germ of a far more powerful future crisis.—F. £,} 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I 479 

furthermore, unsuccessful] speculation with the capital of other peo- 
ple; finally, commodity-capital which has depreciated. or is com- 
pletely unsaleable, or returns that can never more be realized again. 
The entire artificial system of forced expansion of the reproduction 
Process cannot, of course, be remedied by having some bank, like 
the Bank of England, give to all the swindlers the deficient capital 
by means of its paper and having it buy up all the depreciated com- 
modities at (heir old nominal values. Incidentally, everything here 
appears distorted, since in this paper world, the real price and its 
real basis appear nowhere, but only bullion, metal cain, notes, 
bills of exchange, securities. Particularly in centres where the entire 
money business of the country is concentrated, like London, does 
this distortion become apparent; the entire process becomes in- 
comprehensible; it is less so in centres of production. 

Incidentally in connection with the superabundance of indus- 
trial capital which appears during crises the following should be 
noted: commodity-capital is in itself simultaneously money-capi- 
tal, that is, a definite amount of value expressed in the price of the 
commodities. As use-value it is a definite quantum of objects of 
utility, and there is a surplus of these available in times of crises. 
But as money-capilal as such, as polential money-capital, it is 
subject to continual expansion and contraction. On the eve of a 
erisis, and during it, commodity-capital in ils capacity as poten- 
tial money-capilal is contracted. It represents less money-capilal 
for its owner and his creditors (as well as security for bills of exchange 
and loans) than it did at the time when it was bought and when 
ihe discounts and mortgages based on it were transacted. If this is 
the meaning of the contention that the money-capital of a country 
is reduced in times of stringency, this is identical with saying 
that the prices of commodities have fallen. Such a collapse in 
prices merely balances out their earlier inflation. 

The incomes of the unproductive classes and of those who live 
on fixed incomes remain in the main stationary during the inflation 
of prices which goes hand in hand with over-production and over- 
speculation. Hence their consuming capacity diminishes relatively, 
and with it their ability to replace that portion of the total reproduc- 
tion which would normally enter inlo their consumption. Even 
when their demand remains nominally the same, il decreases in 
reality. 

It should be noted in regard to imports and exports, that, one aft- 
er another, all countries become involved in a crisis and that it 
then becomes evident that all of them, with few exceptions, have 
exported and imported too much, so that they all have an unfavour- 

480 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

able balance of payments. The trouble, therefore, does not actually 
lie with the balance of payments. For example, England sufiers 
from a drain of gold. It has imported too much. But at the same time 
all other countries are over-supplied with English goods. They have 
thus also imported too much, or have been made to import toa much. 
(There is, indeed, a difference between a country which exports on 
credit and those which export little or nothing on credit. But the 
latter then import on credit; and this is only then not thecase when 
commodities are sent to them on consignment.) The crisis may first 
break out in England, the country which advances most of the 
credit and takes the least, because the balance of payments, the 
balance of payments due, which must be settled immediately, is 
unfavourable, even though the general balance of trade is favourable. 
This is explained partly as a result of the credit which it has grant- 
ed, and partly as a result of the huge quantity of capital loaned to 
foreign countries, so that a large quantity of returns flow back to 
it incommiodities, in addition to the actual trade returns. (However, 
the crisis has at times first broken out in America, which takes most 
of the commercial and capital credit from England.) The crash in 
England, initiated and accompanied by a gold drain, settles Eng- 
land's balance of payments, partly by a bankruptcy of its importers 
(about which more below), partly by disposing of a portion of its 
commodity-capital at low prices abroad, and partly by the sale of 
foreign securities, the purchase of English securities, ete. Now comes 
the turn of some other country. The balance of payments was mo- 
mentarily in its favour; but now the time lapse normally existing 
between the balance of payments and balance of trade has been elim- 
inated or at least reduced by the crisis: all payments are now sud- 
denly supposed to be made at once. The same thing is now repeated 
here. England now has a return flow of gold, the other country a gold 
drain. What appears in one country as excessive imports, appears in 
the other as excessive exports, and vice versa. But over-imports and 
over-exports have taken place in all countries (we are not speak- 
ing here about crop failures, etc., but about a general crisis); that 
is. over-production promoted by credit and thegeneral inflation of 
prices that goes with it. 

In 1857, the crisis broke out in the United States. A flow of gold 
from England to America followed. But as soon as the bubble in 
America burst, the crisis broke out in England and the gold flowed 
from America to England. The same took place between England and 
the continent. The balance of payments is in times of general crisis 
unfavourable to every nation, at least toevery commercially devel- 
oped nation, but always to each country in succession, as in volley 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. L 481 

firing, i.e., as soon as each one’s turn comes for making payments; and 
once the crisis has broken out, e.g., in England, it compresses the 
series of these terms into a very short period. It then becomes evi- 
dent that al! these nations have simultaneously over-exported (thus 
over-produced) and over-imported (thus over-traded), that prices 
were inflated in all of them, and credit stretched too far. And the 
same break-down takes place in all of them. The phenomenon of 
a gold drain then takes place successively in all of them and proves 
precisely by its general character 1) that gold drain is just a phenom- 
enon of a crisis, not its cause; 2) that the sequence in which it hits 
the various countries indicates only when their judgement-day has 
come, i.e., when the crisis started and its latent elements come to 
the fore there. 

It is characteristic of the English economic writers—and the eco- 
nomic literature worth mentioning since 1830 resolves itself mainly 
into a literature on currency, credit, and crises—that they look 
upon the export of precious metals in times of crisis, in spite of the 
turn in the rates of exchange, only from the standpoint of England, 
as a purely national phenomenon, and resolutely close their eyes 
to the fact that all other European banks raise their rate of in- 
terest when their bank raises its own in times of crisis, and that, 
when the ery of distress over the drain of gold is raised in their 
country today, it is taken up in America tomorrow and in Germany 
and France the day alter. 

In 1847, “the engagements running upon this country had to be met” 
[mostly for corn]. “Unfortunately, they were met to a great extent 
by failures” [wealthy England secured relief by bankruptcies in 
its obligations toward the continent and America], “but to the ex- 
tent to which they were not met by failures, they were met by the 
exportation of bullion.” (Report of Committee on Bank Acts, 1857.) 
In other words, in so far as a crisis in England is intensified by bank 
legislation, this legislation is a means of cheating the corn-export- 
ing countries in periods of famine, first on their corn and then on 
the money for the corn. A prohibition on the export of corn dur- 
ing such periods for countries which are themselves labouring more 
or less uncer scarcilies, is, therefore, a very rational measure to 
thwart this plan of the Bank of England to “meet obligations” 
for corn imports “by bankruptcies.” Jt is after all much better that 
the corn producers and speculators lose a portion of their profit for 
the good of their own country than their capital for the good of 
England. 

It follows from the above that commodity-capital, during crises 
and during periods of business depression in general, loses to a large 

17-2787 

482 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

extent its capacity torepresent potential money-capital. The same 
is true of fictitious capital, interest-bearing paper, in so far as it 
circulates on the stock exchange as money-capital. Its price falls 
with rising interest. It falls, furthermore, as a result of the general 
shortage of credit, which compels its owners to dump it in large 
quantities on the market in order to secure money. It falls, finally, 
in the case of stocks, partly as a result of the decrease in revenues 
for which it constitutes drafts and partly as a result of the spurious 
character of the enterprises which it often enough represents. This 
fictitious money-capital is enormously reduced in times of crisis, 
and with it the ability of its owners to borrow money on it on the 
market. However, the reduction of the money equivalents of these 
securities on the stock exchange list has nothing to do with the 
actual capital which they represent, but very much indeed with the 
solvency of their owners. 

CHAPTER XXXI 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. II 
(CONTINUED) 

We are still not finished with this question: to what extent does 
the accumulation of capital in the form of loanable money-capi- 
tal coincide with actual accumulation. i.e., the expansion of the 
reproduction process. 

The transformation of money into loanable money-capital is a 
much simpler matter than the transformation of money into produc- 
tive capital. But two things should be distinguished here: 

1) the mere transformation of money into loan capital; 

2) the transiormation of capital or revenue into money, which 
is transformed into loan capital. 

It is only the latter point which can involve a positive accumula- 
tion of loan capital connected with an actual accumulation of in- 
dustrial capital. 

1. TRANSFORMATION OF MONEY INTO LOAN CAPITAL 

We have already seen that a large build-up or surplus of loan cap- 
ital can occur, which is connected with productive accumulation 
only to the extent that it is inversely proportional to it. This is 
the case in two phases of the industrial cycle, namely, first, when in- 
dustrial capital in both its forms of productive and commodity-cap- 
ital is contracted, i.e., at the beginning of the cycle after the cri- 
sis; and, secondly, when the improvement begins, but when commer- 
cial credit still does not use bank credit to a great extent. In the 
first case, money-capital, which was formerly employed in produc- 
tion and commerce, appears as idle loan capital; in the secorid 
case, it appears used to an increasing extent, but at a very low rate 
of interest, because the industrial and commercial capitalists now 
prescribe terms to the money-capitalist. The surplus of loan capi- 
tal expresses, in the first case, astagnation of industrial capital, and 
in the second, a relative independence of commercial credit from 

17% 

484 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

banking credit—based on the fluidity of the returns, short-term 
credit, and a preponderance of operations with one’s own capital. 
The speculators, who count on the credit capital of other people, 
have not yet appeared on the field; the people who work with their 
own capital are still far removed from approximately pure credit 
operations. In the former phase, the surplus of loan capital is di- 
rectly opposite to expressing actual accumulation. In the second 
phase, it coincides with a renewed expansion of the reproduction 
process—it accompanies it, but is not its cause. The surplus of 
loan capital is already decreasing, i.e., it is still only relative 
compared to the demand. In both cases, the expansion of the actual 
process of accumulation is promoted by the fact that the low inter- 
est—which coincides in the first cas? with low prices and in the 
second, with slowly rising prices—increases that portion of ithe 
profit which is transformed into profit of enterprise. This takes 
place to an even greater extent when interest rises to its average 
level during the height of the period of prosperity, when it has 
indeed grown, but not relative to profit. 

We have seen, on the other hand, that an accumulation of Joan 
capital can take place without any actual accumulation, i.e., by 
mere technical means such as an expansion and concentration of 
the banking system; and a saving in the circulation reserve, or in 
the reserve fund of private means of payment, which are then al- 
ways transformed into loan capital for a short time. Although this 
loan capital, which, for this reason, is also called floating capital, 
always retains the form of loan capital only for shori periods of 
time (and should indeed also be used for discounting only for short 
periods of time), there is a contintial ebb and flow of it. If one draws 
some away, another adds to it. The mass of loanable money-capi- 
tal thus grows quite independently of the actual accumulation (we 
are not speaking here at all about loans for a number of years but 
only of short-term ones on bills of exchange and deposits). 

Bank Committee, 1857. Question 501.“What do you mean by 
‘floating capital’?”—[Answer of Mr. Weguelin, Governor of the Bank 
of England:] “It is capital applicable to loans of moncy ior short 
periods.... (402) The Bank of England notes ... the country banks 
circulation, and the amount of coin which is in the country.” — [Ques- 
tion:]“It does not appear from the returns before the Committee, 
if by floating capital you mean the active circulation” [of the notes 
of the Bank of England], “that there is any very great variation 
in the active circulation?” | But there isa very great difference wheth- 
er this active circulation is advanced by the money-lender or by 
the reproductive capitalist himself. Weguelin's answer:] “I include 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. II 485 

in floating capital the reserves of the bankers, in which there is 
a considerable fluctuation."— That is to say, there is considera- 
ble fluctuation in that portion of the deposits which the bankers 
have not loaned out again, but which figures as their reserve and for 
the greater part also as the reserve of the Bank of England, where 
they are deposited. Finally, the same gentleman says: floating cap- 
ital may be bullion, that is, bar and coin (503).—It is truly won- 
derful how in this credit gibberish of the money-market all catego- 
ries of political economy receive a different meaning and a different 
form. Floating capital is the expression there Jor circulating capi- 
tal, which is, of course, something quite different, and money is 
capital, and bullion is capital, and bank-notes are circulation, and 
capital is a commodity, and debts are commodities, and fixed cap- 
ital is money invested in hard-to-sell paper! 

“The joint-stock banks of London... have increased their deposits 
from £8,850,774 in 1847 to £43,100,724 in 1857.... The evidence 
given to your Committee leads to the inference that of this vast 
amount, a large part has been derived from sources not heretofore 
made available for this purpose; and that the practice of opening 
accounts and depositing money with bankers has extended to numer- 
ous classes who did not formerly employ their capital(!) in that 
way. IL is stated by Mr. Rodwell, the Chairman of the Association 
of the Private Country Bankers” [distinguished from joint-stock 
banks], “and delegated by them to give evidence to your Commit- 
tee, that in the neighbourhood of Ipswich this practice has lately 
increased Jour-fold among the farmers and shopkeepers of that dis- 
trict; that almost every farmer, even those paying only £50 per 
annum rent, now keeps deposits with bankers. The aggregate of 
these deposits of course finds its way to the employments of trade, 
and especially gravitates to London, the centre of commercial activ- 
ity, where it is employed first in the discount of bills, or in other ad- 
vances to the customers of the London bankers. That large portion, 
however, for which the bankers themselves have no immediate de- 
mand passes into the hands of the bill-brokers, who give to the 
banker in return commercial bills already discounted by them for 
persons in London and in diferent parts of the country, asa security 
for the sum advanced by the banker.” (Bank Committee, 1858, p. 8.) 

By making advances to the bill-broker on bills of exchange which 
this broker has already discounted once, the banker does, in fact, 
rediscount them; but inreality, very many of these bills have al- 
ready been rediscounted by the bill-broker, and with the same mon- 
ey that the banker uses to rediscount the bills of the bill-broker, 
the latter rediscounts new bills. What this leads to is shown by the 

486 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

following: “Extensive fictitious credits have been created by means 
ol accommodation bills, and opencredits, great facilities for which 
have been afforded by the practice of joint-stock country banks dis- 
counting such bills, and rediscounting them with the bill-brokers 
in the London market, upon the credit of the bank alone, without 
reference to the quality of the bills otherwise” (foc. ci/.). 
Concerning this rediscounting and the assistance which this pure- 
ly technical increase of loanable money-capital gives to credit 
swindles, the following extract from the Economist is of interest: 
“For some years past capital” [namely, loanable money-capital] 
“has accumulated in some districts of the country more rapidly than 
it could be used, while, in others, the means of employing capital 
have increased more rapidly than the capital itself. While the 
bankers in the purely agricultural districts throughout the king- 
dom found no sufficient means of profitably and safely emploving 
their deposits in their own districts, those in the large mercantile 
towns, and in the manufacturing and mining districts, have found 
a larger demand for capital than their own means could supply. The 
eifect of this relative state of different districts has led, of late years, 
ta the establishment and rapid extension of a new class of houses 
in the distribution of capital, who, though usually called bill-brok- 
ers, arein reality bankers upon an immense scale. The business 
of these houses has been to receive, for such periods, and at such 
rates of interest as were agreed upon, thesurplus-capital of bankers 
in those districts where it could not be employed, as well as the 
temporary unemployed moneys of public companies and extensive 
mercantile establishments, and advance them at higher rates of 
interest to banker in those districls where capital was more in de- 
mand, generally by rediscounting the bills taken from their cus- 
tomers... and inthis way Lombard Street has become the great cen- 
tre in which the transfer of spare capital has been made from one 
part of the country, where it could not be profitably employed, to 
another, where a demand existed for it, as well as between individuals 
similarly circumstanced. At first these transactions were confined 
almost exclusively to borrowing and lending on banking securities. 
But as the capital of the country rapidly accumulated, and became 
more economized by the establishment of banks, the funds at the 
disposal of these ‘discount hauses’ became so large that they were 
induced to make advances first on dock warrants of merchandise 
(storage bills on commodities in docks), and next on bills of lading, 
representing produce not even arrived in this country, though some- 
times, if not generally, secured by bills drawn by the merchant upon 
his broker, This practice rapidly changed the whole character of 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. IT 487 

English commerce. The [acilities thus afiorded in Lombard Street 
gave extensive powers to the brokers in Mincing Lane, who on their 
part ... offered the full advantage of them to the importing mer- 
chant; who so far took advantage of them, that, whereas 25 years 
ago, the fact that a merchant received advances on his bills of lad- 
ing, or even his dock warrants, would have been [atal to his credit, 
the practice has become so common of late years that it may be said 
to be now the general rule, and not the rare exception, as it was 25 
years ago. Nay, so much further has this system been carried, that 
large sums have been raised in Lombard Street on bills drawn 
against the forthcoming crops oj distant colonies. The consequence 
of such facilities being thus granted to the importing merchants 
led them to extend their transactions abroad, and to invest their 
floating capital with which their business has hitherto been conducl- 
ed, in the most objectionable of all fixed securities—foreign plan- 
tations—over which they could exercise little or no control. And 
thus we see the direct change of credit through which the capital of 
the country, collected in our rural districts, and in small amounts 
in the shape of deposits in country banks, and centres in Lom- 
bard Street for employment, has been, [irst, made available for the 
extending operations in our mining and manufacturing districts, by 
the rediscount of bills to banks in those localities, next, for granting 
grealer facilities for the importation of foreign produce by advances 
upon dock warrants and bills of lading, and thus liberating the 
‘legitimate’ mercantile capital of houses engaged in foreign and co- 
lonial trade, and inducing to its most objectionable advances on 
foreign plantations.” (Economist, 1847, p. 1334.) -This is how 
credits are “nicely” devoured. The rural depositor fancies that he 
deposits only with his banker, and fancies furthermore that 
when his banker lends to others, it is done to private persons 
whom he knows. He has not the slightest suspicion that this banker 
places his deposit at the disposal of some London bill-broker, 
over whose operations neither of them have the slightest control. 

We have already seen how large public enterprises, such as rail- 
ways, May momentarily increase Joan capital. owing to the cir- 
cumstance that the deposited amounts always remain at the dispos- 
al of the bankers for a certain length of time until they are really 
used. 

Incidentally, the mass of loan capital is quite different from the 
quantity of circulation. By the quantity of circulation we mean 
here the sum of all the bank-notes and coin, including bars of 

1s 1 OF Pp q 
488 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

precious metals, existing and circulating in a country. A portion of 
this quantity constitules the reserve of the banks which contin- 
uously vary in magnitude. ; 

“On November 12, 1857” [the date of the suspension of the Bank 
Act of 1844], “the entire reserve of the Bank of England was only 
£580,751 (including London and all its branches); their deposits at 
the same time amounting to £22,500,000; of which near six and 
a hall million belonged to London bankers.” (Bank Acts, 1858, 

. LVIL.) 

i The variations in the interest rate (aside from those occurring over 
longer periods or the variation in the interest rate among various 
countries; the former are dependent upon variations in the general 
rate of profit, the latter on differences in the rates of profit and in 
the development of credit) depend upon the supply of loan capital 
(ail other circumstances, state of confidence, etce., being equal), 
that is, of capital loaned in the form of money, coin and notes; 
in contradistinction to industrial capital, which, as such—in com- 
modity-form—is loaned by means of commercial credit among the 
agents of reproduction themselves. 

However, the mass of this loanable money-capital is different 
from, and independent of, the mass of circulating money. 

For example, if £20 were loaned five times per day, a money-cap- 
ital of £100 would be loaned, and this would imply at the same 
timethat this £20 would have served, moreover, at least four times 
as a means of purchase or payment; for, if no purchase and pay- 
ment intervened—so that it would not have represented at least 
four times the converted form of capital (commodities, including 
labour-power)—it would not constitute a capital of £100, but only 
five claims of £20 each. 

In countries with a developed credit, we can assume that all mon- 
ey-capital available for lending exists in the form of deposits with 
banks and money-lenders. This is at least true for business as a 
whole. Moreover, in times of flourishing business, before the real 
speculation gets underway—when credit is easy and confidence 
is growing—most of the functions of circulation are settled by a 
simpie transier of credit, without the help of coin or paper money. 

The mere possibility of large sums of deposits existing when a 
relatively small quantum of a medium of circulation is available, 
depends solely on: 

1) the number of purchases and payments which the same coin 
performs; 

2) the number of return excursions, whereby it goes back to the 
banks as deposits, so that its repeated function as a means of pur- 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. I] 489 

chase and payment is promoted through its renewed transformation 
into deposits. For example, a small dealer deposits weekly with 
his banker £100 in money; the banker pays out a portion of the de- 
posit of a manufacturer with this; the latter pays it to his workers; 
and the workers use it to pay the small dealer, who deposits it in 
the bank again. The £100 deposited by this small dealer have 
served, therefore, first, to pay the manufacturer a deposit of his; 
secondly, to pay the workers; thirdly, to pay the dealer himself: 
fourthly, to deposit another portion of the money-capital of the 
same small dealer; thus at the end of twenty weeks, if he himself 
did not have to draw against this money, he would have deposited 
£2,000 in the bank by means of the same £100. 

To what extent this money-capital is idle, is shown only by the 
ebb and flow in the reserve fund of the banks. Therefore, Mr. We- 
guelin, Governor of the Bank of England in 1857, concludes that 
the gold of the Bank of England is the “only” reserve capital: 
“1258. Practically, ] think, the rate of discount is governed by the 
amount of unemployed capital which there is in the country. The 
amount of unemployed capital is represented by the reserve of the 
Bank of England, which is practically a reserve of bullion. When, 
therefore, the bullion is drawn upon, it diminishes the amount of 
unemployed capital in the country, and consequently raises the 
value of that which remains.”—"1364. The reserve of bullion in the 
Bank of England is, in truth, the central reserve, or hoard of treas- 
ure, upon which the whole trade of the country is carried on.... 
And it is upon that hoard or reservoir that the action of the foreign 
exchanges always falls.” (Report on Bank Acts, 1857.) 

The statistics of exports and imports furnish a measure of the 
accumulation of real, i.e., productive and commodity-capitai. 
These always show that, during the ten-year cyclical periods of 
development of British industry (1815 to 1870), the maximum of 
the last prosperity before the crisis always reappears as the mini- 
mum of the following prosperity, whereupon it rises to a new and 
far higher peak. 

The actual or declared valueof the exported products from Great 
Britain and Jreland inthe prosperity year of 1824 was £40,396,300. 
With the crisis of 1825, the amount of exports then falls below this 
sum and fluctuates between 35 and 39 million annually. With the 
return of prosperity in 1834, it rises above the former maximum to 
£41,649,191, and reaches in 1836 the new maximum of $53,268,571. 
Beginning with 1837, it falls ‘again to 42 million, so that the 

490 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

new minimum is already higher than the old maximum, and then 
fluctuates between 50 and 53 million. The return of prosperity lifts 
the amount of exports in 1844 to £58,500,000, whereby the peak 
of 1836 is again already far exceeded. In 1845, it reaches £60, 111,082; 
it then falls to something over 57 million in 1846, reaches 
in 1847 almost 59 million, in 1848 almost 53 million, rises in 1849 
to 63,500,000, in 1853 to nearly 99 million, in 1854 to 97 million, 
in 1855 to 94,500,000, in 1856 almost 116 million and reaches a 
peak of 122 million in 1857. It falls in 1858 to 116 million, rises 
already in 1859 to 130 million, in 1860 to nearly 136 million, in 
1861 only 125 million (the new low is here again higher than the 
former peak), in 1863 to 146,500,000. 

Of course, the same thing could be demonstrated in the case of 
imports, which shows the expansion of the market; here it is only 
a matter of the scale of production. [Of course, this holds true of 
England only for the time of its actual industrial monopoly; but it 
applies in general to the whole complex of countries with modern 
large-scale industries, as long as the world-market is still expand- 
ing.—F. E.] 

2. TRANSFORMATION OF CAPITAL OR REVENUE 
INTO MONEY THAT IS TRANSFORMED INTO LOAN CAPITAL 

We will consider here the accumulation of money-capital, in so 
far as it is not an expression either of a stoppage in the flow of com- 
mercial credit or of an economy—whether it be an economy in 
the actual circulating medium or in the reserve capital of the agents 
engaged in reproduction. 

Aside from these two cases, an accumulation of money-capital 
can arise through an unusual inflow of gold, as in 1852 and 1853 
as a result of the new Australian and Californian gold mines. This 
gold was deposited in the Bank of England. The depositors received 
notes forit, which they did not directly redeposit with bankers. 
By this means the circulating medium was unusually increased. 
(Testimony of Weguelin, Bank Committee, 1857, No. 1329.) The 
Bank strove to utilize these deposits by lowering its discount to 
2%. The mass of gold accumulated in the Bank rose during six 
months of 1853 to 22-23 million. 

The accumulation of all money-lending capitalists naturally al- 
ways takes place directly in money-form, whereas we have seen 
that the actual accumulation of industrial capitalists is accom- 
plished, as a rule, by an increase in the elements of reproductive 
capital itself. Hence, the development of the credit system and the 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL, IT 491 

enormous concentration of the money-lending business in the hands 
ol large banks must, by themselves alone, accelerate the accumula- 
tion of loanable capital, as a form distinct from actual accumula- 
tion. This rapid development of loan capital is, therefore, a result 
of actual accumulation, for it is a consequence of the development 
of the reproduction process, and the profit which forms the source 
of accumulation for these money-capitalists is only a deduction from 
the surplus-value which the reproductive ones filch (and it is at the 
same time the appropriation of a portion of the interest from the 
savings of others). Loan capital accumulates at the expense of both 
the industrial and commercial capitalists. We have seen that in the 
nnfavourable phases of the industrial cycle the rate of interest may 
rise so high that it temporarily consumes the whole profit of some 
lines of business which are particularly handicapped. At the same 
time, prices of government and other securities fall. It is at such 
times that the money-capitalists buy this depreciated paper in huge 
quantities which in the later phases soon regains its former level 
and rises above it. It is then sold again and a portion of the money- 
capital of the public is thus appropriated. That portion which is 
not sold yields a higher interest because it was bought below par. 
But the money-capitalists convert al! profits made, and reconverted 
by them into capital, first into loanable money-capital. The 
accumulation of the latler—as distinct from the actual accu- 
mulation, although its offshoot—thus takes place, even when we 
consider only the money-capitalists, bankers, etc., by themselves, 
as an accumulation of this particular class of capitalists. And 
it must grow with every expansion of the credit system which ac- 
companies the actual expansion of the reproduction process. 

If the interest rate is low, this depreciation of the money-capi- 
tal falls principally upon the depositors, not upon the banks. Be- 
fore the development of stock banks, three-fourths of all the de- 
posits in England lay in the banks without yielding interest. 
While interest is now paid on them, it amounts to at least 1% less 
than the current rate of interest. 

As for the money accumulation of the other classes of capitalists, 
we disregard that portion of it which is invested in interest-bearing 
paper and accumulates in this form. We consider only that por- 
tion which is thrown upon the market as loanable money-capital. 

Inthe first place, we have here that portion of the profit which is 
not spent as revenue, but is set aside for accumulation—for 
which, however, the industrial capitalists have no use in their own 
business at the moment. This profit exists directly in commodity- 
capital, a part of whose value it constitutes, and along with which 

499 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

it isrealized in money. Now, if it is not reconverted into the produc- 
tion elements of commodity-capital (we leave out of consideration 
for the present the merchant, whom we shall discuss separately), it 
must remain for a length of time in the form of money. This amount 
increases with the amount of capital itself, even when the rate 
of profit declines. That portion which is to be spent as revenue is 
gradually consumed, but, in the meantime, as deposits, it consti- 
tutes loan capital with the banker. Thus, even the growth of that 
portion of profit which is spent as revenue expresses itself as a 
gradual and continually repeated accumulation of loan capital. 
The same is true of the other portion, which is intended for accumu- 
lation. Therefore, with the development of the credit systern and 
its organization, even an increase in revenue, i.e., the consumption 
of the industrial and commercial capitalists, expresses itself as an 
accumulation of loan capital. And this holds true for all revenues 
so far as they are consumed gradually, in other words, for ground- 
rent, wages in their higher form, incomes of unproductive classes, 
etc. All of them assume for a certain time the form of money 
revenue and are, therefore, convertible into deposits and thus into 
loan capital. All revenue—whether it be intended for consumption or 
accumulation—as long as it exists in some form of money, is a part 
of the value of commodity-capital transformed into money, and is, 
for this reason, an expression and result of actual accumulation, 
but is not productive capital itself. When a spinner has exchanged 
his yarn for cotton—that portion which constitutes revenue how- 
ever for money, the real existence of his industrial capital is the 
yarn, which has passed into the hands of the weaver or, perhaps, of 
some private consumer, and the yarn is, in fact, the existence—wheth- 
er it is for reproduction or consumption—ol the capital-value as 
well as the surplus-value contained in it. The magnitude o! the 
surplus-value transformed into money depends upon the magni- 
tude of the surplus-value contained in the yarn. But as soon as it 
has been translormed into money, this money is only the value 
existance of this surplus-value. And as such it becomes a moment 
of loan capital. For this purpose, nothing more is required than 
that it be transformed into a deposit, if it has not already been 
loaned out by its owner. But in order to be retransformed into pro- 
ductive capital, it must, on the other hand, already have reached a 
certain minimum limit. 

CHAPTER XXXI 
MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. IIL 
(CONCLUDED) 

The mass of money to be transformed back into capital in this 
manner is a result of the enormous reproduction process, but consid- 
ered by itself, as toanable money-capital, it is not itself a mass of 
reproductive capital. 

The most important point of our presentation so far is that the 
expansion of the part of the revenue intended for consumption (leav- 
ing out of consideration the worker, because his revenue is equai 
to the variable capital) shows itself at first as an accumulation of 
money-capital. A factor, therefore, enters into the accumulation 
of money-capital that is essentially different from the actual accu- 
mulation of industrial capital; for the portion of the annual product 
which is intended for consumption does not by any means become 
capital. A portion of it replaces capital, ie., the constant 
capital of the producers of means of consumption, but to the extent 
that it is actually transformed into capital, it exists in the natural 
form of the revenue of the producers of this constant capital. The 
same money, which represents the revenue and serves merely for 
the promotion of consumption, is regularly transformed into loan- 
able money-capital for a period of time. In so far as this money 
represents wages, it is at the same time the money-form of the var- 
iable capital; and in so far as it replaces the constant capital of 
the producers of means of consumption, it is the money-form 
temporarily assumed by their constant capital and serves to pur- 
chase the components of their constant capital to be replaced in kind. 
Neither in the one nor in the other form does it express in itself 
accumulation, although its quantity increases with the growth of 
the reproduction process. But it performs temporarily the function 
of loanable money, i.e., of money-capital. In this respect, there- 
fore, the accumulation of money-capital must always reflect a 
greater accumulation of capital than actually exists, owing to the 
fact that the extension of individual consumption, because it is 
proinoted by means of money, appears as an accumulation of mon- 

494 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ey-capilal, since it furnishes the money-form for actual accumu- 
lation, i.e., for money which permits new investments of capital, 

Thus, the accumulation of loanable money-capital expresses in 
part only the fact that all money into which industrial capital is 
{transformed in the course of its circuit assumes the form not of 
money advaticed by the reproductive capitalists, but of money bor- 
rowed by them; so that indeed the advance of money that must take 
place in the reproduction process appears as an advance of bor- 
rowed money. In fact, on the basis of commercial credit, one person 
lends to another the money required for the reproduction process. 
But this now assumes the following form: the banker, who receives 
the money as a loan from one group of the reproductive capitalists, 
lends it to another group of reproductive capitalists, so that the 
banker appears in the role of a supreme benefactor; and at the same 
time, the control over this capital falls completely inlo the hands 
of the banker in his capacity as middleman. 

A few special forms of accumulation of money-capital still re- 
main to be mentioned. For example, capital is released by a fall 
in the price of the elements of production, raw materials, etc. If 
the industrial capitalist cannot expand his reproduction process 
immediately, a portion of his money-capital is expelled from the cir- 
cuit as superfluous and is transformed into loanable money-capital. 
Secondly, however, capital in the form of money is released espe- 
cially by the merchant, whenever interruptions in his business take 
place. If the merchant has completed a series of transactions and 
cannot begin a new series because of such interruptions unti! later, 
the money realized represents for him only a hoard, surplus-capi- 
tal. But at the same time, it represents a direct accumulation of 
loanable money-capital. In the first case, {he accumulation of money- 
capital expresses a repetition of the reproduction process under more 
favourable conditions, an actual release of a portion of formerly 
tied-up capital; in other words, an opportunity for expanding the 
reproduction process with the same amount of money. But in the 
other case, it expresses merely an interruption in the flow of trans- 
actions. However, in both cases it is converted into loanable money- 
capital. represents its accumulation, influences equally the money- 
market and the rate of interest—although it expresses a promotion of 
the actual accumulation process in one case and its obstruction 
in the other. Finally, accumulation of money-capital is influenced 
by the number of people who have feathered their nests and have 
withdrawn from reproduction. Their number increases as more prof- 
its are made in the course of the industrial cycle. In this case, the 
accumulation of loanable money-capital expresses, on the one hand, 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAT, CAPITAL. III 495 

an actual accumulation (in accordance with its relative extent), 
and, on the other hand, only the extent of the transformation of 
the industrial capitalists into mere money-capitalists. 

As for the other portion of profit, which is not intended to be con- 
sumed as revenue, it is converted into money-capital only when it 
is not immediately able to find a place for investment in the ex- 
pansion of business in the productive sphere in which it has been 
made. This may be due to two causes, Either because this sphere of 
production is saturated with capital, or because accumulation must 
first reach a certain volume before it can serve as capital, depending 
on the investment magnitudes of new capital required in this par- 
ticular sphere. Hence it is converted for a while into loanable mon- 
ey-capital and serves in the expansion of production in other spheres. 
Assuming all other conditions being equal, the quantity of 
profits intended for transformation back into capital will depend on 
the quantity of profits made and thus on the extension of the repro- 
duction process itself. But if this new accumulation meets with 
difficulties in its employment, through a lack of spheres for invest- 
ment, i.e., due to a surplus in the branches of production and an 
over-supply of loan capital, this plethora of loanable money-cap- 
ital merely shows the limitations of capitalist production. The 
subsequent credit swindle proves that no real obstacle stands in 
the way of the employment of this surplus-capital. However, an 
obstacle is indeed immanent in its laws of expansion, i.e., in the 
limits in which capital can realize itself as capital. A plethora of 
money-capital as such does not necessarily indicate over-production, 
not even a shortage of spheres of investment for capital. 

The accumulation of loan capital consists simply in the fact that 
money is precipitated as loanable money. This process is very differ- 
ent from an actual transformation into capital; it is merely the 
accumulation of money in a form in which it can be transformed into 
capital. Bul this accumulation can reflect, as we have shown, 
events which are greatly different from actual accumulation. As 
long as actual accumulation is continually expanding, this extend- 
ed accumulation of money-capital may be partly its result, part- 
ly the result of circumstances which accompany it but are quite 
different from it, and, finally, even partly the result of impediments 
to actual accumulation. If for no other reason than that accumula- 
tion of loan capital is inflated by such circumstances, which are in- 
dependent of actual accumulation but nevertheless accompany it, 
there must be a continuous plethora of money-capital in definite 
phases of tle cycle and this plethora must develop with the expan- 
sion of credit. And simultaneously with it, the necessity of driving 

496 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

{he production process beyond its capitalistic limits must also 
develop: over-trade, over-production, and excessive credit. At the 
same time, this must always take place in forms that call forth a 
reaction. 

As far as accumulation of mioney-capital from ground-rent, 
wages, elc., is concerned, it is not necessary to discuss that matter 
here. Only one aspect should be emphasized and that is that the 
business of actual saving and abstinence (by hoarders), to the ex- 
tent that it furnishes elements of accumulation, is left by the divi- 
sion of labour, which comes with the progress of capitalist produc- 
tion, to those who receive the minimum of such elements, and who 
frequently enough lose even their savings, as do the labourers when 
banks fail. On the one hand, the capital of the industrial capitalist is 
not “saved” by himself, but he has command of the savings of oth- 
ers in proportion to the magnitude of his capital; on the other 
hand, ihe money-capitalist makes of the savings of others his own 
capital, and of the credit, which the reproductive capitalists give 
to one another and which the public gives to them, a private 
source for enriching himself. The last illusion of the capitalist sys- 
tem, that capital is the fruit of one’s own labour and savings, is 
thereby destroyed. Not only does profit consist in the appropria- 
tion of other people’s labour, but the capital, with which this labour 
of others is set in motion and exploited, consists of other people’s 
property, which the money-capitalist places at the disposal of the 
industria} capitalists, and for which he in turn exploits the latter. 

A few remarks remain to be made about credit capital. 

How often the same piece of money can figure as loan capital, 
wholly depends, as we have already previously shown, on: 

1) how often it realizes commodity-values in sale or payment, 
thus transfers capital, and [furthermore how often it realizes reve- 
nue. How olten it gets into other hands as realized value, either 
of capital or of revenue, obviously depends, therefore, on the extent 
and magnitude of the actua) transactions; 

2) this depends on the economy of payments and the development 
and organization of the credit system; 

3) finally, the concatenation and velocity of action of credits, so 
that when a deposit is made al one point it immediately starts off 
as a loan at another. 

Even assuming that the form in which loan capital exists is 
exclusively that of real money, gold or silver—the commodity 
whose substance serves as a measure of value—a large portion of 
this money-capital is always necessarily purely fictitious, that is, 
a title to value—just as paper money. In so far as money functions 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. SII 497 

in the circuit of capital, it constitutes indeed, for a moment, money- 
capital; but it does not transform itsell into loanable money-capi- 
tal; it is rather exchanged for the elements of productive capital, 
or paid out as a medium of circulation in the realization of revenue, 
and cannot, therefore, transform itself into loan capital for its own- 
er. But insofar as it is transformed into loan capital, and the same 
money repeatedly represents Joan capital, it is evident that it exists 
only at one point in the form of metallic money; at all other points 
it exists only in the form of claims to capital. With the assumption 
made, the accumulation of these claims arises from actual accumula- 
tion, that is, from the transformation of the value of commodity- 
capital, etc., into money; but nevertheless the accumulation of 
these claims or titles as such differs from the actual accumulation 
from which it arises, as well as from the future accumulation (tlie 
new production process), which is promoted by the lending of this 
money. 

Prima facie |oan capital always exists in the form of money, ® 
later as a claim to money, since the money in which it originally ex- 
ists is now in the hands of the borrower in actual money-form. 
For ihe lender it has been transformed into a claim to money, 
into a tifle of ownership. The same mass of actual money can, there- 
fore, represent very different masses of money-capital. Mere money, 

° B. A. 1857. Testimony of Twells, banker: “4516. As a banker. do you deal 
in capital or in money?—We deal in money."—“4517. How ure the deposits 
paid into your bank?—In money."—“4518. How are they paid aute—In 
money."—“4519. Then can they be called anything else but money?—No.” 

Overstone (see Chapter XX VI) confuses continually “capital” and “money.” 
“Value ol money” also means interest to him, but in so far as it is determined 
hy the mass of money; “value of capital” is supposed to be interest, in so 
far as it is determined by the demand lor productive papltal and the profit 
made by it. He says: “4140. The use of the word ‘capital’ is very danger- 
ous."—“4148. The export of bullion from this country is a diminution of the 
quantity of money in this country, anda diminution of the quantity of money in 
this country must of course creale a pressure upon the money-market generally” 
{but not in the capital-market, according to thisJ.—“4112. As the money goes 
out of the country, the quantity in the country is diminished. That diminution 
of the quantity remaining in the country produces an increased value of thal mon- 
ey” [ this originally means in his theory an increase in the value of money as such 
through a contraction of circulation, as compared to the values of commodities; 
in other words, an increase in the value of money is the same as a fall in the value 
of commodities. But since in the meantime even he has been convinced beyond 
peradventure that the mass ol circulating money does not determine prices, it is 
now the diminution in money asa medium of circulation which is supposed to 
raise its value as interest-bearing capital, and thus the rate of interest]. “And 
that increased value of what remains stops the exit of money, and is kept up 
until it has brought back that quantity of money which is necessary to restore the 
equilibrium.”"—More of Overstone’s contradictions later on. 

498 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

whether it represents realized capital or realized revenue, becomes 
Joan capital through the simple act of lending, through its translor- 
mation into a deposit, if we consider the general form in a devel- 
oped credit system. The deposit is money-capital for the depositor. 
But in the hands of the banker it may be only potential money- 
capital, which lies idle in his sale instead of in its owner’s.'° ; 
With the growth of material wealth the class of money-capitalists 
grows; on the one hand, the number and the wealth of retiring 
capitalists, rentiers, increases; and on the other hand, the devel- 
opment of the credit system is promoted, thereby increasing the 
number of bankers, money- lenders, financiers, etc. With the develop- 
ment of the available money-capital, the quantity of interest- 
bearing paper, government securities, stocks, etc., also grows as we 
have previously shown. However, at the same time the demand 
for available money-capital also grows, the jobbers, who speculate 
with this paper, playing a prominent role on the money-market. 
If all the purchases and sales of this paper were only an expression 
of actual investments of capital, it would be correct to say that 
they could have no influence on the demand for loan capital, since 
when A sells his paper, he draws exactly as much money as B puts 
into the paper. But even if the paper itself exists, though not the 

%° At this point the confusion starts: both of these things are supposed to be 
“money,” namely, the deposit as a claim to payment from the banker, and the 
deposited money in the hands of the banker. Banker Twells, before the Banking 
Committee of 1857, offers the following example:"If I begin business with £10,000, 
I buy with £5,000 commodities and put them into warehouse. | deposit the other 
£5,000 with a banker, to draw upon it and use it as] require it. 1 consider it still 
£10,000 capital to me, though £5,000 is in the shape of deposits or money” 
(4528).—This now gives rise to the following peculiar debate.—“4531. You have 
parted with your £5,000 of notes to somebody else?— Yes.”—“4532. Then he 
has £5,000 of deposits?—Yes."—‘“4533. And you have £5,000 of deposits 
left?—Exactly."—"4534. He has £5,000 in money, and you have £5,000 in 
money ?— Yes.”—“4535. But it is nothing but money at last?—No.” This confu- 
sion is due partly to the circumstance that A, who has deposited £5,000, can 
draw on it and dispose of it as though he still had it. To that extent it serves him 
as potential money. However, in all cases in which he draws on it he destroys his 
deposit pro tanto. If he draws out real money, and his own money has already been 
lent to someone else, he is not paid with his own money, but with that of some 
other depositor. If he pays a debt to B with a cheque on his banker, and B deposits 
this cheque with his banker, and the banker of A also has a cheque on the banker 
of B, so that the {wo bankers merely exchange cheques, the money deposited by 
A has performed the function of money twice; first, in the hands of the one who 
has received {he money deposited by A; secondly, in the hands of A’ himself. In 
the second function, it is a balancing of claims (the claim of A on his banker, and 
ihe claim of the latter on the banker of B) without using money. Here the depos- 
it acts twice as money, namely, as real money and then as a claim on money. 
Mere claims to money can take the place of money only hy a balancing of claims. 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL, IIT 499 

capital (at least not as money-capital) originally represented by 
it, it always creales pro tanto a new demand for such money-capi- 
tal. But at any rate it is then money-capital, which was previous- 
ly at the disposal of B but is now at the disposal of A. 

B. A. 1857. No. 4886. “Do you consider that it is a correct de- 
scription of the causes which determined the rate of discount, to say 
that it is fixed by the quantity of capital on the market, which is 
applicable to the discount of mercantile bills, as distinguished from 
other classes of securities?”—[{Chapman:] “No, I think that the ques- 
tion of interest is affected by all convertible securities of a cur- 
rent character; it would be wrong to limit it simply to the dis- 
count of bills, because it would be absurd to say that when there 
is a great demand for money upon [the deposit of] consols, or even 
upon Exchequer bills, as has ruled very much of late, at a rate much 
higher than the commercial rate, our commercial! world is not af- 
fected by it; it is very materially affected by it.”—"4890. When 
sound and current securities, such as bankers acknowledge to be so, 
are on the market, and people want to borrow money upon them, 
it certainly has its effect upon commercial bills; for instance, I can 
hardly expect a man to let me have money at 5% upon commercial 
bills, if he can lend his money at the same moment at 6% upon con- 
sols, or whatever it may be; it aflects us in the same manner; a man 
can hardly expect me to discount bills at 542°, if 1 can lend my 
money at 6% .”—“4892. We do not talk of investors who buy their 
£2,000, or £5,000, or £10,000, as affecting the money-market mate- 
rially. If you ask me as to the rate of interest upon [a deposit of] 
consols, I allude to people, who deal in hundreds of thousands of 
pounds, who are what are called jobbers, who take large portions 
of loans, or make purchases on the market, and have to hold that 
stock till the public take it off their hands at a profit; these men, 
therefore, want money.” 

With the development of the credit system, great concentrated 
money-markets are created, such as London, which are at the same 
time the main seats of trade in this paper. The bankers place huge 
quantities of the public’s money-capital at the disposal of this un- 
savoury crowd of dealers, and thus this brood of gamblers multiplies. 
“Money upon the Stock Exchange is, generally speaking, cheap- 
er than it is elsewhere,” says the incumbent of the Governor's 
chair of the Bank of England in 1848 before the Secret Committee 
of Lords (C. D. 1848, printed 1857, No. 219). 

In the discussion on interest-bearing capital, we have already 
shown that the average interest over a long period of years, other 
conditions remaining equal, is determined by the average rate of 

500 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

profit; not profit of enterprise, which is nothing more than profit 
minus interest. : 

It has also been mentioned, and will be further analysed in an- 
other place, that also for the variations in commercial interest, that 
is, interest calculated by the money-lenders for discounts and loans 
within the commercial world, a phase is reached, in the course of 
the industrial cycle, in which the rate of interest exceeds its mini- 
mum and reaches its mean level (which it exceeds later) and that this 
movement is a result of a rise in profits. 

In the meantime, two things are to be noted here. 

First. When the rate of interest stays up for a long time (we are 
speaking here of the rate of interest in a given country like England, 
where the average rate of interest is given over a lengthy period of 
time, and also shows itself in the interest paid on long-term loans— 
what could be called private interest), it is prima facie proof that 
the rate of profit is high during this period, but it does not prove 
necessarily that the rate of profit of enterprise is high. This latter 
distinction is more or less removed for capitalists, who operate 
mainly with their own capital; they realize the high rate of profit, 
since they pay the interest to themselves. The possibility of a high 
rate of interest of long duration is present when the rate of profit 
is high; this does not refer, however, to the phase of actual squeeze. 
But it is possible that this high rate of profit may leave only a 
low rate of profit of enterprise, after the high rate of interest has 
been deducted. The rate of profit of enterprise may shrink, while 
the high rate of profit continues. This is possible because the en- 
terprises must be continued, once they have been started. During 
this phase, operations are carried on to a large extent with pure 
credit capital (capital of other people); and the high rate of profit may 
be partly speculative and prospective. A high rate of interest can 
be paid with a high rate of profit but decreasing profit of enterprise. 
It can be paid (and this is done in part during times of specula- 
tion), not out of the profit, but out of the borrowed capital itself, 
and this can continue for a while. 

Secondly: The statement that the demand for money-capital, and 
therefore the rate of interest, grows, because the rate of profit is 
high, is not identical with the statement that the demand for 
industrial capital grows and therefore the rate of interest is high. 

In times of crisis, the demand for loan capital, and therefore the 
rate of interest, reaches its maximum, the rate of profit, and with 
it the demand for industrial capital, has to all intents and pur- 
poses disappeared. During such times, everyone borrows only for the 
purpose of paying, in order to seltle previously contracted obliga- 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. If 501 

tions. On the other hand, in times of renewed activity after a crisis, 
loan capital is demanded for the purpose of buying and for the pur- 
pose of transforming money-capital into productive or commercial 
capital. And then it is demanded either by the industrial capital- 
ist or the merchant. The industrial capitalist invests it in means 
of production and in labour-power. 

The rising demand for !abour-power can never by itself be a cause 
for a rising rate of interest, in so far as the latter is determined by 
the rate of profit. Higher wages are never a cause for higher profits, 
although they may be one of the consequences of higher profits dur- 
ing some particular phases of the industrial cycle. 

The demand for labour-power can increase because the exploita- 
tion of labour takes place under especially favourable circum- 
stances, but the rising demand for labour-power, and thus for vari- 
able capital, does not in itself increase the profit; it, on the contrary, 
lowers it pro Zanfo. But the demand [or variable capital can neverthe- 
less increase at the same time, thus also the demand for money- 
capital—which can raise the rate of interest. The market-price of 
labour-power then rises above its average, more than the average 
number of labourers are employed, and the rate of interest rises 
at the same time hecause under such circumstances the demand tor 
money-capital rises. The rising demand for labour-power raises the 
price of this commodity, as every other, increases its price; but 
not the profit, which depends mainly upon the relative cheapness of 
this commodity in particular. But it raises at the same time—un- 
der the assured conditions—the rate of interest, because it increases 
the demand for money-capital. If the money-capitalist, instead of 
lending the money, should transform himself into an industrial capi- 
lalist, the fact that he has to pay more for labour-power would not 
inctease his profit but would rather decrease it correspondingly. 
The state of business may be such that his profit may nevertheless 
rise, bul it would never be so because he pays more [or labour. The 
latter circumstance, in so far as it increases the demand for money- 
capital, is, however, sufficient to raise the rate of interest, If wages 
should rise for some reason during an otherwise unfavourable state 
of business, the rise in wages would lower the rate of profit, but raise 
the rate of interest to the extent that it increased the demand for 
money-capital. 

Leaving labour aside, the thing called “demand for capital” by 
Overstone consists only in a demand for commodities. The demand 
for commodities raises their price, either because it rises above aver- 
age, or because the supply of commodities falls below average. If 
the industrial capitalist or merchant must now pay, e.g., £150 

502 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

for the same amount of commodities for which he used to pay £100, 
he would now have to borrow £150 instead of the former £100, and 
if the rate of interest were 5°, he would now have to pay an inter- 
est of £74 as compared with £5 formerly. The amount of interest 
to be paid by him would rise because he now has to borrow more 
capital. 

The whole endeavour of Mr. Overstone consists in representing the 
interests of loan capital and industrial capital as being identical, 
whereas his Bank Act is precisely calculated to exploit this very 
difference of interests to the advantage of money-capital. 

It is possible that the demand for commodities, in case their sup- 
ply has fallen below average, does not absorb any more money- 
capital than formerly. The same sum, or perhaps a smaller one, has 
to be paid for their total value, but a smaller quantity of use-values 
is received for the same sum. In this case, the demand for Joanable 
capital will be unchanged and therefore rate of interest wil! not 
rise, although the demand for commodities would have risen as 
compared to their supply and consequently the price of commodi- 
ties would have become higher. The rate of interest cannol be 
affected, unless the total demand for loan capital increases, and 
this is not the case under the above assumptions. 

The supply of an article can also fall below average, as it does 
when crop failures in corn, cotton, etc., occur; and the demand for 
loan capital can increase because speculation in these commodi- 
ties counts on further rise in prices and the easiest way to make them 
Tise is to temporarily withdraw a portion of the supply from the 
market. But in order to pay for the purchased commodities without 
selling them, money is secured by means of the commercial “bill of 
exchange operations.” In this case, the demand for loan capital in- 
creases, and the rate of interest can rise as a result of this attempt 
to artificially prevent the supply of this commodity [rom reaching 
the market. The higher rate of interest then reflects an artificial 
reduction in the supply of commodity-capital. 

On the other hand, the demand for an arlicle can grow because its 
supply has increased and the article sells below its average price. 

In this case, the demand for loan capital can remain the same, or 
even fall, because more commodities can be had for the same sum ol 
money, Speculative stock-piling could also occur, either for the 
purpose of taking advantage of the most favourable moment for 
production purposes, or in expectation of a future rise in prices. 
In this case, the demand for loan capital could grow, and the rise 
in the rate of interest would then be a reflection of capital invest- 
ment in surplus stock-piling of elements of productive capital. 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. JIL. 503 

We are only considering here the demand for loan capital as it 
is influenced by the demand for, and supply ol, commodity-capital. 
We have already discussed how the varying state of the reproduc- 
tion process in the phases of the industrial cycle influences the 
supply of loan capital. The trivial proposition that the market rate 
of interest is determined by the supply and demand of (loan) capital 
is shrewdly jumbled up by Overstone with his own postulate, 
namely, that loan capital is identical with capital in general; 
and in this way he tries to transform the usurer into the only 
capitalist and his capital into the only capital. 

In times of stringency, the demand for loan capital is a demand 
for means of payment and nothing else; it is by no means a demand 
for money as a means of purchase. At the same time, the rate of in- 
terest may rise very high, regardless whether real capital, i.e., 
productive and commodity capital, exists in abundance ar is scarce. 
The demand for means of payment is a mere demand for convertibil- 
ity into money, so far aS merchants and producers have good se- 
curities to offer; it is a demand for money-capifal whenever there 
is no collateral, so that an advance of means of payment gives them 
not only the form of money but also the equivalent they lack, what- 
ever its form, with which to make payment. This is the point where 
both sides of the contraversy on the prevalent theory of crises are 
at the same time right and wrong. Those who say thal there is mere- 
ly a lack of means of payment, either have only the owners of 
bona fide securities in mind, or they are fools who believe that it 
is the duty and power of banks to transform all bankrupt swindlers 
into solvent and respectable capitalists by means of pieces of pa- 
per. Those who say that there is merely a lack of capital, are ei- 
ther just quibbling about words, since precisely at such times there 
is a mass of inconvertible capital as a resuit of over-imports and 
over-production, or they are referring only to such cavaliers of 
credit who are now, indeed, placed in the position where they can 
no longer obtain other people’s capital for their operations and now 
demand that the bank should not only help them to pay for the lost 
capital, but also enable them to continue with their swindles. 

It is a basic principle of capitalist production that money, as an 
independent form of value, stands in opposition to commodities, 
or that exchange-value must assume an independent form in money; 
and this is only possible when a definite commodity becomes the 
material whose value becomes a measure of all other commodities, 
so that it thus becomes the general commodity, the commodity 
par excellence—as distinguished [rom all other commodities. This 
must manifest itself in two respects, particularly among capitalis- 

504 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

tically developed nations, which to a large extent replace money, 
on the one hand, by credit operations, and on the other by credit- 
money. In times of a squeeze, when credit contracts or ceases entire- 
ly. money suddenly stands as the only means olf payment and true 
existence of yalue in absolute opposition to al] other commodities. 
Hence the universal depreciation of commodities, the difficulty or 
even impossihility of transforming them into money, i.e., into their 
own purely fantastic form, Secondly, however, credit-money it- 
self is only money to the extent that it absolutely takes the place 
of actual money {othe amount of its nominal value. With a drain 
on gold its convertibility, i.e., its identity with actual gold beco- 
mes problematic. Hence coercive measures, raising the rate ol inter- 
est, etc., for tle purpose of safeguarding the conditions of this con- 
verlibility. This can be carried more or less to extremes by mistak- 
en legislation, based on false theories of money and enforced upon 
the nation by the interests of the money-dealers, the Overstones 
and their ilk. The basis, however, is given with the basis of the mode 
oi production itself. A depreciation of credit-money (not to mention, 
incidentally, a purely imaginary loss of its character as money) 
would unsettle all existing relations. Therefore, the value of commod- 
ities is sacrificed for the purpose of safeguarding the fantastic and 
independent existence of this value in money. As money-value, it 
is secure only as long as money is secure. For a few millions in mon- 
ey, many millions in commodities must therefore be sacrificed. 
This is inevitable under capitalist production and constitutes one 
of its beauties. In former modes of production, this does not occur 
because, on the narrow basis upon which they stand, neither credit 
nor credit-money can develop greatly. As long as the social charac- 
ter of labour appears as the money-existence of commodities, and thus 
as a (hing external to actual production, money crises—independent 
of or as an intensification of actual crises—are inevitable. On the 
other hand, it isclear that as long as the credit of a bank is not shak- 
ea, it will alleviate the panic in such cases by increasing credit- 
money and intensify it by contracting the latter. The entire history 
of modern industry shows that metal would indeed be required 
only for the balancing of international cominerce, whenever its equi- 
librium is momentarily disturbed, if only domestic production 
were organized. That the domestic market does not need any metal 
even now is shown by the suspension of the cash payments of the 
so-called national banks, which resort to this expedient in all ex- 
treme cases as the sole relief. 

_ In the case of two individuals, it would be ridiculous to say that 
in their transactions with one another both have an unfavourable 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. IL 505 

balance of payments. If they are reciprocally creditor and debtor 
of one another, it is evident that when their claims do not balance, 
one must be the creditor and the other the debtor for the balance. 
With nations this is by no means the case. And that this is not the 
case is acknowledged by all economists when they admit that the 
balance of payments can be favourable or unfavourable for a nation, 
though its trade balance must ultimately be settled. The balance of 
payments differs from the balance of trade in that it is a balance of 
trade which must be settled at a definite time. What the crises now 
accomplish is to narrow the difference between the balance of pay- 
ments and the balance of trade to a short interval; and the specil- 
ic conditions which develop in the nation suffering from a crisis 
and, therefore, having its payments become due—these conditions 
already lead to such a contraction of the time of settlement. First, 
shipping away precious metals; then selling consigned commodities 
at low prices; exporting commodities to dispose of them or to obtain 
money advances on them at home; increasing the rate of interest, re- 
calling credit, depreciating securities, disposing of foreign securi- 
ties, attracting foreign capitai for investment in these depreciated 
securities, and finally bankruptcy, which settles a mass of claims. 
At the same time, metal is stil] often sent to the country where a cri- 
sis has broken out, because the drafls drawn on it are insecure and 
payment in specie is most trustworthy. Furthermore, in regard to 
Asia, all capitalist nations are usually simultaneously—directly 
or indirectly—its debtors. As soon as these various circumstances 
exert their full effect upon the other involved nation, it likewise 
begins to export gold and silver, in short, its payments become due 
and the same phenomena are repeated. 

In commercial credit, the interest —as the difference between cred- 
it price and cash price—enters into the price of commodities only 
in so far as the bills of exchange have a longer than ordinary run- 
ning time. Otherwise it does not. And this is explained by the fact 
that everyone takes credit with one hand and gives it with the 
other. [This does not agree with my experience.—F. £.| But in so 
far as discount in this form enters here, it is not regulated by this 
commercial credit, but by the money-market. 

If supply and demand of money-capital, which determine the 
rate of interest, were identical with supply and demand of actual 
capital, as Overstone maintains, the interest would be simultaneous- 
ly low and high, depending on whether various commodities or 
various phases (raw material, semi-finished product, finished prod- 
uct) of the same commodity were being considered. In 1844, the 
rate of interest of the Bank of England fluctuated between 4% (from 

: Y Dp’ F 
506 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

January to September) and 2'/, and 3% (from November to the end 
of the year). In 1845, it was 24, 2°/,, and 3% from January to Octo- 
ber, and between 3 and 5% during the remaining months. The aver- 
age price of [air Orleans cotton was 6'/,d. in 1844 and 4"/,d. in 
1845. On March 3, 1844, the cotton supply in Liverpool was 627,042 
bales, and on March 3, 1845, it was 773,800 bales. To judge by the 
low price of cotton, the rate of interest should have been low in 
1845, and it was indeed for the greater part of this time. But to 
judge by the yarn, the rate of interest should have been high, for 
the prices were relatively high and the profits absolutely high. 
From cotton at 4d. per pound, yarn could be spun in 1845 with a 
spinning cost of 4d. (good secunda mule twist No. 40), or a total cost 
of 8d. to the spinner, which he could sell in September and October 
1845 at 10%% or 11'/,d. per pound. (See the testimony of Wylie 
below.) 

The entire matter can be resolved as follows: 

Supply and demand of Joan capital would be identical with 
supply and demand of capital generally (although this last state- 
ment is absurd; for the industrial or commercial capitalist a commod- 
ity is a form of his capital, yet he never asks for capital as such, 
but only for the particular commodity as such, he buys and pays for 
it as a commodity, e.g., corn or cotton, regardless of the role that 
it has to play in the circuit of his capital), if there were no money- 
lenders, and if in their stead the lending capitalists were in posses- 
sion of machinery, raw materials, etc., which they would lend or 
hire out, as houses are rented out now, to the industrial 
capitalists, who are themselves owners of some of these objects. 
Under such circumstances, the supply of loan capital would be iden- 
tical with the supply of elements of production for the industrial 
capitalist and commodities for the merchant. But it is clear that 
the division of profit between the Jender and borrower would then, 
to begin with, completely depend on the relation of the capital 
which is lent to that which is the property of the one who 
employs it. 

According to Mr. Weguelin (B. A. 1857), the rate of interest is 
de‘ermined by “the amount of unemployed capital” (252); it is 
“but an indication of a large amount of capital seeking employment” 
(271); later this unemployed capital becomes “floating capital” 
(485) and by this he means “the Bank of England notes and other 
kinds of circulation in the country, for instance, the country banks 
circulation and the amount of coin which is inthe country. ...1 in- 
clude in floating capital the reserves of the bankers” (502, 503), and 
later also goid bullion (503). Thus the same Mr. Weguelin says that 

MONEY-CAPITAL AND REAL CAPITAL. IL £07 

the Bank of England exerts great influence upon the rate of interest 
in times, when “we” [the Bank of England] “are holders of the great- 
er portion of the unemployed capital” (1198), while, according to 
the above testimony of Mr. Overstone, the Bank of England “is 
no place for capital.” Mr. Weguelin further says: “I think the rate of 
discount ‘is governed by the amount of unemployed capital which 
there is in the country. The amount of unemployed capital is re- 
presented by the reserve of the Bank of England, which is practi- 
cally a reserve of bullion. When, therefore, the bullion is drawn upon, 
it diminishes the amount of unemployed capital in the country and 
consequently raises the value of that which remains” (1258). 
J. Stuart Mill says (2102): “The Bank is obliged to depend for the sol- 
vency of its banking department upon what it can do to replenish the 
reserve in that department; and therefore as soon as it finds that there 
is any drain in progress, it is obliged to look to the safety of its re- 
serve, and to commence contracting its discounts or selling securi- 
ties."—The reserve, in so far as only the banking department is 
considered, is a reserve for the depcsits only. According to the Over- 
stones, the banking department is supposed to act only as a banker, 
without regard to the “automatic” issue of notes. But in times of 
actual stringency the Bank, independently ol the reserveof the bank- 
ing department, which consists only of notes, keeps a sharp eye 
on the bullion reserve, and must do so if it does not wish to fail. 
For, to the extent that the bullion reserve dwindles, so the reserve 
of bank-notes also dwindles, and no one should be better informed 
of this than Mr. Overstone, who precisely by his Bank Act of 1844 
has so sagaciously arranged this. 

CHAPTER XXXII! 

THE MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION 
IN THE CREDIT SYSTEM 

“The great regulator of the velocity of the currency is credit. This 
explains why a severe pressure upon the money-market is generally 
coincident with a full circulation.” (The Currency Theory Reviewed, 
p. 65.) This is to be taken in a double sense. On the one hand, 
all methods which save on medium ol circulation are based upon 
credit. On the other hand, however, take, Jor example, a 500-pound 
note. A gives it to Bon a certain day in payment [or a bill of 
exchange; B deposits it on the same day with his banker; the latter 
discounts a bill of exchange with it on the very same day lor C; 
C pays it to his bank, the bank gives it to the bill-broker as an ad- 
vance, etc. The velocity with which the note circulates here, to serve 
for purchases and payments, is effected by the velocity with which 
it repeatedly returns to someone in the Jorm of a deposit and passes 
over to someone else again in the form of a loan. The pure economy in 
medium of circulation appears most highly developed in the clearing 
house—in the simple exchange of bills of exchange that are due—and 
in the preponderant function of money as a means of payment for 
merely settling balances, But the very existence of these bills of 
exchange depends in turn on credit, which the industrialists and 
merchants mutually give one another. If this credit declines, so does 
the number of bills, particularly long-term ones, and consequently 
also the eflectiveness of this method of balancing accounts. And this 
economy, which consists in eliminating money Irom transactions and 
rests entirely upon the function of money as a means of payment, 
which in turn is based upon credit, can only be of two kinds (aside 
from the more or less developed technique in the concentration of 
these payments): mutual claims, represented by bills of exchange 
or cheques, are balanced out either by the same banker, who merely 
transcribes the claim from the account of one (o that of another, or 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 509 

by the various bankers among themselves."' The concentration of 8 to 
{0 million bills of exchange in the hands of one bill-broker, such as 
the firm of Overend, Gurney &Co., was one of the principal means 
of expanding the scale of such balancing locally. The effectiveness of 
the medium of circulation is increased through this economy in so 
far as a smaller quantity of it is required simply to balance accounts. 
On the other hand the velocity of the money flowing as medium of 
circulation (by which it is also economized) depends entirely upon 
the flow of purchases and sales, and on the chain of payments, 
in sofar as they occur successively in money. But credit effects and 
thereby increases the velocity of circulation. Asingle piece of mon- 
ey, for instance, can effect only five moves, and remains longer 
in the hands of each individual as mere medium of circulation with- 
out credit mediating—when A, its original owner, buys from B, 
B from C, C from D, D from E, and E from F, that is, when its tran- 
sition [rom one hand to‘another is due only to actual purchases 
and sales. But when B deposits the money received in payment 
from A with his banker and the latter uses it in discounting bills 
of exchange lor C, Cin turn buys from D, D deposits it with his bank- 
er and the latter lends it to E, who buys from F, then even its ve- 
locity as mere medium of circulation (means of purchase) is effected 
by several credit operations: B’s depositing with his banker and the 
latter’s discounting for C, D’s depositing with his banker, and the 
laiter’s discounting for E; in other words through four credil oper- 
ations. Without these credit operations, the same piece of money 
would not have performed five purchases successively in the given 
period of time. The fact that it changed hands without mediation of 
actual sales and purchases, through depositing and discounting, has 
here accelerated ils change of hands in the series of actual transac- 
tions. 

We have seen previously that one and the same bank-note can 
constilute deposits in several banks. Similarly, it can also consti- 

Average number of days during which a bank-note remained in circulation: 

Year | 45 Note | 4:10 Note | 420-100 | 4200-500 | 41,000 
1792 ? 236 209 31 
1818 148 137 121 re 
1846 79 71 34 12 
1856 70 58 27 9 

(Compilation by Marshall, Cashier of the Bank of England, in Report on Bank 
Acts, 1857, Appendix I, pp. 300-01.) 

510 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

tute various deposits in the same bank. The banker discounts, with 
the note which A has deposited, B’s bill of exchange, B pays C, 
and C deposits the same note in the same bank that issued it. 

We have already demonstrated in the discussion of simple money 
circulation (Buch I, Kap. III, 2)* that the mass of actual circulating 
money. assuming the velocity of circulation and economy of pay- 
ments as given, is determined by the prices of commodities and the 
quantity of transactions. The same law governs the circulation of 
notes. 

In the following table, the annual average number of notes of 
the Bank of Engl and, insofar as they were in the hands of the pub- 
lic, are recorded, namely, the 5- and 10-pound notes, the 20- to 
100-pound notes, and the larger denominations between 200 and | .000 
pounds sterling: also the percentages of the total circulation that 
each one of these groupings constitutes. The amounts are in thou- 
sarids, i.e., the last three figures are omitted. ** 

| ver | Baza | x | Aazae] x | PRB] | Tags 
1844 9,263 | 45.7 5,735 | 28.3 5.253 26.0 | 20,241 
1845 9.698 | 46.9 6,082 | 29.3 4,942 23.8 20,722 
1846 9.918 | 48.9 5,778 | 28.5 4,590 22.6 20,286 
1847 9,591 50.1 5,498 | 28.7 4,066 21.2 19,)55 
1848 8,732 | 48.3 5,046 | 27.9 4,307 23.8 18,085 
1849 8,692 | 47.2 5,234 | 28.5 4,477 24.3] 18.403 
1850 9,164 | 47.2 5,587 | 28.8 4,646 24.0 19,9398 
1851 9,362 48.1 5,554 | 28.5 4,557 23.4 19,473 
1852 9,839 45.0 6,16) | 28.2 5,856 26.8 21,856 
1853 10,699 47.3 6,393 | 28.2 5,541 24.5 22,653 
1854 10,565 | 51.0] 5,910 | 28.5 4,234 | 20.5] 20,709 
1855 10,628 | 53.6 5,706 | 28.9 3,459 17.5 19,793 
1856 10,680 | 54.4 5,645 | 28.7 3,323 16.9 19,648 
1857 10,659 | 54.7 5,567 | 28.6 3,241 16.7 19,467 

* English edition: Ch. Ill, 2.—Ed. 

** This table reproduces a photo-c I indica 
all its absolute figures are carterh Ed af ne sania ne sailealed, ‘et 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT SIL 

(B. A. 1858, p. XXVI.) The total sum of circulating bank-notes, 
therefore, positively decreased from 1844 to 1857, although com- 
mercial business, as indicated by exports and imports, had more 
than doubled. The smaller bank-notes of £5 and £10 increased, as 
the table shows, from £9,263,000 in 1844 to $10,659,000 in 1857. 
And this took place simultaneously with the particularly heavy 
increase in gold circulation at that time. On the other hand, there 
was a decrease in the notes of higher denominations (£200 to £1,000) 
from £#5,856,000 in 1852 to £3,241,000 in 1857, i.e., a decrease of 
more than £2% million. This is explained as follows: “On the 8th 
June 1854, the private bankers of London admitted the joint-stock 
banks to the arrangements of the clearing house, and shortly 
afterwards the final clearing was adjusted in the Bank of England. 
The daily clearances are now effected by transfers in the accounts 
which the several banks keep in that establishment. In consequence 
of the adoption of this system, the large notes which the bankers 
formerly employed for the purpose of adjusting their accounts are 
no longer necessary.” (B. A. 1858, p. V.) 

To what small minimum the use of money in wholesale trade has 
been reduced, can be deduced from the table reprinted in Book | 
(Kap. III, Note 103),* which was presented to the Bank Committee 
by Morrison, Dillon & Co., one of the largest of those London firms 
from which a small dealer can buy his entire assortment of commodi- 
ties. 

According to the testimony of W. Newmarch before the Bank 
Committee 1857, No. 1741, other circumstances also contributed 
to economy in the circulating medium: penny postage, railways, le- 
legraphy, in short, the improved means of communication; thus Eng- 
land can now carry on five to six times more business with about the 
same circulation of bank-notes. This is also essentially due to the 
withdrawal from circulation of notes of higher denomination 
than £10. Here Newmarch sees a natural explanation for the phenom- 
enon that in Scotland and Ireland, where one-pound notes also 
circulate, nole circulation has risen by about 31% (1747). The total 
circulation of bank-notes in the United Kingdom, including one- 
pound notes, is said to be £39 million (1749). The gold circulation, 
£70 million (1750). In Scotland, the circulation of notes was 
£3,120,000 in 1834; £3,020,000 in 1844; and £4,050,000 in 1854 
(1782). 

From these figures alone, it is evident that banks issuing notes 
can by no means increase the number of circulating notes at will, 

* English edition: Ch. Il, p. 140, Footnote 1.—&d. 

512 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

as long as these notes are at all times exchangeable for money. 
{Inconvertible paper money is not considered here at all; inconverti- 
ble bank-notes can become a universal medium of circulation only 
where they are actually backed by state credit, as is the case in 
Russia al present. They then fall under the laws of inconvertible 
paper money issued by the state, which have already been developed 
in Book I (Kap. II], 2, c}* “Coin and Symbols of Value."—F. E.} 

The quantity of circulating notes is regulated by the turnover 
requirements, and every superfluous note wends its way back imme- 
diately to the issuer. Since in England only thenotes of the Bank of 
England circulate universally as legal means of payment, we can 
disregard at this point the insignificant, and merely local, note cir- 
culation of the country banks. 

Belore the Bank Committee 1858, Mr. Neave, Governor of the 
Bank of England, testifies: “No. 947. (Question:) Whatever meas- 
ures you resort to, the amount of notes with the public, you say, re- 
mains the same; that is somewhere about £20,000,000?—In ordi- 
nary times, the uses of the public seem to want about £20,000,000. 
There are special periodical moments when, through the year, they 
rise to another £1,000,000 or £1,500,000. [ stated that, if the pub- 
lic wanted more, they could always take it [rom the Bank of Eng- 
land."—“948. You stated that during the panic the public would not 
allow you to diminish the amount of notes; I want you to account for 
that? —In moments of panic, the public have, as | believe, the full 
power of helping themselves as to notes; and of course, as long as 
the Bank has a liability, they may use that liability to take the 
notes from the Bank."—“949. Then there seems to be required, at all 
times, somewhere about £20,000,000 of legal tender? —£20,000,000 
of notes with the public; it varies. It is £18,500,000, £19,000,000, 
£20,000,000, and so on; but taking the average, you may call it 
from £19,000,000 to £20,000,000.” 

Testimony of Thomas Tooke before the Committee of Lords on 
Commercial Distress (C. D. 1848/57), No. 3094: “The Bank has no 
power of its own volition to extend the amount ol its circulation in 
the hands of the public; but it has the power of reducing the amount 
of the notes in the hands of the public, not however without a very 
violent operation.” 

J.C. Wright, a banker for 30 years in Nottingham, having ex- 
plained at length the impossibility for a country bank to be able to 
keep more notes in circulation than the public needs and wants, 

* English edition: Ch, I11,2, c.—£d, 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 513 

says about notes of the Bank of England (C. D. 1848/57), No. 2844: 
“I am not aware that there is any check” (for note issue) “upon the 
Bank of England, but any excess of circulation will go into the 
deposits and thus assume a diflerent name.” 

The same holds true for Scotland, where almost nothing but pa- 
per circulates, because there as well as in Ireland one-pound notes 
are also in use and “the Scotch hate gold.” Kennedy, Director of a 
Scottish bank, declares that banks could not even contract their 
circulation of notes and “conceives that so long as there are internal 
transactions requiring notes or gold to perform them, bankers must, 
either through the demands of their depositors or in one shape or 
another, furnish as much currency as those transactions require... 
The Scottish banks can restrict their transactions, but they cannot 
control their currency.” (/bid., Nos. 3446, 3448.) Similarly, Ander- 
son, Director of the Union Bank of Scotland, states (cb¢d., 
No. 3578): “The system of exchanges between yourselves” [among the 
Scottish banks] “prevents any over-issue on the part of any one bank? 
—Yes; there is a more powerful preventive than the system of ex- 
changes” [which has really nothing to do with this, but does indeed 
guarantee the ability of the notes of eacli bank to circulate through- 
out Scotland], “the universal practice in Scotland of keeping a 
bank account; everybody who has any money ai all has a bank ac- 
count and puts in every day the money which he does not immediate- 
ly want, so that at the close of the business of the day there is no 
money scarcely out of the banks except what people have in their 
pockets.” 

The same applies to Ireland, as indicated in the testimony of the 
Governor of the Bank of Ireland, MacDonnell, and the Director of 
the Provincial Bank of Ireland, Murray, before the same Com- 
mittee. 

Note circulation is just as independent of the state of the gold re- 
serve in the vaults of the bank which guarantees the convertibility 
of these notes, as it is of the will of the Bank of England. “On Sep- 
tember 18, 1846, the circulation of the Bank of England was 
£20,900,000 and the bullion in the Bank £16,273,000; and on 
April 5, 1847, the notes in circulation were £20,815,000 and the 
bullion £10,246,000.... It is evident that six million of gold were 
exported, without any contraction of the currency of the country.” 
(J. G. Kinnear, The Crisis and the Currency, London, 1847, p. 5.) OF 
course, this applies only under present conditions prevailing in Eng- 
land, and even here only in so far as legislation does not decree a 
different relationship between the note issue and metal! reserve. 

Hence only the requirements of business itself exert an influence 

18-2757 

514 DIVISION OP PROFIT 

on the quantity of circulating money —notes and gold. To be noted 
here, in the first instance, are the periodic fluctuations, which re- 
peat themselves annually regardless of the general condition of busi- 
ness, so that for the past 20 years “the circulation is high in one 
month, and it is low in another month, and in a certain other month 
occurs a medium point.” (Newmarch, B. A. 1857, No. 1650.) 

Thus, in August of every year a few millions, generally in gold, 
pass from the Bank of England into domestic circulation to pay the 
harvest expenses; since wages are the principal payments to be made 
here, bank-notes are less serviceable in England for this purpose. 
By the close of the year this money has streamed back to the Bank. 
In Scotland, there are almost nothing but one-pound notes instead 
of sovereigns; here, then, the note circulation is expanded in the 
corresponding situation, namely, twice a year—in May and 
November—irom 3 million to 4 million; alter a fortnight the 
return flow begins, and is almost completed in one month. (Ander- 
son, C. D. 1848/57, Nos. 3595-3600.) 

The note circulation of the Bank of England also experiences a 
momentary fluctuation every three months because of the quarter- 
ly payment of “dividends,” that is, interest on the national debt, 
whereby bank-notes are first withdrawn Irom circulation and then 
again released to the public; but they flow back very soon again. 
Weguelin (B. A. 1857, No. 38) states that this fluctuation in the 
note circulation amounts to two and a half million. Mr. Chapman 
of the notorious firm of Overend, Gurney & Co., however, estimates 
the amount of disturbance thus created in the money-market as 
being much higher. “When you abstract from the circulation 
£6,000,000 or £7,000,000 of revenue in anticipation of dividends, 
somebody must be the medium of supplying that in the intermediate 
times.” (B. A. 1857, No. 5196.) 

Far more significant and enduring are the fluctuations in 
quantity of circulating medium corresponding to the various phases 
of the industrial cycle. Let us listen to another associé of that 
firm on this question, the esteemed Quaker Samuel Gurney (C. D. 
1848/57, No. 2645): “At the end of October (1847) the amount of 
bank-notes in the hands of the public was $20,800,000. At that 
period there was great dilficulty in getting possession of bank- 
notes in the money-market. This arose Irom the alarm of not being 
able to get them in consequence of the restriction of the Act of 1844. 
At present [March 1848] the amount of bank-notes in the hands 
of ihe public is ... £17,700,000, but there being now no commercial 
alarm whatsoever, it is much beyond what is required. There is 
no banking house or money-dealer in London, but what has a larg- 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 515 

er amount of bank-notes than they can use.”—“2650, The amount 
of bank-notes ... out of the custody of the Bank of England affords 
a totally insufficient exponent of the active state of the circulation, 
without taking into consideration likewise ... the state of the com- 
mercial world and the state of credit.”—“2651. The feeling of sur- 
plus that we have under the present amount of circulation in the 
hands of the public arises in a large degree from our present 
state of great stagnation. In a state of high prices and excitement 
z transaction £17,700,000 would give us a feeling of restric- 
ion.” 

[As long as the state of business is such that returns of loans 
made come in regularly and credit thus remains unshaken, the expan- 
sion and contraction of circulation depend simply upon the require- 
ments of industrialists and merchants. Since gold, at least in 
England, does not come into question in the wholesale trade and 
the circulation of gold, aside from seasonal fluctuations, may be 
regarded as rather constant over a long period of time, the note 
circulation of the Bank of England constitutes a sufficiently accu- 
rate measure of these changes. In the period of stagnation following 
a crisis, circulation is smallest; with the renewed demand, a great- 
er need for circulating medium develops, which increases with 
rising prosperity; the quantity of circulating medium reaches its 
apex in the period of overtension and over-speculation—the cri- 
sis precipitously breaks out and overnight bank-notes which yes- 
terday were still so plentiful disappear from the market and with 
them the discounters of bills, lenders of money on securities, and 
buyers of commodities. The Bank of England is called upon for 
help—but even its powers are soon exhausted, for the Bank Act 
of 1844 compels it to contract its note circulation at the very mo- 
ment when the whole world cries out for notes; when owners of 
commodities cannot sell, yet are called upon to pay and are pre- 
pared for any sacrifice, if only they can secure bank-notes. “During 
an alarm,” says the earlier mentioned banker Wright (loc. céé., 
No. 2930), “the country requires twice as mutch circulation as in 
ordinary times, because the circulation is hoarded by bankers and 
others.” 

Once the crisis has broken out, it becomes from then on only a 
question of means of payment. But since every one is dependent 
upon someone else for the receipt of these means of pay:nent, and 
no one knows whether the next one will be able to meet his pay- 
ments when due, a regular stampede ensues for those means of pay- 
ment available on the market, that is, for bank-notes. Everyone 
hoards as many of them as he can lay land on, and thus the notes 

18* 

Ss U MIT 
516 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

disappear from circulation on the very day when they are most need- 
ed. Samuel Gurney (C. D. 1848/57, No. 1116) estimates the amount 
of bank-notes brought under lock and key in October 1847, at atime 
of such alarm, to have reached £4 to £5 million.—F. E.] 

In this connection, the cross-examination of Chapman, Gurney’s 
associate who has been previously mentioned, before the Bank 
Committee of 1857 is especially interesting. I present here its prin- 
cipal contents in context, although certain points are touched upon 
which we shall not examine until later. 

Mr. Chapman has the following to say: 

“4963. 1 have also no hesitation in saying that I do not think it 
is a proper condition of things that the money-market should be 
under the power of any individual capitalist (such as does exist 
in London), to create a tremendous scarcity and pressure, when we 
have a very low state of circulation out. That is possible... there 
is more than one capitalist, who can withdraw from the circulating 
medium £1,000,000 or £2,000,000 of notes, if they have an object 
to attain by it.”—4965.* A big speculator can sell £1,000,000 
or £2,000,000 of consols and thus take the money out of the market. 
Something similar to this has happened quite recently, “it creates 
a very violent pressure.” 

4967. The notes are then indeed unproductive. “But that is noth- 
ing, if it effects his great object; his great object is to knock down 
the funds, to create a scarcity, and he has it perfectly in his power 
to do so.”—An illustration: One morning there was a great demand 
for money in the Stock Exchange; nobody knew its cause; somebody 
asked Chapman to lend him £50,000 at 7%. Chapman was aston- 
ished, for his rate of interest was much lower; he accepted. Soon after 
that the man returned, borrowed another £50,000 at 7%4%, then 
£100,000 at 8%, and wanted still more at 8'/,%. Then even Chap- 
man became uneasy. Later it turned out that a considerable sum of 
money had been suddenly withdrawn from the market. But, says 
Chapman, “I did lend a large sum at 8%; I was afraid to go beyond; 
I did not know what was coming.” 

_ It must never be forgotten that, although £19 to £20 million 
in notes are almost constantly supposed to be in the hands of the 
public, nevertheless, the portion of these notes which actually cir- 
culates, and, on the other hand, the portion which is held idle by 
the banks as a reserve, continually and significantly vary with 
Fespect to each other. If this reserve is large, and therefore the 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 4995,—£d. 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 517 

actual circulation small, it means, from the point of view of the 
money-market, that the circulation is full, money is plentiful; 
if the reserve is small, and therefore the actual circulation full, in 
the language of the money-market the circulation is low, monev 
is scarce—in other words, the portion representing idle loan capi- 
tal is small. A real expansion or contraction of the circulation, that 
is independent of the phases of the industrial cycle—with the 
amount needed by the public, however, remaining the same— 
occurs only for technica] reasons, for instance, on the dates when 
taxes or the interest on the national debt are due. When taxes are 
paid, more notes and gold than usual flow into the Bank of England 
and, in effect, contract the circulation without regard to its needs. 
The reverse takes place when the dividends on the national debt 
are paid out. In the former case, loans are made from the Bank in 
order to obtain circulating medium. [n the latter case, the rate of 
interest falls in private banks because of the momentary growth 
of their reserves. This has nothing to do with the absolute quantity 
of circulating medium; it does, however, concern the banking firm 
which sets this circulating medium in motion and for which this 
process consists in the alienation of loan capital and for which 
it pockets the profits thereby. 

In tlie one case, there is merely a temporary displacement of 
circulating medium, which the Bank of England balances by short- 
term loans at low interest shortly before the quarterly taxes and also 
before the quarterly dividends on the national debt become due; 
the issue of these supernumerary notes first fills up the gap caused 
hy the payment of taxes, while their return payment to the Bank 
soon thereafter brings back the excess of notes obtained by the 
public through the payment of dividends. 

In the other case, low or full circulation is always simply a mat- 
ter of different distribution of the same quantity of circulating 
medium into active circulation and deposits, i.e., an instrument of 
loans. 

On the other hand, if, for example, the number of nates issued is 
increased on the basis of a flow ol gold into the Bank of England, these 
notes assist in discounting bills outside of the Bank and return to 
it through the repayment of loans, so that the absolute quantity of 
circulating notes is only momentarily increased. 

If the circulation is full because of business expansion (which 
may take place even though prices are relatively low), then the rate 
of interest can be relatively high because of the demand for loan 
capital as a result of rising profits and increased new investments. 
[If it is low, because of business contraction, or perhaps because 

HINISLON OF PROFIT 
518 DIVISLON OF PRO 

credit is very plentiful, the rate of interest can be low even though 
prices are high. (See Hubbard.} she a 

The absolute amount of circulation has a determining influence 
on the rate of interest only in times of stringency. The demand for 
{ull circulation can either reflect merely a demand for a hoarding 
medium (disregarding the reduced velocity of the money circula- 
tion and the continuous conversion of the same identical pieces of 
money into loan capital) owing to lack of credit, as was the case 
in 1847 when the suspension of the Bank Act did not cause any ex- 
pansion of the circulation, but sulficed to draw forth the hoarded 
notes and to channel them into circulation; or it may be that more 
means of circulation are actually required under the circumstances, 
as was the case in 1857 when the circulation actually expanded for 
some time alter the suspension of the Bank Act. 

Otherwise, the absolute quantity of circulation has no influence 
whatever upon the rate of interest, since—assuming the economy 
and velocity of currency to be constant—it is determined in the 
first place by commodity-prices and the quantity of transactions 
(whereby one of these generally neutralizes the effect of the other), 
and finally by the state of credit, whereas it by no means exerts 
the reverse effect upon the latter; and, secondly, since commodity- 
prices and interest do not necessarily stand in any direct correla- 
tion to each other. 

During the life of the Bank Restriction Act (1797-1820) a sur- 
plus of currency existed and the rate of interest was always much 
higher than after the resumption of cash payments. Later, it fell 
rapidly with the restriction of the note issue and rising bil] quota- 
tions. In 1822, 1823, and 1832, the general circulation was low, and 
so was the rate of interest. In 1824, 1825, and 1836, the circulation 
was full and the rate of interest rose. In the summer of 1830 the 
circulation was full and the rate of interest low. Since the gold 
discoveries, money circulation throughout Europe has expanded, 
and the rate of interest risen. Therefore, the rate of interest does 
not depend upon the quantity of circulating money. 

The difference between the issue of circulating medium and the 
lending of capital is best demonstrated in the actual reproduction 
process. We have seen (Book II, Part III) in what manner the dif- 
ferent component parts of production are exchanged for one an- 
other. For example, variable capital consists materially of the means 
of subsistence of the labourers, a portion of their own product. 
But this is paid out to them piecemeal in money. The capitalist 
has to advance this, and it is very greatly dependent on the credit 
system organization whether he can pay out the new variable capi- 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION [IN CREDIT 519 

tal the following week with the old money which he paid out in 
the previous week. The same holds for exchange among various 
component parts of the total social capital, for instance, between 
means of consumption and means of production of means of con- 
sumption. The money for their circulation, as we have seen. must 
be advanced by one or both of the exchanging parties. It remains 
thereupon in circulation, but returns after the exchange las been 
completed to the one who advanced it, since it had been advanced 
by him over and above his actually employed industrial capital 
(Book II, Chap. XX). Under a developed system of credit, with 
the money concentrated in the hands of bankers, it is they, at least 
nominally, who advance it. This advance refers only to money in 
circulation. It is an advance of circulation, not an advance oi capi- 
tals which it circulates. 

Chapman: “5062. There may be times, when the notes in the hands 
of the public, though they may be large, are not to be had.” Money 
also exists during a panic; but every one takes good care not to con- 
vert it into loanable capital, i. e., loanable money; everyone holds 
on to it lor the purpose of meeting real payment needs. 

“9099. The country bankers in rural districts send up their unem- 
ployed balances to yourselves and other houses?>—Yes.”—“5100. 
On the other hand, the Lancashire and Yorkshire districts require 
discounts from you Sor the use of their trades?—Yes."—“5101. 
Then by that means the surplus money o! one part of the country 
is made available for the demands of another part of the country?— 
Precisely . so.” 

Chapman states that the custom of banks to invest their surplus 
money-capital for short periods in consols and treasury notes has 
decreased considerably of late, ever since it has become customary 
to lend this money at call, i.e. payable on demand. He personally 
considers the purchase of such paper for his business very imprac- 
tical. He, therefore, invests his money in reliable bills of exchange, 
some of which become due every day, so thal he always knows how 
much ready money he can count on from day to day. [5102 to 5106. | 

Even (he growth of exports expresses itself mire or less for every 
country, but particularly for the country granting credit, as an 
increasing demand on the domestic money-market. which is not 
felt, however, until a period of stringency. When exports increase, 
British manufacturers usually draw long-term bills of exchange 
on the export merchants against consignments of British goods 
(5126). —"5127. Is it not frequently the case that an understanding 
exists that those bills are to be redrawn from time to time?—[Chap- 
man:] Thal is a thing which they keep from us; we should not admit 

520 DIVISION OF PROFIT 
(500% = 2 ee 

any bill of that sort. ... ] dare say it is done, but ] cannot speak toa 
thing of the kind.” [The innocent Chapman.] “5129. If there is a 
large increase of the exports of the country, as there was last year, 
of £20 million, will not that naturally lead to a great demand for 
capital for the discount of bills representing those exports?—No 
doubt."—“5130. Inasmuch as this country gives credit, as a gener- 
al rule, to foreign countries for all exports, it would be an absorp- 
tion of a corresponding increase of capital for the time being?— 
This country gives an immense credit; but then it takes credit for 
its raw material. We are drawn upon from America always at 
60 days, and from other parts at 90 days. On the other hand we 
give credit; if we send goods to Germany, we give two or three 
months.” 

Wilson inquires of Chapman (5131), whether bills of exchange 
on England are not drawn simultaneously with the loading of these 
imported raw materials and colonial goods and whether these bills 
of exchange do not arrive simultaneously with the bills of lading. 
Chapman believes so, but does not profess to know anything about 
such “commercial” transactions and suggests that experts in this 
field be questioned.—In exporting to America, remarks Chapman, 
“the goods are symbolized in transit”; this gibberish is supposed to 
mean that the English export merchant draws against his commodi- 
ties bills of exchange with a four-month term on one of the big 
American banking houses in London and this firm receives collat- 
eral from America. 

“5136. As a general rule, are not the more remote transactions 
conducted by the merchant, who waits for his capital until the 
goods are sold?—There may be houses of great private wealth, 
who can afford to lay out their own capital and not take any advance 
upon the goods; but the most part are converted into advances 
by the acceptances of some well-known established houses.”— 
"5137. Those houses are resident in ... London, or Liverpool, or 
elsewhere."—"5138. Therefore, it makes no difference, whether 
the manufacturer lays out his money, or whether he gets a mer- 
chant in London or Liverpool to advance it; it is still an advance 
in this country?—Precisely. The manufacturer in few cases has 
anything to do with it” [but in 1847 in almost every case]. “A man 
dealing in manufactured goods, for instance, at Manchester, will 
buy his goods and ship them through a house of respectability in 
London; when the London house is satisfied that they are all 
packed according to the understanding, he draws upon this London 
house for six months against these goods to India or China, or wher- 
ever they are going; then the banking world comes in and dis- 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 521 

counts that bill for him; so that, by the time he has to pay [or those 
goods, he has the money all ready by the discount of that bill.°— 
“5139. Although he has the money, the banker is laying out of 
his money?—The banker has the bill, the banker has bought the bill; 
he uses his banking capital in that form, namely, in discounting 
commercial bills.” [Hence even Chapman does not regard the dis- 
counting of bills as an advance of money, but as a purchase of com- 
modities.—F. E.]—“5140. Still that forms part of the demand upon 
the money-market in London?—No doubt; it is the substantial 
occupation of the money-market and of the Bank of England. The 
Bank of England are as glad to get these bills as we are, because 
they know them to be good property.”—“5141. In that way, as 
the export trade increases, the demand upon the money-market 
increases also?—As the prosperity of the country increases, we” 
[the Chapmans] “partake of it."—"5142. Then when these various 
fields for the employment of capital increase suddenly, of course, 
the natural consequence is that the rate of interest -is higher?>—No 
doubt about it.” 

In 5143 Chapman cannot “quite understand, that under our 
large exports we have had such occasion for bullion.” 

In 5144 the esteemed Wilson asks: “May it not be that we give larger 
credits upon our exports than we take credils upon our imports?— 
{ rather doubt that point myself. If a man accepts against his 
Manchester goods sent lo India, you cannot accept for less than ten 
months. We have had lo pay America for her colton (that is per- 
fectly true) some time before India pays us; but still it is rather 
Tefined in its operation."—"5145. If we have had an increase, as 
we had last year, of £20 million in our exports of manufactures 
we must have had a very large increase of imports of raw material 
previously to that” [and in this way over-exports are already iden- 
tified with over-imports, and over-production with over-trading], 
“in order to make up that increased quantity of goods?—No doubt.” 
—5146. We should have to pay a very considerable bal- 
ance, that is to say, the balance, no doubt, would run against us 
during that time, but in the Iong run, with America ... the ex- 
changes are in our favour, and we have been receiving for some 
time past large supplies of bullion from America.” 

5148. Wilson asks the arch-usurer Chapman, whether he does not 
regard his high rate of interest as a sign of great prosperity and a 
high rate of profit. Chapman, evidently surprised at the naivete 
of this sycophant, affirms this, of course, but has enough inlegrity 
to add the following: “There are some, who cannot help themselves; 
they have engagements to meet, and they must fulfil them, whether 

599 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

it is profitable or not; but, for acontinuance” {of the high rate of inter- 
est], “it would indicate prosperity."—Both forget that a high 
rate of interest can also indicate, as it did in 1857, that 
the country is undermined by the roving cavaliers of credit who 
can aflord to pay a liigh interest because they pay it out of 
other people’s pockets (whereby, however, they help to determine 
the rate of interest for all), and meanwhile they live in grand style 
on anticipated profits. Simultaneously, precisely this can inciden- 
tally provide a very profitable business for manufacturers and 
others. Returns become wholly deceptive as a result of the loan sys- 
tem. This also explains the following, which should require no 
explanation so Jar as the Bank of England is concerned, since it 
discounts at a lower rate tlian others when the interest rate is high, 

“5156. I should say,” says Chapman, “that our discounts, taking 
the present moment, when we have had for so long a high rate of 
interest, are at their maximum.” [Chapman made this statement 
on July 21, 1857, a couple of months before the crash.]—“5157. 
In 1852” [when the interest rate was low] “they were not nearly so 
large.” For business was indeed a great deal sounder then. 

“5159. 1f there was a great flood of money in the market ... and 
the bank-rate low, we should get a decrezs2 ol bills. ... In 1852 there 
was a totally different phase of things. The exports and imports 
of the country were as nothing then compared ta the present.”— 
“5161, Under this high rate of discount our discounts are as large 
as they were in 1854.” [When the rate of interest was between 5 
and 5'/,°0.] 

A very amusing part of Chapman’s testimony reveals how these peo- 
ple really regard public money as their own and assume [or tllemselves 
the right toconstant convertibility of the bills of exchange discount- 
ed by them. The questions and replies show great naiveté. It be- 
comes the obligation of legislation to make those bills which are ac- 
cepted by large firms convertible at all time; to ensure that the Bank 
of England should under all circumstances continue to rediscount 
them for bill-brokers. And yet three of such bill-brokers went bank- 
rupt in 1857, owing about 8 million and their own infinitesimally 
small capital compared with these debts.—"5177. Do you mean 
by that that you think that they” [that is bills accepted by Barings 
of Loyds] “ought to be discountable on compulsion, in the sanie way 
that a Bank of England note is now exchangeable against gold by 
compulsion?—I think it would be a very lamentable thing, that 
they should not be discountable; a most extraordinary position, 
that a man should slop payment, who had the acceptances of Smith, 
Payne & Co., or Jones, Loyd & Co. in his lands, because hie could 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 523 

nol get them discounted.”—‘5178. Is not the engagement of Messrs. 
Baring an engagement to pay a certain sum of money when the 
bill is due?—That is perfectly true; but Messrs. Baring 
when they contract that engagement, and every other merchant who 
contracts an engagement, never dream that they are going to pay it 
in sovereigns; they expect that they are going to pay it at the Clear- 
ing House.”—“5180. Do you think that there should be any machin- 
ery contrived by which the public would have a right to claim 
money before that bill was due by calling upon somebody to dis- 
count it{?—No, noi from ihe acceptor; but if you mean by that 
that we are not to have the possibility of getting commercial bills 
discounted, we must alter the whole constitution of things.”"— 
“5182. Then you think that it” [commercial bill] “ought to be con- 
verlible into money, exactly in the same way that a Bank of Eng- 
land note ought to be convertible into gold?—Most decidedly so, 
under certain circumstances.”—“5184. Then you think that the 
provisions of the currency should be so shaped that a bill of ex- 
change of undoubted character ought at all times to be as readily 
exchangeable against money as a bank-note?—I do.”—‘5185, 
You do not mean to say that either the Bank of England or any 
individual should, by law, be compelled to exchange it?—I meah 
to say this, that in framing a bill for the currency, we should make 
provision to prevent the possibility of an inconvertibility of the 
bills of exchange of the country arising, assuming them to be 
undoubtedly solid and legitimate."—This is the convertibility 
of the commercial bill as compared with the convertibility of 
bank-notes. 

“5190. The money-dealers of the country only, in point of fact, 
represent the public.” As did Mr. Chapman later before the court 
of assizes in the Davison case. See the Great City Frauds. 

“5196. During the quarters” [when the dividends are paid] “it 
is ... absolutely necessary that we should go to the Bank of England. 
When you abstract from the circulation £6,000,000 or £7,000,000 
of revenue in anticipation of the dividends, somebody must be ihe 
medium of supplying that in the intermediate time.”—[In_ this 
case it is then a question of a supply of money, not of capital or 
loan capital.] 

“5169. Everybody acquainted with our commercial circle must 
know thal when we are in such a state that we find it impossible 
to sell Exchequer bills, when India bonds are perfectly useless, 
when you cannot discount the first commercial bills, there must 
be great anxiety on {he part of those whose business renders them 
liable to pay the circulating medium of the realm on demand, 

IVISION OF PROFIT 
524 D 

ich is the case with all bankers. Then the effect of that is to make 
ce man double his reserve. Just see what the result of that is 
throughout the country, that every country banker, of whom 
there are about 500, has to send up to his London correspondent to 
remit him £5,000 in bank-notes. Taking such a limited sum as that 
as the average, which is quite absurd, you come to #£2,500,000 taken 
out of the circulation. How is that to be supplied? 

On the other hand, the private capitalists, etc., who have money 
do not let go of it at any interest, for they say alter the manner of 
Chapman, “5195. We would rather have no interest at all, than 
have a doubt about our getting the money in case we [e- 

uire it.” 

“5173. Our system is this: That we have £300,000,000 of liabili- 
ties which may be called for at a single moment to be paid in the 
coin of the realm, and that coin of the realm, if the whole of it is 
substituted, amounts to £23,000,000, or whatever it may be; is 
not that a state which may throw us into convulsions at any mo- 
ment?” Hence the sudden change of the credit system into a mone- 
tary system during crises. 

Aside from the domestic panic during crises, one can speak of 
the quantity of money only in so far as it concerns bullion, univer- 
sal money. And this is precisely what Chapman excludes; he speaks 
only of 23 million in bank-notes. 

The same Chapman: “5218. The primary cause of the derange- 
ment of the money-market” [in April and later in October 1847} 
“no doubt was in the quantity of money which was required to regu- 
late our exchanges, in consequence of the extraordinary importa- 
tions of the year.” 

In the first place, this reserve of world-market money had then 
been reduced to its minimum. Secondly, it served at the same time 
as security for the convertibility of credit-money, bank-notes. 
It combined in this manner two quite different functions, both 
of which, however, stem [rom the nature of money, since real money 
is always world-market money, and credit-money always rests 
upon world-market money. 

In 1847, without the suspension of the Bank Act of 1844, “the 
clearing houses could not have been settled.” (5221.) 

That Chapman had an inkling of the imminent crisis, alter all: 
“9236. There are certain conditions of the money-market (and the 
present is not very far Irom it), where money is exceedingly dilfi- 
cult, and recourse must be had to the Bank.” 

“5239. With Teference to the sums which we took from the Bank 
on the Friday, Saturday and Monday, the 19th, 20th, and 22nd 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 525 

of October, 1847, we should only have been too thankful to have 
got the bills back on the Wednesday following; the money reflowed 
to us directly the panic was over.”—On Tuesday, October 23, the 
Bank Act was suspended and the crisis was thus broken. 

Chapman believes (5274) that the bills of exchange running si- 
multaneously on London amount to $100 or £120 million. This 
does not include local bills made on provincial firms. 

“5287. Whereas in October 1856, the amount of the notes in the 
hands of the public ran up to £21,155,000, there was an extraordi- 
nary difficulty in obtaining money; notwithstanding that the pub- 
lic held so much, we could not touch it.”—This was due to the fear 
caused by the squeeze in which the Eastern Bank found itself for 
a period of time (March 1856). 

5290-92. As soon as the panic is over, “all bankers deriving their 
profit from interest begin to employ the money immediately.” 

5302. Chapman does not explain the uneasiness that exists when 
the bank reserve decreases as being due to apprehension concerning 
deposits, but rather that all those who suddenly may be compelled 
to pay large sums of money are well aware they may be driven to 
seek their last refuge in the bank when there is a stringency in the 
money-market; and “if the banks have a very small reserve, they 
are not glad to receive us; but on the contrary.” , 

It is pretty, incidentally, to observe how the reserve as a real 
magnitude dwindles away. Bankers hold a minimum for current 
business needs either in their own hands or the Bank of England. 
Bill-brokers hold the “loose bank money of the country” without 
any reserve. And the Bank of England has nothing to offset its 
liabilities for deposits but the reserves of bankers and others, 
together with some public deposits, etc., which it permits to drop 
to a very low level, for instance, to £2 million. Aside from these 
£2 million in paper, then, this whole swindle has absolutely no 
other reserve but the bullion reserve in times of stringency (and this 
reduces the reserve, because the notes which come in to replace 
outgoing bullion must be cancelled), and thus every reduction of 
this reserve by drain on gold increases the crisis. 

“5306. If there should not be currency to settle the transactions 
at the clearing house, the only next alternative which I can see is 
to meet together, and to make our payments in first-class bills, 
bills upon the Treasury, and Messrs. Smith, Payne, and so forth."— 
“5307. Then, if the government failed to supply you with a circulat- 
ing medium, you would create one for yourselves?—What can 
we do? The public come in, and take the circulating medium out 
of our hands; it does not exist."—'5308. You would only then do 

"ISION FO LROFIT 
526 DIVISION OF 

in London what they do in Manchester every day of the week ?— 
Yes.” ; 

Particularly clever is Chapman’s reply to a question posed by 
Cayley (a Birmingham man of the Attwood school) regarding Over- 
stone’s conception of capital: “5315. It has been stated before this 
Committee, that ina pressure like that of 1847, men are not looking 
for money, but are looking for capital; what is your opinion In that 
respect?—I do not understand it; we only deal in money; I do 
not understand what you mean by it."—"5316. If you mean thereby 
{commercial capital] the quantity of money which a man has of 
his own in his business. if you call that capital, it forms, in most 
cases, a very small proportion of the money which he wields in his 
aflairs through the credit which is given him by the public”—through 
the mediation of tle Chapmans. 

“5339. Is it the want of property that makes us give up our specie 
payments?—Not at all.,.. ]t is not thal we want property, but it is 
that we are moving under a highly artificial system; and if we have 
an immcase superincumbent demand upon our currency, circum- 
stances may arise to prevent our obtaining that currency. Is the whole 
commercial industry of the country to be paralysed? Shall we 
shut up all the avenues of employment?”—‘5338. If the question 
should arise whether we should maintain specie payments, or 
whether we should maintain the industry of the country, I have no 
hesitation in saying which I should drop.” 

Concerning the hoarding of bank-notes “with a view to aggravate 
the pressure and to take advantage of the consequences” [5358], he 
says that this can very easily occur. Three large banks would be 
sufficient. “5383. Must it not be within your knowledge, as a man 
conversant with the great transactions of this metropolis, that 
capitalists do avail themselves of these crises to make enormous 
profit out of the ruin of the people who fall. victims to them?— 
There can be no doubt about it."—And we may well believe Mr. 
Chapman on this score, although he finally broke his own 
neck, commercially speaking, in an attempt at making “enormous 
profit out of the ruin of victims.” For while his associate Gurney 
says: Every change in business is advantageous for one who is 
well informed, Chapman says: “The one section of the community 
knows nothing of the other; one is the manufacturer, for instance 
who exports to the continent, or imports his raw commod- 
ity: he knows nothing of the man who deals in bullion.” 
(5046.)—And thus it happened that one fine day Gurney and 
Chapman themselves “were not wel] informed” and went inlo ill- 
jamed bankruptcy. 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 527 

We have previously seen that note issue does not in all cases 
signily an advance of capital. The following testimony by Tooke 
before the C. D. Committee of Lords, 1848, indicates merely that 
an advance of capital, even if accomplished by the bank through 
an issue of new notes, does not unqualifiedly signify an increase in 
the number of circulating notes: 

“3099. Do you think that the Bank of England for instance might 
enlarge its advances greatly, and yet lead to no additional issue of 
notes?—There are jiacts in abundance to prove it; one of the most 
striking instances was in 1835, when the Bank made use of the West 
India deposits and of the loan from the East India Company in 
extended advances to the public. At that time the amount of 
notes in the hands of the public was actually rather diminished. 
And something like the same discrepancy is observable in 1846 at 
the time of the payment of the railway deposits into the Bank; 
the securities [in discount and deposits] were increased to about 
thirty million, while there was no perceptible effect upon the 
amount of notes in the hands of the public.” 

Aside from bank-notes, wholesale trade has another medium of 
circulation, which is far more important to it, namely, bills of 
exchange. Mr. Chapman showed us how essential it is for the regu- 
lar flow of business that good bills of exchange be accepted in pay- 
ment everywhere and under all conditions. “Gilt nicht mehr der 
Tausves Jontof, was soll gelten, Zeter, Zeter’* How are these 
two media of circulation related to one another? 

Gilbart writes on this score: “... The reduction of the amount of 
the note circulation uniformly increases the amount of the bill 
circulation. These bills are of two classes—commercial bills and 
bankers’ bills ... when money becomes scarce, the money-lenders 
say, ‘draw upon us and we will accept.’ And when a country banker 
discounts a bill for his customer, instead of giving him thecash, he 
will give him his own draft at twenty-one days upon his London 
agent. These bills serve the purpose of a currency.” (J. W. Gilbart, 
An Inguiry into the Causes of the Pressure, etc., p. 31.) 

This is corroborated in somewhat modified form by Newmarch, 
B. A. 1857, No. 1426: 

“There is no connection between the variations in the amount 
of bill circulation and the variations in the bank-note circulation ... 
the only pretty uniform result is ... that whenever there is any 

* “If the Tausves-Jontof’s nothing, 
What is left? O vile detractor!” 
Heine, Disputation.—Ed. 

“ISTO> PROFIT 
528 DIVISION OF 

pressure upon the money-market, as indicated by a rise in the rate 
of discount, then the volume of the bill circulation is very much) 
increased, and vice versa.” ; 

However, the bills of exchange drawn at such times are by no 
means only the short-term bank-bills mentioned by Gilbart. On 
the contrary, they are largely bills of accommodation, which rep- 
resent no real transaction at all, or simply transactions made for 
the sole purpose of drawing bills of exchange on them; we have 
presented sufficient illustrations of both. Hence the Economist (Wil- 
son) says in comparing the security of such bills with that of bank- 
notes: “Notes payable on demand can never be kept out in excess, 
because the excess would always return to the bank for payment, 
while bills at two months may be issued in great excess, there being 
no means ol checking the issue till they have arrived at maturity, 
when they may have been replaced by others. For a people to admit 
the safety of the circulation of bills payable only on a distant day, 
and to oi ject to the safety of a circulation of paper payable on de- 
mand, is, tous, perfectly unaccountable.” (Economist, 1847, p. 575.) 

The quantity of circulating bills of exchange, therefore, like that 
of bank-notes, is determined solely by the requirements of commerce; 
in ordinary times, there circulated in the filties in the United 
Kingdom, in addition to 39 million in bank-notes, about 300 mil- 
lion in bills of exchange—of which 100-120 million were made 
out on London alone. The volume of circulating bills of exchange 
has no influence on note circulation and is influenced by the latter 
only in times of money tightness, when the quantity of bills in- 
creases and their quality deteriorates. Finally, in a period of crisis, 
the circulation of bills collapses completely; nobody can make use 
of a promise to pay since everyone will accept only cash payment; 
only the bank-note retains, at least thus far in England, its ability 
to circulate, because the nation with its total wealth backs up the 
Bank of England. 

We have seen that even Mr. Chapman, who alter all was himself 
a magnate on the money-market in 1857, complains bitterly that 
there were several large money-capitalists in London strong enough 
to disrupt the whole money-market at any given moment and 
thereby bleed white the smaller money-dealers. There were several 
such money sharks, he said, who could considerably intensify a 
stringency by selling one or two millions’ worth of consols and there- 
by withdrawing an equal amount of bank-notes (and simultaneous- 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 629 

ly available loan capital) from the market. The joint action of 
three large banks would suffice to transform a stringency into a 
panic by a similar manoeuvre. 

The largest capital power in London is, of course, the Bank of 
England, which, however, is prevented by its status as a semi- 
government institution from showing its domination in such a 
brutal manner. Nevertheless it also knows enough about ways and 
means ol! feathering its nest, particularly since the Bank Act of 
1844. 

The Bank of England has a capital of 214,553,000, and in addi- 
tion has at its disposal about £3 million “balance,” that is, undis- 
tributed profits, as well as all money collected by the government 
for taxes, etc., which must be deposited with the Bank until it 
is needed. If we add to this the sum of other deposits, about £30 
million in ordinary times, and the bank-notes issued without 
reserve backing, we shall find that Newmarch made a rather 
conservative estimate in stating (B. A. 1857, No. 1889): “I satis- 
fied myself that the amount of funds constantly employed in (he 
{London] money-market may be described as something like 
£120,000,000; and of that £120,000,000 a very considerable propor- 
tion, something like 15 or 20 per cent, is wielded by the Bank of 
England.” 

In so far as the Bank issues notes which are not covered by the 
bullion reserve in its vaults, it creates symbols of value that con- 
stitute for it not only circulating medium, but also additional— 
even il fictitious—capital to the nominal amount of these unbacked 
notes. And this additional capital yields additional profit.— 
In B. A. 1857, Wilson questions Newmarch: “1563. The circulation 
of a banker, so far as it is kept out upon the average, is an addition 
to the effective capital of that banker, is it not?—Certainly.”— 
“1564. Then whatever profit he derives from that circulation is a 
profit derived from credit, and not from a capital which he actual- 
ly possesses?—Certainly.” 

The same is true, of course, for private banks issuing notes. In 
his replies Nos. 1866 to 1868, Newmarch considers two-thirds of 
all bank-notes issued by them (the last third has to be covered by 
bullion reserve in these banks) as “the creation of so much capital,” 
because this amount of coin is saved. The profit of the banker as 
a result of this may not be larger than that of other capitalists. 
The fact remains that he draws the profit out of this national sav- 
ing of coin. The fact that a national saving becomes a private prol- 
it does not shock the bourgeois economist in the least, since prol- 
it is generally the appropriation of national labour. Is there any- 

DIVISION OF PHOFIT 
530 

i absurd, for instance, than the Bank ol England (1797 
Peta) whee notes have credit only thanks to the state— 
taking payment from the state, i.e., from the public, in the form 
of interest on government loans, for the power granted it by the 
state to transform these same notes frem paper into money and then 
to lend it back to the state? ' : 

The banks, incidentally, have still other means of creating capi- 
tal. Again according to Newmarch, the country banks, as mentioned 
above, are accustomed to send their superfluous funds (that is, 
Bank of England notes) to London bill-brokers, in return for dis- 
counted bills of exchange. With these bills of exchange, the bank 
serves its customers, since it follows a rule not to reissue bills of 
exchange received from its local customers, in order to prevent 
their business transactions from becoming known in their own 
neighbourhood. These bills received [rom London not only serve 
the purpose of being issued to custorners who have to make direct 
payments in London, in the event they do not prefer to get the bank’s 
own draft on London; they also serve to settle payments locally, 
since the banker’s endorsement secures local credit for them. Thus, 
in Lancashire, for instance, all the local banks’ own notes and a 
large portion of Bank of England notes have been pushed out of 
circulation by such bills. (/6id., 1568 to 1574.) 

Thus we see here how banks create credit and capital by 1) issu- 
ing their own notes, 2) writing out drafts on London running up to 
21 days, but paid in cash tothem immediately on issue and 3) pay- 
ing out discounted bills of exchange, which are endowed with 
credit primarily and essentially by endorsement through the bank— 
at least as far as concerns the local district. 

The power of the Bank of England is revealed by its regulation of 
the market rate of interest. In times of normal activity, it may hap- 
pen that the Bank cannot prevent a moderate drain of gold from its 
bullion reserve by raising the discount rate ‘* because the demand 
for means of payment is satisfied by private banks, stock banks and 

* At {he general meeting of stockholders of the Union Bank of London on 
January 17, 1894, President Ritchie relates that the Bank of England raised the 
discount in 1893 from 2';,% in July to3 and 4% in August, and since it lost with- 
in four weeks fully $41), million in gold despite this, it raised the hank-rate 
to 5%, whereupon gold flowed back to it and the bank-rate was reduced to 4% 
in September and then to 3% in October. But this bank-rate was not recog- 
nized inthe market. “When the bank-rale was 5%, {he discount rate was 345%, 
and the rate for money 2"/,%; when the bank-rate fel! to 4%, (he discount rate 
was 2*/,% and the money rate !°/,%; when the bank-rate was 3%, the dis- 

count rate fell to 1",% and ihe money rate to somethi that.” 7 
News, January 18, 1894.)—-f. BE Mcrae tale uy 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 531 

bill-brokers, who have gained considerably in capital power during 
the last thirty years. In such case, the Bank of England must have 
recourse to other means. But the statement made by banker Glyn 
(of Glyn, Mills, Currie & Co.) before the C. D. 1848/57 still holds 
good for critical periods:—‘1709. Under circumstances of great 
pressure upon the country the Bank of England commands the rate 
of interest."—“1710. In times of extraordinary pressure ... when- 
ever the discounts of the private bankers or brokers become compar- 
atively limited, they fall upon the Bank of England, and then it 
is that the Bank of England has the power of commanding the mar- 
ket rate.” 

Nevertheless, the Bank of England, being a public institution 
under government protection and enjoying corresponding privi- 
Jeges, cannot exploit its power as ruthlessly as does private busi- 
ness. For this reason Hubbard remarks before the Banking Commit- 
tee (B. A. 1857): “2844. [Question:] Is not it the case that when the 
rate of discount is highest, the Bank is the cheapest place to go, 
and that when it is the lowest, the bill-brokers are the cheapest 
parties?’—[Hubbard:] That will always be the case, because the 
Bank of England never goes quite so low as ils competitors, and 
when the rate is highest, it is never quite as high.” 

But it is a serious event in business life nevertheless when, in 
lime of stringency, the Bank of England puts on the screw, as the 
saying goes, that is, when it raises still higher the iiterest rate 
which is already above average. “As soon as the Bank puts on the 
screw, all purchases for foreign exportation immediately cease ... 
the exporters wait until prices have reached the lowest point of 
depression, and then, and not till then, they make their purchases. 
But when this point has arrived, the exchanges have been rectified— 
gold ceases to be exported before the lowest point of depression has 
arrived. Purchases of goods for exportation may have the effect 
of bringing back some of the gold which has been sent abroad, but 
they come too late to prevent the drain.” (J. W. Gilbart, An Inquiry 
into the Causes of the Pressure on the Money-Market, London, 1840, 
p. 35.)—“Another effect of regulating the currency by the foreign 
exchanges is that it leads in seasons of pressure to an enormous 
rate of interest.” (Loc. cif., p. 40.)—"The cost of rectifying the 
exchanges falls upon the productive industry of the country, while 
during the process the profits of the Bank of England are actually 
augmented in consequence of carrying on her business with a less 
amount of treasure.” (Loc. cif., p. 52.) 

But, says friend Samuel Gurney, “The great fluctuations in the 
rate of interest are advantageous to bankers and dealers in money— 

DIVISION OF PROFIT 
532 

ions in trade are advantageous to the knowing man.” 
qeareenanoin the Gurneys skim off the cream by ruthlessly 
exploiting the precarious state of business, whereas the Bank of 
England cannot do so with the same liberty, nevertheless it also 
makes a very pretty profit—not to mention the personal profits 
falling into the laps of its directors, as a result of their exceptional 
opportunity for ascertaining the general state of business. Accord- 
ing to data submitted to the Lords’ Committee of 1817 when cash 
payments were resumed, these profits accruing to the Bank of 
England for the entire period from 1797 to 1817 were as fol- 

lows: . 
Bonuses and increased dividends ...--+--- 7,451,136 
New stock divided among proprietors ....+-. - 7,276,500 
Increased value of capital. . 6. - ee eee 14,553,000 
Total, aac 29, 280.636 

This, on a capital of £11,642,100 over a period of 19 years. 
(D.Hardcastle, Banks and Bankers, 2nd ed., London, 1843, p. 120.) 
If we estimate the total gain of the Bank of Ireland, which also 
suspended cash payments in 1797, by the same method, we obtain 
the following result: 

Dividends as by returns due 1821. .-....-.- 4,736,085 
Declared bonus . 2... ee ee ee ee ee 1,225,000 
Increased assets . 2. ee ee ee ee 1,214,800 
Increased value of capital .-.-.-.------ 4,185,000 

Totalh.... 11,360, 885 

This, on a capital of £3 million. (/bid, pp. 363-64).* 

Talk about centralization! The credit system, which has its focus 
in the so-called national banks and the big money-lenders and usu- 
Ters surrounding them, constitutes enormous centralization, and 
gives to this class of parasites the fabulous power, not only to peri- 
odically despoil industrial capitalists, but also to interfere in actual 
production in a most dangerous manner—and this gang knows 
nothing about production and has nothing to do with it. The Acts 
of 1844 and 1845 are proof of the growing power of these bandits, 
who are augmented by financiers and stock-jobbers. 

Should anyone still doubt that these esteemed bandits exploit 
the national and world production solely in the interests of pro- 
duction and the exploited themselves, he will surely learn better 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 163.—Ed, 

MEDIUM OF CIRCULATION IN CREDIT 533 

from the following homily on the high moral worth of bankers: 
“Banking establishments are ... moral and religious institutions... 
How often has the fear of being seen by the watchful and reproving 
eye of his banker deterred the young tradesman [from joining the 
company of riotous and extravagant friends?... What has been his 
anxiety to stand well in the estimation of his banker?... Has nct 
the frown of his banker been of more influence with him than tke 
jeers and discouragements of his friends? Has he not trembled to be 
supposed guilty of deceit or the slightest mis-statement, lest it 
should give rise to suspicion, and his accommodation be in conse- 
quence restricted or discontinued? ... And has not that friendly 
advice been of more value to him than that of priest?” (G. M. Bell, 
a Scottish bank director, in The Philosophy of Joint-Stock Bark- 
ing, London, 1840, pp. 46, 47.) 

CHAPTER XXXIV 

THE CURRENCY PRINCIPLE 
AND THE ENGLISH BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 

{In a former work,"* Ricardo’s theory on the value of money as 
related to commodity-prices has been analysed; we can, therefore, 
confine ourselves here to the indispensable. According to Ricardo, 
the value of metallic money is determined by the labour-time incor- 
porated in it, but only as long as the quantity of money stands in 
correct relationship to the amount and price of commodities to be 
exchanged. If the quantity of money rises above this ratio, its val- 
ue falls and commodity-prices rise; if it falls below the correct 
ratio, its value rises and commodity-prices fall—assuming all 
other conditions equal. In the first case, the country in which this 
excess gold exists will export the gold whose value has depreciated 
and import commodities; in the second case, gold will flow to those 
countries in which it is assessed above its value, while the underas- 
sessed commodities flow from these countries to other markets, 
where they command normal prices. Since under these circum- 
stances “gold itself may become, either as coin or bullion, a token of 
metallic value of greater or smaller magnitude than its own value, it 
is self-evident that convertible bank-notes in circulation must share 
the same fate. Although bank-notes are convertible, and therefore 
their real value corresponds to their nominal value, the aggregate 
currency consisting of metal and of convertible notes may appre- 
ciate or depreciate in accordance with its aggregate quantity, for 
reasons already stated, rising above or falling below the level deter- 
mined by the exchange-value of circulating commodities and the 
metallic value of gold.... This depreciation, not of Paper as com- 
pared with gold, but of gold and paper taken together, or of the aggre- 

* Karl Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Ockonomie, Berlin, 1859, S. 150 If. 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 535. 

gale currency of a country, is one of Ricardo’s principal discov- 
eries which Lord Overstone and Co. pressed into their service and 
made a fundamental principle of Sir Robert Peel’s bank legislation 
of 1844 and 1845.” (Loc. cif., p. 155.) 

We need not here repeat a demonstration of the incorrectness 
of this Ricardian theory which is given in the cited work. We are 
merely interested in the way Ricardo’s theses were elaborated by 
that school of bank theorists who dictated Peel’s above-mentioned 
Bank Acts. 

“The commercial crises of the 19th century, especially the great 
crises of 1825 and 1836, did not result in any new developments in 
the Ricardian theory of money, but they did furnish new applica- 
tions for it. These were no longer isolated economic phenomena, 
such as the depreciation of precious metals in the 16th and 17th 
centuries according to Hume, or the depreciation of paper money in 
the 18th and early 19th centuries according to Ricardo; these were 
instead the violent storms in the world-market wherein the conflict 
of all elements of the capitalist production process discharges 
itself, and whose origin and cure were sought in the most superfi- 
cial and abstract sphere of this process, the sphere of money circu- 
lation. The actual theoretical assumption from which the school 
of economic weather prophets proceeds, is actually reduced to the 
dogma that Ricardo discovered the laws governing the purely 
metallic currency. The only thing remaining for them to do was to 
subordinate credit and bank-note circulation to these laws. 

“The most general and palpable phenomenon in commercial cri- 
ses is the sudden general decline in prices following a prolonged 
over-all rise. The general decline in commodity-prices may be ex- 
pressed as a rise in therelative value of money with respect to all 
commodities, and the general price rise as a declinein the relative 
value of money.In either expression the phenomenon is described but 
not explained.... The different wording leaves the problem as little 
changed as would its translation Irom German into English. Ricardo’s 
theory of money was therefore exceedingly opportune, because it 
lends to a tautology the semblance of a statement of causal relalion- 
ship. Whence comes the periodic general fall in commodity-prices? 
From the periodic rise of the relative value of money. Whence 
the general periodic rise in prices? From the periodic decline in the 
relative value of money. It miglit have been stated with equal truth 
that the periodic rise and fall of prices is due to their periodic rise 
and fall.... Once the tautology is admitted as a causal relationshin, 
the rest follows easily. A rise in commodity-prices is caused by a 
decline in the value of money and a decline in the value of money 

zs VISION OF PROFIT 
536 DIVISI 

is caused, as we know from Ricardo, by an over-supply of currency, 
iLe., arise in the volume of currency over the level determined _by 
its own intrinsic value and the intrinsic value of commodities. 
Similarly, a general decline in commodity-prices is explained by a 
rise in the value of money above its intrinsic value in consequence 
of under-supply of currency. Thus, prices rise and fall periodically, 
because there is periodically too much or too little money in circu- 
lation. Should a price rise happen to coincide with contracted money 
circulation, and a fall in prices with expanded circulation, it may 
be asserted despite this that the quantity of money in circulation 
has, though not absolutely, yet relatively increased or declined in 
consequence of a contraction or expansion of the volume of commod- 
ities in the market, even if this cannot be statistically proved. 
We have seen that according to Ricardo these general price fluc- 
tuations must take place even with a purely metallic currency, but 
that they alternatively balance one another; thus, e.g., an under- 
supply of currency causes a fall in prices, the export of commodities 
abroad, but this export causes an import of gold from abroad, which 
in turn brings about a price rise; the opposite movement taking 
place in the case of an over-supply of currency, when commodities 
are imported and gold is exported. But, since despite these gen- 
eral price fluctuations which are in perfect accord with Ricardo's 
metallic currency, their turbulent and violent form, their crisis 
form, belongs to the period of developed credit system, it is 
crystal clear that the issue of bank-notes is not exactly regu- 
lated by the laws of metallic currency. Metallic currency has its 
remedy in the import and export of precious metal, which immedi- 
ately enters circulation as coin and thus, by its inflow or outflow, 
causes commodity-prices to fall or rise. The same effect on prices 
must now be exerted artificially by banks through imitating the 
laws of metallic currency. If gold is coming in from abroad it 
proves that currency is in under-supply, that the value of money 
is too high and commodity-prices too low, and, consequently, that 
bank-notes must be put into circulation in proportion to the newly 
imported gold. On the other hand, notes must be withdrawn from 
circulation in proportion to the gold exported from thecountry. 
The issue of bank-notes, in other words, must be regulated by the 
import and export of precious metal or by the rate of exchange. 
Ricardo’s false assumption that gold is only coin, and, therefore, 
all imported gold swells the currency, causing prices to rise, while 
all exported gold reduces the currency, leading to a fall in prices— 
this theoretical assumption is here turned into the practical experi- 
sment of putting an amount of coin in circulation equal in every case 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF {844 537 

fo the amount of gold available. Lord Overstone (banker of Jones 
Loyd), Colonel Torrens, Norman, Clay, Arbuthnot and a host of 
other writers, known in England as advocates of the ‘Currency 
Principle,’ have not only preached this doctrine, but succeeded 
in 1844 and 1845 with the aid of Sir Robert Peel’s Bank Acts in 
making it the basis of English and Scottish bank legislation. Its 
ignominious failure, both theoretical as well as practical, fallowing 
upon experiments on the broadest national scale, can be treated 
only in connection with the theory of credit.” (Loc. cit., pp. 
165-68.) 

The critique of this school was furnished by Thomas Tooke, 
James Wilson (in the Economiésé of 1844 to 1847) and John Fullarton. 
But we have seen on several occasions, particularly in Chapter 
XXVIII of this book, haw incompletely they, too, saw through the 
nature of gold, and how unclear they were about the relationship 
of money and capital. We quote here merely a few instances 
in connection with the transactions of the Committee of the 
Lower House of 1857 concerning Peel’s Bank Acts (B. C. 1857). 
—F.E. 

J. G Hubbard, former Governor of the Bank of England, testi- 
fies: “2400. The effect of the export of bullion ... has no reference 
whatever to the prices of commodities. It has an eflect, and a very 
important one, upon the price of interest-bearing securities, because, 
as the rate of interest varies, the value of commodities which em- 
bodied that interest is necessarily powerlully affected.”—He pre- 
sents two tables covering the years 1834 to 1843, and 1845 to 1853,* 
which show that the price variations of fifteen major commercial 
articles were quite independent of the export and import of gold 
and the interest rate. On the other hand, they show a close connec- 
tion between the export and import of gold, which is, indeed, ihe 
“representative of our uninvested capital,” and the interest rate.— 
“In 1847, a very large amount of American securities were retrans- 
ferred to America, and Russian securities to Russia, and other con- 
tinental securities were transferred to those places [rom which we 
drew our supplies of grain.” 

The fifteen major articles on which the following tables of Hub- 
bard are based include cotton, cotton yarn, cotton fabrics, wool, 
woollen cloth, flax, linen, indigo, pig-iron, tin, copper, tailow, sug- 
ar, coflee, and silk. 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 1856.—Ed. 

538 DIVISION OF PNOFIT 
1, 1834-1843 
Of Fifleen Major Arlicles 
Bullion pereee 7 
rae Resin” | Discount | sizresse | Decrease [Unchanged 
1834, March 1 |£9,104,000 | 2%',% = = a 
1835, March | 6,274,000 | 3',% 7 7 1 
1836, March 1 7,918,000 | 3',% I 3 t 
1837, March | 4,079,000 | 5% 5 9 1 
1838, March 1 10,474,000 | 2°/,% 4 i _ 
1839, Sept. 1 2,684,000 | 6% 8 5 2 
1840, June 1 4,571,000 | 47/,% 5 9 1 
1840, Dec. 1 3,642,000 | 5%,% 7 6 2 
1841, Dec. | 4,873,000 | 5% 3 12 — 
1842, Dec. 1 10,603,000 | 2% % 2 13 _ 
1843, June 1 11,566,000 | 2!..% I 14 = 
II. 1844-1853 
Of Filleen Major Articles 
Bullion Market 
vee See | Biseount iter | price lunchanged 

1844, March 1 |£16,162,000] 21/,% _ _ _ 
1845, Dec. 1 13,237,000 | 41% % i 4 = 
1846, Sept. | 16,366,000 | 3% 7 8 = 
1847, Sept, 1 9,140,000} 6% 6 6 3 
1850, March | 17,126,000 | 2%% 5 9 I 
1851, June 1 13,705,000 | 3% 2 11 2 
1852, Sept. 1 21,853,000 19:,% 9 5 1 
1853, Dec. 1 15,093,000 | 5% 14 — 1 

a a es ee | 

Hubbard comments in this regard: “As in the 10 years 1834-43, 
so in 1844-53, movements in the bullion of the Bank were invari- 
ably accompanied by a decrease or increase in the loanable value 
of money advanced on discount; and the variations in the prices 
of commodities in this country exhibit an entire independence of 
the amount of circulation as shown in the fluctuations in bul- 
lion at the Bank of England” 

291). 

(Bank Acts Report, 1857, II, pp. 290, 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1843 539 

Since the demand and supply of commodities regulate their mar- 
ket-prices, it becomes evident here how wrong Overstone is in 
identifying the demand for loanable money-capital (or rather the 
deviations of supply therefrom), as expressed by the discount rate, 
with the demand for actual “capital.” The contention that commod- 
ity-prices are regulated by fluctuations in the quantity of curren- 
cy is now concealed by the phrase that discount rate fluctuations 
express fluctuations in the demand for actual material capital, as 
distinct frorm money-capital. We have seen that before the same 
Committee both Norman and Overstone actually contended this, 
and that the latter especially was compelled to resort to very lame 
subterfuges, until he was finally cornered (Chap. XXVI). It is 
indeed an old humbug that changes in the existing quantity of 
gold in a particular country must raise or lower commodity-prices 
within this country by increasint or decreasing the quantity of 
the medium of circulation. If gold is exported, then, according to 
this Currency Theory, commodity-prices must rise in the country 
importing this gold, and thereby the value of exports from the 
gold-exporting country on the gold-importing country’s market; 
on the other hand, the value of the gold-importing country’s exports. 
would fall on the gold-exporting country’s market while it would 
rise on the domestic market, i.e., the country receiving the gold. 
But, in fact, a decrease in the quantity of gold raises only the inter- 
est rate, whereas an increase in the quantity of gold lowers the 
interest rate; and if not for lhe fact that the fluctuations in lhe inter- 
est rate enter into the determination of cost-prices, or in the deter- 
mination of demand and supply, commodity-prices would be whol- 
ly unaffected by them. 

In the samereport, N. Alexander, head of a large firm doing busl- 
ness with India, expresses the following views on the heavy drain 
of silver to India and China in the mid-fifties. This was partly 
due to the Chinese Civil War, which checked the sale of English 
fabrics in China, and partly due to the disease among silkworms in 
Europe, which sharply reduced silkworm breeding in Italy and 
France: 

“4337. Is the drain for China or for India?—You send the silver 
to India, and you buy opium with a great deal of it, all which goes 
on to China to lay down funds for the purchase of the silk; and the 
state of the markets in [ndia (in spite of the accumulation of silver 
there) makes it a more profitable investment for the merchant to 
lay down silver than to send piece-goods or English manufactures.” — 
“4338. In order to obtain the silver, has there not been a great drain 
from France?—Yes, very large.”—“4344. Instead of bringing 

‘ Ni Fr PROFIT 
510 DIVISION OF P 

in silk from France and Italy, we are sending it there in large quan- 
tities, both from Bengal and from China.” 

In other words, silver, the money metal of that continent, was sent 
to Asia instead of commodities, not because commodity-prices had 
risen in the country which produced them (England), but because 
prices had fallen, as a result of over-imports in the country which 
imported them; and this despite the fact that the silver was received 
by England from France and had to be paid for partly in gold. 
According to the Currency Theory, prices should have fallen in Eng- 
land and risen in [India and China as a result of such imports. 

Another illustration. Belore the Lords’ Committee (C. D. 1848/57), 
Wylie, one of the first Liverpool merchants, testifies as fol- 
lows: —“1994. At the close of 1845 there was no trade that was more 
remunerating, and in which there were such large profits [than 
cotton spinning]. The stock of cotton was large and good, uselul 
cotton could be bought at 4d. per pound, and from such cotton good 
secunda mule twist No. 40 was made at an expense not exceeding a 
like amount, say at a cost of 8d. per pound in all to the spinner. 
This yarn was largely sold and contracted for in September and Octo- 
ber 1845 at 10% and 11%4d. per pound, and in some instances the 
spinners realized a profit equal to the first cost of the cotton.”— 
“1996. The trade continued to be remunerative until the beginning 
of 1846."—“2000. On March 3, 1844, the stock of cotton [627,042 
bales] was more than double what it is this day [on March 7, 1848, 
when it was 301,070 bales] and yet the price then was 1'/,d. per 
pound dearer.” [6'/,d. as against 5d.J—At the same time yarn, 
good secunda mule twist No. 40, had fallen from 11%4-12d. to 9¥ad. 
per lb. in October, and to 7’/,d. at the end of December 1847; yarn 
was sold at the purchase price of the cotton from which it had been 
spun (fbid., Nos. 2021 and 2022). This shows the self-interest of 
Overstone’s sagacity according to which money should be “dear” 
because capital is “scarce.” On March 3, 1844, the bank interest rate 
stood at 3%, in October and November of 1847 it rose to 8 and 9%, 
and was still 4% on March 7, 1848. The prices of cotton were de- 
pressed far below the price which corresponded to the state of supply 
by the complete stoppage of sales and the panic with its ensuing 
high rate of interest. As a result, there was an enormous decrease 
in imports in 1848, on the one hand, and, on the other, a decrease 
in production in America; hence a new rise in cotton prices in 1849. 
According to Overstone, the commodities were too dear because 
there was too much money in the country. 

“2002. The late decline in the condition of the cotton manulac- 
tories is not to be ascribed to the want of the raw material, as the 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 54t 

Price seerns to have been lower, though the stock of the raw mate- 
tial is very much diminished.” How nicely Overstone confuses 
prices, or the value of commodities, wilh the value of money, that is, 
the interest rate. In his reply to Question 2026, Wylie sums up his 
general judgement of the Currency Theory, based on which Cardwell 
and Sir Charles Wood, in May 1847, “asserted the necessity of car- 
tying out the Bank Act of 1844 in its full and entire integrity.”— 
“These principles seerned to me to be of a nature that would give 
an artificial high value to money and an artificial and ruinously 
low value to all commodities and produce.”—He says, furthermore, 
concerning the eflects of this Bank Act on business in general: 
“As bills at four months, which is the regular course of drafts, from 
manufacturing towns on merchants and bankers for the purchase of 
goods gaing to the United States, could not be discounted except 
at great sacrifices, the execution of orders was checked to a great 
extent, until after the Government Letter of October 25 (suspension 
of the Bank Act), when those four months’ bills becarne discounta- 
ble” (2097).—Wesee, then, that the suspension of this Bank Act was 
received with relief in the provinces as well.—‘2102. Last October 
[1847] there was scarcely an American buyer purchasing goods here 
who did not at once curtail his orders as much as he possibly could; 
and when our advices of the dearness of money reached America, 
all fresh orders ceased.”—“2134. Corn and sugar were special. The 
corn market was allecled by the prospects of the harvest, and sugar 
was aflected by the immense stocks and imports."—‘2163. Of our 
indebtedness to America ... much was liquidated by forced sales 
of consigned goods, and I fear that much was cancelled by the fail- 
ures here.”—“2196, If I recollect rightly, 70 per cent was paid 
on our Stack Exchange in October 1847.” 

(The crisis of 1837 with its protracted aftermath, followed in 
1842 by a regular post-crisis, and the self-interested blindness of 
industrialists and merchants, who absolutely refused to see any over- 
production—for such a thing was absurd and impossible according 
to vulgar economy—had ultimately achieved that confusion ol 
thought which enabled the Currency School to put its dogma into 
practice on a national scale. The bank legislation of 1844 and 1845 
was passed. 

The Bank Act of 1844 divides the Bank of England into an issue 
department and a banking department. The former receives se- 
curities—principally government obligations—amounting to 
14 million, and the entire metal hoard, of which not more than one- 
quarter is to consist of silver, and issues notes to the full amount of 
the total. In so far as these notes are not in the hands of the public, 

‘ISION OF PROFIT 
542 DIVISLO 

they are lield in the banking department and, together with the small 
amount of coin required for daily use (about one million), consti- 
tute its ever ready reserve. The issue department gives the public 
gold for notes and notes for gold; the remaining transactions with 
the public are carried on by the banking department. Private banks 
in England and Wales authorized in 1844 to issue their own notes 
retained this privilege, but their note issue was fixed; if one of 
these banks ceases to issue its own notes, the Bank of England can 
increase its unbacked notes by two-thirds of the quota thus made 
available; in this way its issue was increased by 1892 from £14 
to £1612 million (to be exact, £16,450,000). 

Thus, for every five pounds in gold which leave the bank treas- 
ury, a five-pound note returns to the issue department and is de- 
stroyed; for every five sovereigns going into the treasury a new 
five-pound note comes into circulation. In this manner, Overstone’s 
ideal paper circulation, which strictly follows the laws of metallic 
circulation, is carried out in practice, and by this means, according 
to the advocates of the Currency Theory, crises are made impossi- 
ble for all time. 

But in reality the separation of the Bank into two independent 
departments deprived its management of the possibility of freely 
utilizing its entire available means at critical times, so that situa- 
tions could arise in which the banking department might beon the 
verge of bankruptcy while the issue department still had intact sev- 
eral millions in gold and, in addition, its entire 14 million in 
securities. And this could take place so much more easily since 
there is a period in almost every crisis when heavy exports o! gold 
take place which must be covered in the main by the metal reserve 
of the bank. But for every five pounds in gold which then go abroad, 
the domestic circulation is deprived of a five-pound note, so that the 
quantity of circulating medium is reduced precisely at a time when 
the largest quantity is most needed. The Bank Act of 1844 thus 
directly induces the entire commercial world forthwith to hoard a 
reserve fund of bank-notes at the outbreak of a crisis; in other words, 
to accelerate and intensify the crisis. By such artificial intensifi- 
cation of demand for money accommodation, that is, for means of 
payment, at the decisive moment, and the simultaneous restriction 
of the supply the Bank Act drives the rate of interest to a 
hitherto unknown height during a crisis. Hence, instead of 
eliminating crises, the Act, on the contrary, intensifies them toa 
point where either the entire industrial world must go to pieces, or 
else the Bank Act. Both on October 25, 1847, and on November 12, 
1857, the crisis reached such a point; the government then lifted 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 543 

the restriction for the Bank in issuing notes by suspendi 

of 1844, and this sufficed in both baa to ecrcdme he ee. tn 
1847, the assurance that bank-notes would again be issued for 
first-class securities sufficed to bring to light the £4 to £5 mil- 
lion of hoarded notes and put them back into circulation; in 1857 
the issue of notes exceeding the legal amount reached almost one 
million, but this lasted only for a very short time. 

11 should also be mentioned that the 1844 legislation still shows 
traces recalling the first twenty years of the 19th century, the period 
when specie payments were suspended and notes devaluated. The 
fear that notes may lose their credit is still plainly in evidence. 
But this fear is quite groundless, since even in 1825 the issue of 
a discovered old supply of one-pound notes, which had been taken 
out of circulation, broke the crisis and proved thereby that the 
credit of the notes remained unshaken even in times of the most 
general and deepest mistrust. And this is quite understandable; 
for, after all, the entire nation backs up these symbols of value 
with its credit.—F. E.] 

Let us now turn to a few comments on the effect of the Bank Act. 
John Stuart Mill believes that the Bank Act of 1844* kept down 
over-specilation. Happily this sage spoke on June 12, 1857. Four 
months | ‘er the crisis broke out. He literally congratulaled the 
“bank directors and the commercial public generally” on the fact 
that they “understand much better than they did the nature of a 
commercial crisis, and the extreme mischief which they do both 
to themselves and to the public by upholding over-speculation.” 
(B. C. 1857, No. 2031.) 

The sagacious Mr. Mill thinks that if one-pound notes are issued 
“as advances to manufacturers and others, who pay wages... the 
notes may get into the hands of others who expend them for con- 
sumption, and in that case the notes do constitute in themselves a 
demand for commodities and may for some time tend to promote a 
rise of prices.” Does Mr. Mill assume, then, that manufacturers 
will pay higher wages because they pay them in paper instead oi 
gold? Or does he believe that if a manufacturer receives his loan in 
£100 notes and exchanges them for gold, these wages would con- 
stitute less demand than if paid immediately in one-pound notes? 
And does he not know that, for inslance, in certain mining districts 
wages were paid in the notes of local banks, so that several labourers 
together received one five-pound note? Does this increase their de- 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 1847,—Ed. 

544 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

mand? Or will bankers advance money to manufacturers more easi- 
ly and in larger quantities in small notes than in large ones? 

[This singular fear which Mill has for one-pound notes would 
be inexplicable if his whole work on political economy did not 
reveal an eclecticism which shows no hesitation in the face of any 
contradiction. On the one hand, he agrees on many points with 
Tooke as opposed to Overstone; on the other, he believes that com- 
modity-prices are determined by the quantity of available money. 
He is thus by no means convinced that, all other conditions being 
equal, a sovereign will find its way into the coffers of the Bank for 
every one-pound note issued. He fears that the quantity of circu- 
lating medium could be increased and thereby devaluated, that 
is, commodity-prices might rise. This and nothing more is concealed 
behind the above-mentioned apprehension.—F. E.] 

Tooke expresses the following views before the C. D. 1848/57 
concerning the division of the Bank into two departments and the 
excessive precautions taken to safeguard the cashing of notes: 

The greater fluctuations of the interest rate in 1847, as compared 
with 1837 and 1839, are due solely to the separation of the Bank 
into two departments (3010).—The safety of bank-notes was aflect- 
ed neither in 1825 nor in 1837 and 1839 (3015).—The demand for 
gold in 1825 was aimed only at filling the vacuum created by the 
complete discredit of the one-pound notes of country banks; this 
vacuum could be filled only by gold, until such time as the Bank 
of England also issued one-pound notes (3022).—In November and 
December 1825 not the slightest demand existed for gold [or export 
purposes (3023). 

“In point of discredit at home as well as abroad, a failure in pay- 
ing the dividends and the deposits would be of far greater conse- 
quence than the suspending of the payment of the bank-notes (3028).” 

“3035. Would you not say that any circumstance, which had the 
effect of ultimately endangering the convertibility of thenote, would 
be one likely to add serious difficulty in a moment of commercial 
pressure?—Not at all.” 

“In the course of 1847 ... an increased issue from the circulating 
department might have contributed to replenish the coffers of the 
Bank, as it did in 1825” (3058). 

Before the Committee on B. A. 1857, Newmarch testifies: “1357. 
Fea mniscnievels effect ... of that separation of departments (of 

ts ank) and ... a necessary consequence from the cutting in two 
ol the reserve of bullion has been that the banking business of the 
Bank of England, that is to say, the whole of that part of the opera- 
lion of the Bank of England which brings it more immediately into 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 545 

contact with the commerce of the country, has been carried on upon 
a moiety only of its former amounts of reserve. Out of that division 
of the reserve has arisen, therefore, this state of things, that when- 
ever the reserve of the banking department has been diminished ,even 
to a small extent, it has rendered necessary an action by the Bank 
upon its rate of discount. That diminished reserve, therefore, has 
produced a frequent succession of changes and jerks in the rate of 
discount.” —“1358. The alterations since 1844” [until J une 1857]“have 
been some 60 in number, whereas the alterations prior to {844 in the 
same space of time certainly did not amount to a dozen.” 

Of special interest is the testimony of Palmer, a Director of the 
Bank of England since 1811 and for a while its Governor, before 
the Lords’ Committee on C. D. 1848/57: 

“828. In December 1825, there was about £1,100,000 of bullion 
remaining in the Bank. At that period it must undoubtedly have 
failed ia foto, if this Act had been in existence [meaning the 
Act of 1844]. The issue in December, I think, was 5 or 6 millions 
of notes in a week, which relieved the panic that existed at that 
period.” 

“825. The first period [since July 1, 1825] when the present Act 
would have failed, if the Bank had attempted to carry out the trans- 
actions then undertaken, was on the 28th of February 1837; at 
that period there were £3,900,000 to £4,000,000 of bullion in the 
possession of the Bank, and then the Bank would have been leit 
with £650,000 only in the reserve. Another period is in the year 
1839, which continued from the 9th of July to the 5th of Decem- 
ber.”—“826. What was the amount of the reserve in that case?— 
The reserve was minus altogether £200,000 upon the 5th of Septem- 
ber. On the 5th of November it rose to about a million or a mil- 
lion and a half."—"830. The Act of 1844 would have prevented the 
Bank giving assistance to the American trade in 1837.”—‘831. There 
were three of the principal American houses that failed. ... Almost 
every house connected with America was in a state of discredit, and 
unless the Bank had come forward at that period, I do not believe 
that there would have been more than one or {wo houses that could 
have sustained themselves.”—“836. The pressure in 1837 is not 
to be compared with that of 1847. The pressure in the former year 
was chiefly confined to the American trade.”—838. (Early in 
June 1837 the management of the Bank discussed the question of 
overcoming the pressure.) “Some gentlemen advocated the opinion... 
that the correct principle was to raise the rate of interest, by which 
the price of commodities would be lowered; in short, to make money 
dear and commodities cheap, by which the foreign payment would 

19 —_9757 

‘ISION OF PROFIT 
546 NIVISION 

accomplished.”—"906. The establishment of an artificial limi- 
con ol ie powers of the Bank under the Act of 1844, instead of 
the ancient and natural limitation of the Bank’s powers, namely, 
the actual amount of its specie, tends to create artificial difficulty, 
and therefore an operation upon the prices of merchandise that 
would have been unnecessary but for the provisions of the Act.”— 
“968. You cannot, by the working of the Act of 1844, materially 
reduce the bullion, under ordinary circumstances, below nine mil- 
lion and a half. It would then cause a pressure upon prices and 
credit which would occasion such an advance in the exchange with 
foreign countries as 1o increase the import of bullion, and to that 
extent add to the amount in the issue department.”—“996. Under 
the limitation that you [the Bank] are now subject to, you have not 
the command of silver to an extent that you require at a time when 
silver would be required for an action upon the foreign ex- 
changes."—"999. What was the object of the regulation restricting 
the Bank as to the amount of silver to one-filthe?—I cannot answer 
that question.” 

The purpose was to make money dear; aside from the Currency 
Theory, the separation of the two bank departments and the require- 
ment for Scottish and Irish banks to hold gold in reserve for back- 
ing notes issued beyond a certain amount had the same purpose. 
This brought about a decentralization of the national metal reserve, 
which decreased its capability of correcting unfavourable exchange 
rates. All the following stipulations aim to raise the interest rate: 
that the Bank of England shall not issue notes exceeding 14 mil- 
lion except against gold reserve; that the banking department shall 
be administered as an ordinary bank, forcing the interest rate down 
when money is plentiful and driving it up when money is scarce; 
limiting the silver reserve, the principal means of rectifying the 
rates of exchange with the continent and Asia; the regulations con- 
cerning the Scottish and Irish banks, which never require money 
for export but must now keep it under the pretence of ensuring an 
actually illusory convertibility of their notes. The fact is that the 
Act of 1844 caused a run on the Scottish banks for gold in 1857 
for the first time. Nor does the new bank legislation make any dis- 
tinction between a drain of gold abroad or for domestic purposes, 
although it goes without saying that their effects are quite different. 
Hence the continual large fluctuations in the market rate of inter- 
est. With reference to silver, Palmer says on two separate occa- 
sions, 992 and 994, that the Bank can buy silver for notes only when 
the rate of exchange is favourable for England, i.e., silver is super- 
fluous; for: “1003. The only object in holding a considerable amount of 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF [844 547 

bullion in silver is to facilitate making the foreign payment 
so long as the exchanges are against the country.,—“1004. Silver 
is ... a commodity which, being money in every other part of the 
world, is therefore the most direct commodity ... for the purpose” 
payments abroad]. “The United States latterly have taken gold 
alone.” 

In his opinion, the Bank did not have to raise the interest rate 
atove its old level of 5% in times of stringency, so long as unfavourab- 
le exchange rates do not drain gold to foreign countries. Were it not 
for the Act of 1844, the Bank would be able to discount all first- 
class bills presented to it without difficulty. [1018-20.] But under 
the Act of 1844 and in tte state in which the Bank found itself 
in October 1847, “there was no rate of interest which the Bank 
could have charged to houses of credit, which they would not have 
been willing to pay to carry on their payments.” And this high 
interest rate was precisely the purpose of the Act. 

“1029. ... Great distinction which I wish to draw between the action 
ol the rate of interest upon a foreign demand [for precious metal] 
and an advance in the rate for the object of checking a demand upon 
the Bank during a period of internal discredit."—"1023. Previ- 
ously tothe Act of 1844... when the exchanges were in favour of the 
country, and positive panic and alarm existed through the country, 
there was no limit put upon the issue, by which alone that state of 
distress could be relieved.” 

So speaks a man who has occupied a post for 39 years in the admin- 
istration of the Bank of England. Let us now listen to a private 
banker, Twells, an associate of Spooner, Attwood & Co. since 1801. 
He is alone among the witnesses before the B. C. 1857 who provides 
us with an insight into the country’s actual state of affairs and who 
sees the crisis approaching. In other respects, however, he is a sort 
of little-shilling man from Birmingham, like his associates, the 
Attwood brothers, who are the founders of this school. (See Zur 
Kritik der pol. Oek., S. 59.) He testifies: “4488. How do you think 
that the Act of 1844 has operated?—If 1 were to answer you as a 
banker, I should say that it has operated exceedingly well, for it 
has afforded a rich harvest to bankers and [money-]capitalists 
of all kinds. But it has operated very badly to the honest industri- 
ous tradesman who requires steadiness in the rate of discount, that 
he may be enabled to make his arrangements with confidence.... 
It has made money-lending a most profitable pursuit.”—“4489. 
It [the Bank Act] enables the London joint-stock banks to return 
from 20 to 22% to their proprietors?—The other day one of them 
was paying 18% and I think another 20%; they ought to support 

19* 

. N OF PROFIT 
548 DIVISLON 

the Act of 1844 very strongly.”—"4490. The little tradesmen and 
respectable merchants, who have not a large capital ... it pinches 
them very much indeed... The only means that I have of knowing 
is that ] observe such an amazing quantity of their acceptances 
unpaid. They are always small, perhaps ranging from £20 to £100, 
a great many of them are unpaid and go back unpaid to all parts 
of the country, which is always an indication of suffering amongst 
... little shopkeepers.”—4494. He declares that business is not 
profitable now. The following remarks of his are important because 
Uiey show that he saw the latent existence of the crisis when 
none of the others had even an inkling of it. 

“4494. Things keep their prices in Mincing Lane, but we sell noth- 
ing, we cannot sell upon any terms; we keep the nominal price.”"— 
4495. He relates the following case: A Frenchman sends a broker in 
Mincing Lane commodities for £3,000 to be sold at a certain price. 
The broker cannot obtain the requested price, and the Frenchman 
cannot sell below this price. The commodities remain unsold, but 
the Frenchman needs money. The broker therefore makes him an 
advance of £1,000 and has the Frenchman draw a bill of exchange 
of £1,000 for three months on the broker against his commodities as 
security. At the end of the three months the bill becomes due, but the 
commodities still remain unsold. The broker must then pay the 
bill, and although he possesses security for £3,000, he cannot con- 
vert it into cash and as a result faces difficulties. In this manner, 
one person drags another down with him.—“4496. With regard to 
the large exports ... where there is a depressed state of trade at home, 
it necessarily forces large exportation.”—“4497. Do you think 
that the home consumption has been diminished?—Very much 
indeed ... immensely ... the shopkeepers are the best authorities.”— 
“4498. Still the importations are very large; does not that indicate a 
large consumption?—It does, éf you can sell; but many of the 
warehouses are full of these things; in this very instance which I 
have been relating, there is £3,000 worth imported, which cannot 
be sold.” 

“4514. When money is dear, would you say that capital would 
be cheap?—Yes.”—-This man, then, is by no means of Overstone’s 
opinion that a high rate of interest is the same as dear capital. 

The lollowing shows how business is now conducted: “4616. Others 
are going to a very great extent, carrying on a prodigious trade in 
exports and imports, to an extent far beyond what their capital 
justifies them in doing; there can be no doubt of all of that. These 
men may succeed; they may by some lucky venture get large lor- 
tunes, and put themselves right. That is very much the system in 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 549 

which a great deal of trade is now carried on. Persons wil! consent 
to lose 20, 30, and 40 per cent upon a shipment; the next venture 
may bring-it back to them. If they fail in one after another, then 
they are broken up; and that is just the case which we have often 
seen recently; mercantile houses have broken up, without one shil- 
ling of property being left.” 

“4791. The low rate of interest [during the last ten years] operates 
against bankers, it is true, but I should have very great difficulty 
in explaining to you, unless | could show you the books, how much 
higher the profits [his own] are now than they used to be formerly. 
When interest is low, from excessive issues, we have large deposits; 
when interest is high, we get the advantage in that way.”—“4794. 
When money is at a moderate rate, we have more demand for it; 
we lend more; it operates in that way [for us, the bankers]. When 
it gets higher, we get more than a fair proportion for it; we get more 
than we ought to do.” 

We have seen that the credit of Bank of England notes is consid- 
ered beyond question by all experts. Nevertheless, the Bank Act 
completely ties up nine to ten million in gold for the convertibil- 
ity of these notes. The sacredness and inviolability of this reserve is 
thereby carried much farther than among hoarders of olden times. Mr. 
Brown (Liverpool) testifies, C. D. 1847/58: “2311: This money [the 
metal reserve in the issue department] might as well have been thrown 
into the sea [rom any use that it was of at that time, there being no 
power to employ any of it without violating the Act of Parliament.” 

The building contractor E. Capps, already cited earlier, whose 
testimony is also used to illustrate the modern building system in 
London (Book II, Chap. XI), sums up his opinion of the Bank Act 
of 1844 as follows [B. A. 1857]: “5508. Then upon the whole ... 
you think that the present system [of bank legislation] is a 
somewhat adrait scheme far bringing the profits of industry period- 
ically into the usurer’s bag?—I think so. J know that it las 
operated so in Lhe building trade.” 

As mentioned before, the Scottish banks were forced by the Bank 
Act of 1845 into asystem resembling that of the English. They were 
obliged to hold gold in reserve lor their note issue beyond the limit 
fixed for each bank. The effect of this may be seen from the following 
testimony before the C. D. 1857. 

Kennedy, Director of a Scottish bank: “3375. Was there anything 
that you can call a circulation of gold in Scotland previously to the 
passing of the Act of 1845?—None whatever.”—"3376. Has there 
been any additional circulation of gold since?—None whatever; 
the people dislike gold.”—3450. The sum of about £900,000 in 

DIVISION OF PROFIT 
550 

gold, which the Scottish banks are compelled to keep since 1845, 
can only be injurious in his ee and “absorbs unprofitably so 
2 } the capital of Scotland.” 

PS eeenate Anderson, Director of the Union Bank of Scot- 
land: “3588. The only pressure upon the Bank of England by the 
banks in Scotland for gold was for foreign exchanges?—It was; 
and that is not to be relieved by holding gold in Edinburgh, ps 
“3590. Having the same amount of securities in the Bank of England 
for in the private banks of England] “we have the same power that 
we had before of making a drain upon the Bank of England.” 

Finally, we quote an article Irom the Economist (Wilson): “The 
Scotch banks keep unemployed amounts of cash with their Lon- 
don agents; these keep them in the Bank of England. This gives 
to the Scotch banks, within the limits of these amounts, command 
over the metal reserve of the Bank, and here it is always in the place 
where it is needed, when foreign payments are to be made."—This 
system was disturbed by the Act of 1845: In consequence of the Act 
ol 1845 for Scotland “of late a large drain of the coin of the Bank 
has taken place, to supply a mere contingent demand in Scotland, 
which may never occur.... Since that period there has been a large 
sum uniformly locked up in Scotland, and another considerable sum 
constantly travelling back and forward between London and Scot- 
land. If a period arrives when a Scotch bank expects an increased 
demand for its notes, a box of gold is brought down from London; 
when this period is past, the same box, generally unopened, is sent 
back to London.” (Economist, October 23, 1847.) 

[And what does the father of the Bank Act, banker Samuel Jones 
Loyd, alias Lord Overstone, say to all this? 

Already in 1848 he repeated belore the Lords’ Committee on Com- 
mercial Distress that “pressure, and a high rate of interest, caused by 
the want of sulficient capital, cannot be relieved by an extra issue 
of bank-notes” (1514), in spite of the fact that the mere authority 
to increase the note issue, given by the Government's Letter of 
October 25, 1847, had sulficed to take the edge off the crisis. 

He holds to the view that “the high rate of interest and the depres- 
sion of the manufacturing interests was the necessary result ol the 
diminution of the material capital applicable to manulacturing 
and trading purposes” (1604). And yet the depressed condition of 
the manulacturing industry had for months consisted in material 
commodity-capital filling the warehouses to overflowing and being 
actually unsaleable; so that lor precisely this reason, material pro- 
ductive capital lay wholly or partly idle, in order not to produce 
still more unsaleable commodity-capital, 

CURRENCY PRINCIPLE AND BANK LEGISLATION OF 1844 551 

And before the Bank Committee of 1857 he says: “By strict and 
prompt adherence to the principles of the Act of 1844, everything 
has passed off with regularity and ease, the monetary system is safe 
and unshaken, the prosperity of the country is undisputed, the pub- 
lic confidence in the wisdom of the Act of 1844 is daily gaining 
strength, and if the Committee wish for further practical illustra- 
tion of the soundness of the principles on which it rests, or of the 
beneficial results which it has ensured, the true and sufficient an- 
swer to the Committee is, look around you, look at the present state 
of the trade of this country, ... look at the contentment of the peo- 
ple, look at the wealth and prosperity which pervades every class 
of the community, and then having done so, the Committee may be 
fairly called upon to decide whether they will interfere with the 
continuance of an Act under which those results have been devel- 
oped.” (B. C. 1857, No. 4189.) 

To this song of praise by Overstone before the Committee on 
July 14, the antistrophe was given on November 12 of the same 
year in the shape of a letter to the Bank’s management, in which 
the government suspended the miracle-working law of 1844 to 
save what could still be saved.—F. £.] 

CHAPTER XXXV 
PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 

1. MOVEMENT OF THE GOLD RESERVE 

It should be noted in regard to the accumulation of notes in 
times of stringency, that it is a repetition of the hoarding of pre- 
cious metal as used to take place in troubled times in the most 
primitive conditions of society. The Act of 1844 is interesting in 
its operation because it seeks to transform all precious metal exist- 
ing in the country into a circulating medium; it seeks to equate 
a drain of gold with a contraction of the circulating medium and 
a return flow of gold with an expansion of the circulating medium, 
As a result, the experiment proved the contrary to be the case. 
With a single exception, which we shall mention shortly, the quan- 
tity of circulating notes of the Bank of England has never, since 
1844, reached the maximum which it was authorized to issue. The 
crisis of 1857 proved on the other hand that this maximum does 
not suffice under certain circumstances. From November 13 to 30, 
1857, a daily average of £488,830 above this maximum was cir- 
culating (B. A. 1858, p. XI). The legal maximum was at that time 
£14,475,000, plus the amount of metal reserve in the vaults of 
the Bank. 

Concerning the out how and inflow of precious metal, the following 
is to be noted: 

First, a distinction should be made between the back and forth 
movernent of metal within a region which does not produce any gold 
and silver, on the one hand, and, on the other, the flow of gold 
and silver from their sources of production to various other coun- 
tries and the distribution of this additional metal among them. 

Belore the gold mines of Russia, California and Australia made 
their influence felt, the supply since the beginning of the 19th cen- 
tury sufficed only for the replacement of worn-out coins, for gener- 
al use in articles of luxury, and for the export of silver to Asia. 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGR 553 

However, in the first place, silver exports to Asia have since in- 
creased extraordinarily, owing to the Asiatic trade of America 
and Europe. The silver exported from Europe was largely replaced 
by the additional supply of gold. Secondly, a portion of the 
newly imported gold was absorbed by internal money circulation. 
It is estimated that up to 1857 about 30 million in gold were added 
to England’s internal circulation.’* Furthermore, the average level 
of metal reserves in all the central banks of Europe and America 
increased since 1844. The expansion of domestic money circulation 
resulted at the same time in bank reserves growing more rapidly 
in the period of stagnation following upon the panic, because of 
the larger quantity of gold coins thrust out of domestic circula- 
tion and immobilized. Finally, the consumption of precious metal 
for luxury articles increased since the discovery of new gold 
deposits as a consequence of the increased wealth. 

Secondly, precious meta! flows back and forth between countries 
which do not produce any gold or silver, the same country continu- 
ally importing, and also exporting. It is only the preponderance 
of this movement in one or another direction which, in the final 
analysis, determines whether a drain or an augmentation has tak- 
en place, since the mere oscillations and frequently parallel move- 
ments largely neutralize one another. But for this reason, in so 
far as the result is concerned, the continuity and, in the main, the 
parallel course of both movements is overlooked. A greater import 
or a greater export of precious metal is always interpreted to be 
solely the effect and expression of the relation between the imports 
and exports of commodities, whereas it is simultaneously indic- 

“ The effect this had on the money-market is indicated by the lollowing 
testimony of Newmarch: “1509. At the close of 1853, there was a considerable ap- 
prehension in the public mind, and in September of that year the Bank of Eng- 
land raised its discount on three occasions.... In the early part of Oclober there 
was a considerable degree of apprehension and alarm in the public mind. That 
apprehension and alarm was relieved to a very great extent hefore the endof 
November, and was almost wholly removed, in consequence of the arrival of 
nearly £5,000,000 of treasure from Australia... The same thing happened 
in the autumn of 1854, by the arrival in the months of October and November 
of nearly 6,000,000 of treasure. The same thing lappened again in the autumn 
of 1855, which we know was a period of excitement and alarm, by the arriv- 
als, in the three months of September, Octoher and November, of nearly 
£8,000,000 of treasure; and then at Lhe close of last year, 1856, we find exactly 
the same occurrence. In truth, ] might appeal to lhe observation almost of any 
member of the Committee, whether the natural and complete salvent to which 
we have got into the habit of looking for any financial pressure, is not the 
arrival of a gold ship.” 

VISION OF PROFIT 
554 DL 

ative of the relation between exports and imports of precious met- 
al itself, quite independent of commodity trade. : 

Thirdly, the preponderance of imports over exports, and vice 
versa, is measured on the whole by the increase or decrease in met- 
al reserves of the central banks. The greater or lesser precision 
of this criterion naturally depends primarily on the degree of cen- 
tralization of the banking business in general. For on this depends 
the extent that precious metal in general accumulated in the so- 
called national banks represents the national metal reserve. But 
assuming this to be the case, the criterion is not accurate because 
an additional import may be absorbed under certain circumstances 
by domestic circulation and the growing consumption of gold and 
silver in producing luxury articles; furthermore, because without 
additional import, a withdrawal of gold coin for domestic circula- 
tion could take place, and thus the metal reserve could decrease 
even without a simultaneous increase in exports. 

Fourthly, an export of metal assumes the aspect of a drain when 
the movement of decrease continues for a long time, so that the 
decrease represents a tendency of movement and depresses the met- 
al reserve of the bank considerably below its average level, down 
to approximately its average minimum. This minimum is more or 
less arbitrarily fixed, in so far as it is differently determined in 
every individual case by legislation concerning backing for the 
cashing of notes, etc. Concerning the quantitative limits which 
such a drain can reach in England, Newmarch testified before 
the Committee on B. A. 1857, Evidence No. 1494: “Judging from 
experience, it is very unlikely that the efflux of treasure arising 
from any oscillation in the foreign trade will proceed beyond 
£3,000,000 or £4,000,000.”—In 1847, the lowest gold reserve level 
of the Bank of England, occurring on October 23, showed a de- 
crease of £5,198,156 as compared with that of December 26, 1846, 
and a decrease of £6,453,748 as compared with the highest level 
of 1846 (August 29). 

Fifthly, the determination of the metal reserve of the so-called 
national banks, a determination, however, which does not by itself 
regulate the magnitude of this metal hoard, for it can grow sole- 
ly by the paralysis of domestic and foreign trade, is three- 
fold: 1) reserve fund for international payments, in other words, 
reserve [und of world-money; 2) reserve fund for alternately expand- 
ing and contracting domestic metal circulation; 3) reserve [und 
for the payment of deposits and for the convertibility of notes 
(this is connected with the function of the bank and has nothing 
to do with the functions of money as such), The reserve [und can, 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 555 

therefore, also be influenced by conditions which affect every one 
of these three functions. Thus, as an international fund it can be 
influenced by the balance of payments, no matter by what factors 
the latter may be determined and whatever its relation to the bal- 
ance of trade may be. As a reserve fund for domestic metal circu- 
lation it can be influenced by the latter’s expansion or contrac- 
tion. The third function—that of a security fund—does not, 
admittedly, determine the independent movement of the metal re- 
serve, but has a two-fold effect. If notes are issued which replace 
metallic money (also including silver coins in countries where sil- 
ver is a measure of value) in domestic circulation, the function of 
the reserve fund under 2) drops away. And a portion of the pre- 
cious metal, which served to perform this function, will for a long 
time find its way abroad. In this case metallic coins are not with- 
drawn for domestic circulation, and thus the temporary augmenta- 
tion of the metal reserve by immobilizing a part of the circulating 
coined metal simultaneously falls away. Furthermore, if a mini- 
mum metal reserve must be maintained under all circumstances 
for the payment of deposits and for the convertibility of notes, 
this affects in its own way the results of a drain or return flow of 
gold; it affects that part of the reserve which the bank is obliged 
to maintain under all circumstances, or that part which it seeks 
to get rid of as useless at certain times. If the circulation were 
purely metallic and the banking system concentrated, the bank 
would likewise have to consider its metal reserve as security for 
the payment of its deposits, and a drain of metal could cause a 
panic such as was witnessed in Hamburg in 1857. 

- Sixthly, with the exception of perhaps 1837, the real crisis al- 
ways broke out only after a change in the rates of exchange, that 
is, as soon as the import of precious metal had again gained 
preponderance over its export. 

In 1825, the real crash came alter the drain on gold had ceased. 
In 1839, there was a drain on gold, but it did not bring about a 
crash. In 1847, the drain on gold ceased in April and the crash 
came in October. In 1857, the drain on gold to foreign countries 
had ceased in early November, and the crash did not come until 
later that same month. 

This is particularly evident in the crisis of 1847, when the drain 
on gold ceased in April after causing a slight preliminary crisis, 
and the real business crisis did not come until October. 

The following testimony was presented at the Secret Committee 
ol the House of Lords on Commercial Distress, 1848. This evidence 
was not printed until 1857 (also cited as C. D. 1848/57). 

ig N OF PROFIT 
556 DIVIS1O 

Evidence of Tooke: In April 1847, a stringency arose, which, 
strictly speaking, equalled a panic, but was of relatively short 
duration and not accompanied by any commercial failures of im- 
portance. In October the stringency was far more intensive than 
at any time during April, an almost unheard-of number of commer- 
cial failures taking place (2996).—In April the rates of exchange, 
particularly with America, compelled us to export a considerable 
amount of gold in payment for unusually large imports; only by an 
extreme effort did the Bank stop the drain and drive the rates high- 
er (2997).—In October the rates of exchange favoured England 
(2998).—The change in the rates of exchange had begun 
in the third week of April (3000).—They fluctuated in July and 
August; since the beginning of August they always favoured Eng- 
land (3001).—The drain on gold in August arose from a demand 
for internal circulation. 

J. Morris, Governor of the Bank of England: Although the rate 
of exchange [favoured England since August 1847, and an import 
of gold had taken place in consequence, the bullion reserve of the 
Bank decreased. “22,200,000 went out into the country in conse- 
quence of the internal demand” (137).—This is explained on the 
one hand by an increased employment of labourers in railway 
construction, and on the other by the “circumstance of the bankers 
wishing to provide themselves with gold in times of distress” (147). 

Palmer, ex-Governor and a Director of the Bank of England 
since 1811: “684. During the whole period from the middle of. 
April 1847 to the day of withdrawing ihe restrictive clause in the 
Act of 1844 the foreign exchanges were in favour of this country.” 

The drain of bullion, which created an independent money pan- 
ic in April 1847 was here therefore, as always, but a precursor 
of the crisis, and a turn had already taken place before it broke 
out. In 1839, a heavy drain of bullion took place for grain, etc., 
while business was strongly depressed, but there was no crisis or 
money panic. 

Seventhly, as soon as general crises have spent themselves, gold 
and silver—leaving aside the inflow of new precious metal from 
the producing countries—distribute themselves once more in 
the proportions in which they existed in a state of equilibrium as 
individual hoards of the various countries. Other conditions being 
equal, the relative magnitude of a hoard in each country will be 
determined by ihe role of that country in the world-market. They 
flow from the country which had more than jis normal share to 
those with less than a normal amount. These movernents of out- 
going and incoming metal merely restore ihe original distribution 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCIIANGE 557 

among the various national reserves. This redistribution, however, 
is brought about by the effects of various circumstances, which 
will be taken up in our treatment of rates of exchange. As soon 
as the normal distribution is once more restored—beginning 
with this moment—a stage of growth sets in and then again 
a drain. {This last statement applies, of course, only to England, 
as the centre of the world money-market.—F. E. 

Eighthly, a drain of metal is generally the symptom of a change 
in the state of foreign trade, and this change in turn is a premoni- 
tion that conditions are again approaching a crisis.'® 

Ninthly, the balance of payments can favour Asia against Eu- 
rope and America.*® 

An import of precious metal takes place mainly during two pe 
tiods. On the one hand, it takes place in the first phase of a low in 
terest rate, which follows upon a crisis and reflects a restriction of 
production; and then in the second phase, when the interest rate 
rises, but before it attains its average level. This is the phase dur- 
ing which returns come quickly, commercial credit is abundant, 
and therefore the demand for loan capital does not grow in propor- 
tion to the expansion of production. In both phases, with loan cap- 
ital relatively abundant, the superfluous addition ol capital exist- 
ing in the form of gold and silver, i.e., a form in which it can 
primarily serve only as loan capital, must seriously affect the 
rate of interest and concomitantly the atmosphere of business 
in general, 

On the other hand, a drain, a continued and heavy export of 
precious metal, takes place as soon as returns no longer flow, mar- 
kets are overstocked, and an illusory prosperity is maintained on- 

*S According to Newmarch, a drain ol golc to foreign countries can arise from 
three causes: 1) from purely commercial conditions, that is, if imports have ex- 
ceeded exports, as was the case in 1836 to 1844, and again in 1847—principally 
a heavy import of grain; 2) in order to secure the means for investing English 
capital in foreign countries, as in 1857 for railways in India; and 3) for definite 
expenditures abroad, as in 1853 and 1854 lor war purposes in tlie Orient. 

11918. Newmarch. “When you combine India and China, when you bring 
into account the transactions between India and Australia, and the still more 
important transactions between China and the United States, the trade being 
a triangular one, and the adjustment taking place through us... then it is true 
that the balance of trade was not merely against this country, but against 
France, and against the United States."—(B. A. 1857.) 

1SION OF PROFIT 
558 DIVIS 

ly by means of credit; in other words, as soon as a greatly increased 
demand for loan capital exists and the interest rate, therefore, has 
reached at least its average level. Under such circumstances, which 
are reflected precisely in a drain of precious metal, the eflect of 
continued withdrawal of capital, in aform in which it exists direct- 
ly as loanable money-capital, is considerably intensified. This 
tiust have a direct influence on the interest rate. But instead of 
restricting credit transactions, the rise in interest rate extends 
them and leads to an overstraining of all their resources. This pe- 
riod, therefore, precedes the crash. 

Newmarch is asked, B. A. 1857: “1520. But then the volume of 
bills in circulation increases with ihe rate of discount?—I1 seems 
to do so.”—"1522. In quiet ordinary times the ledger is ihe real 
instrument of exchange; but when any difficulty arises; when, for 
example, under such circumstances as ] have suggested, there is 
a rise in the bank-rate of discount ... then the transactions natu- 
rally resolve themselves into drawing bills of exchange, those bills 
ol exchange being not only more convenient as regards legal proof 
of the transaction which hastaken place, but also being more con- 
venient in order to effect purchases elsewhere, and being pre-emi- 
nently convenient as a means of credit by which capital can be 
raised.”—Furthermore, as soon as somewhat threatening conditions 
induce the bank to raise its discount rate—whereby the probabili- 
ty exists al the same time that the bank will cut down the running 
time of the bills to be discounted by ii—the general apprehension 
spreads that this will rise in crescendo. Everyone, and above all 
the credit swindler, will therefore strive to discount the future and 
have as many means of credit as possible al his command at the 
given time. These reasons, then, amount to this: it is not that 
the mere quantity of imported or exported precious metal as 
such which makes ils influence felt, but that it exerts its effect, 
firstly, by virtue of the specific character of precious metal as capi- 
tal in money-form, and secondly, by acting like a feather which, 
when added to the weight on the scales, suffices to tip the oscillat- 
ing balance definitely 10 one side; it acts because it arises under 
conditions when any addition decides in favour of one or the 
other side. Without these grounds, it would be quite inexplicable 
why a drain of gold amounting to, say, £5,000,000 io £8,000,000— 
and this is the limit of experience to date—should have any 
appreciable effect. This smail decrease or increase of capital, which 
seems insignificant even compared to the £70 million in gold which 
circulate on an average in England, is really a negligibly small mag- 
nitude when compared to production of such volume as that of the 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCITANGE 559 

English.'? But it is precisely the development of the credit and 
banking system, which tends, on the one hand, to press all money- 
capital into the service of production (or what amounts to the same 
thing, to transform all money income into capital), and which, 
on the other hand, reduces the metal reserve to a minimum in a cer- 
tain phase of the cycle, so that it can no longer perform the func: 
tions for which it is intended—it is the developed credit and bank- 
ing system which creates this over-sensitiveness of the whole or- 
ganism. At less developed stages of production, the decrease or 
increase of the hoard below or above its average level is a relative- 
ly insignificant matter. Similarly, on the other hand, even a 
very considerable drain of gold is relatively ineffective if it does 
not occur in the critical period of the industrial cycle. 

In the given explanation we have not considered cases in which 
a drain of gold takes place as a result of crop failures, etc. In such 
cases the large and sudden disturbance of the equilibrium of 
production, which is expressed by this drain, requires no fur- 
ther explanation as to its effect. This effect is that much 
greater the more such a disturbance occurs in a period when 
production isin full swing. 

We havealso omitted from consideration the function of the met- 
al reserve as a security for bank-note convertibility and as the 
pivot of the entire credit system. The central bank is the pivot of 
the credit system. And the metal reserve, in turn, is the pivot of 
the bank.'® The change-over from the credit system to the mone- 
tary system is necessary, as I have already shown in Book I 
(Kap. ItI)* in discussing means of payment. That thegreatest sacri- 
fices of real wealth are necessary to maintain the metallic basis in 
a critical moment has been admitted by both Tooke and Loyd-Over- 

" See, for instance, the ridiculous reply of Weguelin, where he states that 
a drain ol five millions in gold is so much capital less, and thus attempts to cx- 
plain certain phenomena which do rod take place when there is an infinitely great- 
er increase in prices or depreciation, expansion or contraction of real industri- 
al capital. On the other hand, it is just as ridiculous to attempt to iat these 
Phenomena directly as symptoms of an expansion or contraction ol the mass 
of real capital (cansidered from the viewpoint of its materiaf elements). 

8 Newmarch (B. A. 1857): “1364. The reserve of bultion in the Bank of Eng- 
land is, in truth, the central reserve or hoard of treasure upon which the whole 
trade of the country is made to turn; all the other banks in the country look to 
the Bank of England as the central hoard or reservoir from which they are to draw 
their reserve of coin; and it is upon that hoard or reservoir that the action of the 
foreign exchanges always falls.” 

* English edition: Ch. I11.—£d. 

1s ‘ > PI mL 
560 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

stone. The controversy revolves merely round a plus or a minus, 
and round the more or less rational treatment of the inevitable." 
A certain quantity of metal, insignificant compared with the to- 
tal production, is admitted to be the pivotal point of the system. 
Hence the superb theoretical dualism, aside from the appalling 
manilestation of this characteristic that it possesses as the pivot- 
al point during crises. So long as enlightened economy treats “of 
capital” ex professo, it looks down upon gold and silver with the 
greatest disdain, considering them as the most indifferent and use- 
less form of capital. But as soon as it treats of the banking system, 
everything is reversed, and gold and silver become capital par 
excellence, for whose preservation every other form of capital and 
labour is to be sacrificed. But how are gold and silver distin- 
guished from other formsof wealth? Not by the magnitude of their 
value, for this is determined by the quantity of labour incorporated 
in them; but by the fact that they represent independent incarna- 
tions, expressions of the social character of wealth. [The wealth 
o! society exists only as the wealth of private individuals, who are 
its private owners. It preserves its social character only in that 
these individuals mutually exchange qualitatively different use- 
values for the satisfaction of their wants. Under capitalist produc- 
tion they can do so only by means of money. Thus the wealth of 
the individual is realized as social wealth only through the medium 
of money. It is in money, in this thing, that the social] nature of 
this wealth is incarnated.—F. £.] This social existence of wealth 
therefore assumes the aspect of a world beyond, of a thing, matter, 
commodity, alongside of and external to the real elements of 
social wealth. So long as production is ina state of flux this is 
forgotten. Credit, likewise a social form of wealth, crowds out mon- 
ey and usurps its place. It is faith in the social character of pro- 
duction which allows the money-form of products to assume the 
aspect of something that is only evanescent and ideal, something 
merely imaginative. But as soon as credit is shaken—and this 
phase of necessity always appears in the modern industrial cycle— 
all the real wealth is to be actually and suddenly transformed into 
money, into gold and silver—a mad demand, which, however, 
grows necessarily out of the system itself. And all the gold and sil- 

* “Practically, Lhen, both Mr. Tooke and Mr. Loyd would meet an addition- 
al demand for gold ... by an early ... contraction of credit by raising the rate 
of interest, and restricting advances cf capital.... But the principles of Mr. 
Loyd lead to certain [legal] restrictions and regulations which ... produce the 
most serious inconvenience.” (Economist, 1847, p. 1418.) 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 561 

ver which is supposed to satisfy these enormous demands amounts 
to but a few millions in the vaults of the Bank. 2° 

Among the effects of the gold drain, then, the [act that produc- 
tion as social production is not really subject to social control, 
is strikingly emphasized by the existence of the social form of wealth 
as a thing external to it. The capitalist system of production, in 
fact, has this feature in common with former systems of production, 
in so far as they are based on trade in commodities and private 
exchange. But only in the capitalist system of production does 
this become apparent in the most striking and grotesque form of 
absurd contradiction and paradox, because, in the first place, pro- 
duction for direct use-value, for consumption by the producers 
themselves, is most completely eliminated under the capitalist 
system, so that wealth exists only as a social process expressed as 
the intertwining of production and circulation; and secondly, with 
the development of the credit system, capitalist production con- 
tinually strives to overcome the metal barrier, which is simul- 
taneously a material and imaginative barrier of wealth and its 
movement, but again and again it breaks its back on this barrier. 

In the crisis, the demand is made that all bills of exchange, se- 
curities and commodities shall be simultaneously convertible into 
bank money, and all this bank money, in turn, into gold, 

i]. THE RATE OF EXCHANGE 

[The rate of exchange is known to be the barometer for the in- 
ternational movement of money metals. If England has more pay- 
ments to make to Germany than Germany to England, the price 
of marks, expressed in sterling, rises in London, and the price of 
sterling, expressed in marks, falls in Hamburg and Berlin. If this 
preponderance of England’s payment obligations towards Germany 
is not balanced again, for instance, by a preponderance of purchases 
by Germany in England, the sterling price of bills of exchange 
in marks on Germany must rise to the point where it will pay to 
send metal (gold coin or bullion) [rom England to Germany in pay- 
ment of obligations, instead of sending bills of exchange. This is 
the typical course of events. 

70 “You quite agrce that there is no mode by which you can modify the de- 
mand for bullion except by raising lhe rate of interest?’—Chapman [associate 
member of the great bill-brokers’ firm of Overend, Gurney & Co.]:“I should say 
so... When our bullion falls to a certain point, we had better sound the tocsin 
at once and say we are drooping, and every man sending money abroad must 
do it at his own peril.” (B, A. 1857, Evidence No. 5057.) 

562 DIVISTON OF PROFIT 

If this export of precious metal assumes a larger scope and lasts 
for a longer period, then the English bank reserve is affected, and 
the English money-market, particularly the Bank of England, must 
take protective measures. These consist mainly, as we have already 
seen. in raising the interest rate. When the drain on gold is consid- 
erable, the money-market as a rule becomes tight, that is, the de- 
mand for loan capital in the form of money significantly exceeds 
the supply and the higher interest rate follows quite naturally from 
this: the discount rate fixed by the Bank of England corresponds 
to this situation and asserts itself on the market. However there 
are cases when the drain on bullion is due to other than ordinary 
combinations of business transactions (for instance, loans to 
foreign states, investment of capital in foreign countries, etc.), and 
the London money-market as such does not justify an effective 
rise in the interest rate; the Bank of England must then first 
“make money scarce,” as the phrase goes, through heavy loans in 
the “open market” and thus artificially create a situation which jus- 
tifies, or renders necessary, arise in the interest rate; such a ma- 
noeuvre becomes more difficult from year to year.—F. £.} 

How this raising of the interest rate affects the rates of exchange 
is shown by the following testimony before the Committee of the 
Lower House concerning bank legislation in 1857 (quoted as B. A. 
or B. C. 1857). 

John Stuart Mill: “2176. When there is a state of commercial 
difficulty there is always...a considerable fall in the price of se- 
curities ... foreigners send over to buy railway shares in this coun- 
try, or English holders of foreign railway shares sell their foreign 
railway shares abroad ... ifiere is so much transfer of bullion pre- 
vented.”—"2182. A large and rich class of bankers and dealers 
in securities, through whom the equalization of the rate of interest 
and the equalization of commercial pressure belween different coun- 
tries usually takes place ... are always on the look out to buy secu- 
rities which are likely to rise.... The place for them to buy securi- 
ties will be the country which is sending bullion away.”—"2184, 
These investments of capital took place to a very considerable ex- 
tent in 1847, to a sulficient extent to have relieved the drain con- 
siderably.” 

J. G. Hubbard, ex-Governor, and a Director of the Bank of 
England since 1838: “2545. There are great quantities of European 
securities ... which have a European currency in all the different 
Mmoney-markels, and those bonds, as soon as their value is .:. re- 
duced by 1 or 2 per cent in one market, are immediately purchased 
for transmission to those markets where their value is still unim- 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 553 

paired.”—“2565. Are not foreign countries considerably in debt 
to the merchants of this country?—Very largely.”—"2566. There- 
fore, the cashment of those debts might be sulficient to account 
for a very large accumulation of capital in this country?—In 
1847, the ultimate restoration of our position was effected by our 
striking off so many millions previously due by America, and so 
many millions due by Russia to this country.” [At the same time, 
England owed these same countries “so and so many millions” for 
grain and also did not fail to “draw a line” through the greater por- 
tion of these millions via the bankruptcy of the English debtors. 
See the report on Bank Acts, 1857, Chapter XXX, p. 31* above.— 
F. E.)—“2572. In 1847, the exchange between this country and 
St. Petersburg was very high. When the Government Letter came 
out authorizing the Bank to issue irrespectively of the limitation 
of £14,000,000 [above and beyond the gold reserve—/. E£.], 
the stipulation was that the rate of discount should be 8%. At that 
moment, with the then rate of discount, it was a profitable opera- 
tion to order gold to be shipped from St. Petersburg to London and 
on its arrival to lend it at 8% up to the maturity of the three 
months’ bills drawn against the purchase of gold.”—2573. In all 
bullion operations there are many points to be taken into considera- 
tion; there is the rate of exchange and the rate of interest, which 
is available for the investment during the period of the maturity 
of the bill [drawn against ii—F. £.].” 

RATE OF EXCHANGE WITH ASIA 

The following points are important because, on the one hand, 
they show how England recoups its losses when its rate of exchange 
with Asia is unfavourable, at the expense of other countries, whose 
imports from Asia are paid through English middlemen. On the 
other hand, they are important because Mr. Wilson once again 
makes the loolish attempt here to identily the effect of the export 
of precious metal on the rates of exchange with the effect of the 
export of capital in general upon these rates; the export being in 
both cases not as a means of paying or buying, but for capital in- 
vestment. In the first place, it goes without saying that whether 
so many millions of pounds sterling are sent to India in precious 
metal or ironrails, tobe invested in railways there, these are mere- 
ly two different forms of transferring the same amount of capital 
fo another country; namely, a transfer which does not enter the 

* Present edition: p. 48!.—E&d. 

564 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

calculation of ordinary mercantile business, and for which the 
exporting country expects no other return than the future annual 
revenue from the income of these railways.If this export is made 
in the form ol precious metal, il will exert a direct influence upon 
the money-market and with it upon the interest rate of the country 
exporting this precious metal; if not necessarily under all circum- 
stances, then under the previously outlined conditions, since it is 
precious metal and as such is directly loanable money-capital and 
the basis of the entire money system. Similarly, this export also 
directly affects the rate of exchange. Precious metal is exported 
only for the reason, and to the extent, that bills of exchange, say 
on India, which are offered in the London money-market, do not 
suffice to make these extra remittances. In other words, there is 
a demand for Indian bills of exchange which exceeds their supply, 
and so the rates turn for a time against England, not because it 
is in debt to India, but because it has to send extraordinary sums 
to India. In the long run, such a shipment of precious metal to 
India must have the effect of increasing the Indian demand for Eng- 
lish commodities, because it indirectly increases the consuming 
power of India for European goods. But if the capital is shipped 
in the form of rails, etc., it cannot have any influence on the 
rales of exchange, since India has no return payment to make Jor 
it. Precisely for this reason, it need not have any influence on the 
money-market. Wilson seeks to establish the existence of such an 
influence by declaring that such an extra expendilure would bring 
about an additional demand for money accommodation and would 
thus influence the interest rate. This may be the case; but to main- 
tain that it must take place under all circumstances is totally wrong. 
No matter where the rails are shipped and whether laid on English 
or Indian soil, they represent nothing but a definite expansion of 
English production in a particular sphere. To contend that an ex- 
pansion of production, even within very broad limits, cannot 
take place without driving up the interest rate, is absurd. Money 
accommodation, i.e., the amount of business transacted which in- 
cludes credit operations, may grow; but these credit operations can 
increase while the interest rate remains unchanged. This was actu- 
ally the case during the railway mania in England in the for- 
ties. The interest rate did not rise. And it is evident that,so far as 
actual capital is concerned, in this case commodities, the effect 
on the money-markel will be just the same, whether these commodi- 
ties are destined for foreign countries or for domestic consumption. 
It could only make a difference when capital investments by Eng- 
land in foreign countries exerted a restraining influence upon 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 565 

its commercial exports, i.e., exports for which payment must be 
made, thus giving rise to a return flow, or to the extent that these 
capital investments are already general symptoms indicating the 
over-expansion of credit and the initiation of swindling opera- 
tions. 

Te the following, Wilson puts the questions and Newmarch re- 
plies. 

“1786. On a former day you stated, with reference to the demand 
for silver for the East, that you believed that the exchanges with 
India were in favour of this country, notwithstanding the large 
amount of bullion that is continually transmitted to the East; have 
you any ground for supposing the exchanges to be in favour of this 
country?—Yes, I have.... 1 find that the real value of the exports 
from the United Kingdom to India in 1851 was £7,420,000; to 
that is to be added the amount of India House dralts, that is, 
the funds drawn from India by the East India Company for the 
purpose of their own expenditure. Those drafts inthat year amount- 
ed to £3,200,000, making, therefore, the total export from the 
United Kingdom to India £10,620,000. In 1855... the actual 
value of the export of goods [rom the United Kingdom had risen 
to £10,350,000 and the India House dralts were £3,700,000, mak- 
ing, therefore, the total export from this country £14,050,000. 
Now as regards 1851, | believe there are no means of stating what 
was the real valueol the import of goods from India to this country, 
but in 1854 and 1855 we have a statement of the real value; in 1855, 
the total real value of the imports of goods [rom India to this coun- 
try was £12,670,000 and that sum, compared with the 214,050,000 
I have mentioned, left a balance in favour of the United King- 
dom, as regards the direct trade between the two countries, of 
£1,380,000.” 

Thereupon Wilson remarks that the rates of exchange are also 
aflected by indirect commerce. For instance, exports from India 
to Australia and North America are covered by dralis on 
London, and therefore affect the rale of exchange just as though 
the commodities had gone directly from India to England. Fur- 
thermore, when India and China are considered together, the bal- 
ance is against England, since China has constantly to make heavy 
payments to India for opium, and England has to make payments 
to China, so that the sums go by this circuitous route to India 
(1787, 1788). 

1791. Wilson now asks if the effect on the rates of exchange 
will not be the same whether capital “went in the form of iron 
rails and locomotives, or whether it went in the form of coin.” 

SISION OF PROFIT 
566 DIVISION OF PROI 

Newmarch correctly answers: The £12 million which have been 
sent during the last few years to India for railway construction 
served to purchase an annuity which India has to pay at regular 
intervals to England. “But as far as regards the immediate operation 
on the bullion market, the investments of the £12 million would 
only be operative as far as bullion was required to be sent out for 
actual money disbursements.” 

1797. [Weguelin asks:] “If no return is made for this iron (rails), 
how can it be said to allect the exclanges?—I do not think that 
that part of the expenditure which is sent out in the form of commod- 
ities affects the computation of the exchange.... The computa- 
tion of the exchange between two countries is affected, one might 
say, solely by the quantity of obligations or bills offering in one 
country, as compared with the quantity offering in the other coun- 
try against it; that is the rationale of the exchange. Now, as re- 
gards the transmission of those £12,000,000, the money in the first 
place is subscribed in this country... now, if the nature of the trans- 
action was such that the whole of that £12,000,000 was required 
to be laid down in Calcutta, Bombay, and Madras in treasure... 
a sudden demand would very violently operate upon the price 
oj silver, and upon the exchange, just the same as if the India Com- 
pany were to give notice tomorrow that their drafts were to be raised 
from £3,000,000 to £12,000,000. But half of those £12,000,000 
is spent... in buying commodities in this country... iron rails 
and timber, and other materials ... it is an expenditure in this coun- 
try of the capital of this country for a particular kind of commod- 
ity to be sent out to India, and there is an end of it.”—“1798. 
{Weguelin:] But the production of those articles of iron and tim- 
ber necessary for the railways produces a large consumption of 
foreign articles, which might affect the exchange?—Certainly.” 

Wilson now thinks that iron represents labour to a large extent, 
and that the wage paid for this labour largely represents imported 
goods (1799), and then questions further: 

“1801. But speaking quite generally, it would have the effect 
oi turning the exchanges against this country if you sent 
abroad the articles which were produced by the consumption of 
the imported articles without receiving any remittance for them 
either in the shape of produce or otherwise?—That principle is 
exactly what took place in this country during the time of the great 
railway expenditure [1845]. For three or four or five years, you spent 
upon railways £30,000,000, nearly the whole of which went in the 
payment of wages. You sustained in three years a larger popula- 
tion employed in constructing railways, and locomotives, and car- 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 567 

riages, and stations than you employed in the whole of the factory 
districts. The people ... spent those wages in buying tea and sug- 
ar and spirits and other foreign commodities; those commodities 
were imported; but it was a fact, that during the time this great 
expenditure was going on the foreign exchanges between this coun- 
try and other countries were not materially deranged. There 
was no efflux of bullion, on the contrary, there was rather an influx.” 

1802. Wilson insists that with an equalized trade balance and 
par rates between England and India the extra shipment of iron 
and locomotives “would affect the exchanges with India.” New- 
march cannot see it that way so long as the rails are sent out as 
capital investment and India has no payment to make for them 
in one form or another; he adds: “I agree with the principle that no 
one country can have permanently against itself an adverse state 
of exchange with all the other countries, with which it deals; an 
adverse exchange with one country necessarily produces a favour- 
able exchange with another.".—Wilson retorts with this triv- 
iality: “1803. But would not a transfer of capital be the same wheth- 
er it was sent in one form or another?—As regards the obliga- 
tion it would.”—“]804, The effect therefore of making railways 
in India, whether you send bullion or whether you send materials, 
would be the same upon the capital-market here in increasing the 
value of capital as if the whole was sent out in bullion?” 

If iron prices did not rise, it was in any case proof that the “val- 
ue” of “capital” contained in the rails had not been increased. 
What we are here concerned with is the value of money-capital, i.e., 
the interest rate. Wilson would like to identify money-capital 
with capital in general. The simple fact is essentially that 12 mil- 
lion were subscribed in England for Indian railways. This is a 
matter which has nothing directly to do with the rates of exchange, 
and the designation of the £12 million is also the same to the mon- 
ey-market. {f the money-market is in good shape, it need not produce 
any effect at allon it, just as the English railway subscriptions in 
1844 and 1845 left the money-market unaffected. If the money- 
market is already in somewhat difficult straits, the interest rate 
might indeed be affected by it, but certainly only in an upward 
direction, and this, according to Wilson’s theory, would favoura- 
bly affect the rates of exchange for England, that is, it would work 
against the tendency to export precious metal; if not to India, 
then to some other country. Mr. Wilson jumps from one thing to 
another. In question 1802 it is the rates of exchange that are sup- 
posed to be affected, and in Question 1804 the “value of capital”— 
which are two very different things. The interest rate may affect 

IVISION OF PROFIT 
568 D Ss 

the rates of exchange, and the rates of exchange may affect the in- 
terest rate, but the latter can be stable while the rates of exchange 
fluctuate, and the rates of exchange can bestable while the interest 
rate fluctuates. Wilson cannot get it through his head that the mere 
form in which capital is shipped abroad makes such a difference 
in the effect, i.e., that the difference in the form of capital is of 
such importance, and particularly its money-form, which runs 
very much counter to enlightened economy. Newmarch replies 
to Wilson one-sidedly in that he does not indicate that he has 
jumped so suddenly and without reason from rate of exchange to in- 
terest rate. Newmarch answers Question 1804 with uncertainty and 
equivocation: “No doubt, if there isa demand for £12,000,000 to 
be raised, it is immaterial, as regards the general rate of interest, 
whether that £12 million is required to be sent in bullion or in 
materials. I think, however” [a fine transition, this “however,” 
when he intends to say the exact opposite} “it is not quite immate- 
rial” [it is immaterial, but, nevertheless, it is not immaterial] 
“because in the one case the £6 million would be returned immedi- 
ately; in the other case it would not be returned so rapidly. There- 
fore it would make some” [what definiteness!] “diflerence, whether the 
£6 million was expended in this country or sent wholly out of it.” 
What does he mean when he says six million would return imme- 
diately? In so far as the £6 million have been expended in England, 
they exist in rails, locomotives, etc., which are shipped to India, 
whence they do not return; their value returns very slowly through 
amortization, whereas the six million in precious metal may 
perhaps return very quickly in kind. In so far as the six million 
have been expended in wages, they have been consumed; but the 
money used for payment circulates in the country the same as ever, 
or jorms a reserve. The same holds true for the profits of rail pro- 
ducers and that portion of the six million which replaces their con- 
stant capital. Thus, this ambiguous statement about returns is 
used by Newmarch only to avoid saying directly: The money has 
remained in the country, and in so far as it serves as loanable money- 
capital the difference for the money-market (aside from the possi- 
bility that circulation could have absorbed more coin) is only that 
it is charged to the account of A instead of B. An investment of 
this kind, where capital is transferred to other countries in commod- 
ities, not in precious metal, can aflect the rate of exchange (but 
not the rate of exchange with the country in which the exported 
capital is invested) only in so far as the production of these export- 
ed commodities requires an additional import of other foreign com- 
modities. This production then cannot balance out the. additional 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCITANGE 559 

import. However, the same thing happens with every export on 
credit, no matter whether intended for capital investment or or- 
dinary commercial purposes. Moreover, this additional import 
can also call forth by way of reaction an additional demand for Eng- 
lish goods, for instance, on the part of the colonies or the United 
States. 

Previously, Newmarch stated that, owing to dralts of the East 
India Company, exports [rom England to India were larger than 
imports. Sir Charles Wood cross-examines him on this score. This 
preponderance of English exports to India over imports from In- 
dia is actually brought about by imports from India for which Eng- 
land does not pay any equivalent. The drafts of the East India 
Company (now the East India government) resolve themselves into 
a tribute levied on India. For instance, in 1855, imports from In- 
dia to England amounted to £12,670,000; English exports to India 
amounted to £]0,350,000; balance in India’s favour £2,250,000.* 
“If that was the whole state of the case, that £2,250,000 would 
have to be remitted in some form to India. But then come in the 
advertisements from the India House. The India House advertise 
to this eflect that they are prepared to grant drafts on the various 
presidencies in India to the extent of £3,250,000. [This amount 
was levied lor the London expenses of the East India Company and 
for the dividends to be paid to stockholders.] And that not merely 
liquidates the £2,250,000 which arose out of the course of trade, 
but it presents £1,000,000 of surplus” (1917). 

"1922. [Wood:] Then the effect of those India House draits is 
not to increase the exports to India, but pro tanto to diminish them?” 
[This should read: to reduce the necessity of covering the imports 
from India by exports to that country to the same amount.] Mr. 
Newmarch explains this by saying that the British import “good 
government” into India lor these £3,700,000 (1925). Wood, as 
a former Minister for India, knows full well tle kind of “good gov- 
ernment” which the British import to India, and correctly re- 
plies with irony: “1926. Then the export, which, you state, is caused 
by the East India drafts, is an export of good government, and not 
ol produce."—Since England exports a good deal “in this way” 
lor “good government” and as capital investment in foreign coun- 
tries—thus obtaining imports which are completely independent 
of the ordinary run of business, tribute partly lor exported “good 

* |. @, approximalely 2'/, million; more precisely, 2,320,000.—-2d. 

570 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

government” and partly in the form of revenues from capital in- 
vested in the colonies or elsewhere, i.e., tribute lor which it does 
not have to pay any equivalent—it is evident that the rates of 
exchange are not affected when England simply consumes this trib- 
ute without exporting anything in return. Hence, it is also evi- 
dent that the rates of exchange are not affected when it reinvests 
this tribute, not in England, but productively or unproductively in 
foreign countries; for instance, when it sends munitions for it 
to the Crimea. Moreover, io the extent that imports from abroad 
enter into the revenue of England—ol course, they must be paid 
for in the form of tribute, for which no equivalent return is neces- 
sary, or by exchange for this unpaid tribute or in the ordinary course 
of commerce—England can either consume them or reinvest them 
as capital. In neither case are the rates of exchange ailected, and 
this is overlooked by the sage Wilson. Whether a domestic or a 
foreign product constitutes a part of the revenue—whereby the 
latter case merely requires an exchange of domestic for foreign 
products—the consumption of this revenue, be it productive or 
unproductive, alters nothing in the rates of exchange, even though 
it may alter the scale of production. The following should be read 
with the foregoing in mind: 

1934. Wood asks Newmarch how the shipment of war supplies 
to the Crimea would affect the rate of exchange with Turkey. New- 
march replies: “I do not see that the mere transmission of warlike 
stores would necessarily affect the exchange, but certainly the trans- 
mission of treasure would affect the exchange.” In this case he 
thus distinguishes capital in the form of money from capital in 
other forms. But now Wilson asks: 

“1935. If you make an export of any article to a great extent, 
for which there is to be no corresponding import” [Mr. Wilson [or- 
gets that there are very considerable imports into England for which 
corresponding exports have never takeri place, except in the lorm 
of “good government” or of previously exported investment capital; 
in any case imports which do not enter into normal commercial 
movement. But these imports are again exchanged, for instance, for 
American products, and the circumstance that American goods 
are exported without corresponding imports does not alter the 
fact that the value of these imports can be consumed without an 
equivalent flow abroad; they have been received without recipro- 
cal exports and can therefore be consumed without entering into 
the balance of trade], “you do not discharge the foreign debt you 
have created by your imports” [but, iJ you have previously paid 
for these imports, for instance, by credit given abroad, then no debt 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 571 

is contracted thereby, and the question has nothing to do with the 
international balance; it resolves itself into productive and unpro- 
ductive expenditures, no matter whether the products so consumed 
are domestic or foreign], “and therefore you must by that trans- 
action affect the exchanges by not discharging the foreign debt, 
by reason of your export having no corresponding imports?>—That 
is true as regards countries generally.” 

This lecture by Wilson amounts to saying that every export with 
no corresponding import is simultaneously an import with no cor- 
responding export, because foreign, i.e., imported, commodities 
enter into the production of the exported article. The assump- 
tion is that every export of this kind is based on, or creates, an 
unpaid import and thus presupposes a debt abroad. This is wrong, 
even when the following two circumstances are disregarded: 1) Eng- 
land receives certain imports free of charge for which it pays no 
equivalent, e.g, a portion of its Indian imports. It can exchange 
these for American imports and export the latter without import- 
ing in return; in any case, so far as the value is concerned, it has 
only exported something that has cost it nothing. 2) England may 
have paid for imports, for instance, American imports, which con- 
stitute additional capital; if it consumes these unproductively, 
for instance, as war materials, this does not constitute any debt 
towards America and does not affect the rate of exchange with Amer- 
ica. Newmarch contradicts himself in Nos. 1934 and 1935, and Waod 
calls this to his attention in No. 1938: “If no portion of the gaads 
which are employed in the manufacture of the articles exported 
without return [war materials], came from the country to which 
those articles are sent, how is the exchange with that country affect- 
ed; supposing the trade with Turkey to be in an ordinary state 
of equilibrium, how is the exchange between this country and Tur- 
key affected by the export of warlike stores ta the Crimea?”—Here 
Newmarch loses his equanimity; he forgets thal he has answered 
the same simple question correctly in No. 1934, and says: “Weseem, 
I think, to have exhausted the practical question, and to have 
now attained a very elevated region of metaphysical discussion.” 

(Wilson has still another version of his claim that the rate of ex- 
change is affected by every transfer of capital from one country 
to another, no matter whether in the form of precious metal or com- 
modities. Wilson knows, of course, that the rate of exchange is affect- 
ed by the interest rate, particularly by the relation of the rates 
of interest prevailing in the two countries whose mutual rates of 

VISION OF PROFIT 
572 vt 

exchange are under discussion, If he can now demonstrate that ‘Sur- 
pluses of capital in general, i.e., in the first place, commodities 
of all kinds including precious metal, have a hand in influencing 
the interest rate, then he is a step closer to his goal; a transfer of 
any considerable portion of this capital to some other country must 
then change the interest rate in both countries, with the change 
taking place in opposite directions. Thereby, in a secondary way, 
the rate of exchange between both countries is also altered.— F. E. 

He then says in the Economist, 1847, page 574, which he edit- 
ed at the time: 

“No doubt, however, such abundance of capital as is indi- 
cated by large stocks of commodities of all kinds, including bul- 
lion, would necessarily lead, not only to low prices of commodities 
in general, but also toa lower rate of interest for the use ol capital +). 
If we have a stock of commodities on hand, which is sufficient to 
serve the country for two years to come, a command over those com- 
modities would be obtained for a given period, at a much lower rate 
than if the stocks were barely sufficient to last us two months %). 
All loans of money, in whatever shape they are made, are simply 
a transfer of a command over commodities from one to another, 
Whenever, therefore, commodities are abundant, the interest of 
money must below, and when they are scarce, the interest of money 
must be high®). As commodities become abundant, the number of 
sellers, in proportion to the number of buyers, increases, and, in 
proportion as the quantity is more than is required for immediate 
consumption, so must a larger portion be kept for future use. Un- 
der these circumstances, the terms on which a holder becomes will- 
ing to sell for a future payment, or on credit, become lower than 
if he were certain that his whole stock would be required within 
a few weeks” 4). 

In regard to statement'), it is to be noted that a large influx 
in precious metal can take place simultaneously with a contrac- 
tion in production, as is always the case in the period following 
a crisis. In the subsequent phase, precious metal may come in from 
countries which mainly produce precious metal; imports of other 
commodities are generally balanced by exports during this period. 
In these two phases, the interest rate is low and rises but slowly; 
we have already discussed the reason for this. This low interest 
rate could always be explained without recourse to the influence of 
any “large stocks of commodities of all kinds.” And how is this 
influence to take place? The Jow price of cotton, for instance, ren- 
ders possible the high profits of the spinners, etc. Now why is 
the interest rate low? Surely not because the profit, which may be 

PRFCIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 573 

made on borrowed capital, is high. But simply and solely because, 
under existing conditions, the demand for loan capital does not 
grow in proportion to this profit; in other words, because loan cap- 
ital has a movement different from industrial capital. What the 
Economist wants to prove is exactly the reverse, namely, that the 
movements of loan capital are identical with those of industrial 
capital. 

In regard to statement *), if we reduce the absurd assumption of 
stocks for two years in advance to the point where it begins to take 
on some meaning, it signifies that the market is overstocked. This 
would cause a fall in prices. Less would have to be paid for a bale 
of cotton. This would by no means justify the conclusion that mon- 
ey for the purchase of this cotton is more easily borrowed. This 
depends on the state of the money-market. If money can be bor- 
rowed more easily, it is only because commercial credit is in a state 
requiring it to make less use than usual of bank credit. The com- 
modities glutting the market are either means of subsistence or 
means of production. The low price of both increases the industrial 
capitalist’s profit. Why should it depress the interest rate, unless 
it be through the antithesis, rather than the identity, between 
the abundance of industrial capital and the demand for money 
accommodation? Circumstances are such that the merchant and 
industrial capitalist can more easily advance credit lo one another; 
owing to this facilitation of commercial credit, both industrialist 
as well as merchant need less bank credit; hence the interest rate 
can be low. This low interest rate has nothing to do with the influx 
in precious metal, although both may run parallel to each other, 
and the same causes bringing about low prices of imported arti- 
cles may also produce a surplus of imported precious metal. If the 
import market were really glutted, it would prove that a decrease 
in the demand for imported articles lad taken place, and this 
would be inexplicable at low prices, unless it were attributed to a 
contraction ol domestic industrial production; but this, again, 
would be inexplicable, so long as there is excessive importing at 
low prices. A mass of absurdities—in order to prove that a fall 
in prices=a fall in the interest rate. Both may simultaneously exist 
side by side. But if they do, it will bea reflection of the opposition 
in the directions of the movement of industrial capital and the 
movement of loanable money capital. It will not be a reflection of 
their identity. 

In regard to statement*), it is hard to understand even alter 
this exposition why money interest should be low when commodi- 
ties are available in abundance. If commodities are cheap, then I 

¥ Y F PROFIT 
574 DIVISION OF 

may need only £1,000 instead of the previous £2,000 to buy a 
definite quantity. But perhaps I nevertheless invest £2,000, and 
thus buy twice the quantity which I could have bought formerly, 
In this way, | expand my business by advancing the same capital, 
which I may have to borrow. I buy £2,000 worth of commodities, 
the same as before. My demand on the money-market therefore 
remains the same, even though my demand on the commodity- 
market rises with the fall in commodity-prices. But if this demand 
for commodities should decrease, that is, if production should 
not expand with the fall in commodity-prices, an event which 
would contradict all the laws of the Economis/, then the demand for 
loanable money-capital would decrease, although the profit would 
increase. But this increasing profit would create a demand for 
loan capital. Incidentally, a low level of commodity-prices may be 
due to three causes. First, to lack of demand. In such a case, the 
interest rateis low because production is paralysed and not because 
commodities are cheap, for the low prices are but a reflection of 
that paralysis. Second, it may be due to supply exceeding demand. 
This may be the result of a glut on the market, etc., which may 
lead to a crisis and coincide with a high interest rate during the 
crisis itself; or, it may be the result of a fall in the value of commodi- 
ties, so that the same demand can be satisfied at lower prices. Why 
should the interest rate fall in the last case? Because profits in- 
crease? If this were due to less money-capital being required for 
obtaining the same productive or commodity-capital, it would 
merely prove that profit and interest are inversely proportional to 
each other. In any case, the general statement of the Economist 
is false. Low money-prices for commodities and a low interest rate 
do not necessarily go together. Otherwise, the interest rate would 
be lowest in the poorest countries, where money-prices for produce 
are lowest, and highest in the richest countries, where money- 
prices for agricultural products are highest. In general, the Economist 
admits: If the value of money falls, it exerts no influence on the 
interest rate. £100 bring £105 the same as ever. If the £100 are 
worth less, so are the £5 interest. This relation is not affected by 
the appreciation or depreciation of the original sum. Considered 
from the point of view of value, a definite quantity of commodi- 
ties is equal to a definite sum of money. If this value increases, it 
is equal to a larger sum of money. The opposite is true when it 
falls. If the value is equal to 2,000, then 5% =100; if it is equal to 
1,000, then 5% =50. But this does not alter the interest rate in any 
way. The rational part of this matler is merely that greater money 
accommodation is required when it takes £2,000 to sell the same 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 575 

quantity of commodities than when only £1,000 are required. But 
this merely shows that profit and interest are here inversely pro- 
portional to each other. For the lower the prices of the components 
of constant and variable capital, the higher the profit and the lower 
the interest. But the opposite can also be and is often the case. 
For instance, cotton may be cheap because no demand exists for 
yarn and fabrics; and cotton may be relatively expensive because 
a large profit in the cotton industry creates a great demand for it. 
On the other hand, the profits of industrialists may be high pre- 
cisely because the price of cotton is low. Hubbard’s table proves 
that the interest rate and the prices of commodities execute com- 
pletely independent movements, whereas the movements of the in- 
terest rate adhere closely to those of the metal reserve and the 
rates of exchange. 

The Economist states: “Wlienever, therefore, commodities are 
abundant, the interest of money must be low.” Precisely the oppo- 
site obtains during crises. Commodities are superabundant, incon- 
vertible into money, and therefore the interest rate is high; in anoth- 
er phase of the cycle the demand for commodities is great and there- 
fore quick returns are made, but at the same time, prices are 
rising and because of the quick returns the interest rate is low. “When 
they [the commodities] are scarce, the interest of money must 
be high.” The opposite is again true in the slack period following 
a crisis. Commodities are scarce, absolutely speaking, not with 
teference to demand: and the interest rate is low. 

In regard to statement‘), it is pretty evident that an owner of 
commodities, provided he can sell the latter at all, will get rid 
of them at a lower price when the market is glutted than he would 
when there is a prospect of the existing supply becoming rapidly 
exhausted. But why the interest rate should fall because of that is 
not so clear. 

If the market is glutted with imported commodities, the interest 
rate may rise as a result of an increased demand on the part of the 
owners for loan capital, in order to avoid dumping their commod- 
ities on the market. The interest rate may fall, becanse the fiuid- 
ity of commercial credit may keep the demand for bank credit 
relatively low. 

The Economist mentions the rapid effect on rates of exchange 
in 1847 of the raising of the interest rate and other circumstances 
exerting pressure on the money-market. But it should be borne 

DIVISTON OF PROFIT 
576 

i ind that the gold drain continued until the end of April in 
epiteol the change in the rates of exchange; a turn did not take 
until early May. 

lar ee 1, 1847, the metal reserve of the Bank was £15,066, 
691; the interest rate 3'/,%; three months’ rates of exchange on 
Paris 25.75; on Hamburg 13.10; on Amsterdam 12.3*/,. On March 5, 
the metal reserve had fallen to £11,595,535; the discount had 
risen to 4%; the rate of exchange fell to 25.67 % on Paris; 13.9"/, 
on Hamburg; and 12.2% on Amsterdam. The drain of gold contin- 
ued. See the following table: 

Bullion Re- 

1847 | Sagveof the MoneysMacket Highest Three-Month Rales 
Englund (fH) 

Paris Hamburg a a 

March 20; 11,231,630 | Bank disc. 4% . .| 25.67% | 13.99/, 12.2% 

April 3 10,246,410 5 » B% . «| 25.80 13.10 12.3% 

April JO} 9,867,053 | Money very scarce] 25.90 13.10'/, | 12.4% 
April 17} 9,329,941 | Bank disc. 5.5% .| 26.02% | 13.10%, | 12.5% 
April 24] 9,213,890 | Pressure... .. 26.05 13.13 12.6 

May | 9,337,716 | Increasing pressure| 26.15 13,129/, | 12.6% 
May 8 9,588,759 | Highest pressure. .) 26.27% | 13.15% | 12.7%, 

In 1847, the total export of precious metal from England amount- 
ed to £8,602,597. 

Of this to the United States .......,... £ 3,226,411 
Frances is Gees. gai a east 5 £ 2,479,892 
Hanse towns. 2. 2... 20 £ 958,781 
Holland !.9 5 sae bare es £247,743 

In spite of the change in the rates at the end of March, the drain 
of gold continued for another full month, probably to the United 
States. 

“We thus see” [says the Economist, 1847, p. 954] “how rapid and 
striking was the effect of a rise in the rate of interest, and the pres- 
sure which ensued in correcting an adverse exchange, and in turn- 
ing the tide of bullion back to this country. This effect was pro- 
duced entirely independent of the balance of trade. A higher rate 
of interest caused a lower price of securities, both foreign and Eng- 
lish, and induced large purchases to be made on foreign account, 
which increased the amount of bills to be drawn from this country, 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 577 

while, on the other hand, the high rate of interest and the difficul- 
ty of obtaining money was such that the demand of those bills fell 
off, while their amount increased.... For the same cause orders 
for imports were countermanded, and investments of English funds 
abroad were realized and brought home for employment here. 
Thus, for example, we read in the Rio de Janeiro Price Current 
of the 10th May, ‘Exchange [on England] has experienced a 
further decline, principally caused by a pressure on the market 
for remittance of the proceeds of large sales of [Brazilian] gov- 
ernment stock, on English account.’ Capital belonging to this 
country, which has been invested in public and other securities 
abroad, when the interest was very low here, was thus again 
brought back when the interest became high.” 

ENGLAND'S BALANCE OF TRADE 

India alone has to pay 5 million in tribute for “good govern- 
ment,” interest and dividends on British capital, etc., not counting 
the sums sent home annually by officials as savings from their sala- 
ries, or by English merchants as part of their profit to be invested 
in England. Every British colony continually has to make large 
remittances for the same reason. Most of the banks in Austral- 
ia, the West Indies, and Canada, have been founded with English 
capital, and the dividends are payable in England. In the same 
way, England owns many foreign securities—European, North 
American and South American—on which it draws interest. In 
addition to this it has interests in foreign railways, canals, mines, 
etc., with corresponding dividends. Remittance on all these items 
is made almost exclusively in products over and above the amount 
of English exports. On the other hand what is sent from England 
to owners of English securities abroad and for consumption by Eng- 
lishmen abroad, is insignificant in comparison. 

The question, so far as it concerns the balance of trade and the 
rates of exchange, is “at any particular moment one of time.” “Prac- 
tically speaking ... England gives long credits upon her exports, 
while the imports are paid for in ready money. At particular mo- 
ments this difference of practice has a considerable eflect upon 
the exchanges. At a time when our exports are very considerably 
increasing, e.g., 1850, a continual increase of investment of British 
capital must be going on ... in this way remittances of 1850 may 
be made against goods exported in 1849. But if the exports of 1850 
exceed those of 1849 by more than 6 million, the practical effect 
must be that more money is sent abroad, to this amount, than re- 

20 -2757 

578 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

turned in the same year. And in this way an effect is produced on 
the rates of exchange and the rate of interest. When, on the con- 
trary, our trade is depressed after a commercial crisis, and when 
our exports are much reduced, the remittances due for the past 
years of larger exports greatly exceed the value of our imports; 
jhe exchanges become correspondingly in our favour, capital rap- 
idly accumulates at home, and the rate of interest becomes less.” 
(Economist, January 11, 1851.) 

The foreign rates of exchange can change: 

1) In consequence of the immediate balance of payments, no 
matter what the cause—a purely mercantile one, or capital in- 
vestment abroad, or government expenditures for wars, etc., in 
so lar as cash payments thereby are made to foreign countries. 

2) In consequence of money depreciation—whether metal or 
paper—in a particular country. This is purely nominal. If £1 
should represent only half as much money as formerly, it would 
naturally be counted as 12.5 francs instead of 25 francs. 

3) When it is a matter of a rate of exchange between countries, 
of which one uses silver and the other gold as “money,” the rate of 
exchange depends upon the relative fluctuations of the value of 
these {wo metals, since these necessarily alter the parity between 
them. This is illustrated by the rates of exchange in 1850; they 
were unfavourable to England, although that country’s export 
rose enormously. Yet no drain of gold took place. This was a re- 
sult of a momentary rise in the value of silver as against gold. 
{See Economist, November 30, 1857.) 

Parity for the rate of exchange of £1 is: Paris, 25 francs 20 cent.; 
Hamburg, 13 marks banko 10.5 shillings; Amsterdam, 11 florins 
97 cent. To the extent that the Paris rate of exchange exceeds 
25.20 francs, it becomes more favourable to the English debtor 
of France, or the buyer of French commodities. In both cases he 
needs fewer pounds sterling in order to accomplish his purpose.— 
In remoter countries, where precious metal is not easily obtained 
when bills of exchange are scarce and insufficient for remittances 
to be made to England, the natural effect is to drive up the prices 
of such products as are generally shipped to England since a great- 
er demand arises for them, in order to send them to England in 
place of bills of exchange; this is often the case in India. 

An unfavourable rate of exchange, or even a drain on gold, can 
take place when there is a great abundance of money in England, 
the interest rate is low and the price for securities is high. 

In the course of 1848 England received large quantities of sil- 
ver from India, since good bills of exchange were rare and medi- 

PRECIOUS METAL AND RATE OF EXCHANGE 579 

ocre ones were not readily accepted in consequence of the crisis of 
1847 and the general lack of credit in business with India. All this 
silver had barely arrived before it found its way to the continent, 
where the revolution led to the formation of many hoards. The 
bulk of the same silver made the trip back to India in 1850, since 
the rate of exchange now made this profitable. 

The monetary system is essentially a Catholic institution, the 
credit system essentially Protestant. “The Scotch hate gold.” In 
the form of paper the monetary existence of commodities is only a 
social one. It is Faith that brings salvation. Faith in money-value 
as the immanent spirit of commodities, faith in the mode of produc- 
tion and its predestined order, faith in the individual agents of 
production as mere personifications of self-expanding capital. But 
the credit system does not emancipate itself from the basis of the 
monetary system any more than Protestantism has emancipated 
itself from the foundations of Catholicism. 

20* 

CHAPTER XXXVI 
PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 

Interest-bearing capital, or, as we may call it in its antiquated 
form, usurer’s capital, belongs together with its twin brother, mer- 
chant's capital, to the antediluvian forms of capital, which long 
precede the capitalist mode of production and are to be found in 
ihe most diverse economic formations ol society. 

The existence of usurer’s capital merely requires that at least 
a portion of products should be transformed into commodities, 
and that money should have developed in its various functions along 
with trade in commodities. 

The development of usurer’s capital is bound up with the devel- 
opment of merchant’s capital and especially that of money-deal- 
ing capital. In ancient Rome, beginning with the last years of 
the Republic, when manufacturing stood far below its average lev- 
el of development in the ancient world, merchant's capital, mon- 
ey-dealing capital, and usurer’s capital developed to their high- 
est point within the ancient form. 

We have seen that hoarding necessarily appears along with 
money, But the professional hoarder does not become important 
until he is transformed into a usurer. : 

The merchant borrows money in order to make a profit with it, 
in order to use it as capital, that is, to expend it. Hence in earlier 
forms of society the money-lender stands in the same relation to 
him as to the modern capitalist. This specific relation was also 
experienced by the Catholic universities, “The universities of Al- 
cala, Salamanca, Ingolstadt, Freiburg in Breisgau, Mayence, Co- 
logne, Tréves, one after another recognized the legality of interest 
for commercial loans. The first five of these approbations were de- 
posited in the archives of the Consulate of the city of Lyons and 
published in the appendix tothe Traité de f' usure ef des iniéréis, by 
Bruyset-Ponthus, Lyons.” (M. Augier, Le Crédit public, etc. Paris, 
1842, p. 206.) In all the forms in which slave economy (not the 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 581 

patriarchal kind, but that of later Grecian and Roman times) 
serves as a means of amassing wealth, where money therefore is a 
means of appropriating the labour of others through the purchase 
of slaves, land, etc., money can be expanded as capital, i. e., bear 
interest, for the very reason that it can be so invested. 

The characteristic forms, however, in which usurer’s capital 
exists in periods antecating capitalist production are of two kinds. 
I purposely say characieristic forms. The same forms repeat them- 
selves on the basis of capitalist production, but as mere subordi- 
nate forms. They are then no longer the forms which determine 
the character of interest-bearing capital. These two forms are: 
first, usury by lending money to extravagant members of the upper 
classes, particularly landowners; secondly, usury by lending mo- 
ney to small producers who possess their own conditions of la- 
bour — this includes the artisan, but mainly the peasant, since 
particularly under pre-capitalist conditions, in so far as they per- 
mit of small independent individual producers, the peasant class 
necessarily constitutes the overwhelming majority of them. 

Both the ruin of rich landowners through usury and the impov- 
erishment of the small producers lead to the formation and con- 
centration of large amounts of money-capital. But to what extent 
this process does away with the old mode of production, as hap- 
pened in modern Europe, and whether it puts the capitalist mode of 
production in its stead, depends entirely upon the stage of histor- 
ical development and the attendant circumstances. 

Usurer’s capital as the characteristic form of interest-bearing 
capital corresponds to the predominance of small-scale production 
of the self-employed peasant and small master craftsman. When 
the labourer is confronted by the conditions of labour and by the 
product of labour in the shape of capital, as under the developed 
capitalist mode of production, he has no occasion to borrow any 
money asa producer. When he does any money borrowing, he does so, 
for instance, at the pawnshop to secure personal necessities. But 
wherever the labourer is the owner, whether actual or nominal, of 
his conditions of labour and his product, he stands as a producer 
in relation to the money-lender’s capital, which confronts him as 
usurer’s capital. Newman expresses the matter insipidly when he 
says the banker is respected, while the usurer is hated and de- 
spised, because the banker lends to the rich, whereas the usurer lends 
to the poor. (F. W. Newman, Lectures on Political Economy, Lon- 
don, 1851, p. 44.) He overlooks the fact that a difference between 
two modes of social production and their corresponding social or- 
ders lies al the heart of the matter and that the situation cannot 

IVISION OF PROFIT 
582 D 

be explained by the distinction between rich and poor. Moreover, 
the usury which sucks dry the small producer goes hand in hand with 
the usury which sucks dry the rich owner of a large estate. As soon 
as the usury of the Roman patricians had completely ruined the 
Roman plebeians, the small peasants, this form of exploitation came 
toanend and a pure slave economy replaced the small peasant 
economy. 

In the form of interest, the entire surplus above the barest 
means of subsistence ({he amount that later becomes wages o! the 
producers) can be consumed by usury (this later assumes the form 
of profit and ground-rent), and hence it is highly absurd to compare 
the level of ihis interest, which assimilates aff the surplus-value 
excepting the share claimed by the state, with the level of the mod- 
ern interest rate, where interest constitutes at least normally on- 
ly a part of the surplus-value. Such a comparison overlooks that 
the wage-worker produces and gives to the capitalist who employs 
him, profit, interest and ground-rent, i.e., the entire surplus-value. 
Carey makes this absurd comparison in order to show how advan- 
tageous the development of capital, and the fall in the interest rate 
that accompanies it, are for the labourer. Furthermore, while the 
usurer, not content with squeezing the surplus-labour out of his 
victim, gradually acquires possession even of his very conditions 
of labour, land, house, etc., and is continually engaged in thus ex- 
propriating him, it is again forgotten that, on the other hand, 
this complete expropriation of the labourer from his conditions 
of labour is not a result which the capitalist mode of production 
seeks to achieve, but rather the established condition for its point 
of departure. The wage-slave, just like the real slave, cannot be- 
come a creditor’s slave due to his position—at least in his capac- 
ity as producer; the wage-slave, it is true, can become acreditor’s 
slave in his capacity as consumer. Usurer’s capital in the form 
whereby it indeed appropriates all of the surplus-labour of the di- 
rect producers, without altering the mode of production; whereby 
the ownership or possession by the producers of the conditions of 
labour—and small-scale production corresponding to this—is 
its essential prerequisite; whereby, in other words, capital does 
not directly subordinate labour to itself, and does not, therefore, 
confront it as industrial capital—this usurer’s capital impover- 
ishes the mode of production, paralyses the productive forces in- 
stead of developing them, and at thesame time perpetuates the mis- 
erable conditions in which the social productivity of labour is 
not developed at the expense of labour itself, as in the capitalist 
mode of production. 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSIIIPS 583 

Usury thus exerts, on the one hand, an undermining and destruc- 
tive influence on ancient and feudal wealth and ancient and feu- 
dal property. On the other hand, it undermines and ruins small- 
peasant and small-burgher production, in short, all forms in which 
the producer still appears as the owner of his means of production. 
Under the developed capitalist mode of production, the labourer 
is not the owner of the means of production, i.e., the field which 
he cultivates, the raw materials which he processes, etc. But under 
this system separation of the producer from the means of pro- 
duction reflects an actual revolution in the mode of production 
itself. The isolated Jabourers are brought together in Jarge work- 
shops for the purpose of carrying out separate but interconnected 
activities; the tool becomes a machine. The mode of production 
itself no longer permits the dispersion of the instruments of pro- 
duction associated with small property; nor does it permit the iso- 
lation of the labourer himself. Under the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction usury can no longer separate the producer from his means 
of production, for they have already been separated. 

Usury centralizes money wealth where the means of production 
are dispersed. It does not aller the mode of production, but at- 
taches itself firmly to it Jikea parasite and makes it wretched. It 
sucks out its blood, enervates it and compels reproduction to pro- 
ceed under ever more pitiable conditions. Hence the popular ha- 
tred against usurers, which was most pronounced in the ancient world 
where ownership of means of production by the producer himself 
was at the same time the basis for political status, the independ- 
ence of the citizen. 

To the extent that slavery prevails, or in so far as the surplus- 
product is consumed by the feudal lord and his retinue, while eith- 
er the slave-owner or the feudal lord fall into the clutches of the 
usurer, the mode of production still remains the same; it only be- 
comes harder on the labourer. The indebted slave-holder or feu- 
da! lord becomes more oppressive because he is himself more op- 
pressed. Or he finally makes way for the usurer, who becomes a 
landed proprietor or a slave-holder himself, like the knights in 
ancient Rome. The place of the old exploiter, whose exploitation 
was more or less patriarchal because it was largely a means of po- 
litical power, is taken by a hard, money-mad parvenu. But the 
mode of production itself is not altered thereby. 

Usury has a revolutionary effect in all pre-capitalist modes of 
production only in so far as it destroys and dissolves those forms 
of property on whose solid foundation and continual reproduction 
in the same form the political organization is based. Under Asian 

SISION OY PROFIT 
584 DIVISIO 

forms, usury can continue a long time, without producing anything 
more than economic decay and political corruption. Only where 
and when the other prerequisites of capitalist production are pres- 
ent does usury become one of the means assisting in establishment 
of the new mode of production by ruining the feudal lord and 
smail-scale producer, on the one hand, and centralizing the condi- 
tions of labour into capital, on the other. 

In the Middle Ages no country had a general rate of interest. 

The Church forbade, from the outset, all lending at interest. Laws 
and courts offered little protection for loans. Interest was so much 
the higher in individual cases. The limited circulation of money, 
the need to make most payments in cash, compelled people to 
borrow money, and all the more so when the exchange business 
was still undeveloped. There were large divergences both in inter- 
est rates and the conceptions of usury. In the time of Char- 
lemagne it was considered usurious to charge 100%. In Lindau on 
Lake Constance, some local burghers took 2167/,% in 1348. In 
Zurich, the City Council decreed that 43’/,% should be the legal 
interest rate. In Italy 40% had to be paid sometimes, although 
the usual rate from the 12th to the 14th century did not exceed 
20%. Verona ordered that 12'/,% be the legal rate. Emperor Frie- 
drich II fixed the rate at 10%, but only for Jews. He did not deign 
to speak for Christians. In the German Rhine provinces, 10% was 
the rule as early as the 13th century, (Hillmann, Geschichte des 
Stddtewesens, II, S. 55-57.) 
- Usurer’s capital employs the method of exploitation charac- 
teristic of capital yet without the latter’s mode of production. This 
condition also repeats itself within bourgeois economy, in back- 
ward branches of industry or in those branches which resist the trans- 
ition to the modern mode of production. For instance, if we wish 
to compare the English interest rate with the Indian, we should 
not take the interest rate of the Bank of England, but rather, e.g., 
that charged by lenders of small machinery to small producers in 
domestic industry. 

Usury, in contradistinction to consuming wealth, is historical- 
ly important, inasmuch as it is in itself a process generating capi- 
tal. Usurer’s capital and merchant's wealth promote the formation 
of moneyed wealth independent of landed property. The less prod- 
ucts assume the character of commodities, and the less intensive- 
ly and extensively exchange-value has taken hold of production, 
the more does money appear as actual wealth as such, as wealth in 
general—in contrast to its limited representation in use-values. 
This is the basis of hoarding, Aside from money as world-nioney 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 585 

and as hoard, it is, in particular, the form of means of payment 
whereby it appears as the absolute form of commodities. And it 
is especially its function as a means of payment which develops 
interest and thereby money-capital. What squandering and 
corrupting wealth desires is money as such, money as a means of 
buying everything (also as a means of paying debts). The small 
producer needs money above all for making payments. (The trans- 
formation of services and taxes in kind to landlords and the state 
into money-rent and money-taxes plays a great role here.) In eith- 
er case, money is needed as such. On the other hand, it is in usu- 
ry that hoarding first becomes reality and that the hoarder ful- 
fils his dream. What is sought from the owner of a hoard is not cap- 
ital, but money as such; but by means of interest he transforms 
this hoard of money into capital, that is, into a means of appropri- 
ating surplus-labour in part or in its entirety, and similarly secur- 
ing a hold on a part of the means of production themselves, even 
though they may nominally remain the property of others. Usury 
lives in the pores of production, as it were, just as the gods of Epi- 
curus lived in the space between worlds. Money is so much harder 
to obtain, the less the commodity-form constitutes the general 
form of products. Hence the usurer knows no other barrier but the 
capacity of those who need money to pay or to resist. In smmall-peas- 
ant and small-burgher production money serves as a means of pur- 
chase, mainly, whenever the means of production of the labourer 
(who is still predominantly their owner under these modes of pro- 
duction) are lost to him either by accident or through extraordi- 
nary upheavals, or at least are not replaced in the normal course 
of reproduction. Means of subsistence and raw materials consti- 
tute an essential part of these requirements of production. If these 
become more expensive, it may make it impossible to replace them 
out of the returns for the product, just as ordinary crop failures 
may prevent the peasant from replacing his seed in kind. The 
same wars through which the Roman patricians ruined the plebe- 
ians by compelling them to serve as soldiers and which prevented 
them [rom reproducing their conditions of labour, and therefore made 
paupers of them (and pauperization, thecrippling or loss of the pre- 
requisites of reproduction is here the predominant form)—these 
same wars filled the store-rooms and coffers of the partricians 
with looted copper, the money of that time. Instead of directly 
giving plebeians the necessary commodities, i.e., grain, horses, 
and cattle, they loaned them this copper for which they had no 
use themselves, and took advantage of this situation to exact enor- 
mous usurious interest, thereby turning the plebeians into their 

YISTON OF PROFIT 
586 DIVISIO 

debtor slaves. During the reign of Charlemagne, the Frankish peas- 
ants were likewise ruined by wars, so that they faced no choice 
but to become serls instead of debtors. In the Roman Empire, as 
is known, extreme hunger Irequently resulted in the sale of chil- 
dren and also in free men selling themselves as slaves to the rich. 
So much for general turning-points. In individual cases the main- 
tenance or loss of the means of production on the part of smal! pro- 
ducers depends on a thousand contingencies, and every one of these 
contingencies or losses signifies impoverishment and becomes a crev- 
ice into which a parasitic usurer may creep. The mere death of 
his cow may render the small peasant incapable of renewing his 
reproduction on its former scale. He then falls into the clutches of 
the usurer, and once in the usurer’s power he can never extricate 
himself. 

The really important and characteristic domain of the usurer, 
however, is the function of money as a means of payment. Every 
payment of money, ground-rent, tribute, tax, etc., which becomes 
due on a certain date, carries with it the need to secure money for 
such a purpose. Hence from the days of ancient Rome to those of 
modern times, wholesale usury relies upon tax-collectors, fermiers 
généraux, receveurs généraux. Then, there develops with commerce 
and the generalization of commodity-production the separation, 
in time, of purchase and payment. The money has to be paid on a 
definite date. How this can lead to circumstances in which the money- 
capitalist and usurer, even nowadays, merge into one is shown by 
modern money crises. This same usury, however, becomes one of 
the principal means of further developing the necessity for money 
as a means of payment—by driving the producer ever more deeply 
into debt and destroying his usual means of payment, since the 
burden of interest alone makes his normal reproduction impossible. 
At this point, usury sprouts up out of money as a means of pay- 
ment and extends this function of money as its very own domain. 

The credit system develops as a reaction against usury. But this 
should not be misunderstood, nor by any means interpreted in 
the manner of the ancient writers, the church fathers, Luther or 
the early socialists. It signifies no more and no less than the subor- 
dination of interest-bearing capital to the conditions and require- 
ments of the capitalist mode of production. 

_ On the whole, interest-bearing capital under the modern cred- 
it system is adapted to the conditions of the capitalist mode of 
Production. Usury as such does not only continue to exist, but is 
even freed, among nations with a developed capitalist production, 
from the fetters imposed upon it by all previous legislation. Interest. 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 587 

bearing capital retains the form of usurer's capital in relation to 
persons or classes, or in circumstances where borrowing does not, 
nor can, take place in the sense corresponding to the capitalist 
mode of production; where borrowing takes place as a result of in- 
dividual need, as at the pawnshop; where money is borrowed by 
wealthy spendthrilts for the purpose of squandering; or where the 
producer is a non-capitalist producer, such as a small farmer or 
craftsman, who is thus still, as the immediate producer, the owner 
of his own means of production; finally where the capitalist pro- 
ducer himself operates on sucha small scale that he resembles 
those self-employed producers. 

What distinguishes interest-bearing capital—in so far as it 
is an essential element of the capitalist mode of production—Irom 
usurer’s capital is by no means the nature or character of this cap- 
ital itself. It is merely the altered conditions under which it oper- 
ates, and consequently also the totally transformed character of the 
borrower who confronts the money-lender. Even when a man with- 
out fortune receives credit in his capacity of industrialist or mer- 
chant, it occurs with the expectation that he will function as capi- 
talist and appropriate unpaid labour with the borrowed capital. 
He receives credit in his capacity of potential capitalist. The cir- 
cumstance that a man without fortune but possessing energy, so- 
lidity, ability and business acumen may become a capitalist in this 
manner—and the commercial value of each individual is pretty 
accurately estimated under the capitalist mode of production—is 
greatly admired by apologists of the capitalist system. Although 
this circumstance continually brings an unwelcome number of new 
soldiers of fortune into the field and into competition with the al- 
ready existing individual capitalists, it also reinforces the suprem- 
acy of capital itself, expands its base and enables it to recruit 
ever new forces for itself out of the substratum of society. In a 

. similar way, the circumstance that the Catholic Church in the Mid- 
dle Ages formed its hierarchy out of the best brains in the land, 
regardless of their estate, birth or fortune, was one of the principal 
means of consolidating ecclesiastical rule and suppressing the laity. 
The more a ruling class is able to assimilate the foremost minds 
of a ruled class, the more stable and dangerous becomes its rule. 

The initiators of the modern credit system take as their point 
of departure not an anathema against interest-bearing capital in 
general, but on the contrary, its explicit recognition. 

We are not referring here to such reactions against usury which 
atlempted to protect the poor against it, like the Monis-de-piété 
(1350 in Sarlins in Franche-Comté, later in Perugia and Savona 

588 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

in Italy, 1400 and 1479). These are noteworthy mainly because they 
reveal the irony of history, which turns pious wishes into their 
very opposite during the process of realization. According to a 
moderate estimate, the English working-class pays 100% to the 
pawnshops, the modern successors of Monés-de-piéié”. We are 
also not referring to the credit fantasies of such men as Dr. 
Hugh Chamberleyne or John Briscoe, who attempted during the 
last decade of the {7th century to emancipate the English aristoc- 
tracy irom usury by means of a farmers’ bank using paper money 
based on real estate’’. 

The credit associations established in the 12th and 14th centu- 
ties in Venice and Genoa arose from the need for marine commerce 
and the wholesale trade associated with it to emancipate them- 
selves from the domination of out-moded usury and the monopoliza- 
tion of the money business. While the actual banks founded in 
those city-republics assumed simultaneously the shape of public 
credit institutions from which the state received loans on future 
tax revenues, it should not be forgotten that the merchants found- 
ing those associations were themselves prominent citizens of those 
states and as much interested in emancipating their government 
as they were in emancipating themselves from the exactions of 
usurers,** and at the same time in getting tighter and more secure 

21 “It is by Irequent fluctuations within the month, and by pawning one ar- 
ticle to relieve another, where a small sum isobtained, that the premium for mon- 
ey becomes so excessive. There are about 240 licensed pawnbrokers in the me- 
tropolis, and nearly 1,450 in the country. The capital employed is supposed some- 
what to exceed a million pounds sterling; and this capital is turned round thrice in 
the course of a year, and yields each lime about 33', percent on an ave.age; 
according to which calculation, the inferior orders of society in England pay 
about one million a year for the use of a temporary loan, exclusive of what they 
lose by goods being forfeited.” (J. D. Tuckett, A History of the Past and Present 
State of the Labouring Population, London, 1846, 1, p. 114.) 

7 Even in the titles of their works they state as their principal purpose “the 
general good of the landed men, the great increase of the value of land,” the exemp- 
tion of “the nobility, gentry, etc., from taxes, enlarging their yearly estates, etc.” 
Only the usurers would stand to lose, those worst enemies of the nation who 
had done more injury to the nobility and yeomanry than an army of invasion 
from France could have done. 

“The rich goldsmith (the precursor of the banker), for example, made Charles 
anf of England pay twenty and thirty per cent for accommodation. A business so 
profitable, induced the goldsmith ‘more and more to become lender to the King, 
to anticipate all {he revenue, to take every grant of Parliament into pawn as soon 
as it was given; also to outvie each other in buying and taking to pawn bills, or- 
ders, and tallies, so that, in effect, all the revenue passed through their hands.’" 
(John Francis, History of the Bank of England, London, 1848, I, p. 31.) “The erec- 
tion of a bank had been suggested several times before that. It was at last a ne- 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSIIIPS 589 

control over the state. Hence, when the Bank of England was to 
be established, the Tories also protested: “Banks are republican 
institutions. Flourishing banks existed in Venice, Genoa, Amster- 
dam, and Hamburg. But who ever heard of a Bank of Franceor 
Spain?” 

The Bank of Amsterdam, in 1609, was not epoch-making in the 
development of the modern credit system any more than that of 
Hamburg in 1619. It was purely a bank for deposits. The cheques 
issued by the bank were indeed merely receipts for the deposited 
coined and uncoined precious metal, and circulated only with the 
endorsement of the acceptors. But in Holland commercial credit 
and dealing in money developed hand in hand with commerce and 
manufacture, and interest-bearing capital was subordinated to 
industrial and commercial capital by the course of development 
itself. This could already beseen in the low interest rate. Holland, 
however, was considered in the 17th century the model of economic 
development, as England is now. The monopoly of old-style usury, 
based on poverty, collapsed in that country of its own weight. 

During the entire 18th century there is the cry, with Holland 
referred to as an example, for a compulsory reduction of the rate 
of interest (and legislation acts accordingly), in order to subordi- 
nate interest-bearing capital to commercial and industrial capital, 
instead of the reverse. The main spokesman [or this movement is 
Sir Josiah Child, the father of ordinary English private banking. 
He declaims against the monopoly of usurers in much the same 
way as the wholesale clothing manufacturers, Moses & Son, do 
when leading the fight against the monopoly of “private tailors.” 
This same Josiah Child is simultaneously the father of English 
stock-jobbing. Thus, this autocrat of the East India Company de- 
fends its monopoly in the name of free trade. Versus Thomas Man- 
iey (Interest of Money Mistaken) he says: “As the champion of the 
timid and trembling band of usurers he erects his main batteries 
at that point which I have declared to be the weakest ... he denies 
point-blank that the low rate of interest is the cause of wealth and 
vows that it is merely its effect.” (Traités sur le Commerce, etc., 
1669, trad. Amsterdam et Berlin, 1754.) “If it is commerce that en- 
riches a country, and if a lowering of interest increases commerce, 
then a lowering of interest or a restriction of usury is doubtless 
a fruitful primary cause of the wealth of a nation. It is not at all 
absurd to say. that the same thing may be simultaneously a cause 

cessity” (l.c., p. 38). “The bank was a necessity for the government itself, sucked 
dry by usurers, in order toobtain money at a reasonable rate, on the security 
of parliamentary grants” (I.c., pp. 59, 60). 

JISION OF PROFIT 
590 DIVISIO 

under certain circumstances, and an effect under others” (l.c., 
p. 155). "The egg is the cause of the hen, and the hen is the cause of 
the egg. The lowering of interest may cause an Increase of wealth, 
and the increase of wealth may cause a still greater reduction of 
interest” (1. c., p. 156). “Iamthe defender of industry and my op- 
ponent defends laziness and sloth” (p. 179). 

This violent battle against usury, this demand for the subor- 
dination of interest-bearing capital lo industrial capital, is but 
the herald of the organic creations that establish these prerequi- 
sites of capitalist production in the modern banking system, which 
on the one hand robs usurer’s capital of its monopoly by concen- 
trating all idle money reserves and throwing them on the money- 
market, and on the other hand limits the monopoly of the precious 
metal itself by creating credit-money. 

The same opposition to usury, the demand for the emancipation 
of commerce, industry and the state [rom usury, which are ob- 
served here in the case of Child, will be found in all writings on bank- 
ing in England during the last third of the 17th and the early 
18th centuries. We also find colossal illusions about the miracu- 
lous effects of credit, abolition of the monopoly of precious metal, 
its displacement by paper, etc. The Scotsman William Pater- 
son, founder of the Bank of England and the Bank of Scotland, is 
by all odds Law the First. 

Against the Bank of England “all goldsmiths and pawnbrokers 
set up a howl of rage.” (Macaulay, History of England, 1V, p. 499.) 
“During the first ten years the Bank had to struggle with great dif- 
ficulties; great foreign feuds; its notes were only accepted far be- 
low their nominal value... the goldsmiths (in whose hands the trade 
in precious metals served as a basisof a primitive banking business) 
were jealous of the Bank, because their business was diminished, 
their discounts were lowered, their transactions with the govern- 
ment had passed to their opponents.” (J. Francis, 1. c., p. 73.) 

Even before the establishment of the Bank of England a plan 
was proposed in 1683 for a National Bank of Credit, which had for 
ils purpose, among others, “that tradesmen, when they have a con- 
siderable quantity of goods, may, by the help of this bank, deposit 
their goods, by raising a credit on their own dead stock, employ 
their servants, and increase their trade, till they get a good mar- 
ket instead of selling them at a loss.” After many endeavours 
this Bank of Credit was established in Devonshire House on Bish- 
opsgate Street. It made loans to industrialists and merchants 
on the security of deposited goods to the amount of three-quarters 
of their value, in (he form of bills of exchange. In order to make 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 59t 

these bills of exchange capable of circulating, a number of people 
in each branch of business were organized into a society, from which 
every possessor of such bills would be able toobtain goods with the 
same facility as if he were to ofler them cash payment. This bank’s 
business did not flourish, Its machinery was too complicated, and 
the risk too great in case of a commodity depreciation. 

If we go by the actual content of those records which accompany 
and theoretically promote the formation of the modern credit sys- 
tem in England, we shall not find anything in them but—as 
one of its conditions—the demand for a subordination of interest- 
bearing capital and of loanable means of production in general to 
the capitalist mode of production. On the other hand, if we simply 
cling to the phraseology, we shall be Irequently surprised by the 
agreement—including the mode of expression—with the illu- 
sions of the followers of Saint-Simon about banking and credit, 

Just as in the writings of the physiocrats the cultivateur does 
not stand for the actual tiller of the soil, but for the big farmer, 
so the fravailleur with Saint-Simon, and continuing on through 
his disciples, does not stand for the labourer, but for the indus- 
trial and commercial capitalist. “Un fravailleur a besoin d’ aides, 
de seconds, d’ouvriers, il les cherche intelligents, habiles, dévoués; 
il les met a l'oeuvre, et leurs travaux sont productifs.”* 

In fact, one should bear in mind that only in his last work, Le 
Nouveau Christianisme, Saint-Simon speaks directly for the work- 
ing-class and declares their emancipation to be the goal of his 
efforts. All his Iormer writings are, indeed, mere encomiums of 
modern bourgeois society in contrast to the feudal order, or of in- 
dustrialists and bankers in contrast to marshals and juristic law- 
manufacturers of the Napoleonic era. What a difference compared 
with the contemporaneous writings of Owen!** For the follow- 

*“A travailleur (worker) needs helpers, supporters, labourers; he looks for such 
as are intelligent, able, devoted: he puts them to work, and their Jabour is pro- 
ductive.” (Religion saint-simonienne, Economie poltlique et Politique, Paris, 
1831, p. 104.) 

24 Marx would surely have modified this passage considerably, had he re- 
worked his manuscript. It was inspired by the role of the ex-followers of Saint- 
Simon under France’s Second Empire, where, just at the time that Marx wrote 
the above, the warld-redeeming credit [antasies of this school, through the irony 
of history, were being realized in the form of a tremendous swindle on a scale 
never seen before. Later Marx spoke only with admiration of the gen- 
ius and encyclopaedic mind of Saint-Simon. When in his earlier works the lat- 
ter ignores the antithesis between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat which was 
just then coming into existence in France, when he includes among the travail. 
teurs that part of the bourgeoisie which was active in production, this corre 
sponds to Fourier’s conception of attempting to reconcile capital and labour. and 

SISION OF PROFIT 
509 DIVISION O1 

ers of Saint-Simon, the industrial capitalist likewise remains 
the sravailleur par excellence, as the above-quoted passage indi- 
cates. Alter reading their writings critically, one will not be sur- 
prised that their credit and bank fantasies materialized in the Cré- 
dit mobilier, founded by an ex-follower olf Saint-Simon, Emile 
Pereire. This form, incidentally, could become dominant only. 
in a country like France, where neither the credit system nor 
large-scale industry had reached the modern level of development. 
This was not at all possible in England and America, The embryo 
of Crédit mobilier is already contained in the following passages 
from Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. Premiére année, 1828-29, 
gme éd., Paris, 1831. It is understandable that bankers can lend 
money more cheaplythan the capitalists and private usurers. These 
bankers are, therefore, “able to supply tools to the industrialists 
far more cheaply, that is, at ower inéerest, than the real-estate own- 
ers and capitalists, who may be more easily mistaken in their 
choice of borrowers” (p. 202). But the authors themselves add in 
a footnote: “The advantage that would accrue from the mediation 
of bankers between the idle rich and the fravailleurs is often coun- 
terbalanced, or even cancelled, by the opportunities offered in our 
disorganized society to egoism, which may manifest itself in var- 
ious forms of fraud and charlatanism. The bankers often worm their 
way between the travailleurs and idle rich for the purpose of ex- 
ploiting both to the detriment of society.” Travailleur here means 
capitaliste industriel. Incidentally, it is wrong to regard the means 
at the command of the modern banking system merely as the means 
of idle people. In the first place, it is the portion of capital which 
industrialists and merchants temporarily hold in the form of idle 
Money, as a4 money reserve or as capital to be invested. Hence it 
is idlecapital, but not capital of the idle. In the second place, it is 
the portion of all revenue and savings in general which is fo be 
temporarily or permanently accumulated. Both are essential to 
the nature of the banking system. 

But it should always be borne in mind that, in the first place, 
money—in the form of precious metal—remains the foundation 
from which the credit system, by its very nature, can never detach 
itself. Secondly, that the credit system presupposes the monopoly 
of social means of production by private persons (in the form of 
capital and landed property), that it is itself, on the one hand, an 

is explained by the economic and political situation of France in those days. 
The fact that Owen was more far-sighted in this respect is due to his different en- 
vironment, for he lived ina period of industrial revolution and of acutely sharp- 
ening class antagonisms.—F. E, 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 593 

immanent form of the capitalist mode of production, and on the 
other, a driving lorce in its development to its highest and ulti- 
mate form. 

The banking system, so far as its formal organization and cen- 
tralization is concerned, is the most artificial and most developed 
product turned out by the capitalist mode of production, a fact 
already expressed in 1697 in Some Thoughts of the Interests of Eng- 
land. This accounts for the immense power of an institution such 
as the Bank of England over commerce and industry, although 
their actual movements remain completely beyond ils province 
and it is passive toward them. The banking system possesses in- 
deed the form of universal book-keeping and distribution of means 
of production on a social scale, but solely the form. We have seen 
that the average profit of the individual capitalist, or of every in- 
dividual capital, is determined not by the surplus-labour appro- 
priated at first hand by each capital, but by the quantity of total 
surplus-labour appropriated by the total capital, from which each 
individual capital receives its dividend only propotional to its aliq- 
uot part of the total capital. This social character of capital is first 
promoted and wholly realized through the full development of the 
credit and banking system. On the other hand this goes farther. It 
places al! the available and even potential capital of sociely that is 
not already actively employed at the disposal of the industrial and 
commercial capitalists so that neither the lenders nor users of this 
capilal are its real owners or producers. It thus does away with 
the private character of capilal and thus contains in itself, but only 
in itself, the abolition of capital itself. By means of the banking 
system the distribution of capital as a special business, a social 
function, is taken out of the hands of the private capitalists and 
usurers. But at the same time, banking and credit thus become the 
most potent means of driving capitalist production beyond its 
own limits, and one of the most effective vehicles of crises and 
swindle. 

The banking system shows, [urthermore, by substituting vari- 
ous forms of circulating credit in place of money, that money is 
in reality nothing but a particular expression of the social character 
of labour and its products, which, however, as antithetical to 
the basis of private production, must always appear in the last 
analysis as a thing, a special commodity, alongside other commodi- 
ties. 

Finally, there is no doubt that the credit system will serve as 
a powerful lever during the transition from the capitalist mode of 
production to the mode of production of associated labour; but on- 

594 DIVISION OF PROFIT 

ly as one element in connection with other great organic revolu- 
tions of the mode of production itself. On the other hand, the illu- 
sions concerning the miraculous power of the credit and banking 
system, in the socialist sense, arise from a complete lack of lamiliar- 
ify with the capitalist mode of production and the credit system 
as one of its forms. As soon as the means o! production cease being 
translormed into capital (which also includes th abolition of pri- 
vate property in land), credit as such no longer has any meaning. 
This, incidentally, was even understood by the followers of Saint- 
Simon. On the other hand, as long as the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion continues to exist, interest-bearing capital, as ome of its 
forms, also continues to exist and constitutes in fact the basis of 
its credit system. Only that sensational writer, Proudhon, who want- 
ed to perpetuate commodity-production and abolish money,** 
was capable of dreaming up the monstrous crédit gratuit, the os- 
tensible realization of the pious wish of the petty-bourgeois estate. 

In Religion saint-simonienne, Economie politique et Politique, we 
read on page 45: “Credit serves the purpose, in a society in which 
some own the instruments of industry without the ability or will to 
employ them, and where other industrious people have no instruments 
of labour, of transferring these instruments in the easiest manner 
possible from the hands of the former, their owners, to the hands 
of the others who know how to use them. Note that this definition 
regards credit as a result of the way in which properiy is consti- 
tuted.” Therefore, credit disappears with this constitution of prop- 
erty. We read, furthermore, on page 98, that the present banks 
“consider it their business to follow the movement initiated by 
transactions taking place outside of their domain, but not them- 
selves to provide an impulse to this movement; in other words, the 
banks perform the role of capitalists in relation tothe /ravailleurs, 
whom thev loan money.” The notion that the banks themselves 
should take over the management and distinguish themselves 
“through the number and uselulness of their managed establish- 
ments and of promoted works” (p. 101) contains the crédét mobilier 
in embryo. In the same way, Charles Pecqueur demands that the 
banks (which the followers of Saint-Simon call a Systeme général 
des banques) “should rule production.” Pecqueur is essentially a 
follower of Saint-Simon, but much more radical. He wants “the 
credit institution ... to control the entire movement of national 
production.”—“Try to create a national credit institution, which 

28 Karl Marx, Misére de la Philosophie, Bruxelles et Paris, 1847.—Karl 
Marx, Zur Kritik der politischen Oekonomie, S. 64. 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 595 

shall advance the wherewithal to needy people of talent and mer- 
it, without, however, forcibly tying these borrowers together through 
close solidarity in production and consumption, but on the 
contrary enabling them to determine their own exchange and pro- 
duction. In this way, you will only accomplish what the private 
banks already accomplish now, that is, anarchy, disproportion be- 
tween production and consumption, the sudden ruin of one person, 
and the sudden enrichment of another; so that your institution 
will never get’ any farther than producing a certain amount of ben- 
efits for one person, corresponding to an equivalent amount of 
misfortune to be endured by another ... and you will have only 
provided the wage-labourers assisted by you with the means to 
compete with one another just as their capitalist masters now do.” 
(Ch. Pecqueur, Théorie Nouvelle d'Economie Sociale et Politique, 
Paris, 1842, p. 434.) 

We have seen that merchant's capital and interest-bearing cap- 
ital are the oldest forms of capital. But it is in the nature of things 
that inlerest-bearing capital assumes in popular conception the 
form of capital par excellence. In merchant’s capital there takes 
place the work of middleman, no matter whether considered as cheat- 
ing, labour, or anything else. But in the case of interest-bearing 
capital the self-reproducing character of capital, the self-expanding 
value, the production of surplus-value, appears purely as an occult 
property. This accounts for the fact that even some political econ- 
omists, particularly in countries where industrial capital is not 
yet fully developed, as in France, cling to interest-bearing capital 
as the fundamental form of capital and regard ground-rent, for exam- 
ple, merely as a modified form of it, since the loan-form also pre- 
dominates here. In this way, the internal organization of the capi- 
talist mode of production is completely: misunderstood, and the 
fact is entirely overlooked that land, like capital, is loaned only 
to capitalists. Of course, means of production in kind, such as 
machines and business offices, can also be loaned instead of money. 
But they then represent a definile sum of money, and the fact that 
in addition to interest a part is paid for wear and tear is due to 
their use-value, i.e., the specific natural form of these elements 
of capital. The decisive factor here is again whether they are 
loaned to direct producers, which would presuppose the non-exist- 
ence of the capitalist mode of production—at least in the sphere 
in which this oceurs—or whether they are loaned to industri- 
al capitalists, which is precisely the assumption based upon the 
capilalist mode of production. It is. still more irrelevant and mean- 
ingless to drag the lending of houses, etc., for individual use into 

VISION OF PROFIT 
506 DIVIS 

this discussion. That the working-class is also swindled in this form, 
and to an enormous extent, is self-evident; but this is also done by 
the retail dealer, who sells means of subsistence to the worker. This 
is secondary exploitation, which runs parallel to the primary ex- 
ploitation taking place in the production process itself. The dis- 
tinction between selling and loaning is quite immaterial in this 
case and merely formal, and, as already indicated, cannot appear 
as essential to anyone, unless he be wholly unfamiliar with the ac- 
tual nature of the problem. 

Usury, like commerce, exploits a given mode of production. 
It does not create it, but is related to it outwardly. Usury tries 
to maintain it directly, so as to exploit it ever anew; it is conserv- 
ative and makes this mode of production only more pitiable. The 
less elements of production enter into the production process as 
commodities, and emerge from it as commodities, the more does 
their origination from money appear as a separate act. The more in- 
significant the role played by circulation in the social reproduction, 
the more usury flourishes. 

That money wealth develops as a special kind of wealth, means 
in respect to usurer’s capital that it possesses all its claims in the 
form of money claims. It develops that much more in a given coun- 
try, the more the main body of production is limited to natural 
services, etc., that is, to use-values. 

Usury is a powerful lever in developing the preconditions for 
industrial capital in so far as it plays the following double role, 
first, building up, in general, an independent money wealth along- 
side that of the merchant, and, secondly, appropriating the condi- 
tions of labour, that is, ruining the owners of the old conditions of 
labour. 

INTEREST IN THE MIDDLE AGES 

“In the Middle Ages the population was purely agricultural. 
Under such a government as was the feudal system there can be 
but little traffic, and hence but little profit. Hence the laws 
against usury were justified in the Middle Ages. Besides, 
in an agricultural country a person seldom wants to borrow 
money except he be reduced to poverty or distress... In 
the reign of Henry VIII, interest was limited to 10 per cent. 
James I reduced it to 8 per cent. ... Charles II reduced it to 6 per 
cent; in the reign of Queen Anne, it was reduced to 5 per cent... 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 597 

In those times, the lenders ... had, in fact, though not a legal, yet 
an actual monopoly, and hence it was necessary that they, like 
other monopolists, should be placed under restraint. In our times 
it is the rate of profit which regulates the rate of interest. In those 
times, it was the rate of interest which regulated the rate of profit. 
If the money-lender charged a high rate of interest to the mer- 
chant, the merchant must have charged a higher rate of profit on 
his goods. Hence, a large sum of money would be taken from the 
pockets of the purchasers to be put into the pockets of the money- 
rears fora History and Principles of Banking, pp. 163, 
164, 165. 

“T have been told that 10 gulden are now taken annually at ev- 
ery Leipzig Fair,* that is, 300n each hundred; some add the Neuen- 
burg Fair, thus making 40 per hundred; whether that is so, I 
don’t know. For shame! What will be the infernal outcome of this?... 
Whoever now has 100 florins at Leipzig, takes 40 annually, which 
is the same as devouring one peasant or burgher each year. If one 
has 1,000 florins, he takes 400 annually, which means devouring 
a knight or a rich nobleman per year. If one has 10,000 florins, he 
takes 4,000 per year, which means devouring a rich count each year, 
If one has 100,000 florins, as the big merchants must possess, he 
takes 40,000 annually, which means devouring one affluent prince 
each year. If one has 1,000,000 florins, he takes 400,000 annually, 
which means devouring one mighty king every year. And he does 
not risk either his person or his wares, does not work, sits near 
his fire-place and roasts apples; so might a lowly robber sit at 
home and devour a whole world in ten years.” (Quoted from Biicher 
vom Kaufhandel und Wucher vom Jahre 1524, Luther's Werke, 
Wittenberg, 1589, Teil 6.) 

“Fifteen years ago I took pen in hand against usury, when it 
had spread so alarmingly that I could scarcely hope for any improve- 
ment. Since then it has become so arrogant that it deigns not 
to be classed as vice, sin, or shame, but achieves praise as pure vir- 
tue and honour, as though it were performing a great favour and 
Christian service for the people. What will help deliver us now 
that shame has turned into honour and vice into virtue?” (Martin 
Luther, An die Pfarherrn wider den Wucher 2u predigen, Witten- 
berg, 1540.) 

* The author has in mind the Ioan of 100 gulden with interest payable 
in three instalments at the Leipzig Fair, held three times annually: New 
Year’s, Easter and St. Michael's Day.—&d. 

ISION OF PROFIT 
5S8 DIVISION OF 

“Jews, Lombards, usurers and extortioners were our first bankers, 
our primitive traffickers in money, their character little short 
oi infamous... They were joined by London goldsmiths. As a body... 
our primitive bankers ... were a very bad set, they were gripping 
usurers, iron-hearted extortioners.” (D. Hardcastle, Banks and Bank- 
ers, 2nd ed., London, 1843, pp. 19, 20.) 

“The example shown by Venice (in establishing a bank) was 
thus quickly imitated; all sea-coast towns, and in general all towns 
which had earned fame through their independence and commerce, 
founded their first banks. The return voyage of their ships, which 
often was of long duration, inevitably Jed to the custom of lending 
on credit. This was further intensified by the discovery of Amer- 
ica and the ensuing trade with that continent.” (This is the main 
point.) The chartering of ships made large loans necessary—a pro- 
cedure already obtaining in ancient Athens and Greece. In 1380, 
the Hanse town ol Bruges possessed an insurance company. (M. 
Augier, I.c., pp. 202, 203.) 

To what extent the granting of loans to landowners, and thus 
to the pleasure-seeking wealthy in general, still prevailed in the 
last third of the 17th century, even in England, before the develop- 
ment of modern credit, may be seen, among others, in the works 
of Sir Dudley North, He was not only one of the first English mer- 
chants, but also one oJ the most prominent theoretical economists 
of his time: “The moneys employed at interest in this nation, 
ate not near the tenth part, disposed to trading people, where- 
with to manage their trades; but are for the most part lent for 
the supplying of luxury, and to support the expense of persons, 
who though great owners of lands, yet spend faster than their 
lands bring in; and being loath to sell, choose rather to mort- 
aot estates.” (Discourses upon Trade, London, 1691, 
pp. 6-7.) 

Poland in the 18th century: “Warsaw carried on a large bustling 
business in bills of exchange which, however, had as its principal 
basis and aim the usury of its bankers. In order to secure money, 
which they could lend to spendthrift gentry at 8% and more, they 
sought and obtained abroad open exchange credit, that is, credit 
that had no commodity trade as its basis, but which the foreign 
drawee continued to accept as long as the returns from these 
manipulations did not fail to come in. However, they paid heavily 
for this through bankruptcies of men like Tapper and other 
highly respected Warsaw bankers.” (J. G. Busch, Theoretisch- 
praktische Darstellung der Handlung, etc., 3rd ed., Hamburg, 1808, 
Vol. II, pp. 232, 233.) 

PRE-CAPITALIST RELATIONSHIPS 599 

ADVANTAGES DERIVED BY THE CHURCH 
FROM THE PROHIBITION OF INTEREST 

“Taking interest had been interdicted by the Church. But sell- 
ing property for the purpose of finding succour in distress had not 
been forbidden. It had not even been prohibited to transfer proper- 
ty to the money-lender as security for a certain term, until a debt- 
or repaid his loan, leaving the money-lender free to enjoy the usu- 
fruct of the property as a reward for his abstinence from his money... 
The Church itself, and its associated communes and pia corpora, 
derived much profit from this practice, particularly during the 
crusades. This brought a very large portion of national wealth 
into possession of the so-called ‘dead hand,’ all the more so because 
the Jews were barred from engaging in such usury, the posses- 
sion of such fixed liens not being concealable.... Without the ban 
on interest churches and cloisters would never have become so afflu- 
ent” (l.c., p. 55). 

ee ————————_—_—— 

PART VI 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT 
INTO GROUND-RENT 

CHAPTER XXXVIL 
INTRODUCTION 

The analysis of landed property in its various historical forms 
is bevond the scope of this work. We shall be concerned with it 
only in so far as a portion of the surplus-value produced by capi- 
tal fails to the share ol the landowner. We assume, then, that agri- 
culture is dominated by the capitalist mode of production, just 
as manufacture is; in other words, that agriculture is carried on 
by capitalists who differ from other capitalists primarily in the 
manner in which their capital, and the wage-labour set in motion 
by this capital, are invested. So far as we are concerned, the farm- 
er produces wheat, etc., in much the same way as the manufac- 
turer produces yarn or machines. The assumption that the capital- 
ist mode of production has encompassed agriculture implies that 
it rules over all spheres of production and bourgeois society, i.e., 
that its prerequisites, such as free competition among capitals, the 
possibility of transferring the latter [rom one production sphere to 
another, and a unijorm level of the average profit, etc., are fully 
matured. The form of landed property which we shall consider here 
is a specifically historical one, a form fransformed through the in- 
fluence of capital and of the capitalist mode of production, either 
of feudal landownership, or of small-peasant agriculture as a 
means of livelihood, in which the possession of the land and the 
soil constitutes one of the prerequisites of production for the direct 
producer, and in which his ownership of land appears as the most ad- 
vantageous condition for the prosperity of Ais mode of production. 
Just as the capitalist mode of production in general is based on 
the expropriation of the conditions of labour from the labourers, 
so does it in agriculture presuppose the expropriation of the rural la- 
bourers from the land and their subordination oa capitalist, who car- 

INTRODUCTION 60} 

ries on agriculture for the sake of profit. Thus, for the purpose of 
our analysis, the objection that other forms of landed property and 
of agriculture have existed, or still exist, is quite irrelevant. Such 
an objection can only apply to those economists who treat ihe capi- 
talist mode of production in agriculture, and the form of landed 
property corresponding to it, not as historical but rather as eter- 
nal categories. 

For our purposes it is necessary to study the modern form of 
landed property, because our task is to consider the specific con- 
ditions of production and circulation which arise from the invest- 
ment of capital in agriculture. Without this, our analysis of capi- 
tal would not be complete. We therefore confine ourselves exclu- 
sively to the investment of capital in agriculture itself, that is, 
in producing the principal agricultural crop which feeds a given 
people. We can use wheat for this purpose, because it is the prin- 
cipal means of subsistence in modern capitalistically developed 
nations. (Or, instead of agriculture, we can use mining because the 
laws are the same for both.) 

One of the big contributions of Adam Smith was to have shown 
that ground-rent for capital invested in the production of such agri- 
cultural products as flax and dye-stufls, and in independent cattle- 
raising, etc., is determined by the ground-rent obtained from capi- 
tal invested in the production ol the principal article of subsistence. 
In fact, no further progress has been made in this regard since then. 
Any limitations or additions would belong in an independent study 
of landed property, not here. Hence, we shall not speak of land- 
ed property ex professo—in so far as it does not refer to land 
destined for wheat production—but shal! merely refer to it on oc- 
casion by way oi illustration. 

It should be noted for the sake of completeness that we also in- 
clude water, etc., in the term land, in so far as it belongs to some- 
one as an accessory to the land. 

Landed property is based on the monopoly by certain persons 
over definite portions of the globe, as exclusive spheres of their 
private will to the exclusion of all others.** With this in mind, 
the problem is to ascertain the economic value, that is, the re- 

20 Nothing could be more comical than Hegel’s development of private land- 
ed property. According to this, man as an individual must endow his will with 
reality as the soul of external nature, and must therefore take possession of this 
nature and make it his private property. If lhis were the destiny of the “indizid- 
ual," of man as an individual, it would follow that every human being must be 
a landowner, in order to become a real individual. Free private ownership of land, 
a very recent product, is, according lo Hegel, not a definite social relation, but 

G02 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLYS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

alization of this monopoly on the basis of capitalist production. 
With the legal power of these persons to use or misuse certain 
portions of the globe, nothing is decided. The use of this power 
depends wholly upon economic conditions, which are independent 
of their will. The legal view itself only means that the landowner 
can do with the land what every owner of commodities can do with 
his commodities. And this view, this legal view of Iree private own- 
ership of land, arises in the ancient world only with the dissolu- 
tion of the organic order of society, and in the modern world only 
with the development of capitalist production. It has been import- 
ed by Europeans to Asia only here and there. In the section deal- 
ing with primitive accumulation (Buch 1, Kap. XXIV),* we saw 
that this mode of production presupposes, on the one hand, the sep- 
aration of the direct producers from their position as mere acces- 
sories to the land (in the form of vassals, serfs, slaves, etc.}, and, 
on the other hand, the expropriation of the mass of the people from 
the land. To this extent, the monopoly of landed property is a his- 
torical premise, and continues to remain the basis of the capital- 
ist mode ol production, just as in all previous modes of production 
which are based on the exploitation of the masses in one form or 

a relation of man as an individual to "nature,” an absolute right of man to appro- 
priate all things (Hegel, Philosophie des Rechts, Berlin, 1840, S. 79). This much, 
at least, is evident: the individual cannot maintain himself as a landowner by 
his mere “will” against the will of another individual, who likewise wants to be- 
come a real individual by virtue of the same strip of land. It definitely requires 
something olher [han goodwill. Furthermore, it is absolutely impossible to deter- 
mine where the “individual” draws the line for realizing his will—whether this 
will requires for its realization a whole country, or whether it requires a whole 
group of countries by whose appropriation “the supremacy of my will over the 
thing can be manifested." Here Hegel comes to a complete impasse. “The appro- 
priation is of a very particular kind; [ do not take possession of more than | 
touch with my body; but it is clear, on the other hand, that external things are 
more extensive than I can grasp. By thus having possession of such a thing, some 
other is thereby connected to it. I carry out the act of appropriation by means 
of my hand, but its scope can be extended” (p. 90). But this other thing is again 
linked with still another, and so the boundary within which my will, as the 
soul, can pour into the soil, disappears. “When I possess something, my mind at 
once passes over to the idea that not only this property in my immediate posses- 
sion, but what is associated with it is also mine. Here positive right must decide, 
for nothing more can be deduced from the concept” (p. 91). This is an extraordi- 
narily naive admission “ol the concept,” and proves that this concept which makes 
the blunder at the very outset of regarding as absolute a very definite legal 
view of landed property—Lelonging to bourgeois society—understands “noth- 
ing” of the actual nature of this landed property. This contains at the same 
time the admission that “positive right” can, and must, alter its determinations 
as the re uirements of social, i.e., economic, development change. 
* English edition: Part VIII.—Ed. 

INTRODUCTION 603 

another. But the form of landed property with which the incipi- 
ent capitalist mode of production is confronted does not suit it. 
It first creates for itself the form required by subordinating agricul- 
ture to capital. It thus transforms feudal landed property, clan 
property, small-peasant property in mark communes—no matter 
how divergent their juristic forms may be—into the economic 
form corresponding to the requirements of this mode of produc- 
tion. One of the major results of the capitalist mode of production 
is that, on the one hand, it transforms agriculture from a mere 
empirical and mechanical sell-perpetuating process employed by 
the least developed part of society into the conscious scientific 
application of agronomy, in so far as this is at all feasible under 
conditions of private property;*? that it divorces landed property 
from the relations of dominion and servitude, on the one hand, and, 
on the other, totally separates land asan instrument of production 
from Janded property and landowner—lor whom the land merely 
represents a certain money assessment which he collects by vir- 
tue of his monopoly from the industrial capitalist, the capi- 
talist farmer; it dissolves the connection between landownership 
and the land so thoroughly that the landowner may spend his whole 
life in Constantinople, while his estates lie in Scotland. Land- 
ed property thus receives its purely economic form by discarding 

27Very conservative agricultural chemists, such as Johnston, admit 
that a really rational agriculture is confronted everywhere with insurmountable 
barriers stemming from private property. So do writers who are ex professe advo- 
cates of the monopoly of private property in the world, for instance, Charles 
Comte in his two-volume work, which has as its special aim the defence of private 
ptoperty. "A nation,” he says, “cannot attain to the degree of prosperity and pow- 
er compatible with its mature, unless every portion of the soil nourishing it 
is assigned to that purpose which agrees best with the general interest. In order 
to give to its wealth a strong develapment, one sole and above all highly enlight- 
ened will should, if possible, take it upon itself to assign each piece of its domain 
its task and make every piece contribute to the prosperity of all others. But the 
existence of such a will ... would be incompatible with the division of the land 
into private plots ... and with the authority guaranteed each owner to dispose 
of his property in an almost absolute manner.”—Johnston, Comtc, and others, 
only have in mind the necessity of tilling theland of acertain country as a whole, 
when they speak of a contradiction belween property and a rational system 
of agronomy. But the dependence of ihe cultivation of particular agricultural 
products upon the fluctuations of market-prices, and the continual changes in 
this cultivation with these price fluctuations—the whole spirit of capitalist 
production, which is directed loward the immediate gain of money—are in con- 
tradiction to agriculture, which has to minister to the entire range of permanent 
necessities of life required by the chain of successive generations. A striking il- 
lustration of this is Iurnished by the forests, which are only rarely managed 
in a way more or less corresponding to the interests of society as a whole, i-e., 
when they are not private property, but subject to the contro! of the state. 

604 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

all its former political and social embellishments and associations, 
in brief all those traditional accessories, which are denounced, as 
we shall see later, as useless and absurd superfluities by the indus- 
irial capitalists themselves, as well as their theoretical spokesmen, 
in the heat of their struggle with landed property. The rationaliz- 
ing of agriculture, on the one hand, which makes it for the first 
time capable of operating on a social scale, and the reduction ad 
absurdum of property in land, on the other, are the great achieve- 
ments of the capitalist mode of production. Like all of its other 
historical advances, it also attained these by first completely im- 
poverishing the direct producers. 

Belore we proceed to the problem itsell, several more prelimi- 
nary remarks are necessary 1o avoid misunderstanding. 

The prerequisites for the capitalist mode of production therefore 
are the following: The actual tillers of the soil are wage-labourers 
employed by a capitalist, the capitalist farmer who is engaged in 
agriculiure merely as a particular field of exploitation for capital, 
as investment for his capital in a particular sphere of production. 
This capitalist farmer pays the landowner, the owner of the land 
exploited by him, a sum of money at definite periods fixed by con- 
tract, for instance, annually (just as the borrower of money-capi- 
tal pays a fixed interest), for the right to invest his capital in this 
specific sphere of production. This sum of money is called ground- 
rent, no matter whether it is paid for agricultural land, building 
lots, mines, fishing grounds, or forests, etc. [1 is paid for the en- 
tire time jor which the landowner has contracted to rent his land 
to ihe capitalist farmer. Ground-rent, therefore, is here that form 
in which property in land is realized economically, that is, pro- 
duces value. Here, then, we have all three classes—wage-labour- 
ers, industrial capitalists, and landowners constituting together, 
and in their mutual opposition, the framework of modern society. 

Capital may be fixed in the land, incorporated in it either in a 
transitory manner, as through improvements of a chemical nature, 
fertilization, etc., or more permanently, as in drainage canals, ir- 
rigation works, levelling, farm buildings, etc. Elsewhere I have 
called the capital thus applied to land fa ¢erre-capital.** It be- 

** Misére de la Philosophie, p. 165. There 1 have made a distinction between 
ferre-matiére and terre-capital. “The mere application of further outlays of cap- 
ital to land already transformed into means of production increases |and as cap- 
ital without adding anything to land as matter, that is, to the extent of the 
land.... Land as capital is no more eternal than any other capital.... Land as 
capital ; pee capital; but fixed capital gets used up just as much as circulat- 
ing capital.” 

INTRODUCTION 605 

longs to the category of fixed capital. The interest on capital 
incorporated in the land and the improvements thus made in it 
as an instrument of production can constitute a part of the rent 
paid by the capitalist farmer to the landowner,?® but it does not 
constitute the actual ground-rent, which is paid for the use of the 
Jand as such—be it in a natural or cultivated state. In a system- 
atic treatment of landed property, which is not within our scope, 
this part of the landowner’s revenue would have to be dis- 
cussed at length, But a few words about it will suffice here. The more 
transitory capital investments, which accompany the ordinary 
production processes in agriculture, are all made without excep- 
tion by the capitalist farmer. These investments, like cultivation 
proper in general, improve the land,*° increase its output, and trans- 
form the land from mere material into land-capital when the cul- 
tivation is carried on more or less rationally, i.e., when it is not 
reduced to a brutal spoliation of the soil, as was in vogue, e.g., 
among the former slave-holders in the United States; however, 
the gentlemen landowners secure themselves against such prac- 
tice by contract. A cultivated field is worth more than an unculti- 
vated one of the same natural quality. The more permanent fixed 
capital investments, which are incorporated in the soil and used 
up ina longer period of time, are also in the main, and in some 
spheres often exclusively, made by the capitalist farmer. But as soon 
as the time stipulated by contract has expired—and this is one 
of the reasons why with the development of capitalist production 
the landowners seek to shorten the contract period as much as pos- 
sible—the improvements incorporated in the soil become the prop- 
erty of the landowner as an inseparable feature of the substance, 
the land, In the new contract made by the landowner he adds the 
interest for capital incorporated in the land to the ground-rent it- 
self. And he does this whether he now leases the land to the capital- 
ist farmer who made these improvements or to some other farm- 
er. His rent is thus inflated; and should he wish to sell his land 
(we shall see immediately how its price is determined), its value 
is now higher. He sells not merely the land but the improved land, 
the capital incorporated in the land for which he paid nothing. 
Quite aside from the tnovements of ground-rent itself, here lies 
one of the secrets of the increasing enrichment of landowners, the 
continuous inflation of their rents, and the constantly growing mon- 

2° | say “can” because under certain circumstances this interest is regulated 
by the law of ground-rent and, therefore, can disappear, as in the case of compe- 
tition between virgin lands of great natural fertility. 

* See James Anderson and Carey. 

606 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

ey-value of their estates along with progress in economic develop- 
ment. Thus they pocket a product of social development created 
without their help—fruges consumere nati. Bul this is at the same 
time one of the greatest obstacles to a rational development of 
agriculture, for the tenant farmer avoids all improvements and out- 
lays for which he cannot expect complete returns during the term 
of his lease. We find this situation denounced as such an obstacle 
again and again, not only in the 18th century by James Anderson, 
the actual discoverer of the modern theory of rent—who was al- 
so a practical capitalist farmer and an advanced agronomist for 
his time—but also in our own day by opponents of the pres- 
ent constitution of landed property in England. 

A. A. Walton, inhis History of the Landed Tenures of Great Brit- 
ain and Ireland, London, 1865, says on this score (pp. 96, 97): 
“All {he efforts of the numerous agricultural associations through- 
out the country must fail to produce any very extensive or really 
appreciable results in the real advancement of agricultural improve- 
ment, so long as such improvements mean in a far higher degree 
increased value to the estate and rent-roll of the landlord, than bet- 
tering the condition of the tenant farmer or the labourer. The farm- 
ers, generally, are as well aware as either the landlord or his 
agent, or even the president of the Agricultural Association, that 
good drainage, plenty of manure, and good management, com- 
bined with the increased employment of labour, to thoroughly 
cleanse and work the land, will produce wonderful results both in 
improvement and production. To do all this, however, consid- 
erable outlay is required, and the farmers are also aware, that 
however much they may improve the land or enhance its value, 
the landlords will, in the long run, reap the principal benefit, 
in higher rents and the increased value of their estates.... They 
are shrewd enough to observe what those orators [landowners and 
their agents speaking at agricultural festivities], by some singu- 
lar inadvertence, omit to tell them—namely, that the lion’s share 
oi any improvements they may make is sure to go into the pockets 
of the landlords in the long run.... However much the former ten- 
ant may have improved the farm, his successor will find that the 
landlord will always increase the rent in proportion to the in- 
creased value of the land from former improvements.” 

In agriculture proper this process does not yet appear quite as 
plainly as when the land is used for building purposes. By far 
the largest portion of land used in England for building purposes 
but not sold as a freehold is leased by the landowners for 99 years 
or, if possible, for a shorter term. After the lapse of {his period tlie 

INTRODUCTION 607 

buildings fall into the hands of the landowner together with the 
land itself. “They [the tenants] are bound to deliver up the house 
at the expiration of the lease, in good tenantable condition, to the 
great landlord, afler having paid an exorbitant ground-rent up to 
the expiration of the lease. No sooner is the lease expired, than the 
agent or surveyor will come and examine your house, and see that 
you put it into good repair, and then take possession of il, and annex 
it lo his lord’s domains.... The fact is, if this system is permitted 
to be in full operation for any considerable period longer, the whole 
of the house property in the kingdom will be in the hands of the 
great landlords, as well as the land. The whole of the West End 
of London, north and south from Temple Bar, may be said {o be- 
long to about half a dozen great landlords, all let at enormous rents, 
and where the leases have not quite expired they are fast falling 
due. The same may be said either more or less of every town in 
the kingdom. Nor does this grasping system of exclusion and monop- 
oly stop even here. Nearly the whole of the dock accommodation 
in our seaport towns is by the same process of usurpation in the 
hands of the great leviathans of the land” (I. c., p. 93). It is evident 
in these circumstances thal when the census for England and Wales 
in 1861 gives the total population as 20,066,224 and the number 
of landlords as 36,032, the proportion of owners to the number of 
houses and to population would look completely different ii the 
large landlords were placed on one side and the small ones on the 
other. 

This illustration of ownership in buildings is important. In the 
first place, it clearly shows the diflerence between actual ground- 
rent and interest on fixed capital incorporated in the land, which 
may constitute an addition to ground-rent. Interest on buildings, 
like that on capital incorporated in the land by the tenant in agri- 
culture, falls into the hands of the industrial capitalist, the build- 
ing speculator, or the tenant, so long as the lease lasts, and has 
in itself nothing to do with ground-rent, which must be paid on 
stated dates annually for the use of the land. Secondly, it shows that 
capital incorporated in the land by others ultimately passes into 
the hands of the landlord together with the land, and that the in- 
terest for it inflates his rent. 

Some writers, acting either as spokesmen of landlordism and tak- 
ing up the cudgels against the attacks of bourgeois economists, or 
in an endeavour to transform the capitalist system of production 
from a system of contradictions into one of “harmonies,” like 
Carey, have tried to represent ground-rent, the specific economic 
expression of landed property, as identical with interest. This would 

608 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-KENT 

eliminate the opposition between Jandlords and capitalists. 
The opposite method was employed in the early stages ol capitalist 
production. In those days, landed property was still regarded by 
popular conception as the pristine and respectable form of private 
property, while interest on capital was decried as usury. Dudley 
North, Locke and others, therefore, represented interest on capital 
as a form analogous to ground-rent, just as Turgot deduced the jus- 
tification for interest from the existence of ground-rent.—Aside 
from the fact that ground-rent may, and does, exist in its pure form 
without any addition for interest on capital incorporated in the 
land, those more recent writers forget that, in this way, the land- 
lord not only receives interest on other persons’ capital that costs 
him nothing, but also pockets this capital of others without re- 
compense. The justification of landed property, like that of all 
other forms of property corresponding to a certain mode of produc- 
tion, is that the mode of production itself is a transient histor- 
ical necessity, and this includes the relations of production and 
exchange which stem from it. It is true, as we shall see later, 
that landed property differs [rom other kinds of property in that 
it appears superfluous and harmful at a certain stage of develop- 
ment, even from the point of view of the capitalist mode of 
production. 

Ground-rent may in another form be confused with interest and 
thereby its specific character overlooked. Ground-rent assumes the 
form of a certain sum of money, which the landlord draws annual- 
ly by leasing a certain plot on our planet. We have seen that every 
particular sum of money may be capitalized, that is, considered 
as the interest on an imaginary capital. For instance, if the aver- 
age rate of interest is 5%, then an annual ground-rent of £200 
may be regarded as interest on a capital of £4,000. Ground-rent 
so capitalized constitutes the purchase price or value of the land, 
a category which like the price of labour is prima facie irrational, 
since the earth is not the product of labour and therefore has no 
value. But on the other hand, a real relation in production is con- 
cealed behind this irrational form. If a capitalist buys land yield- 
ing a rent of £200 annually and pays £4,000 Jor it, then he draws 
the average annual interest of 5% on his capital of £4,000, just 
as if he had invested this capital in interest-bearing papers or 
loaned it directly at 5% interest, It is the expansion of a capital 
of £4,000 at 5%. On this assumption, he would recover the pur- 
chase price of his estate through its revenues in twenty years. In 
England, therefore, the purchase price of land is calculated in so 
many years’ purchase which is merely another way of expressing 

INTRODUCTION 609 

the capitalization of ground-rent. It is in fact the purchase price— 
not of the land, but of the ground-rent yielded by it—calculated in 
accordance with the usual interest rate. But this capitalization of 
Tent assumes the existence of rent, while rent cannot inversely be 
derived and explained from its own capitalization. Its exislence, 
independent of its sale, is rather the starting-point for the in- 
quiry. 

It follows, then, that the price of land may rise or fall inverse: 
ly as the interest rate rises or [alls if we assume ground-rent to 
be a constant magnitude. If the ordinary interest rate should [all 
from 5% to 4%, then the annual ground-rent of £200 would rep- 
resent the annual realization [rom a capital of £5,000 instead of 
£4,000. The price of the same piece of land would thus have ris- 
en from £4,000 to £5,000, or from 20 years’ to 25 years’ pur- 
chase. The converse would take place in the opposite case. This 
is a movement of the price of land which is independent of the move- 
nent of ground-rent itself and regulated only by the interest rate. But 
as we have seen that therate of profit has a tendency to fall in thecour- 
se of social progress, and, therefore, the interest rate has the same 
tendency, so far as it is regulated by the rate of profit; and that, 
furthermore, the interest rate shows a tendency to [all in conse- 
quence of the growth of loanable capital, apart from the influence 
of the rate of profit, it follows that the price of land has a tenden- 
cy to rise, even independently of the movement of ground-rent and 
the prices of the products of the land, of which rent constitutes 
a part. 

The confusion of ground-rent itself with the interest form which 
it assumes for the buyer of the land—a confusion resulting from 
complete lack of familiarity with the nature of ground-rent—must 
necessarily lead to the most absurd conclusions. Since landed prop- 
erty is considered in all ancient countries asa particularly genteel 
form of property, and its purchase also as an eminently sale capi- 
tal investment, the interest rate at which ground-rent is bought 
is generally lower than that of other long-term investments of cap- 
ital, so that a buyer of real estate draws, for instance, only 4% 
on his purchase price, whereas he would draw 5% for the same cap- 
ital in other investments. In other words, he pays more capital 
for ground-rent than he would for the same annual amount of 
income [rom other investments. This leads Mr. Thiers to conclude 
in his generally very poor work on La Propriété (a reprint of his 
speech in the French National Assembly in 1849 directed against 
Proudhon) that ground-rent is low, whereas it merely proves that 

its purchase price is high. 

21-2757 

610 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

The fact that capitalized ground-rent appears as the price or 
value of land, so that land, therefore, is bought and sold like any 
other commodity, serves some apologists as a justification for land- 
ed property since the buyer pays an equivalent [or it, the same 
as for other commodities: and the major portion of landed prop- 
erty has changed hands in this way. The same reason in that case 
would also serve to justily slavery, since the returns from the la- 
bour of the slave, whom the slave-holder has bought, merely repre- 
sent the interest on the capital invested in this purchase. To de- 
rive a justification for the existence of ground-reat from its sale and 
purchase means in general to justify its existence by its existence. 

As important as it may be for a scientific analysis of ground- 
tent—that is, the independent and specific economic form of 
landed property on the basis of the capitalist mode of production— 
to study it in its pure form free of all distorting and obfus- 
cating irrelevancies, it is just as important for an understanding 
of the practical effects of landed property—even for a theoret- 
ical comprehension of a multitude of facts which contradict the 
concept and nature of ground-rent and yet appear as modes of ex- 
istence of ground-rent—to learn the sources which give rise to 
such muddling in theory. 

In practice, naturally, everything appears as ground-rent that 
is paid as lease money by tenant to landlord for the right to culti- 
vate the soil. No matter what the composition of this tribule and 
no matter what its sources, it has this in common with the actual 
ground-rent—that the monopoly of the so-called landed proprietor 
of a portion of our planet enables him to levy such tribute and im- 
pose such an assessment. It has this in common with the actual 
ground-rent—that it determines the price of land, which, as we 
have indicated earlier, is nothing but the capitalized income from 
the lease of the land. 

We have already seen that interest for the capital incorporated 
in the land may constitute such an extraneous component of 
ground-rent, a component which must become a continually growing 
extra charge on the total rent of a country as economic develop- 
ment progresses. But aside from this interest, it is possible that 
the lease money may conceal in part, and in certain cases in its 
entirety, i.e., in complete absence of the actual ground-rent— 
when the land is, therefore, actually worthless—a deduction from 
the average profit or from the normal wages, or both. This por- 
tion, whether of profit or wages, appears here as ground-rent, be- 
cause instead of falling to the industrial capitalist or the wage- 
worker, as would normally be the case, it is paid to the landlord 

INTRODUCTION . 611 

in the form of lease money. Economically speaking, neither the 
one nor the other of these portions constitutes ground-rent; but, 
in practice, it constitutes the landlord's revenue, an economic real- 
ization of his monopoly, much as actual ground-rent, and it 
has just as determining an influence on land prices. 

We are not speaking now of conditions in which ground-rent, 
the manner ol expressing landed property in the capitalist mode of 
production, formally exists without the existence of the capital- 
ist mode of production itself, i.e., without the tenant himself 
being an industrial capitalist, nor the type of his management be- 
ing a capitalist one. Such is the case, e.g., in Ireland. The tenant 
there is generally a small farmer. What he pays to the landlord in 
the form of rent frequently absorbs not merely a part of his profit, 
that is, his own surplus-labour (to which he is entitled ¢s posses- 
sor of his own instruments of labour), but also a part of his normal 
wage, which he would otherwise receive for the same amount of 
labour. Besides, the landlord, who does nothing at all for the im- 
provement of the land, also expropriates his small capital, which 
the tenant Jor the most part incorporates in the land through his 
own labour. This is precisely what a usurer would do under similar 
circumstances, with just the difference that the usurer would at 
least risk his own capital in the operation. This continual plun- 
der is the core of the dispute over the Irish Tenancy Rights Bill. 
The main purpose of this Bill is tocompel the landlord when order- 
ing his tenant off the land to indemnify the fatter Jor his improve- 
ments on the land, or for his capital incorporated in the land. Pal- 
merston used to wave this demand aside with the cynical answer: 
“The House of Commons is a house of landed proprietors.” 

Nor are we referring to exceptional circumstances in which the 
landlord may enforce a high rental—even in countries with capital- 
ist production—that stands in no relation to the yield from the 
soil. Of such a nature, for example, is the leasing of small patches 
of land to labourers in English factory districts, either as small 
gardens or for amateur spare-time farming. (Reports of Inspectors of 
Factories.) 

We are referring to ground-rent in countries with develaped cap!- 
talist production. Among English tenants, for instance, there are a 
humber of small capitalists who are destined and compelled by 
education, training, tradition, competition, and other circumstances. 
to invest their capital as tenants in agriculture. They are [orced 
to be satisfied with less than the average profit, and to turn over 
part of it to the landlords as rent. This is the only condition under 
which they are permitted to invest their capital in the land, in, 

21* 

612 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

agricullure. Since landlords everywhere exert considerable, and 
in England even overwhelming, influence on legislation, they are 
able to exploit this situation for the purpose of victimizing the 
entire class of tenants. For instance, the Corn Laws of 1815—a bread 
tax, admittedly imposed upon the country to secure for the idle 
landlords a continuation of their abnormally increased rentals 
during the anti-Jacobin war—had indeed the effect, excluding 
cases of a few extraordinarily rich harvests, of maintaining prices of 
agricultural products above the level to which they would have 
fallen had corn imports been unrestricted. But they did not have the 
effect of maintaining prices at the level decreed by the law-making 
landlords to serve as normal prices in such manner as to constitute 
the legal limit for imports of foreign corn. But the leaseholds were 
contracted in an atmosphere created by these normal prices, 
As soon as the illusion was dispelled, anew law was passed, contain- 
ing new normal prices, which were as much the impotent expres- 
sion of a greedy landlord's fantasy as the old ones, In this way, ten- 
ants were defrauded irom 1815 up tothe thirties. Hence the stand- 
ing problem of agricultural distress during this entire period. Hence 
the expropriation and the ruin of a whole generation of tenants dur- 
ing this period and their replacement by a new class of capitalists.** 

A much more general and important fact, however, is the de- 
pression of the actual farm-labourer’s wage below its normal aver- 
age, so that part of it is deducted to become part of the lease money 
and thus, in the guise of ground-rent, it flows into the pocket of the 
landlord rather thanthe labourer. Thisis, for example, quite gener- 
ally the case in England and Scotland, with the exception of a few 
favourably situated counties. The inquiries into the level of wages 
by the parliamentary investigating committees, which were ap- 
pointed before the passage of the Corn Laws in England—so far 
the most valuable and almost unexploited contributions to the histo- 
ry of wages in the 19th century, and at the sametimea pillory erected 
for themselves by the English aristocracy and bourgeoisie—proved 
convincingly and beyond a doubt that the high rates of rent, and 
the corresponding rise in ]and prices during the anti-Jacobin war, 
were due in part tono other cause but deductions from wages and their 
depression to a level that was even below the physical minimum 
requirement; in other words, to part of the normal wage being hand- 

_™ See the Anti-Corn Law Prize-Essays. However, the Corn Laws always kept 
prices at an artificially higher level. For the better placed tenants this was te 
vourable. They protiea from the passivity in which the protective duties kept 
the great mass of tenants who relied, with or without good reason, on the excep- 
tional average price. 

INTRODUCTION 613 

ed over to the Jandlords. Various circumstances, such as the depre- 
ciation of money and the manipulation of the Poor Laws in the agri- 
cultural] districts, had made this operation possible at a time when 
the incomes of the tenants were enormously increasing and the land- 
lords were amassing fabulous riches. Indeed, one of the main 
arguments of both tenants and landlords for the introduction of du- 
ties on corn was that it was physically impossible to depress 
farm-labourers’ wages any lower. This state of affairs has not sig- 
nificantly changed, and in England, as in all European countries, 
a portion of the normal wage is absorbed by ground-rent just as ever. 
When Count Shaftesbury, then Lord Ashley, one of the philanthrop- 
ic aristocrats, was so extraordinarily moved by the condition 
of English factory operatives and acted as their spokesman 
in Parliament during the agitation for a ten-hour day, the spokes- 
men of the industrialists took their revenge by publishing wage 
statistics of agricultural labourers in the villages belonging to him 
(see Buch I, Kap. XXIII, 5, e)* (“The British Agricultural Prole- 
tariat”), which clearly showed that a portion of the ground-rent of 
this philanthropist consisted of loot filched for him by his tenants 
out of the wages of agricultural labourers. This publication is 
also interesting for the fact that its revelations may bravely take 
their place beside the worst exposures made by the committees in 
1814 and 1815. As soon as circumstances force a temporary increase 
in the wage of agricultural labourers acry goes up from the capital- 
ist tenant farmers that raising wages to the normal level, as done 
in other branches of industry, would be impossible and would 
ruin them, unless ground-rent were reduced at the same time. 
Therein lies the confession that under the head of ground-rent there 
is a deduction of the labourers’ wages which is handed over to 
the landlords. For instance, from 1849 to 1859 the wages of agricul- 
tural labourers rose in England through a combination of momen- 
tous events: the exodus from Ireland, which cul off the supply of 
agricultural labourers coming from there; an extraordinary absorp- 
tion of the agricultural population by factories; a war-time de- 
mand for soldiers; an exceptionally large emigration to Australia and 
the United States (California), and other circumstances which need 
not be dwelt upon here. At the same time, average prices of grain 
fell by more than 16% during this period, with the exception of 
the poor agriculiural years 1854 to 1856. The tenant farmers cla- 
moured, for a reduction in rents. They were successful in individual 
cases, but on the whole failed to achieve this demand. They had 

* English edition: Ch. XXV, 5, e.—E£d. 

614 TRANSFORMATION OF SUIRLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

recourse to a reduction of production costs, among other things by 
the mass production of steam-engines and new machinery, which to 
some extent replaced horses and pushed them out of the economy, 
but also brought about, in part, an artificial over-population by 
throwing agricultural day-labourers out of work, and thereby 
caused a new drop in wages. And this took place in spite of the over- 
all relative decrease in agricultural population during that decade 
as compared with the growth of total population, and in spite of 
an absolute decrease in agricultural population in some purely agri- 
cultural districts.:? Thus Fawcett, then professor of political econ- 
omy at Cambridge [who died in 1884 while Postmaster General], 
stated at the Social Science Congress on October 12, 1865: “The la- 
bourers were beginning to emigrate, and the farmers were already 
beginning to complain that they would not be able to pay such 
high rents as they have been accustomed to pay, because labour 
was becoming dearer in consequence of emigration.” Here, then, high 
ground-rent is directly identified with low wages. And in so far 
as the level of land prices is determined by this circumstance— 
increasing rent—a rise in the value of Jand is identical with a de- 
preciation of labour, the high price of land is identical with the low 
price of labour. 

The samme is true of France. “The rental rises because the prices 
of bread, wine, meat,vegetables and fruit rise, on the one hand, 
while, on the other hand, the price of labour remains unchanged. 
If the older people examine the accounts of their fathers, taking us 
back about 100 years, they will] find that the price of a day’s la- 
bour in rural France was the sameasit is now. The price of meat 
has trebled since then.... Who is the victimof this revolution? Is it 
the rich man, who is the proprietor of an estate, or the poor man 
whoworks it?... The increase in rental is evidence of a public disas- 
ter." (Du Mécanisme de la Société en France et en Angleterre, 
by M. Rubichon, 2nd ed., Paris, 1837, p. 101.) 

Illustrations of rent representing deductions, on the one hand, 
from average profit and, on the other, from average wages: 

Morton, real estate agent and agricultural mechanic who was pre- 
viously quoted, states that it has been observed in many localities 
that rent for large estates is lower than for small ones because “the 
competition is usually greater for the latter than for the former, 
and as iew small farmers are able to turn their attention to any other 

* Jolin C. Morton, The Forces Used in Agriculture. Lecture in the London 
Society of Arts, 1860, based upon authentic documents collected from about 100 
tenants in 12 Scottish and 35 English counties. 

INTRODUCTION 615 

business than that of farming, their anxiety to get a suitable oc- 
cupation leads them in many instances to give more rent than 
their judgement can approve of.” (John C. Morton, The Re- 
sources of Estates, London, 1858, p. 116.) 

However, this difference is supposed to be gradually disappearing 
in England; this he attributes largely to the emigration precisely of 
the class of small tenants. The same Morton illustrates with an 
example in which clearly the wage of the tenant himself, and even 
more surely that of his labourers, suffers a deduction for ground-rent. 
This takes place in the case of leaseholds with less than 70 to 80 
acres (30-34ha.) where a two-horse plough cannot be maintained. 
“Unless the tenant works with his own hands as laboriously as any 
labourer, his farm will not keep him. If he entrusts the perform- 
ance of his work to workmen while he continues merely to observe 
them, the chances are, that at no distant period, he will find he 
is unable to pay his rent” (I. c., p. 118). Morton concludes, there- 
fore, that unless the tenants of a certain locality are very poor, 
the leaseholds should not be smaller than 70 acres, so that the 
tenants may keep two or three horses. 

Extraordinary sagacity on the part of Monsieur Léonce de La- 
vergne, Membre de (Instilut et de la Société Centrale d’ Agricul- 
dure. In his Economie Rurale de ' Angleterre (quoted from the Eng- 
lish translation, London, 1855), he makes the following compari- 
son of the annual advantage derived from catile which is employed 
in France but not in England where it is replaced by horses (p. 42): 

FRANCE: Milk... & 4 million ENGLAND: Milk .. . €16million 
Meat . . . £16 million Meat . . . £20 million 

Labour . . . £ 8 million Labour Pes 
£28 million £ 36 million 

But the greater total for England is obtained here because accord- 
ing to his own testimony milk is twice as expensive in England as 
in France whereas he assumes the same prices for meat in both coun- 
tries (p. 35); therefore, English milk production shrinks to £8 
million and the total 10 $28 million, which is the same as in France. 
It is indeed rather too much when Mr. Lavergne allows the quanti- 
ties and price differences to enter simultaneously into his calcula- 
tions so that when England produces certain articles more dearly 
than France, this appears to be an advantage of English agricul - 
ture, whereas at best it signifies a larger profit for the tenants and 
landlords. 

G16 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

That Mr. Lavergne is not only familiar with tle economic achieve- 
ments of English agriculture, but also subscribes to the prejudices 
of the English tenants and landlords, is shown on page 48: “One 
great drawback attends cereals generally ... they exhaust the soil 
which bears them.” Not only does Mr. Lavergne believe that other 
plants do not do so, but also believes that fodder crops and root 
crops enrich the soil; “Forage plants derive from the atrnosphere 
the principal elements of their growth, while they give to the soil 
more than they take [rom it; thus both directly and by their 
conversion into animal manure contributing in two ways to repair 
the mischief done by cereals and exhausting crops generally; one 
principle, therefore, is that they should at least alternate with 
these crops; in this consists the Norfolk rotation” (pp. 50, SI). 

No wonder that Mr, Lavergne, who believes these English rustic 
lairy-tales, also believes that the wages of English farm-labourers 
have lost their former abnormality since the duties on corn have been 
lifted. (See what has been previously said on this point. Buch I, 
Kap. XXIII, 5, pp. 701 to729.*) But let us also listen to Mr. John 
Bright’s speech in Birmingham, December 14, 1865. Alter mention- 
ing the 5 million families entirely unrepresented in Parlia- 
ment, he continues: “There is among them one million, or rath- 
er more than one million, in the United Kingdom who are classed 
in the unfortunate list of paupers. There is another million just 
above pauperism, but always in peril lest they should become pau- 
pers. Their condition and prospects are not more favourable than 
that. Now look at the ignorant and lower strata of this portion of 
the community. Look to their abject condition, to their poverty, 
to their suffering, to their utter hopelessness of any good. Why, in 
the United States—even in theSouthern States during the reign of 
slavery—every Negro had an idea that there was a day of jubilee 
for him. But to these people—to this class of the lowest strata in 
this country—I am here to state that there is neither the belief of 
anything better nor scarcely an aspiration alter it. Have you read 
a paragraph which lately appeared in the newspapers about John 
Cross, a Dorsetshire labourer? He worked six days in the week, had 
an excellent character from his employer for whom he had worked 
twenty-four years at the rate of eight shillings per week. John 
Cross had a family of seven children to provide for out of these 
wages in his hovel—for a feeble wife and an infant child. 
He took—legally, I believe he stole—a wooden hurdle of the 

* English edition: Ch. XXV, 5, pp. 673-96,.—Ed. 

INTRODUCTION 617 

value of sixpence. For this offence he was tried before the mag- 
istrates and sentenced to 14 or 20 days’ imprisonment.... I can 
tell you that many thousands of cases like that of John Cross are 
lo be found throughout the country, and especially in the south, 
and that their condition is such that hitherto the most anxious 
investigator has been unable to solve the mystery as to how they 
keep body and soul together, Now cast your eye over the country 
and look at these five million of families and the desperate condi- 
tion of this strata of them. Is it not true that the unenfranchised na- 
tion may be said to toil and toil and knowing almost no rest? Com- 
pare it with the ruling class—but if I do] shall be charged with com- 
munism.... But compare this great toiling and unenfranchised na- 
tion with the section who may be considered the governing classes. 
Look at its wealth; look at its ostentation—look at its luxury. Be- 
hold its weariness—for there is weariness amongst them, but it 
is the weariness of satiety—and see how they rush from place to 
place, as it were, to discover some new pleasure.” (Morning Star, 
December 14,1865.) 

It is shown in what follows how surplus-labour, and consequently 
surplus-product, is generally conlused with ground-rent—that qual- 
itatively and quantitatively specifically determined, at least on the 
basis of the capitalist mode of production, part of the surplus-prod- 
uct.The natural basis of surplus-labour in general, that is, a nat- 
ural prerequisite without which such labour cannot be performed, 
is that Nature must suppty—in the form of animal or vegetable prod- 
ucts of the land, in fisheries, elc.—the necessary means of subsist- 
ence under conditions of an expenditure of labour which does not 
consume the entire working-day. This natural productivity of 
agricultural labour (which includes here the labour of simple gather- 
ing, hunting, fishing and cattle-raising) is the basis of all surplus- 
labour, as all labour is primarily and initially directed toward the 
appropriation and production of food. (Animals also supply at 
the same time skins for warmth in colder climates; also cave-dwell- 
ings, etc.) 

The same confusion between surplus-product and ground-rent is 
found differently expressed by Mr. Dove. Originally agricultural 
and industrial labour were not separated; the latter was an ad- 
junct of the former. The surplus-labour and the surplus-product of 
the land-cultivating tribe, house commune, or family included 
both agricultural and industrial labour. Both went hand in hand. 
Hunting, fishing and agriculture were impossible without suitable 
tools. Weaving, spinning, etc., were first carried on as an agrarian 

side line. 

618 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

We have previously shown that just as the labour of an in- 
dividual workman breaks up into necessary and surplus-labour, 
ihe aggregate labour of the working-class may be so divided that 
the portion which produces the total means of subsistence for the 
working-class (including the means of production required for this 
purpose) performs the necessary labour for the whole of 
society. The labour performed by the remainder of the working- 
class may then be regarded as surplus-labour. But the necessary 
labour consists by no means only of agricultural labour, but also of 
that labour which produces all other products necessarily includ- 
ed in the average consumption of the labourer. Furthermore, 
irom the social standpoint, some perform only necessary labour 
because others perform only surplus-labour, and vice versa. It 
is but a division of labour between them. The same 
holds for the division of labour between agricultural and industri- 
al labourers in general. The purely industrial character of labour, 
on the one hand, corresponds to the purely agricultural character 
on ihe other. This purely agricultural labour is by no means natu- 
ral. but is rather a product—and a very modern one at that, which 
has not yet been achieved everywhere—of social development— 
and corresponds to a very definite stage of the development of 
production. Just as a portion of agricultural labour is material- 
ized in products which either minister only to luxury or serve as raw 
materials in industry, but by no means serve as food, let alone as food 
for the masses, so on the other hand a portion of industrial labour 
is materialized in products which serve as necessary means of 
consumption for both agricultural and non-agricultural labourers. 
It is a mistake. from a social point of view, to regard this industri- 
ai labour as surplus-labour. It is, in part, as much necessary la- 
bour as ihe necessary portion of the agricultural labour. It is 
also but a form rendered independent of a part of industrial labour 
which was formerly naturally connected with agricultural labour, 
a necessary mutual supplement to the specifically agricultural la- 
bour now separated from it. (From a purely material point of view, 
500 mechanical weavers, e.g., produce surplus-fabrics to a far 
greater degree, that is, more than is required for their own clothing.) 

Finally, it should be borne in mind in considering the various 
forms of manifestation of ground-rent, that is, the lease money 
paid under the heading of ground-rent to the landlord for the use of 
the land for purposes of production or consumption, that the price 
of things which have in themselves no value, i.e., are not the 
product of labour, such as land, or which at least cannot be repro- 
duced by labour, such as antiques and works of art by certain 

INTRODUCTION 619 

masters, etc., may be determined by many fortuitous combina- 
tions. In order to sel] a thing, nothing more is required than its ca- 
pacity to be monopolized and alienated. 

There are three main errors to be avoided in studying ground-rent, 
and which obscure its analysis. 

1) Confusing the various forms of rent pertaining to different 
stages of development of the social production process. 

Whatever the specific form of rent may be, all types have this 
in common: the appropriation of rent is that economic form in 
which landed property is realized, and ground-rent, in turn, pre- 
supposes the existence of landed property, the ownership of 
certain portions of our planet by certain individuals. The owner 
may be an individual representing the community, as in Asia, 
Egypt, etc.; or this landed property may be merely incidental to 
the ownership of the immediate producers themselves by some in- 
dividual as under slavery or seridom; or it may be a purely pri- 
vate ownership of Nature by non-producers, a mere title to land; 
or, finally, it may be a relationship to the land which, as in the 
case ol colonists and small peasants owning land, seers to be di- 
rectly included—in the isolated and not socially developed labour— 
in the appropriation and production of the products of particular 
plots of land by the direct producers. 

This common element in the various forms of rent, namely that 
of being the economic realization of landed property, of legal fic- 
tion by grace of which certain individuals have an exclusive right 
to certain parts of our planet—makes it possible for the differ- 
ences to escape detection. 

2) All ground-rent is surplus-value, the product of surplus-la- 
bour. In its undeveloped form as rent in kind it is still directly the 
surplits-product itself. Hence, the mistaken idea that the rent corre- 
sponding to the capitalist mode of production—which is always a 
surplus over and above profit, i.e., above a value portion of com- 
modities which itself consists of surplus-value (surplus-labour) 
—that this special and specific component of surplus-value is ex- 
plained by merely explaining the general conditions for the ex- 
istence of surplus-value and profit in general. These conditions are: 
the direct producers must work beyond the time necessary for re- 
producing their own labour-power, for their own reproduction. They 
must perform surplus-labour in general. This is the subjective con- 
dition. The objective condition is that they must be able to per- 
form surplus-labour. The natural conditions must be such that 

620 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

a part of their available labour-time suffices for their reproduction 
and self-maintenance as producers, that the production of their 
necessary means of subsistence shall not consume their whole la- 
bour-power. The fertility of Nature establishes a limit here, a 
starting-point, a basis. On the other hand, the development of the 
social productive power of their labour forms the other limit. Ex- 
amined more closely, since the production of means of subsistence is 
the very first condition of their existence and of all production in 
general, labour used in this production, that is, agricultural labour 
in the broadest economic sense, must be [ruitful enough so as not to 
absorb the entire available labour-time in the production of means 
of subsistence for the direct producers, that is, agricultural sur- 
plus-labour and therefore agricultural surplus-product must be 
possible. Developed further, the total agricultural labour, both 
necessary and surplus labour, of a segment of society must suffice to 
produce the necessary subsistence for the whole of society, that 
is, for non-agricultural labourers too. This means therefore that the 
major division of labour between agricultural and industrial must 
be possible: and similarly between tillers of the soil producing means 
of subsistence and those producing raw materials. Although the 
labour of the direct producers of means of subsistence breaks up into 
necessary and surplus labour as far as they themselves are con- 
cerned, it represents from the social standpoint only the necessary la- 
bour required to produce the means of subsistence. Incidentally, the 
same is true for all division of labour within society as a whole, as 
distinct from the division of labour within individual workshops. 
It is the labour necessary for the production of particular arti- 
cles, for the satisfaction of some particular need of society for these 
particular articles. If this division is proportional, then the prod- 
ucts of various groups are sold at their values (at a later stage 
of development they are sold at their prices of production), or at 
prices which are certain modifications of these values or prices of 
production determined by general laws. It is indeed the effect of 
the law of value, not with reference to individual commodities or 
articles, but to each total product of the particular social spheres of 
production made independent by the division of labour; so that not 
only is no more than the necessary Jabour-time used up for each specif- 
ic commoadity, but only the necessary proportional quantity of the 
total social labour-time is used up in the various groups. For the 
condition remains that the commodity represents use-value. But 
if the use-value of individual commodities depends on whether 
they satisfy a particular need then the use-value of the mass of 
the social product depends on whether it satisfies the quantitative- 

INTRODUCTION 621 

ly definite social need for each particular kind of product in an 
adequate manner, and whether the labour is therefore proportionate- 
ly distributed among the different spheres in keeping with these 
social needs, which are quantitatively circumscribed. (This point 
is to be noted in the distribution of capital among the various spheres 
of production.) The social need, that is, the use-value on a so- 
cial scale, appears here as a determining factor for the amount of 
total social Jabour-time which is expended in various specific spheres 
of production. But it is merely the same law which is already ap- 
plied in the case of single commodities, namely, that the use-value 
of a commodity is the basis of its exchange-value and thus of its 
value. This point has a bearing upon the relationship between nec- 
essary and surplus labour only in so far as a violation of this pro- 
portion makes it impossible to realize the value of the commodity 
and thus the surplus-value contained in it. For instance, let us 
assume that proportionally too much colton goods have been pro- 
duced, although only the labour-time necessary under the prevail- 
ing conditions is incorporated in this total cloth production. 
But in general too much social labour has been expended in this 
particular line; in other words, a portion of this product is useless. 
It is therefore sold solely as if it had been produced in the necessary 
proportion. This quantitative limit to the quota of social labour- 
time available for the various particular spheres of production is 
but a more developed expression of the law of value in general, 
although the necessary labour-time assumes a different meaning here. 
Only just so much of it is required for the satisfaction of social needs. 
The limitation occurring here is due to the use-value. Society can use 
only so much of its total labour-time for this particular kind of prod- 
uct under prevailing conditions of production, But the subjective 
and objective conditions of surplus-labour and surplus-value in 
general have nothing to do with the particular form of either the 
profit or the rent. These conditions apply to surplus-value as such, 
no matter what special form it may assume. Hence they do not 
explain ground-rent. 

3) It is precisely in the economic realization of landed property, 
in the development of ground-rent, that the following characteris- 
tic peculiarity comes to the fore, namely that its amount is by no 
means determined by the actions of its recipient, but is deter- 
mined rather by the independent development of social labour in 
which the recipient takes no part. It may easily happen, therefore, 
that something is regarded as a peculiarity of rent (and of the 
products of agriculture in general), which is really a common 
feature of all branches of production and all their products where 

622 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

the basis is commodity-production—and, in particular, capitalist 
production, which is in its entirety commodity-production. 

The amount of ground-rent (and with it the value o/ land) grows 
with social development as a result of the total social labour. On 
ihe one hand, this leads to an expansion of the market and ol the 
demand for products of the soil, and, on the other, it stimulates the 
demand for land itself, which is a prerequisite of competitive pro- 
duction in all lines of business activity, even those which are not 
agricultural. More exactly—if one considers only the actual agri- 
cultura} rent—rent, and thereby the value of the land, develops 
with the market for the products of the soil, and thus with the in- 
crease in the non-agricultural population, with its need and demand 
for means ol subsistence and raw materials. It is in the nature of cap- 
italist production to continually reduce the agricultural popula- 
tion as compared with the non-agricultural, because in industry 
{in the strict sense) the increase ol] constant capital in relation to 
variable capital goes hand in hand with an absolute increase, 
though relative decrease, in variable capital; on the other hand, in 
agriculture the variable capital required for the exploitation of 
acertain plot of land decreases absolutely; it can thus only increase 
to the extent that new land is taken into cultivation, but this 
again requires as a prerequisite a still greater growth of the non-ag- 
Ticultural population. 

In fact, we are not dealing here with a characteristic peculiarity 
of agriculture and its products. On the contrary, the same applies 
to all other branches of production and products where the basis 
is commodity-production and its absolute form, capitalist produc- 
tion. 

These products are commodities, or use-values, which have an 
exchange-value that is to be realized, to be converted into money, 
only in so far as other commodities form an equivalent for them, 
that is, other products confront them as commodities and values; 
thus, in so far as they are not produced as immediate means of 
subsistence for the producers themselves, but as commodities, as 
products which become use-values only by their transformation into 
exchange-values (money), by their alienation. The market for these 
commodities develops through the social division of labour; the 
division of productive labours mutually transforms their respective 
products into commodities, into equivalents for each other, making 
them mutually serve as markets. This is in no way peculiar io 
agricultural products. 

Rent can develop as money-rent only on the basis of commodity- 
production, in particular capitalist production, and it develops to 

INTRODUCTION 623 

the sarhe extent that agricultural production becomes commodity- 
production, that is, to the same extent that non-agricultural produc- 
tion develops independently of agricultural production, for to 
that degree the agricultural product becomes commodity, exchange- 
value, and value. In so far as commodity-production and thus 
the production of value develops with capitalist production so does 
the production of surplus-value and surplus-product. But in the same 
proportion as the latter develops, landed property acquires 
the capacity of capturing an ever-increasing portion of this sur- 
plus-value by means of its land monopoly and thereby, of raising the 
value of its rent and the price of the land itself. The capitalist 
still performs an active function in the development of this sur- 
plus-value and surplus-product. But the landowner need only ap- 
propriate the growing share in the surplus-product and the surplus- 
value, without having contributed anything to this growth. This 
is the characteristic peculiarity of his position, and not the fact that 
the value of the products of the land, and thus of the land itself, 
increases to the degree that the market for them expends, the de- 
mand grows and with it the world of commodities which confronts 
the products of the land—in other words, the mass of non-agricul- 
tural commodity-producers and non-agricultural commodity-pro- 
duction. But since this takes place without any action on his part, 
it appears to him as something unique that the mass of value, the 
mass of surplus-value, and the transformation of a portion of sur- 
plus-value into ground-rent should depend upon the social produc- 
tion process, on the development of commodity-production in gen- 
eral. For this reason, Dove, for instance, tries to evolve rent [rom 
this. He says that rent does not depend upon the mass of the agri- 
cultural product, but upon its value; however, this depends upon 
the mass and productivity of the non-agricultural population. 
But it is also true of every other product that it can only develop 
as a commodity partly as the mass and partly as the variety of 
other commodities which form equivalents for it increase. This 
has already been demonstrated in connection with the general pres- 
entation of value. On the one hand, the exchangeability of a prod- 
uct in general depends on the multiplicity of commodities exist- 
ing in addition to it. On the other hand, on it depends in partic- 
ular the quantity in which this product can be produced as a com- 
modity. : 

No producer, whether industrial or agricultural, when considered 
by himself alone, produces value or commodities. His product 
becomes a value and a commodity only in the context of definite 
social interrelations. In the first place, in so far as it appears as 

694 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 
ue We a 

the expression of social labour, hence in so far as the individual pro- 
ducer’s labour-time counts as a part of the social labour-time in 
general; and, secondly, this social character of his labour appears 
impressed upon his product through its pecuniary character and 
through its general exchangeability determined by its price. 

Therefore, if, on the one hand, surplus-value or, still more 
narrowly, the surplus-product in general is explained instead of 
rent, the mistake is made, on the other hand, of ascribing 
exclusively to agricultural products a characteristic which belongs 
to all products in their capacity as commodities and values. This 
is vulgarized still more by those who pass from the general determi- 
nation of value over to the realization of the value of a specific 
commodity. Every commodity can realize its value only in the 
process of circulation, and whether it realizes its value, or to what 
extent it does so, depends on prevailing market conditions. 

It is not a singularity of ground-rent, then, that agricultural 
products develop into, and as, values, i.e., that they confront other 
commodities as commodities, and that non-agricultural products 
confront them as commodities; or that they develop as specific 
expressions of social labour. The singularity of ground-rent is rath- 
er that together with the conditions in which agricultural prod- 
ucts develop as values (commodities), and together with the condi- 
tions in which their values are realized, there also grows the power 
of landed property to appropriate an increasing portion of these 
values, which were created without its assistance; and so an increas- 
ing portion of surplus-value is transformed into ground-rent. 

CHAPTER XXXVIII 
DIFFERENTIAL RENT: GENERAL REMARKS 

In the analysis of ground-rent we shall begin with the assump- 
tion that products paying such arent, products in which a portion 
of the surplus-value, and therefore also a portion of the total price, 
resolves itself into ground-rent, i.e., that agricultural as well as 
mining products are sold at their prices of production like all oth- 
er commodities. (It suffices for our purposes to confine ourselves 
to agricultural and mining products.) In other words, their sell- 
ing prices are made up of the elements of their cost (the value of 
consumed constant and variable capital) plus a profit determined 
by the general rate of profil and calculated on the total advanced 
capital, whether consumed or not. We assume, then, that average 
selling prices of these products are equal to their prices of produc- 
tion. The question now arises how it is possible for ground-rent 
to develop under these conditions, i. e., how it is possible for a por- 
tion of the profit to become transformed into ground-rent, so that 
a portion of the commodity-price falls to the Jandlord. 

In order to demonstrate the general character of this form of 
ground-rent, let us assume that most of the factories of a certain 
country derive their power from steam-engines, while a smaller 
number derive it from natural waterfalls. Let us further assume that 
the price of production in the former amounts to 115 for a quantity 
of commodities which have consumed a capital of 100. The 15% 
profit is calculated not solely on the consumed capital of 100, but 
on the total capital employed in the production of this commodity- 
value. We have previously shown that this price of production is 
not determined by the individual cost-price of every single indus- 
trial producer, but by the average cost-price of the commodity un- 
der average conditions of capital in the entire sphere of production. 
It is, in fact, the market-price of production, the average market- 
price as distinct from its oscillations. It is in general in the form of 
{he market-price, and, furthermore, in the form of the regulating 

626. TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROPFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

market-price, or mark«t-price of production, that the nature of the 
yalue of commodities asserts itself, its determination not 
by the labour-time necessary’ in the case of any individual 
producer for the production of a certain quantity of commodi- 
ties, or of some individual commodity, but by the socially necessary 
labour-time; that is, by the labour-time, required for the production 
of the socially necessary total quantity of commodity varieties on 
the market urder the existing average conditions of social producticn. 

As definite figures are immaterial in this case, we shall assume 
furthermore that the cost-price in factories run on water-power 
is only 90 instead of 100. Since the regulating market-price of pro- 
duction of this quantity of commodities=115, with a profit of 15%, 
the manulacturers who operate their machines on water-power will 
also sell their commodities at 115, i.e., the average price regulating 
the market-price. Their profit would then be 25 instead of 15; 
the regulating price of production would allow them a surplus- 
profit of 10% not because they sell their commodities above the 
price of production, but because they sell them at the price of pro- 
duction, because their commodities are produced, or their capital 
operates, under exceptionally favourable conditions, i.e., under 
conditions which are more favourable than the average prevail- 
ing in this sphere. 

Two things become evident at once: 

First, the surplus-profit of the producers who use a natural wa- 
terfall as motive power is to begin with in the same class 
with all surplus-profit (and we have already analysed this 
category when discussing prices of production) which is not the 
fortuitous result of transactions in the circulation process, of the 
fortuitous fluctuations in market-prices. This surplus-profit, then, 
is likewise equal to the difference between the individual price of 
production of these favoured producers and the general social price 
of production regulating the market in this entire production 
sphere. This difference is equal to the excess of the general price of 
production of the commodities over their individual price of pro- 
duction. The two regulating limits of this excess are, on the one hand, 
the individual cost-price, and thus the individual price of produc- 
tion, and, on the other hand, the general price of production. 
The value of commodities produced with water-power is smaller 
because a smaller total quantity of labour is required for their pro- 
duction, i.e., less labour—in materialized form—enters into the 
constant capital as part of the latter. The labour employed here is 
more productive, its individual productive power is greater than that 
employed in the majority of factories of the same kind. Its greater 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT: GENERAL REMARKS 627 

productive power is shown in the fact that in order to 
produce the same quantity of commodities, it requires a smaller 
quantity of constant capital, a smaller quantity of materialized 
labour, than the others. It also'requires less living labour, because 
the water-wheel need not be heated. This greater individual produc- 
tiveness of employed labour reduces the value, but also the cost- 
price and thereby the price of production of the commodity. For 
the individual industrial capitalist this expresses itself in a lower 
cost-price for his commodities. He has to pay for less materialized 
labour, and also less wages for less living labour-power employed. 
Since the cost-price of his commodities is lower, his individual 
price of production is also lower. His cost-price is 90 instead of 100. 
His individual price of production would therefore be only 103%% 
instead of 115 (100: 11590 : 1034). The difference between his 
individual price of production and the general price of production 
is limited by the difference between his individual cost-price and 
the general cost-price. This is one of the magnitudes which form the 
limits to his surplus-profit. The other is the magnitude of the gener- 
al price of production into which the general rate of profit enters 
as one of the regulating factors. Were coal to become cheaper, the 
difference between his individual cost-price and the general cost- 
price would decrease, and with it his surplus-profit. Should he be 
compelled to sell his commodities at their individual value, or 
at the price of production determined by their individual value, 
then the difference would disappear. It is, on the one hand, a re- 
sult of the fact that the commodities are sold at their general mar- 
ket-price, the price brought about by the equalization of individual 
prices through competition, and, on the other, a result of the fact 
that the greater individual productivity of labour set in motion 
by him does not benefit the labourer, but the employer, as does all 
productivity of labour, that it appears as the productiveness of 
capital. 

Since the level of the general price of production is one of the 
limits of this surplus-profit, the level of the general rate of profit 
being one of its factors, this surplus-profit can only arise from the 
difflerence between the general and the individual price of produc- 
tion, and consequently from the difference between the general 
and the individual rate of profit. An excess above this difference 
presupposes the sale of products above, not at, the price of 
production regulated by the market. . 

Secondly, thus far, the surplus-profit of the manufacturer using 
natural water-power instead of steam does not differ in any way 
from any other surplus-profit. All normal surplus-profil, that is, 

628 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

all surplus-profit not due to fortuitous sales or market-price fluc- 
tuations is determined by the difference between the individual 
price of production of the commodities of a particular capital and 
the general price of production, which regulates the market-prices 
of the commodities produced by the capital in this sphere of pro- 
duction in general, or, in other words, the market-prices of com- 
modities of the total capital invested in this sphere of production. 

But now we come to the difference. 

To what circumstance does the industrial capitalist in the pres- 
ent case owe his surplus-profit, the surplus resulting for him person- 
ally from the price of production regulated by the general rate of 

rofit? 

e He owes it in the first instance to a natural force—the motive 
power of the waterfall—which is found readily available in Nature 
and is not itself a product of labour like the coal which trans- 
forms water into steam. The coal, therefore, has value, must be 
paid for by an equivalent, and has a cost. The waterfall is a natural 
production agent in the production of which no labour enters. 

But this is not all. The manufacturer who operates with steam 
also employs natural forces which cost him nothing yet make the 
labour more productive and increase the surplus-value and thereby 
the profit, inasmuch as they thus cheapen the manufacture of the 
means of subsistence required for the labourers. These natural 
forces are thus quite as much monopolized by capital as the social 
natural forces of labour arising from co-operation, division of la- 
bour, etc. The manufacturer pays for coal, but not for the capacity 
of water to alter its physical state, to turn into steam, not for the 
elasticity of the steam, etc. This monopolization of natural forces, 
that is, of the increase in labour-power produced by them, is com- 
mon to all capital operating with steam-engines. It may increase 
that portion of the product of labour which represents surplus-value 
in relation to that portion which is transformed into wages. In so far 
as it does this, it raises the general rate of profit, but it does not 
create any surplus-profit, for this consists of the excess of individu- 
al profit over average profit. The fact that the application of a natu- 
ral force, a waterfall, creates surplus-profit in this case, cannot 
therefore be due solely to the circumstance that the increased pro- 
ductivity of labour here results from the application of a natural 
force. Other modifying circumstances are necessary. 

Conversely. The mere application of natural forces in industry 
may influence the level of the general rate of profit because it af- 
fects the quantity of labour required to produce the necessary means 
of subsistence. But in itself it does not create any deviation from the 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT: GENERAL REMARKS 629 

general rate of profit, and this is precisely the point in which we 
are interested here. Furthermore, the surplus-profit which some 
individual capital otherwise realizes in a particular sphere of pro- 
duction—for deviations of the rates of profit in various spheres of 
production are continually balanced out: into an average rate—is 
due, aside from fortuitous deviations, to a reduction in cost-price, 
in production costs. This reduction arises either from the fact 
that capital is used in greater than average quantities, so that 
the faux frais of production are reduced, while the general causes 
increasing the productiveness of labour (co-operation, division of 
labour, etc.) can become effective to a higher degree, with more 
intensity, because their field of activity has become larger; or it 
may arise from the fact that, aside from the amount olf functioning 
capital, better methods of labour, new inventions, improved ma- 
chinery, chemical manufacturing secrets, etc., in short, new and 
improved, better than average means of production and methods 
of production are used. The reduction in cost-price and the surplus- 
profit arising from it are here the result of the manner in which the 
functioning capital is invested. They result either from the fact that 
the capital is concentrated in the hands of one person in extraor- 
dinarily large quantities (a condition that is cancelled out as soon 
as equal magnitudes of capital are used on the average), or 
from the fact that a certain magnitude of capital functions in 
a particularly productive manner (a condition that disappears as 
soon as the exceptional method of production becomes general or is 
surpassed by a still more developed one). 

The cause of the surplus-profit, then, arises here from the capital 
itself (which includes the labour set in motion by it) whether it 
be due to the greater magnitude of capital employed or to its more 
efficient application; and, as a matter of fact, there is no particular 
reason why all capital in the same production sphere should not be 
invested in thesame manner. On thecontrary, thecompetition between 
capitals tends to cancel these differences more and more. The deter- 
mination of value by the socially necessary labour-time asserts itself 
through the cheapening of commodities and the compulsion to 
produce commodities under the same favourable conditions. But 
metters are dilferent with the surplus-profit of an industrial capital- 
ist who makes use of the waterfall. The increased productiveness 
of the labour used by him comes neither from the capital and labour 
itself, nor from the mere application of some natural force differ- 
ent from capital and labour but incorporated in the capital. It 
arises from the greater natural productiveness of labour bound up 
with the application of a force of Nature, but not a force of Nature 

630 TRANSFORM ATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

that is at {he command of all capital in the same sphere of produc- 
tion, as for example the elasticity of steam. In other words, its 
application is not to be taken for granted whenever capital is gen- 
erally invested in this sphere of production. On the contrary, it 
is a Monopolizable force of Nature which, like the water/all, is 
only at the command of those who have at their disposal particu- 
lar portions of the earth and its appurtenances. It is by no means 
within the power of capital to call into existence this natural prem- 
ise for a greater productivity of labour in the same manner as 
any capital may transform water into steam. It is found only lo- 
cally in Nature and, wherever it does not exist, it cannot be estab- 
lished by a definite investment of capital. It is not bound to goods 
which labour can produce, such as machines and coal, but to spe- 
cific natural conditions prevailing in certain portions of land. Those 
manufacturers who own waterfalls exclude those who do not from 
using this natural force, because land, and particularly land en- 
dowed with water-power, is scarce. This does not prevent the 
amount of water-power available for industrial purposes from being 
increased, even though the number of natural waterfalls in 
a given country is limited. The waterfall may be harnessed by man 
in order to fully exploit its motive force. If such exists, the water- 
wheel may be improved so as to make use of as much of the water- 
power as possible; where the ordinary wheel is not suitable for the 
water-supply, turbines may be used, etc. The possession of this 
natural force constitutes a monopoly in the hands of its owner; 
it is a condition for an increase in the productiveness of the invest- 
ed capital that cannot be established by the production process 
oj the capital itself;*® this natural force, which can be monopolized 
in (his manner, is always bound to the land. Such a natural force 
does not belong to the general conditions of the sphere of produc- 
tion in question, nor to those conditions of the latter which may be 
generally established. 

Now let us assume thai the waterfalls, along with the Jand to 
which they belong, are held by individuals who are regarded as 
owners of these portions of the earth, i.e., who are landowners. 
These owners prevent the investment of capital in the 
waterfalls and their exploitation by capital. They can permit 
or forbid such utilization. But a waterfall cannot be created by 
capital out of itself. Therefore, the surplus-profit which arises from 
the employment of this waterfall is not due to capital, but to the 
utilization of a natural force which can be monopolized, and has 

———— re 

™ Concerning extra profit, see the /nguéry (against Malthus). 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT: GENERAL REMARKS 631 

been monopolized, by capital. Under these circumstances, the sur- 
plus-profit is transformed into ground-rent, that is, it falls into 
possession of the owner of a waterfall. If the manufacturer pays the 
owner of a waterfall £10 annually, then his profit is £15, that is, 
15% on the £100 which then make up his cost of production; and 
he is just as well or possibly better off than all other capitalists in 
his sphere of production who operate with steam. It would not 
alter matters one bit if the capitalist himself shoutd be the own- 
er of a waterfall. He would, in such a case, pocket as before the 
surplus-profit of £10 in his capacity as waterfall owner, and not 
in his capacity as capitalist; and precisely because this surplus 
does not stem from his capital as such, but rather from the control 
of a limited natural force distinct [rom his capital which can be 
monopolized, is it transformed into ground-rent. 

First, it is evident that this rent is always a differential rent, 
for it does not enter as a determining factor into the general pro- 
duction price of commodities, but rather is based on it. It invariably 
arises [rom the difference between the individual production price 
of a particular capital having command over the monopolized natu- 
ral force, on the one hand, and the general production price of the 
total capital invested in the sphere of production concerned, on the 
other. 

Secondly, this ground-rent does not arise from the absolute in- 
crease in the productiveness of employed capital, or labour appropri- 
ated by it, since this can only reduce the value of commodities; 
it is due to the greater relative fruitfulness of specific separate capi- 
tals invested in a certain production sphere, as compared with in- 
vestments of capital which are excluded from these exceptional and 
natural conditions favouring productiveness. For instance, if 
the use of steam should offer overwhelming advantages not offered 
by the use of water-power, despite the fact that coal has value 
and the water-power has not, and if these advantages more than 
compensated for the expense, then, the water-power would not be 
used and could not produce any surplus-profit, and therefore could 
not produce any rent. 

Thirdly, the natural force is not the source of surplus-profit, but 
only its natural basis, because this natural basis permits an ex- 
ceptional increase in the productiveness of labour. In the same way, 
use-value is in general the bearer of exchange-value, but not ils 
cause. If the same use-value could be obtained without labour, it 
would have no exchange-value, yet it would retain, as before, the 
same natural usefulness as use-value. On the other hand, nothing 
can have exchange-value unless it lias use-value, i.e., unless it is 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

632 

a natural bearer of labour. Were it not for the fact that the various 
values are averaged out into prices of production, and the various in- 
dividual prices of production into a general price of production 
regulating the market, the mere increase in productivity of labour 
through utilization of the waterfall would merely lower the price 
of commodities produced with the aid of this waterfall, without 
increasing the share of profit contained in these commodities. Simi- 
larly. on the other hand, this increased productivity of labour itself 
would not be converted into surplus-value were it not for the fact 
that capital appropriates the natural and social productivity of 
the labour used by it as its own. 

Fourthly, the private ownership of the waterfall in itself has nothing 
1o dowith the creation oi the surplus-value(profit) portion, and there- 
jore, of the price of the commodity in general, which is produced by 
means of the waterfall. This surplus-profit would also exist if landed 
property did not exist; for instance, if the land on which the water- 
fall is situated were used by the manufacturer as unclaimed land. 
Hence landed property does not create the portion of value which 
is translormed into surplus-profit, but merely enables the landowner, 
the owner of the waterfall, to coax this surplus-profit out of the pock- 
et of the manufacturer and into his own. It is not the cause of the 
creation of such surplus-profit, but is the cause of its transformation 
into the form of ground-rent, and therefore of the appropriation 
of this portion of the profit, or commodity-price, by the owner of 
the land or waterfall. 

Fiithly, it is evident that the price of the waterfall, that is, the 
price which the landowner would receive were he to sell it to a 
third party or even to the manufacturer himself, does not immedi- 
ately enter into the production price of the commodities, although 
it does enter into the individual cost-price of the manufacturer; be- 
cause the rent arises here from the price of production of similar 
commodities produced by steam machinery, and this price is reg- 
ulated independently of the waterfall. Furthermore, this price of 
the waterfall on the whole is an irrational expression, but behind it is 
hidden a real economic relationship. The waterfall, like land in 
general, and like any natural force, has no value because it does not 
Tepresent any materialized labour, and therefore, it has no price, 
which is normally no more than the expression of value in money 
terms. Where there is no value, there is also eo ipso nothing to be 
expressed in money. This price is nothing more than the capitalized 
rent. Landownership enables the landowner to appropriate the dif- 
ference between the individual profit and average profit. The prof- 
it thus acquired, which is renewed every year, may be capitalized, 

DIFFERENTITAL RENT: GENERAL REMARKS 633 

and appears then as the price of the natural force itself. If the sur- 
plus-profit realized by the manufacturer using the waterfall 
amounts to £10 per year, and the average interest is 5%, lhen these 
£10 represent the annual interest on a capital of £200 and the 
capitalization of the annual £10 which the waterfall enables its 
owner to appropriate from the manufacturer, appears then as the 
capital-value of the waterfall itself. That it is not the waterfall 
itself which has value, but that its price is a mere reflection of the 
appropriated surplus-profit capitalistically calculated, becomes at 
once evident from the fact that the price of £200 represents mere- 
ly the product obtained by multiplying a surplus-profit of £10 
by 20 years, whereas, olher conditions remaining equal, the same 
waterfall will enable its owner to appropriate these £10 every year 
for an indefinite number of years—30 years, 100 years, or x years; 
and, whereas, on the other hand, should some new method of 
production not applicable with water-power reduce the cost-price 
of commodities produced by steam machinery from £100 to £90, 
the surplus-profit, and thereby the rent, and thus the price of the 
waterfall, would disappear. 

Now that we haye described the general concept of differential 
rent, we shall pass on to its consideration in agriculture proper. 
What applies to agriculture will also apply on the whole to mining. 

CHAPTER XXXIX 
FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 
(DIFFERENTIAL RENT I) 

Ricardo is quite right in the following observations: 

“Rent is always the difference between the produce obtained by 
the employment of two equal quantities of capital and labour” 
(Principles, p. 59). [He means differential rent, for he assumes that 
no other rent but differential rent exists.] He should have added, 
“on equal areas of Jand” in so far as it is a matter of ground-rent and 
not surplus-profit in general. 

In other words, surplus-profit, if normal and not due to acciden- 
tal occurrences in the circulation process, is always produced as a 
difference bet ween the products of two equal quantities of capita! and 
labour, and this surplus-profit is transformed into ground-rent when 
two equal quantities of capital and labour are employed on equal 
areas of land with unequal results. Moreover, it is by no means ab- 
solutely necessary for this surplus-profit to arise from the unequal 
results of equal quantities of invested capital. The various invest- 
ments may also employ unequal quantities of capital. Indeed, this 
is generally the case. But equal proportions, for instance £100 of 
each, produce unequal results; that is, their rates of profit are 
different. This is the general prerequisite for the existence of sur- 
plus-profit in any sphere of capital investment. The second prereq- 
uisite is the transformation of this surplus-profit into the form of 
ground-rent (of rent in general as a form distinct from profit); 
it must be investigated in each case: when, how, under what condi- 
tions this transformation takes place. 

Ricardo is also right in the following observation, provided it is 
limited to differential rent: 

“Whatever diminishes ihe inequality in the produce obtained 
on the same or on new land, tends to lower 1ent; and whatever 
increases that inequality, necessarily produces an opposite effect and 
lends to raise it” (p. 74), 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT . 635 

However, among these causes are not merely the general ones 
(Jertility and location), but also 1) the distribution of taxes, depend- 
ing on whether it operates uniformly or not; the latter is always 
the case when, as in England, it is not centralized and when the tax 
is levied on land, not on rent; 2) the inequalities arising froma differ- 
ence in agricultural development in different parts of the coun- 
try, since this line of production, owing to its traditional character, 
evens out with more difficulty than manulacture; and 3) the ineqiial- 
ity in distribution of capital among capitalist tenants. Since the 
invasion of agriculture by the capitalist mode of production, trans- 
formation of independently producing peasants into wage-workers, 
is in fact the last conquest of this mode of production, these ine- 
qualities are greater here than in any other line of production. 

Having made these preliminary remarks, I will first present a brief 
summary of the characteristic features of my analysis in contra- 
distinction to that of Ricardo, etc. 

We shall first consider the unequal results of equal quantities 
of capital applied to different plots of land of equal size; or, in the 
case of unequal size, results calculated on the basis of equal areas. 

The two general causes of these unequal results—quite independ- 
ent of capital—are: 1) Fertility. (With reference to this first 
point, it will be necessary to discuss what is meant by natural fer- 
tility of land and what [actors are involved.) 2) The location of the 
land. This is a decisive factor in the case of colonies and in general 
determines the sequence in which plots of land can be cultivated. 
Furthermore, it is evident that these two different causes of dif- 
ferential rent—fertility and location—may work in opposite direc- 
tions. A certain plot of land may be very favourably located and 
yet be very poor in fertility, and vice versa. This circumstance is 
important, for it explains how it is possible that bringing into 
cultivation the land of a certain country may equally well proceed 
from the better to the worse land as vice versa. Finally, it is clear 
that the progress of social production in general has, on the one hand, 
the effect of evening out differences arising from location as a cause 
of ground-rent, by creating local markets and improving locations 
by establishing communication and transportation facilities; 
on the other hand, it increases the differences in individual locations 
of plots of land by separating agriculture from manufacturing and 
forming large centres of production, on the one hand, while rela- 
tively isolating agricultural districts, on the other. : 

For the present, however, we shall leave this point concerning 

636 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

location out of consideration and confine ourselves to natural fertil- 
ity. Aside from climatic factors, etc., the difference in natural fer- 
tility depends on the chemical composition of the top soil, that is, 
on its different plant nutrition content. However, assuming the chem- 
ical composition and natural fertility in this respect to be the 
same for two plots of land, the actual effective fertility differs de- 
pending on whether these elements o! plant nutrition are in a form 
which may be more or less easily assimilated and immediately uti- 
lized for nourishing the crops. Hence, it will depend partly upon 
chemical and partly upon mechanical developments in agriculture to 
what extent the same natural fertility may be made available on 
plots of land of similar natural fertility. Fertility, although an 
objective property of the soil, always implies an economic relation, 
a telation to the existing chemical and mechanical level of de- 
velopment in agriculture, and, therefore, changes with this level 
oi development. Whether by chemical means (such as the use of 
certain liquid fertilizers on stiff clay soil and calcination of heavy 
clayey soils) or mechanical means (such as special ploughs for heavy 
soils), the obstacles which made a soil of equal fertility actual- 
ly less fertile can be eliminated (drainage also belongs under this 
head). Or even the sequence in types of soils taken under cultiva- 
tion may be changed thereby, as was the case, for instance, with light 
sandy soil and heavy clayey soil at a certain period of development 
in English agriculture. This shows once again that historically, in the 
sequence of soils taken under cultivation, one may pass over from 
more fertile to less fertile soils as well as vice versa. The same re- 
sults may be obtained by an artificially created improvement in soil 
composition or by a mere change in agricultural methods. Finally, 
the same result may be brought about by a change in the hierarchi- 
cal arrangement of the soil types due to different conditions of the 
subsoil, as soon as the latter likewise begins to be tilled and turned 
over into top layers. This is in part dependent on the employ- 
ment of new agricultural methods (such as the cultivation of fod- 
der-grass) and in part on the employment of mechanical means which 
either turn the subsoil over into top layers, mix it with top soil, 
or cultivate the subsoil without turning it up. 

All these influences upon the differential fertility of various plots 
of land are such that {rom the standpoint of economic fertility, the 
level of labour productivity, in this case the capacity of agricul- 
ture to make the natural soil fertility immediately exploitable—a 
capacity which diflers in various periods of development—is as 
much a factor in so-called natural soil fertility as its chemical 
composition and other natural properties. 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 637 

We assume, then, the existence of a particular stage of develop- 
ment in agriculture. We assume furthermore that the hierarchical 
arrangement of soil types accords with this stage of development, 
as is, of course, always the case for simultaneous capital investments 
on different plots of land. Differential rent may then form either an 
ascending or a descending sequence, for although the sequence is 
given for the tolality of actually cultivated plots of land, a series of 
movements leading to its formation has invariably taken place. 

Let us assume the existence of four kinds of soil: A, B,C, D. Let us 
furthermore assume the price of one quarter of wheat = £3, or 60 
shillings. Since the rent is solely differential rent, this price of 60 
shillings per quarter for the worst soil is equal to the price of produc- 
tion, that is, equal to the capital plus average profit. 

Let A be this worst soil, which yields!l quarter =60 shillings foreach 
50 shillings spent; hence the profit amounts to 10 shillings, or 20%. 

Let B yield 2 quarters=120 shillings for the same expenditure. 
This would mean 70 shillings of profit, or a surplus-profit of 60 
shillings. 

Let C yield 3 quarters=180 shillings for the same expenditure; 
total profit =130 shillings, surplus-profit =-120 shillings. 

Let D yield 4 quarters=240 shillings=180 shillings of surplus- 
profit. 

We would then have thie following sequence: 

TABLET 
Product Prolil “Rent «| 
Type of Capltal ‘ 
Felt | Quarters | sittings [Advanced) Gear | ites | Sere | ites 
A i 60 50 "y 10 e ~ 
B 2 120 50 Vy, 70 1 60 
Cc 3 180 50 2 130 2 120 
D 4 240 50 3" 190 3 180 
Total. . | 10 qrs | 600sh. | | 6 qrs 360sh. 

The respective rents are: D=190sh.—10sh., or the difference be- 
tween D and A; C=130sh.—10sh., or the difference between C and A; 
B=70sh.—JOsh., or the difference between B and A; and the total 
rent for B, C, D=6 quarters=360 shillings, equal to the sum of 
the differences between D and A, C and A, B and A. 

638 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUSs-FrROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

This sequence, which represents a given product in a given condi- 
tion may, considered abstractly (we have already offered the rea- 
sons why this may be the case in reality), descend from D to A, 
from fertile to less and less fertile soil, or rise from A to D, 
from relalively poor to more and more fertile soil, or, final- 
ly, may fluctuate, ie., now rising, now descending—lor instance 
irom D to C, from C to A, and Irom A to B. 

The process in the case of a descending sequence was as follows: 
The price of a quarter of wheat rose gradually from, say, 15 shil- 
lings to 60 shillings. As soon as the 4 quarters produced by D (we 
may consider these 4 quarters as so many million quarters) no long- 
er sufficed, the price of wheat rose to a point where the supply short- 
age could be produced by C. That is to say, the price olf wheat 
must have risen to 20 shillings per quarter. When it had risen to 
30 shillings per quarter, B could be taken under cultivation, and 
when it reached 60 shillings A could be taken under cultivation; 
and the capital invested did not have to content itself with a rate 
of profit lower than 20%. In this manner, a rent was established for 
D, first of 5 shillings per quarter=20 shillings for the 4 quarters 
produced by it; then of 15 shillings per quarter=60 shillings, then 
of 45 shillings per quarter=180 shillings for 4 quarters. 

If the rate of profit of D originally was similarly=20%, then its 
total profit on 4 quarters of wheat was also but LO shillings, but this 
represented more grain when the price was 15 shillings than it does 
when the price is 60 shillings. But since the grain enters into ihe 
reproduction of labour-power, and part of each quarter has to make 
good some portion of wages and another constant capital. the sur- 
plus-value under these conditions was higher, and thus other things 
being equal the rate of profit too. (The matter of rate of profit will 
have to be specially analysed, and in greater detail.) 

On the other hand, if the sequence were in {he reverse order, that 
is, if the process initiated from A, then the price of wheat at first 
would rise above 60 shillings per quarter when new land would have 
to be taken under cultivation. But since the necessary supply would 
be produced by B,a supply of 2 quarters, the price would fall to 
60 shillings again; for B produced wheat at acost of 30 shillings per 
quarter, but sold it at 60 shillings because the supply just sufficed to 
cover the demand. Thus a rent was formed, first of 60 shillings for B, 
and in the same way for C and D; it is assumed throughout that the 
matket-price remained at 60 shillings, although C and D produced 
wheal having an actual value of 20and 15 shillings per quarter respec- 
tively, because the supply of the one quarter produced by A was need- 
ed as much as ever to satisfy ihe total demand. In this case, the in- 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 639 

crease in demand above supply, which was first satisfied by A, then by 
A and B, would not have made it possible to cultivate B, Cand D 
successively, but would merely have caused a general extension of 
the sphere of cultivation, and the more fertile lands might only 
later come under cultivation. 

In the first sequence, an increase in price would raise the rent 
and decrease the rate of profit. Such a decrease might be entirely 
or partially checked by counteracting circumstances. This point 
will have to be treated later in more detail. It should not be forgot- 
ten that the general rate of profit is not determined uniformly in 
all spheres of production by ihe surplus-value. It is not the agricul- 
tural profit which determines industrial profit, but vice versa. But 
of this more anon. 

In the second sequence the rate of profit on invested capital would 
remain the same. The amount of profit would be represented by 
less grain; but the relative price of grain, compared with that of 
other commodities, would have risen. However, the increase in prof- 
it wherever such an increase takes place, becomes separated from 
the profit in the form of rent, instead of flowing into the pock- 
ets of the capitalist tenant farmer and appearing as a growing 
profit. The price of grain, however, could remain unchanged under 
the conditions assumed here. 

The development and growth of differential rent would remain the 
same for fixed as well as for increasing prices, and for a continuous 
progression from worse to better soils as well as for a continuous 
retrogression from better to worse soils. 

Thus far we have assumed: 1) that the price rises in one sequence 
and remains stationary in the other; 2) that there is a continuous 
progression from better to worse soil, or from worse to better soil. 

But now let us assume that the demand for grain rises from its 
original figure of 10 to 17 quarters; furthermore, that the worst soil 
A is displaced by another soil A, which produces |'/, quarters al a 
price of production of 60 shillings (50sh. cost plus L0sh. for 20% 
profit), so that its price of production per quarter=45 shillings; 
or, perhaps, the old soil A may have improved through continuous 
tational cultivation, or be cultivated more productively at the same 
cost, for instance through the introduction of clover, etc., so that its 
output with the same investment of capital rises to 1'/, quarters. 
Let us also assume that soil types B, C and D yield the same out- 
put as previously, but that new soil types have been introduced, 
for instance, A’ with a fertility lying between A and B, and also 
B’ and B’ with a [fertility between B and C. We should then 
observe the following phenomena: 

640 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

First: The price of production of a quarter of wheat, or its regul- 
ating market-price, falls from 60 shillings to 45 shillings, or by 
25%. 

Secend: The cultivation proceeds simultaneously from more fertile 
to less fertile soil, and from less fertile to more fertile soil. Soil 
A’ is more fertile than A, but less fertile than the hitherto cultivat- 
ed soils B, C and D. B’and B” are more lertile than A, A’ and B, 
but less fertile than C and D. The sequence thus proceeds in criss- 
cross fashion, Cultivation does not proceed to soil absolutely less 
fertile than A, etc., but to relatively less fertile soil with respect 
to the hitherto most [ertile soil types C and D; on the other hand, 
cultivation does not proceed to soil absolutely more fertile, but to 
relatively more fertile soil with respect to the hitherto least [fertile 
soil A, or A and B. 

Thirdly: The rent on B falls; likewise the rent on C and D; but 
the total rental in grain rises from 6 quarters to 7*/,; the amount 
of cultivated and rent-yielding land increases, and the amount of 
produce rises from 10 quarters to 17. The profit, although it re- 
mains the same for A, rises if expressed in grain, but the rate 
of profit itself might rise, because the relative surplus-value does. 
In this case, the wage, i.e,, the investment of variable capital and 
therefore the total outlay, is reduced because of the cheapening 
of means of subsistence. This total rental expressed in money falls 
from 360 shillings to 345 shillings. 

Let us draw up the new sequence. 

TABLE it 
Produci Profil Rent 
Type of Capital Price af 
Sail Quar-] Shil- |!vest-| Quar- | Shil- | Quar- | Shil- Production 
ters | lings e lers lings | ters | lings | Per Quarter 
A 1, 60 50 ey 10 - — 45 sh 
A’ 17), 75 50 ae 25 us 15 36 sh. 
B 2 90 50 me 40 Le 30 30 sh. 
B’ 2My 105 50 1%, 55 | 1 45 25 *!,* sh. 
B’ oe 120 50 1/, 70 | 14/5 60 22 Ys sh. 
Cc 3 435, 50 1%, 85 14/, 75 20 sh. 
D 4 180 §0 2%, | 180 | 2%, | 120 15 sh. 
Total . . .| 17 | 77/1, | 345 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 25/,.—Ed. 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 64! 

Finally, if only soil types A, B,C and D were cultivated as before, 
but their productiveness rose in such a way that A produced 2quarters 
instead of 1 quarter, B—4 quarters instead of 2, C—7 quarters instead 
of 3, and D—10 quarters instead of 4, so that the same causes affect 
the various types of soil differently, the total production increases 
from 10 quarters to 23. Assuming that demand absorbs these 23 
quarters through an increase in population and a fall in prices, we 
should obtain the following result: 

TABLE fit 
Product Profit Rent 
Type of Capital Price of 
Soll -| Shil. |Invest-]| Production | Shil- : 
Gers | lings | ed) | per Quarter | 928" | Tings | Guar | SBl, 
A 2 60 50 30 My 10 Q 0 
B 4 120 50 15 2s 70 2 60 | 
Cc 7 210 50 8, 5/5 160 5 150 
D 10 300 50 6 8', 250 8 240 
Total. . .] 23 | | 15 450 

The numerical proportions in this and in other tables are 
chosen at random but the assumptions are quite rational. 

The first and principal assumption is that an improvement in ag- 
riculture acts differently upon different soils, and in this case affects 
the best types of soil, C and D, more than types A and B. Experi- 
ence has shown that this is generally the case, although the opposite 
may also take place. If the improvement affected the poorer soils 
more than the better ones, rent on the latter would have fallen in- 
stead of risen. But in our table, we have assumed that the absolute 
growth in fertility of all soil types is simultaneously accompanied 
by an increase in greater relative fertility of the better soil lypes, 
C and D; this means an increase in the difference between the product 
at the same capital investment, and thus an increase in differen- 
tial rent. 

The second assumption is that total demand keeps pace with the 
increase in the total product. First, one need not imagine such an 
increase coming about abruptly, but rather gradually—until se- 
quence III is established. Secondly, it is not true that the consump- 
tion of necessities of life does not increase as they become cheaper. 
The abolition of the Corn Laws in England proved the reverse to be 
the case (see Newman); the opposite view stems solely from the fact 

22-2757 

642 TRANSFORMATION OF SUERPLES-PROPIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

{lial large and sudden differences in harvests, which are mere results 
of weather, bring about al one lime an extraordinary fall, at anoth- 
er an extraordinary rise, in grain prices. While in such a case the 
sudden and short-lived reduction in price does nol liave time to exert 
its full effect upon the extension of consumption, the opposite is 
{rue when a reduction arises [rom the lowering of the regulating 
price of production itself, i.e., is of a long-lerin nature. Thirdly, 
a part of the grain may be consumed in the form of brandy or beer; 
and the increasing consumption of both of these items is by no 
means confined within narrow limits. Fourthly, Ue matler depends. 
in part upon the increase in population and in part on the fact that 
the country may be grain-exporling, as England still was long af- 
ter the middle of the 18th century, so that the demand is not solely 
regulated within the confines of national consumption. Finally, 
the increase and price reduction in wheat production may result 
in making wheat, instead of rye or oats, the principal article of con- 
sumption for the masses, so that the demand for it may grow il on- 
ly for this reason, just as the opposile may take place when produc- 
tion decreases and prices rise.—Thus, under these assumptions, 
and with the previously selected ratios, sequence III yields the 
result that the price per quarter falls from 60 to 30 shillings, that 
is, by 50%; that production, compared to sequence I, increases 
from 10 to 23 quarters, i.e., by 130%; that the rent remains fixed 
for soil B, increases by 25% * for C, and by 33'/,%** for D; and that 
the total rental increases from £18 to £22%,*** i.e., by 25% .**** 

A comparison of these three tables (whereby sequence | is to 
be taken twice, rising from A to D, and descending from D 
to A), which may be considered either as given gradations under 
some stage of society, for instance, as existing side by side in three 
different countries, or as succeeding one another in different periods 
of development within the same country, shows: 

1) The sequence, when complete, whatever the course of its for- 
mative process may have been, invariably appears as being in a 
descending line; for when analysing rent the point of departure 
-will always be land yielding the maximum rent, and only finally do 
we come to land yielding no rent. : 

2) The price of production on the worst soil, i.e., which yields 
no rent, is always the one regulating the market-price, although the 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: doubles.—Ed. 
** Tbid.: more than doubles.—Ed. 
*** Ibid.: 29.—Ed. 
F8" Thid.: 22'/,°%o.—Ed, 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERFNTIAL RENT 643 

Jatter in Table I, if its sequence were formed in an ascending line, 
only remained fixed because better and better soi] was constantly 
drawn into cultivation. In such a case, the price of grain produced 
on the best soil is a regulating one in so far as it depends upon 
the quantity produced on such soil to what extent soil type A re- 
mains the regulator. If B, C and D should produce more than de- 
mand requires, A would cease to be the regulator. Storch has this: 
point hazily in mind when he adopts the best soil type as the 
regulating one. In this manner, the American price of grain 
regulates the English price. 

3) Differential rent arises from differences in the natural fertil- 
ity of the soil which is given for every given stage of agricultural 
development (leaving aside for the present the question of loca- 
tion); in other words, Irom the limited area of the best land, and from 
the circumstance that equal amounts of capital must be invested. 
on unequal types of soil, so that an unequal product results [rom 
the same amount of capital. 

4) The existence of a differential rent and of a graduated differen- 
tial rent can develop equally well in a descending sequence, which 
proceeds [rom better to worse soils, as in an ascending one, which 
progresses in the opposite direction from worse to better soils; 
or it may be brought about in checkered fashion by alternating 
movements. (Sequence | may be formed by proceeding from D 
to A, or from A to D; sequence II comprises both types of move- 
ment.) 

5) Depending on its mode of formation, differential rent may de- 
velop along with a stationary, rising or falling price of the prod- 
ucts of the land. In the case of a falling price, total production and 
total rental may rise, and rent may develop on hitherto rentless 
land, even though the worst soil A may have been displaced by a 
better one or may itself have improved, and even though the rent 
may decrease on other land which is better, or even the best (Ta- 
ble IL); this process may also be connected with a jall in total rent 
(in money). Finally, at a time when prices fall on account of a gen- 
eral improvement in cultivation, so that the product of the worst 
soil and its price decrease, the rent on some of the better soils may 
remain the same, or may fall, while it may rise on the best ones. 
Nevertheless, the differential rent of every soil, compared with the 
worst soil, depends, if the difference in quantity of products is 
given, upon the price, say, of a quarter of wheat. But when the price 
is given, differential rent depends upon the magnitude of the 
difference in quantity of products, and if with an increasing abso- 
lute fertility of all soils that of the better ones grows relatively more 

22* 

644 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROPIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

than that of the worse ones, the magnitude of this difference grows 
proportionately. In this way (see Table I), when the price is 60 
shillings, the rent on D is determined by its differential product 
as coinpared with A; in other words, by the surplus of 3 quarters. 
The rent is therefore=3xG0=180 shillings. But in Table III, 
where the price=30 shillings, the rent is determined by the quan- 
tity of surplus-product of D as compared with A=8 quarters; we 
therefore obtain 8x 30=240 shillings. 

This takes care of the first false assumption regarding differential 
rent—still found among West, Malthus, and Ricardo—namely, 
that it necessarily presupposes a movement toward worse and worse 
soil, or an ever-decreasing [ertility of the soil. It can be formed, as 
we have seen, with a movement toward better and better soil; it can 
be formed when a better soil takes the lowest position that was 
formerly occupied by the worst soil; it can be connected with 
a progressive improvement in agriculture. The precondition is 
merely the inequality of different kinds of soil. So far as the 
increase in productivity is concerned, it assumes that the increase 
in absolute fertility of the total area does not eliminate this 
inequality, but either increases it, leaves it unchanged, or merely 
reduces it. 

From the beginning to the middle of the 18th century, Eng- 
land’s grain prices constantly fell in spite of the falling prices of 
gold and silver, while at the same time (viewing this entire period as 
a whole) there was am increase in rent, in the over-all amount of 
rent, in the area of cultivated land, in agricultural production, and 
in population. This corresponds to Table I taken in conjunction 
with Table II in an ascending line, but in such away that the 
worst land A is either improved or eliminated [rom the grain- 
producing area; however, this does not mean that it was not used 
for other agricultural or industrial purposes. 

From the early 19th century (date to be specified more precisely) 
until 1815 there is a constant rise in grain prices, accompanied 
by a steady increase in rent, in the over-all amount of rent, in 
the area of cultivated land, in agricultural production, and in 
population. This corresponds to Table I in a descending line. 
(Cite some sources here on the cultivation of inferior land in that 
period.) : 

In Petty’s and Davenant’s time, farmers and landowners com- 
plained about improvements and the bringing into cultivation 
of new land; the rent on better lands decreased, and the total 
amount of rent increased through the extension of the area of 
land yielding rent. 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 645 

(These three points should be illustrated later by quotations; 
likewise for the difference in fertility of various cultivated sections 
of land in a particular country.) 

Regarding differential rent in general, it is to be noted that the 
market-value is always above the total price of production of the 
total quantity of products. As an example, let us take Table 1. 
Ten quarters of total product are sold for 600 shillings because the 
market-price is determined by the price of production of A, which 
re to 60 shillings per quarter. But the actual price of produc- 
ion is: 

Ax. 2608, cog Gone So 1 qr =60sh. 1 qr=60sh. 
Be eae Poe 2 qrs=60sh. 1 gr=30sh. 
Chi ee ik te eas eae ees 3 qrs=60sh. 1 qr=20sh. 
Dei te oe be ok te eae 4 qrs=60sh. 1 qr=15sh 

10 qrs=240sh. Average 
1 qr=24sh. 

The actual price of production of these 10 quarters is 240 shil- 
lings; but they are sold for 600 shillings, i.e., at 250% of the price 
of production. The actual average price for | quarter is 24 shil- 
lings; the market-price is 60 shillings, i.e., also 250% of the produc- 
tion price. 

This is determination by market-value as it asserts itself on the 
basis of capitalist production through competition; the latter creates 
a false social value. This arises from the law of market-value, to 
which the products of the soii are subject. The determination of the 
market-value of products, including therefore agricultural products, 
is a social act, albeit a socially unconscious and unintentional one. 
It is based necessarily upon the exchange-value of the product, not 
upon the soil and the differences in its fertility. If we suppose the 
capitalist form of society to be abolished and society organized as 
a conscious and planned association, then the 10 quarters would 
represent a quantity of independent labour-time equal to that 
contained in 240 shillings. Society would not then buy this agricul- 
tural product at two and a half times the actual labour-time em- 
bodied in it and the basis for a class of landowners would thus be 
destroyed. This would have the same effect as a reduction in price 
of the product to the same amount resulting from foreign imports. 
While it is, therefore, true that, by retaining the present mode of 

646 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

production, but assuming that the differential rent is paid to the 
state, prices of agricultural products would, everything else being 
equal, remain the same, it is equally wrong to say that the value 
of the products would remain the same i! capitalist production were 
superseded by association. The identity of the market-price for 
commodities of the same kind is the manner whereby the social 
character of value asserts itself on the basis of capitalist production 
and, in general, any production based on the exchange o! commod- 
ities between individuals. What society overpays Jor agricultural 
products in its capacity of consumer, what is a minus in the reali- 
zation of its labour-time in agricultural production, is now a plus 
for a portion of society, for the landlords. 

Asecond circumstance, important for the analysis to be given 
under II of the next chapter, is the following: 

It is not merely a matter of rent per acre, or per hectare, nor gener- 
ally of a difference between the price of production and market-price, 
nor between the individual and the general price of production 
per acre, but it is also a question of how many acres of each type 
of soil are under cultivation. The point of importance here relates 
directly only to the magnitude of the rental, that is, the total rent 
of the entire cultivated area; but it serves us at the same time as 
a stepping-stone to the consideration of a rise in the rate of rent 
although there is no rise in prices, nor increase in the differences 
in relative fertility of the various types of soil if prices fall. 

We had above: 

TABLE 1 
Ty i Price of 
Boi” | Actes prodnetion | Product "grain | "Soney 
7 
A I £3 lq 0 0 
B 1 | $3 2 qrs l qr £3 
Cc 1 : £3 3 qrs 2 qrs £6 
D 1 £3 4 qrs 3 qrs £9 
Total . . . |. 4 acres 10 qrs 6 qrs £18 

_ Now let us assume that the number of cultivated acres is doubled 
in every category. We then have: 

ss FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 647 
TABLE la 
nei Acres | praduction | Product etait" *fioney 
A 2 £6 2 ars 0 0 
B 2 £6 4 ars 2 qrs £ 6 
Cc 2 £6 6 qrs 4 qrs £12 
D 2 £6 8 qrs 6 grs £18 
Total . . .| 8 acres | 20 qrs 12 qrs $36 

Let us assume two more cases. Suppose in the first case produc- 
lion expands on the two poorest types of soil in the following manner: 

TABLE 1b 
Price of Production 

T. t R i R i 
Whe | dere age Po torar 7] Proeues | SERbit | Sithy 

A 4 £3 £12 4 qrs| 0 a 

B 4 £3 £12 8 qrs| 4 qrs £12 

Cc 2 £3 £6 6 qrs | 4 qrs £12 

D 2 £3 £6 8 qrs| 6 qrs £18 
Total. . | 12 acres £36 26 qrs | |4 qrs $42 

And, finally, let us assume an unequal expansion of prdduction 
and cultivated area for the four soil categories: 

TABLE fe 

Price of Production 
Hl R | R it 
MB | acre |] Proc | Semis] ene 
A \ £3 £3 | qr 0 0 
B 2 £3 £6 4 qrs 2 qrs £6 
Cc 5 £3 £15 15 qrs} 10 qrs £30 
D 4 £3 £12 16 qrs 12 qrs £36 
Total 12 acres £36 | 36 qrs | 24 qrs $72 

648 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

In the first place, the rent per acre remains the same in all these 
cases—I, Ja, Ib and Ic—for, in fact, the result of the same invest- 
ment of capital per acre of the same soil type has remained un- 
changed. We have only assumed what is true of any country at any 
given moment; namely, that various soil types exist in definite 
ratios to the total cultivated area. And we also assumed what is 
always true of any two countries being compared, or of the same 
country at different periods, namely, that the proportions in which 
the total cultivated area is distributed arnong the different soil 
types vary. 

In comparing Ia with I we see that if the cultivation of land in 
all four categories increases in the same proportion a doubling of 
the cultivated acreage doubles the total production, and that the 
same applies to the rent in grain and money. 

However, if we compare Ib and then Ic with J, we see that in 
both cases a tripling of the area under cultivation occurs. It in- 
creases in both cases from 4 acres to 12, but in [b classes A and B 
contribute most to the increase, with A yielding no rent and B 
yielding the smallest amount of differential rent. Thus, out of the 
8 newly cultivated acres, A and B account for 3 each, i.e., 6 togeth- 
er, whereas C and D account for | each, i.e., 2 together. In other 
words, three-quarters of the increase is accounted for by A and B, 
and only one-quarter by C and D. With this premise, in Ib com- 
pared with I the trebled area of cultivation does not result ina tre- 
bled product, for the product does not increase from 10 to 30, but 
only to 26. On the other hand, since a considerable part of the 
increase concerns A, which does not yield any rent, and since the 
major part of the increase on better soils concerns B, the rent in 
grain rises only from 6 to 14 quarters, and the rent in money from 
£18 to £42. 

But if we compare Ic with I, where the land yielding no rent does 
not increase in area and theland yielding a minimum rent increases 
but slightly, while C and D account for the major part of the in- 
crease, we find that when the cultivated area is trebled production 
increases from 10 to 36 quarters, i.e., to more than three times its 
original amount. The rent in grain increases from 6 to 24 quarters 
or to four times its original amount; and similarly money-rent, 
from £18 to £72. 

In all these cases it is in the nature of things that the price of 
the agricultural product remains unchanged. The total rental 
increases in all cases with tha extension of cultivation, unless it 
takes place exclusively on the worst soil, which does not yield any 
Tent. But this increase varies. Should this extension involve the 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 649 

better soil types and the total output, consequently, increase not 
merely in proportion to the expansion of the area, but rather more 
Tapidly, then the rent in grain and money increases to ihe same 
extent. Should it be the worst soil, and the types of soil close 
to it, that are principally involved in the expansion (whereby it 
is assumed that the worst soil represents a constant type), the 
total rental does not increase in proportion to the extension of 
cultivation. Thus, given two countries in which soil A, yielding no 
rent, is of the same quality, the rental is inversely proportional to 
the aliquot part represented by the worst soil and the inferior soil 
types in the total area under cultivation, and therefore inversely 
proportional to the output, assuming equal capital investments on 
equal total land areas. A relationship between the quantity of the 
worst and the quantity of the better cultivated land in the total 
land area of a given country thus has an opposite influence on the 
total rental than the relationship between the quality of the worst 
cultivated land and the quality of the better and best has on the 
rent per acre and—other circumstances remaining the same—on 
the total rental. Confusion between these two points has given 
rise to all kinds of erroneous objections raised against difleren- 
tial rent. 

The total rental, then, increases by the mere extension of culti- 
vation, and by the consequent greater investment of capital and 
labour in the land. 

But the most important point is this: Although it is our assump- 
tion that the ratio of rents per acre for the various kinds of soil re- 
mains the same, and therefore also the rate of rent considered with 
reference to capital invested in each acre, yet the following is to 
be observed: If we compare Ia with I, the casein which the number 
of cultivated acres and the capital invested in them have been pro- 
portionately increased, we find that as the total production has 
increased proportionately to the expanded cultivated area, i.e., 
as both have been doubled, so has the rental. It has risen irom 
£18 to £36, just as the number of acres has risen from 
4 to 8. 

I] we take the total area of 4 acres, we find that the total rental 
amounted to £18 and thus the average rent, including the land 
which does not yield any rent, is £444. Such a caiculation might be 
made, say, by a landlord owning all 4 acres; and in this way the 
average rent is statistically computed Jor a whole country. The to- 
tal rental of £18 is obtained by the investment of a capital of £10. 
We call the ratio of these two figures the rate of rent; in the present 
case it is therefore 180%, 

850 TRANSFORMATION: OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

The same rate of rent obtains in Ja, where 8 instead of 4 acres are 
cultivated, but all types of land have contributed to the increase 
in the same proportion. The total rental of £36 yields for 8 acres 
and an invested capital of £20 an average rent of £4% per acre 
and a rate of rent of 180%. 

But if we consider Ib, where the increase has taken place mainiy 
upon two inferior categories of soil, we obtain a rent of £42 for 12 
acres, or an average rent of £3% per acre. The total invested capi- 
tal is £30, and therefore the rate of rent =140%. The average rent 
per acre has thus decreased by £1, and the rate of rent has fallen 
from 180 to 140%. Here then we havea rise in the total rental from 
£18 to £42, but a drop in average rent calculated per acre as well 
as on the basis of capital; the drop takes place parallel to an increase 
in production, but not proportionately. This occurs even though 
the rent for all types of soil, calculated per acre as well as on 
the basis of capital outlay, remains the same. This occurs because 
three-quarters of the increase is accounted for by soil A, which 
does not yield any rent, and soil B, which yields only minimum 
rent. 

If the total expansion in Case Ib had taken place solely on soil A, 
we should have 9 acres on A, | acre on B, | acre onC and | acre on D. 
The total rental would be £18, the same as before; the average rent 
for the 12 acres therefore: would be £1% per acre; and a rent of 
£180n an invested capital of £30 would give a rate of rent of 60%. 
The average rent, calculated per acre as well as on the basis of 
invested capital, would have greatly decreased, while the total 
rental would not have increased. 

Finally, let us compare Ic with I and Ib. Compared with I, the 
area has been trebled, and also the invested capital. The total 
rental is £72 for 12 acres, or £6 per acre—as against £4% in Case 1. 
The rate of rent on the invested capital (£72:£30) is 240% in- 
stead of 180%. The total output has risen from 10 to 36 quarters. 

Compared with Ib, where the total number of cultivated acres, 
the invested capital, and the differences between the cultivated 
soil types are the same, but the distribution different, the output 
is 36 quarters instead of 26 quarters, the average rent per acre is 
£6 instead of £3%, and the rate of rent with reference to the same 
invested total capital is 240% instead of 140%. 

No matter whether we regard the various conditions in tables 
Ia, Ib and Ic as existing simultaneously side by side in different 
countries, or as existing successively in the same country, we come 
to the following conclusions: So long as the price of grain remains 
unchanged because the yield on the worst, rentless soil remains 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 651 

the same; so long as the difference in the fertility of the various cul- 
tivated types of soil remains the same; so long as the respective 
outputs remain the same, hence, given equal capital investments on 
equal aliquot parts (acres) of cultivated area in every type of soil; so 
long as the ratio, therefore, between the rents per acre on each cate- 
gory of soil is constant, and the rate of rent on the capital invested 
in each plot of the same kind of soil is constant: First, the rental 
constantly increases with the extension of cultivated area and with 
the consequent increased capital investment, except for the case 
where the entire increase is accounted for by rentless land. Second- 
/y, the average rent per acre (total rental divided by the total num- 
ber of cultivated acres) as well as the average rate of rent (1otal rent- 
al divided by the invested total capital) may vary very consider- 
ably; and, indeed, both change in the same direction, but in difler- 
ent proportions to each other. If we leave out of consideration the 
case in which the expansion takes place only on the rentless soil 
A, we find that the average rent per acre and the average rate of 
rent on the capital invested in agriculture depend on the propor- 
tions which the various classes of soil constitute in the total culti- 
vated area; or, what amounts to the same thing, on the distribution 
of the total employed capital among the kinds of soil of varying 
fertility. Whether much or little land is cultivated, and whether 
the total rental is therefore larger or smaller (with the exception 
of the case in which the expansion is confined to A), the average 
rent per acre, or the average rate of rent on invested capital, re- 
mains the same as long as the proportions of the various categories 
of soil in the total cultivated area remain unchanged. In spite of 
an increase, even a very considerable one, in the total rental with 
the extension of cultivation and expansion of capital investment, 
the average rent per acre and the average rate of rent on capital de- 
crease when the extension of rentless land, and land yielding only 
little differential rent, is greater than the extension of the superior 
one yielding greater rent. Conversely, the average rent per acre 
and the average rate of rent on capital increase proportionately to 
the extent that better land constitutes a relatively greater part of 
the total area and therefore employs a relatively greater share of 
the invested capital. 

Hence, if we consider the average rent per acre, or hectare, of the 
total cultivated land as is generally done in statistical works, in 
comparing either different countries in tlle same period, or different 
periods in the same country, we find that the average level of rent 
per acre, and consequently total! rental, corresponds to a certain 
extent (although by no means identical, but rather a more rapidly 

652 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

increasing extent) to the absolute, not to the relative, fertility of the 
soil in a given country; that is. to the average amount of produce 
which it yields from the same area. For the larger the share of supe- 
rior soils in the total cultivated area, the greater the output for 
equal capital investments on equally large areas of land; and the 
higher the average rent per acre. In the reverse case the opposite 
takes place. Thus, rent does not appear to be determined by the ra- 
tio of differential fertility, but by the absolute fertility, and the 
law of differential rent appears invalid. For this reason certain phe- 
nomena are disputed, or an attempt is made to explain them by 
non-existing differences in average prices of grain and in the differ- 
ential fertility of cultivated land, whereas such phenomena are 
merely due to the fact that the ratio of total rental to total area of 
cultivated land or to total capital invested in the land—as long as 
the fertility of the rentless soil remains the same and therefore the 
prices of production, and the differences between the various 
kinds of soil remain unchanged—is determined not merely by 
the rent per acre or the rate of rent on capital, but quite as much 
by the relative number of acres of each type of soil in the total num- 
ber of cultivated acres; or, what amounts to the same thing, by the 
distribution of the total invested capital among the various types 
of soil. Curiously enough, this fact has been completely overlooked 
thus far. At any rate, we see (and this is important for our further 
analysis) that the relative level of the average rent per acre, and 
the average rate of rent (or the ratio of the total rental to the total 
capital invested in the land), may rise or fall by merely extensively 
expanding cultivation, as long as prices remain the same, the differ- 
ential fertilities of the various soils remain unaltered, and the 
rent per acre, or rate of rent for capital invested per acre in every 
type of soil actually yielding rent, i.e., for all capital actually 
yielding rent, remains unchanged. 

It is necessary to make the following additional points with ref- 
erence to the form of differential rent considered under heading I; 
they also apply in part to differential rent II: 

First, it was seen that the average rent per acre, or the average 
rate of rent on capital, may increase with an extension of cultiva- 
tion when prices are stationary and the differential fertility of the 
cultivated plots of land remains unaltered. As soon as all the land 
in a given country has been appropriated, and investments of capi- 
tal in land, cultivation, and population have reached a definite 
level—all given conditions as soon as ihe capitalist mode of produc- 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 653 

tion becomes the prevailing one and also encompasses agriculture— 
the price of uncultivated land of varying quality (merely assuming 
differential rent to exist) is determined by the price of the cultivat- 
ed plots of land of the same quality and equivalent location. The 
price is the same—after deducting the cost of bringing the new land 
into cultivation—even though this land does not yield any rent. 
The price of the land is, indeed, nothing but the capitalized rent. 
But even in the case of cultivated land, the price pays only for fu- 
ture rents, as, for instance, when the prevalent interest rate is 5% 
and the rent for twenty years is paid al one time in advance, When 
land is sold, it is sold as land yielding rent, and the prospective 
character of the rent (which is here considered as a product of the 
soil, but it only seems to be that) does not distinguish the unculti- 
vated from the cultivated land. The price of the uncultivated land, 
like its rent—the price of which represents the contracted form of 
the latter—is quite illusory as long as the land is not actually used. 
But it is thus determined a priori and is realized as soon as a pur- 
chaser is found. Hence, while the actual average rent in a given 
country is determined by its actual average annual rental and the 
relation of the latter to the total cultivated area, the price of the 
uncultivated land is determined by the price of the cultivated land, 
and is therefore but a reflection of the capital invested in the culti- 
vated land and the results obtained therefrom. Since all land with 
the exception of the worst yields rent (and this rent, as we shal} see 
under the head of differential rent II, increases with the quantity 
of capital and corresponding intensity of cultivation), the nominal 
price of uncultivated plots of land is thus formed, and they thus 
become commodities, a source of wealth for their owners. This ex- 
plains at the same time, why the price of land increases in a whole 
Tegion, even in the uncultivated part (Opdyke). Land speculation, 
for instance, in the United States, is based sotely on this reflection 
thrown by capital and labour on uncultivated land. 

Secondly, progress in extending cultivated land generally takes 
place either toward inferior soil or on the various given types 
of soil in varying proportions, depending on the manner in which 
they are met. Extension on inferior soil is naturally never made 
voluntarily, but can only result from rising prices, assuming a cap- 
italist mode of production, and can only result from necessity un- 
der any other mode of production. However, this is not absolutely 
so. Poor soil may be preferred to a relatively better soil on account 
of location, which is of decisive importance lor every extension of 
cultivation in young countries; furthermore, even though the soil 
formation in a certain region may generally be classified as fer- 

654 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

tile, it may nevertheless consist of a motley confusion of better and 
worse soils, so that the inferior soil may have to be cultivated if 
only because it is found in the immediate vicinity of the superior 
soil. If inferior soil is surrounded by superior soil, then the latter 
gives it the advantage of location in comparison with more fertile 
soil which is not yet, or is about to become, part of the culti- 
vated area. 

Thus, the State of Michigan was one of the first Western States 
to become an exporter of grain. Yet its soil on the whole is poor. 
But its proximity to the State of New York and its water-ways via 
the Lakes and Erie Canal initially gave it the advantage over the 
States endowed by Nature with more fertile soil, but situated far- 
ther to the West. The example of this State, as compared with the 
State of New York, also demonstrates the transition from superior 
to inferior soil. The soil of the State of New York, particularly its 
western part, is incomparably more fertile, especially for the 
cultivation of wheat. This fertile soil was transformed into infer- 
tile soil by rapacious methods of cultivation, and now the soil of 
Michigan appeared as the more fertile. 

“In 1838, wheaten flour was shipped at Buffalo for the West; 
and the wheat-region of New York, with that of Upper Canada, 
were the main sources of its supply. Now, alter only twelve years, 
an enormous supply of wheat and flour is brought from the West, 
along Lake Erie, and shipped upon the Erie Canal lor the East, at 
Buffalo and the adjoining port of Blackrock.... The effect of these 
Jarge arrivals from the Western States—which were unnaturally 
stimulated during the years of European famine ... has been to render 
wheat less valuable in western New York, to make the wheat cul- 
ture less remunerative, and to turn the attention of the New York 
farmers more to grazing and dairy husbandry, fruit culture, and 
other branches of rural economy, in which they think the North-West 
will be unable so directly to compete with them.” (J. W. Jolinston, 
Notes on North America, London, 1851, J, pp. 220-23.) 

Thirdly, it is a mistaken assumption that the land in colonies 
and, in general, in young countries which can export grain at cheaper 
prices, must of necessity be of greater natural fertility. The grain 
is not only sold below its value’in such cases, but below its price of 
production, i.e., below the price of producton determined by the 
average rate of profit in the older countries. 

The fact that we, as Johnston says (p. 223), “are accustoined to 
attach the idea of great natural productiveness and of boundless 
tracts of rich land, to those new States from which come the large 
supplies of wheat that are annually poured into the port of Buffalo,” 

FIRST FORM OF DIFF RRENTIAL RENT : 655. 

is primarily the result of economic conditions. The entire popula- 
tion of such an area as Michigan, for instance, is at first almost 
exclusively engaged in farming, and particularly in producing agri- 
cultural mass products, which alone can be exchanged for indus- 
trial products and tropical goods. Its entire surplus-production ap- 
pears, therefore, in the form of grain. This from the outset sets 
apart the colonial states founded on the basis of the modern world- 
market from those of earlier, particularly ancient, times. They 
receive through the world-market finished products, such as cloth- 
ing and tools which they would have to produce themselves un- 
der other circumstances. Only on such a basis were the Southern 
States of the Union enabled to make cotton their staple crop. The 
division of labour on the world-market makes this possible. Hence, 
if they seem to have a large surplus-production considering their 
youth and relatively small population, this is not so much due. {to 
the fertility of their soil, nor the fruitfulness of their labour, but 
rather to the one-sided form of their labour, and therefore of the 
surplus-produce in which such labour is incorporated. 
Furthermore, a relatively inferior soil which is newly cultivated 
and never before touched by civilization, provided the climatic 
conditions are then not completely unfavourable, has accumulat- 
ed a great deal of plant food that is easily assimilated—at least in 
the upper layers of the soil—so that it will yield crops for a long 
time without the application of fertilizers and even with very super- 
ficial cultivation. The western prairies have the additional ad- 
vantage of hardly requiring any clearing expenses since Nature has 
made them arable.*** In less fertile areas of this kind, the surplus is 
not produced as a result of the high fertility of the soil, i.e., the 
yield per acre, but as a result of the large acreage which may be su- 
perficially cultivated, since such land costs the cultivator nothing, 
or next 10 nothing as compared with older countries. This is the case, 
for instance, where share cropping exists, as in parts of New York. 
Michigan, Canada, etc. A family superficially cultivates, say, 100 

94 [It is precisely (he rapidly growing cultivation of such prairie or steppe 
regions which of late turns the renowned statement of Mallhus, that “the popu- 
lalion is a burden upon the means of subsistence,” into ridicule, and produced in 
its stead the agrarian lament that agriculture, and with it Germany, will be 
ruined, unless the means of subsistence which are a burden upon the population are 
forcibly kept away Irom them. The cultivation of these steppes, prairies, patn- 
pas, Hanos, ete., is nevertheless only in its beginning, ils revolutionizing efiect 
on European agriculture will, therefore, make itself felt inthe future even more 
so than hitherto.—F. &.] 

656 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

acres, and although the output per acre is not large, the output 
from 100 acres yields a considerable surplus for sale. In addition 
to this, cattle may be grazed on natural pastures at almost no cost, 
without requiring artificial grass meadows. It is the quantity of 
the land, not its quality, which is decisive here. The possibility 
of such superficial cultivation is naturally more or less rapidly ex- 
hausted, namely, in inverse proportion to the fertility of the new 
soil and in direct proportion to the export of its products. “And yet 
such a country will give excellent first crops, even of wheat, and 
will supply to those who skim the first cream off the country, a large 
surplus of this grain to send to market” (1. c., p. 224). Property re- 
lations in countries with maturer civilizations, with their determi- 
nation of the price of uncultivated soil by that of the cultivated, 
etc., make such an extensive economy impossible. 

That this soil, therefore, need not be exceedingly rich, as Ricardo 
imagines, nor that soils of equal fertility need be cultivated, may 
be seen from the following. In the State of Michigan 465,900 acres 
were planted in 1848 to wheat which yielded 4,739,300 bushels, or 
an average of 10’/, bushels per acre; alter deducting seed grain, this 
leaves less than 9 bushels per acre. Of the 29 counties of this State, 
2 produced an average of 7 bushels, 3 an average of 8 bushels, 2—9, 
7—10, 6—11, 3—12, 4—13 bushels, and only one county produced 
an average of 16 bushels, and another 18 bushels per acre (I. c., 
p. 225). 

For practical cultivation higher soil fertility coincides with 
greater capability of immediate exploitation of such fertilily. The 
latter may be greater in a naturally poor soil than in a naturally 
rich one; but it is the kind of soil which a colonist will take up first, 
and must take up when capital is wanting. 

Finally, the extension of cultivation to larger areas—aside from 
the case just mentioned, in which recourse must be had to soil in- 
ferior than that cultivated hitherto—to the various kinds of soil 
from A to D, thus, for instance, the cultivation of larger tracts of 
B and C does net by any means presuppose a previous rise in grain 
prices any more than the preceding annual expansion of cotton spin- 
ning, for instance, requires a constant rise in yarn prices. Although 
considerable rise or fall in market-prices affects the volume ol pro- 
duction, regardless of it there is in agriculture (just as in all other 
capitalistically operated lines of production) nevertheless a contin- 
uous relative over-production, in itself identical with accumula- 
tion, even at those average prices whose level has neither a retard- 
ing nor exceptionally stimulating eflect on production. Under 
other modes of production this relative over-production is eflected 

FIRST FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 657 

directly by the population increase, and in colonies by steady im- 
migration. The demand increases constantly, and, in anticipation 
of this, new capital is continually invested in new land, although 
this varies with the circumstances lor different agricultural products, 
It is the formation of new capitals which in itself brings this about. 
But so far as the individual capitalist is concerned, he measures 
the volume of his production by that of his available capital, 
to the extent that he can still control it himself. His aim is to 
capture as big a portion as possible of the market. Should there be 
any over-production, he will not take the blame upon himself, but 
places it upon his competitors. The individual capitalist may expand 
his production by appropriating a larger aliquot share of the 
existing market or by expanding the market itself. 

CHAPTER XL 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 
(DIFFERENTIAL RENT II) 

Thus far we have considered differential rent only as the result 
of varying productivity of equal amounts of capital invested in 
equal areas of land of different fertility, so that differential rent 
was determined by the difference between the yield [rom the cap- 
ital invested in the worst, rentless soil and that from the capital 
invested in superior soil. We had side by side capitals invested 
in different plots of land, so that every new investment of capital 
signified a more extensive cultivation of the soil, an expansion of 
cultivated area. In the last analysis, however, differential rent was 
by its nature merely the result of the different productivity of equal 
capitals invested in land. But can it make any difference if capitals 
of different productivily are invested successively in the same plot 
of land or side by side in different plots of land, provided the results 
are the same? 

To begin with, there is no denying that, in so far as the forma- 
tion of surplus-profjt is concerned, it is immaterial whether £3 
in production price per acre of A yield 1 qr, so that £3 is the 
price of production and the regulating market-price of | qr, 
while £3 in production price per acre of B yield 2 qrs, and thereby 
£3 of surplus-profit, similarly, £3 in production price per acre of 
C yield 3 qrs and £6 of surplus-profit, and, finally, £3 in produc- 
tion price per acre of D yield 4 qrs and £9 of surplus-profit: or wheth- 
er the same result is achieved by applying these £12 in production 
price, or £10 of capital, with the same success in the same se- 
quence upon one and the same acre. It is in both cases a capital of 
£10, whose value portions of £24 each are successively invested— 
whether in four acres of varying fertility side by side, or succes- 
sively in one and the same acre of land—and because of their vary- 
ing outputs, one portion yields no surplus-profit, whereas the 
other portions yield surplus-profit proportionate to their difference 
in yield with respect to rentless investment. 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 659 

The surplus-profit and the various rates of surplus-profit for the 
different value portions of capital are formed in the same manner 
in both cases. And the rent is nothing but a form of this surplus- 
profit, which constitutes its substance. But at any rate, in the 
second method, there are some difficulties concerning the trans- 
formation of surplus-profit into rent, this change of form, which in- 
cludes the transfer of surplus-profit from the capitalist tenant to the 
landowner. This accounts for the obstinate resistance of English 
tenants to official agricultural statistics. And it accounts for their 
struggle against the landlords over the determination of actual 
results derived from their capital investment (Morton). For rent 
is fixed when land is leased, and after that the surplus-profit aris- 
ing from successive investments of capital flows into the pockets 
of the tenant as long as the lease lasts. This is why the tenants have 
fought for long leases, and, on the other hand, due to the greater 
pewer of the landlords, an increase in the number of tenancies at 
will has taken place, i. e., leases which can be cancelled annually. 

It is therefore evident from the very outset that, even il immate- 
rial for the law of formation of surplus-profit, it makes a consid- 
erable difference for the transformation of surplus-profit into ground- 
rent whether equal capitals are invested side by side in equal areas 
of land with unequal results, or whether they are invested succes- 
sively in the same land. The latter method confines this transforma- 
tion, on the one hand, within narrower limits, on the other hand, 
within more variable limits. For this reason, the work of the tax- 
assessor, aS Morton shows in his Resources of Estates, becomes a 
very important, complicated and difficult profession in countries 
practising intensive cultivation (and, economically speaking, we 
mean nothing more by intensive cultivation than the concentration 
oj capital upon the same plot rather than its distribution among 
several adjoining pieces of land). If soil improvements are of a more 
permanent nature the artificially increased differential fertility 
of the soil coincides with its natural differential fertility as soon as 
the lease expires, and therefore the assessment of the rent corre- 
sponds to the determination of the rent on plots ol different fertili- 
ties in general. On the other hand, in so far as the fortnation of sur- 
plus-profit is determined by the magnitude of operating capital, 
the amount of rent for acertain amount of operating capital is add- 
ed to the average rent of the country and thus provision is made for 
the new tenant to command sufficient capital to continue culti- 
vation in the same intensive manner. 

660 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

In the study of differential rent I], the following points are still 
to be emphasized. 

First, its basis and point of departure, not just historically, but 
also in so far as concerns its movements at any given period of 
time, is differential rent 1, that is, the simultaneous cultivation 
side by side of soils of unequal fertility and location; in other words, 
the simultaneous application, side by side, of unequal portions of 
the total agricultural capital upon plots of land of unequal quality. 

Historically this is self-evident. In the colonies, colonists have 
but little capital to invest; the principal production agents are la- 
bour and land. Every individual head of family seeks for himself 
and his kin an independent field of employment alongside his fel- 
low-colonists. This must generally be the case in agriculture proper 
even under pre-capitalist modes of production. In the case of 
sheep-herding and cattle-raising, in general, as independent lines 
of production, exploitation of the soil is more or less common 
and extensive [rom the very outset. The capitalist mode of pro- 
duction has for its point of departure former modes of production 
in which the means of production were, in fact or legally, the property 
of the tiller himself, in a word, from a handicraft-like pursuit of 
agriculture. It is in the nature of things that the latter gives way 
but gradually to the concentration of means of production and their 
transformation into capital, as against direct producers trans- 
formed into wage-labourers. In so far as the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction is manifested here typically, it occurs at first particularly 
in sheep-herding and cattle-raising. But it is thus not manilest- 
ed in a concentration of capital upon a relatively small area of 
land, but in production on a larger scale, economizing in the ex- 
pense of keeping horses, and in other production costs; but, in fact, 
not by investing more capital in the same land. Furthermore, 
in accordance with the natural laws of field husbandry, capital— 
used here, at the same time, in the sense of means o! production 
already produced—becomes the decisive element in soil cultiva- 
tion when cultivation has reached a certain level of development 
and the soil has been correspondingly exhausted. So long as the 
tilled area is small in comparison with the untilled, and so long as 
the soil strength has not been exhausted (and this is the case when 
cattle-raising and meat consumption prevail in the period before 
agriculture proper and plant nutrition have become dominant), 
the new developing mode of production is opposed to peasant pro- 
duction mainly in the extensiveness of the land being tilled for a 
capitalist, in other words, again in the extensive application of 
capital to larger areas of land. It should therefore be remembered 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 661 

from the outset that differential rerit I is the historical basis which 
serves as a point of departure. On the other hand, the movement of 
differential rent II at any given moment occurs only within a sphere 
which is itself but the variegated basis of differential rent I. 

Secondly, in the differential rent in form II, the differences in 
distribution of capital (and ability to obtain credit) among tenants 
are added to the differences in fertility. In manufacturing proper, 
each line of business rapidly develops its own minimum volume 
of business and a corresponding minimum of capital, below which no 
individual business can be conducted successfully. In the same way, 
each line of business develops a normal average amount of capital 
above this minimum, which the bulk of preducers should, and do, 
command. A larger volume of capital can produce extra profit;a small- 
er volume does not so much as yield the average profit. The capitalist 
mode of production spreads in agriculture but slowly and uneven- 
ly, as may be observed in England, the classic land of the capitalist 
mode of production in agriculture. In so far as the free importation 
of grain does not exist, or its effect is but limited because the volume 
is small, producers working inferior soil, and thus under worse 
than average conditions of production, determine the market-price, 
A large portion of the total mass of capital invested in husband- 
ry, and in general available to it, is in their hands. 

It is true that the peasant, for example, expends much labour 
on his small! plot of land. But it is labour isolated from objective 
social and material conditions of productivity, labour robbed and 
stripped of these conditions. 

This circumstance enables the actual capitalist tenants to appro- 
priate a portion of surplus-profit—a fact which would not obtain, at 
least so far as this point is concerned, if the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction were as evenly developed in agriculture as in manufac- 
ture. 

Let us first consider just the formation of surplus-profit with 
differential rent II, without for the present bothering about thecon- 
ditions under which the transformation of this surplus-profit into 
ground-rent may take place. 

It is then evident that differential rent Il is merely differently 
expressed differential rent I, but identical to it in substance. The 
variation in fertility of various soil types exerts its influence in 
the case of differential rent I only in so far as unequal results 
are attained by capitals invested in the soil, i.e., the amount of 
products obtained either with respect to equal magnitudes of capital, 
or proportionate amounts. Whether this inequality takes place 
for various capitals invested successively in the same land or for 

662 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLVUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

capitals invested in several plots of differing soil type—this can 
change nothing in the difference in fertility nor in its product and 
can therefore change nothing in the formation of differential rent 
for the more productively invested portions of capital. It is still 
the soi! which, now as before, shows different fertility with the 
same investment of capital, save that here the same soil performs 
for acapital successively invested in different portions what various 
kinds of soil do in the case of diflerential rent I for different equal 
portions of social capital invested in them. 

Ii the same capital of £10, which is shown in Table I to be invest- 
ed in the form of independent capitals of £2% each by various 
tenants in each acre of the four soil types A, B, C and D, were in- 
stead successively invested in one and the same acre D, so that the 
first investment yielded 4 qrs, the second 3, the third 2, and the 
fourth 1 qr (or in the reverse order), then the price of the quarter 
furnished by the least productive capital, namely=£3, would 
not vield any diflerential rent, but would determine the price of 
prcduction, so long as the supply of wheat whose price of produc- 
tion is £3 were needed. And since our assumption is that the capi- 
talist mode of production prevails, so that the price of £3 includes 
the average profit made by a capital of £2% generally, the other 
three portions of £2% each will yield surplus-profil in accordance 
with the difference in output, since this output is not sold al its 
own price of production, but at the price of production ol! the least 
nroductive investment of £2%; the latter investment does not 
yield any rent and the price of its products is determined by the 
general law of prices of production. The formation of surplus-profit 
would be the same as in Table I. 

Once again it is seen here that differential rent II presupposes 
differential rent ]. The minimum output obtained from a capital 
of £2'%, ie., from the worst soil, is here assumed to be | qr. 
Assumed, also, is that aside from the £2% which yield 4 qrs and 
for which he pays a differential rent of 3 qrs, the tenant operating 
with soil type D invests in this same soil £2% which yield only 
l qr, like the same capital upon the worst soil A. This would be an 
investment of capital which does not yield rent, since it returns to 
him only average profit. There would be no surplus-profit which 
could be transformed into rent. On the other hand, this decreasing 
yield of the second investment olf capital in D would have no influ- 
ence on the rate of profit. It would be the same as though £2% 
had been invested anew in an additional acre of soil type A, a Cir- 
cumstance which would in no way affect the surplus-profit and, 
therefore, the diflerential rent of soils A, B, C and D. But for the 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 663 

tenant, this additional investment of £2% in D would have been 
quite as profitable as, in accordance with our assumption, the 
investment of the original £2% per acre of D, although the latter 
yields 4 qrs. Furthermore, if two other investments of £2% each 
should yield an additional output of 3 qrs and 2qrsrespective- 
ly, a decrease would have taken place again compared with the 
output from the first investment of £2% in D, which yielded 4 qrs, 
i.e., a surplus-profit of 3 qrs. But it would be merely a decrease in 
the amount of surplus-profit, and would not affect either the aver- 
age profit or the regulating price of production. The Jatter would 
be the case only if the additional production yielding this decreas- 
ing surplus-profit made the production upon A superfluous, and 
threw acre A out of cultivation. [n such case, the decreasing pro- 
ductiveness of the additional investment of capital in acre D would 
be accompanied by a fall in the price of production, for instance, 
from £3 to £1%, if acre B would become the rentless soil and 
regulator of the market-price. 

The output from D would now be=4+1+3+2=10 qrs whereas 
formerly it was==4 qrs. But the price per quarter as regulated by B 
would have fallen to £1%. The difference between D and B would 
be=10—2=8 qrs, at £14 per quarter=£12, whereas the money- 
rent from D was previously=£9. This should be noted. Calculated 
per acre, the magnitude of rent would have risen by 33'/,% inspite 
of the decreasing rate of surplus-profit on the two additional capi- 
tals of £2% each. 

We see [rom this to what highly complicated combinations 
differential rent in general, and in form 1I coupled with form I, in 
particular, may give rise, whereas Ricardo, for instance, treats it 
very one-sidedly and as though it were a simple matter. As in the 
above case, a fall in the regulating market-price and at the same 
time rise in rent from fertile soils may take place so that both the 
absolute product and the absolute surplus-product increase. (In 
differential rent I, in descending order, the relative surplus-product 
and thus the rent per acre may increase, although the absolute 
surplus-product per acre remains constant or even decreases.) 
But at the same time, productiveness of the investments of capital 
made successively in the same soil decreases, although a large por- 
tion of them falls to the more fertile soils. From a certain point of 
view—as concerns both output and prices of production—the 
productivity of labour has risen. But from another point of view, 
it has decreased because the rate of surplus-profit and the surplus- 
product per acre decrease for the various investments of capital in 
the same land. 

664 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

Differential rent II, with decreasing productiveness of succes- 
sive investments of capital, would necessarily be accompanied 
by arise in price of production and an absolute decrease in produc- 
tivity only if investments of capital could be made in none but the 
worst soil A. If an acre of A, which with an investment of capital 
of £2%, yielded 1 qr at a price of production of £3, should only 
yield a total of 1% qrs with an additional outlay of £2%, ie, a 
total investment of £5, then the price of production of this 1% qrs= 
=4£6, or that of 1 qr=£4. Every decrease in productivity with a 
growing investment of capital would here mean a relative decrease 
in output per acre, whereas upon superior soils it would only sig- 
nify a decrease in the superfluous surplus-product. 

But by the nature of things, with the development of intensive 
cultivation, i.e., with successive investments of capital in the 
same soil, this will take place more advantageously, or to a great- 
er extent on better soils. (We are not referring to permanent improve- 
ments by which a hitherto useless soil ts converted into useful 
soil.) The decreasing productiveness of successive investments of 
capital must, therefore, have principally the effect indicated above. 
The better soil is selected because it aflords the best promise that 
capital invected in it will be profitable, since it contains the most 
natural elements of fertility, which need but be utilized, 

When, after the abolition of the Corn Laws, cultivation in Eng- 
land became still more intensive, agreat deal of former wheat land 
was devoted to other purposes, particularly cattle pastures, while 
the fertile land best suited for wheat was drained and otherwise 
improved. The capital for wheat cultivation was thus concentrated 
in a more limited area. 

In this case—and all possible surplus rates between the greatest 
surplus-product of the best soil and the output of rentless soil A 
coincide here with an absolute, rather than a relative, increase in 
surplus-product per acre—the newly formed surplus-profit (poten- 
tial rent) does not represent a portion of a former average profit 
transformed into rent (a portion of the output in which the average 
profit formerly was expressed) but an additional surplus-profit, 
which is transformed out of this form into rent. 

On the other hand, only in such case where the demand for grain 
increased to such an extent that the market-price rose above the 
price of production of A, so that the surplus-product of A, B, or 
any other kind of soil could be supplied only at a price higher than 
£3 would the decrease in yield from an additional investment of 
capital in any of the soil types A, B, C and D be accompanied by 
a rise in price of production and the regulating market-price. In 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 665 

so far as this lasted for alengthy period of time without resulting in 
the cultivation of additional soil A (of at least the quality of A) 
ot without a cheaper supply resulting from other circumstances. 
wages would rise in consequence of the increase in the price of 
bread, everything else being equal, and the rate of profit 
would fall accordingly. In this case, it would te immaterial 
whether the increased demand were satisfied by bringing under 
cultivation soil of inferior quality than A, or by additional 
investments of capital, in any of the four types of soil. Differential 
rent would then increase together with a falling rate of profit. 

This one case, in which the decreasing productiveness of sub- 
sequent additional capitals invested in already cultivated soils 
may lead to an increase in price of production, afall in rate of 
profit, and the formation of higher differential rent—for the latter 
would increase under the given circumstances upon all kinds of 
soil just as though soil of inferior quality than A were regulating 
the market-price —has been labelled by Ricardo as the only case, 
the normal case—to which he reduces the entire formation of 
differential rent IT. 

This would also be the case if only type A soil were cultivat- 
ed and successive investments of capital in it were not accom- 
panied by a proportional increase in produce. 

Here then, in the case of differential rent II, one completely loses 
sight of differential rent I. 

Except for this case, in which the supply from the cultivated 
soils is either insufficient and the market-price thus continually 
higher than the price of production until new additional soil of 
inferior quality is taken under cultivation, or until the total prod- 
uct from the additional capital invested in various kinds of soil 
can be supplied only at a higher price of production than that 

-hitherto prevailing—save for this case, the proportional drop 
in productivity of the additional capitals leaves the regulating 
price of production and the rate of profit unchanged. For the rest, 
three additional cases are possible: 

a) If the additional capital invested in any one of the types of 
soil A, B, C or D yields only the rate of profit determined by the 
price of production of A, then no surplus-profit, and therefore no 
potential rent, is formed, any more than there would be if addition- 
al type A soil had been cultivated. 

b) If the additional capital yields a larger product, new surplus: 
profit (potential rent) is, of course, formed provided the regulating 
price remains the same. This is not necessarily the case; it isnot 
the case, in particular, when this additional production throws soil 

GGG TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

A out of cullivalion and thus out of the sequence of competing soils. 
In this case, the regulating price of production falls. If this were 
accompanied by a fall in wages, or il the cheaper product were to 
enter into the constant capital as one of its elements, the rate of 
profit would rise. If the increased productivity of the additional 
capital had taken place upon the best soils C and D, it would de- 
pend entirely upon the degree of increased productivity and the 
amount ol additional new capital to what extent the formation of 
increased surplus-profit (and thus increased rent) would be associat- 
ed with the fall in prices and the rise in the rate of profit. The lat- 
ter may also rise without a fall in wages, through a cheapening of 
the elements of constant capital. 

c) If the additional investment of capital takes place with de- 
creasing surplus-profit, but in such manner that the yield from the 
additional outlay still leaves a surplus above the yield from the 
same capital invested in A, a new formation of surplus-profit takes 
place under all! circumstances, unless the increased supply excludes 
soil A irom cultivation. This may take place simultaneously upon 
D,C, B and A. But, on the other hand, if the worst soil A is squeezed 
out of cultivation, then the regulating price of production 
falls and it will depend upon the relation between the reduced price 
of 1 qr and the increased number of quarters forming surplus-prof- 
it whether the surplus-profit expressed in money, and consequently 
the differential rent, rises or falls. But at any rate, it is noteworthy 
here that with decreasing surplus-profit from successive investments 
of capital the price of production may fall, instead of rising, which 
it seemingly should do at first sight. 

These additional investments of capital with decreasing surplus 
yields correspond entirely to the case in which, e.g., four new inde- 
pendent capitals of £2% each would be invested in soils with fer- 
tility between A and B, B and C, C and D, and yielding 1%, 2'/,. 
2?',, and 3 qrs respectively. Surplus-profit (potential rent) would’ 
take shape on all these soils for all four additional capitals, al- 
though the rate of surplus-profit, compared with that for the same 
investment of capital on the correspondingly better soil, would have 
decreased, And it would be immaterial whether these four capitals 
were invested in D, etc., or distributed between D and A. 

We now come to an essential difference between the two forms 
of differential rent. 

Under differential rent 1, with constant price of production and 
constant differences, the average rent per acre, or the average rate 
of rent on capital, may increase together with the rental. But 
the average is a mere abstraction. The actual amount of rent, 

SECOND FORM OF DIFFERENTIAL RENT 667 

reece per acre or with respect to capital, remains the same 
here. 

On the other hand, under the same conditions, the amount 
of rent calculated per acre may increase although the rate of 
rent, measured relative to invested capital, remains the same. 

Let us assume that production is doubled by the investment of 
£5 instead of £2% in each of the soils A, B, C and D, i.e., a total 
ol £20 instead of £10, and that the relative fertility remains un- 
changed. This would be tantamount to cultivating 2 instead of | 
acre of each of these kinds of soil at the same cost. The rate of 
profit would remain the same; also its relation to surplus-profit or 
rent. But if! A were now to yield 2 qrs, B—4, C—6, and D—8, 
the price of production would nevertheless remain £3 per quarter 
because this increase is not due to doubled fertility with the same 
capital, but to the same proportional fertility with a doubled capi- 
tal. The two quarters of A would now cost £6 just as | qr cost £3 
before. The profit would have doubled on all [our soils, but only 
because tlie invested capital was doubled. In the same proportion, 
however, the rent would also have been doubled; it would be 2 qrs 
for B instead of |, 4 qrs for C instead of 2, and 6 for D instead of 3; 
and correspondingly, the money-rent for B; C and D would now be 
£6, £12, and £18 respectively. Like the yield per acre, therent in 
money per acre would be doubled, and, consequently, also the price 
of the land whereby this money-rent is capitalized. Calculated in 
this manner, the amount of rent in grain and money increases, and 
thus the price of land, because the standard used in its computa- 
tion, i.e., the acre, is an area of constant magnitude. On the other 
hand, calculated as rate of rent on invested capital, there is no 
change in the proportional amount of rent. The total rental of 36 
is to the invested capital of 20 as the rental of 18 is to the invested 
capital of 10. The same holds true lor the ratio of money-rent [rom 
each type of soil to the capital invested in it; for instance, in C, 
£12 rent is to £5 capital as £6 rent was formerly to £2'/, capital. 
No new differences arise here between the invested capitals, but 
new surplus-profits do, merely because the additional capital is 
invested in one of the rent-bearing soils, or in all of them, with the 
same proportional yield as previously. IT this double investment 
took place, for example, only in C, the differential rent between C, 
B and D, calculated with respect to capital, would remain the 
same: for when the amount ol rent obtained from C is doubled, so 
is the invested capital. 

This shows that the amount of rent in produce and money per 
acre, and therefore the price of land, may rise, while the price of 

668 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENYT 

production, the rate of profit, and the differences remain unchanged 
(and therefore the rate of surplus-profit or ol rent, calculated with 
respect to capital, remains unchanged). 

The same may take place with decreasing rates of surplus-prolit, 
and therefore of rent, that is, with decreasing productivity of the 
additional outlays of capital that still yield rent. If the second 
investments of capital of £2% had not doubled the output, but B 
had yielded only 3% qrs, C—5 qrs, and D—7* qrs, then the 
differential rent for the second £2' of capital in B would be 
only % qr instead of 1, on C—I qr instead of 2 and on D—2 qrs 
instead of 3. The proportions between rent and capital for the two 
successive investments would then be as follows: 

First Investment Second Investment 

B: Rent £3, Capital £214 Rent £1%, Capital £2% 
Cc" £6 7 2% * 3, » go 
D: » £9, ii 2% ” Be, ” £2% 

In spite of this decreased rate of relative productivity of capital, 
and thus of the surplus-profit calculated on capital, the rent in 
grain and money would have increased on B Irom | to 1% qrs 
(from £3 to £444), on C—from 2 to 3 qrs (from £6 to £9), and 
on D—from 3 to 5 qrs (irom £9 to £15). In this case, the differ- 
ences for the additional capitals, compared with the capital invested 
in A, would have decreased, the price of production would have 
remained the same, but the rent per acre, and consequently the 
price of land per acre, would have risen. 

The combinations of differential rent II, which presupposes differ- 
ential rent I as its basis, will now be taken up. 

* In ihe German 1894 edition this reads: 6 qrs.—Ed. 

CHAPTER XLI 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.— FIRST CASE: 
CONSTANT PRICE OF PRODUCTION 

The assumption here implies that the market-price is regulated 
as before by the capital invested in the worst soil A. 

I. If the additional capital invested im any one of the rent- 
bearing soils—B, C, D—produces only as much as the same capi- 
tal upon soil A, i.e., if it yields only the average profit at the reg- 
ulating price of production, but no surplus-profit, then the effect 
upon the rent is nil. Everything remains as before. It is the same as 
though an arbitrary number of acres of A quality, i.e., of the worst 
soil, has been added to the cultivated area. 

II. The additional capitals yield additional produce proportional 
to their magnitude on every oneol the various soils; in other words, 
the volume of production grows according to the specific fertility 
of each soil type—in proportion to the magnitude of the addition- 
al capital. In Chapter XXXIX, we started with the following 
Table 1: 

Type of Capital] Profit of |Output|Selling] Pro- | Rent | Rate of 

Soil Acres £ Prod. | Qrs | Price | pre jer z eaep ass 
oil l 
| 

A 1 Jaw} % |] a]. | 3 | 3 folol o 

B 1 fox] % {| 3 | 2 | 3 | 6 Ji 3{ 120% 

GC 1 2% % 3 3 3 9 |2] 6, 240% 

D 1 2% ¥ 3 4 3 12 | 3} 9] 360%* 
Total... 4 | 10 | 12 10 | 30 | 6 | 5 

* In the German 1894 edition this column reads respectively: 12%, 24%, 
36% .—E£d, 

670 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

This is now transformed into: 

TABLE ft 

Le gi Rent 7 

_ a] Seed, ey 
7 % Capital = a : = 2, 2 ete 
1 € ] 5 = Sealeiag | 221 SEo9! Say | es] £ | EEE 
2E | 4 RA SSA OS} srw) aH ZAG 

A | 1 lom+eu=sp il} 6 [2] 3 6 jo] o | 0 
B | 1 j2%+2%—=5} 1] 6 | 4] 3 | 212] BG] 120% 
c | 1 joytex=s} 1} 6 | 6] 3 18 | 4 | 12} 240% 
D | 1 J2%42%=5} 1} 6 | 8] 3 | 24 | 6 | 18] 38% 

4 20] | | 20 | 60 | 12 | 36 | 

It is not necessary in this case that the investment of capilal be 
doubled in all soils, as in the table. The law is the same so long 
as additional capital is invested in one, or several, of the rent- 
bearing soils, no matter in what proportion. It is only necessary 
that production should increase upon every soil in the same ratio 
as the capital. The rent increases here merely in consequence of an 
increased investment of capital in the soil, and in proportion to 
this increase. This increase in produce and rent in consequence of, 
and proportionately to, the increased outlay of capital is just 
the same as regards the quantity of produce and rent, as when the 
cultivated area of the rent-bearing plots of land of the same quality 
had been increased and taken under cultivation with the same out- 
fay of capital as that previously invested in the same types of soils. 
In the case of Table II, for instance, the result would remain the 
same, if the additional capital of £2% per acre were invested in 
an additional acre of B, C and D. 

Furthermore, this assumption does not imply a more productive 
investment of capital, but only an outlay of more capital upon the 
same area with the same success as before. 

All relative proportions remain the same here. Of course, if we 
do not consider the proportional differences, but consider the purely 
arithmetic ones, then the differential rent may change upon the 
various soils. Let us assume, for instance, that additional capital 
has been invested only in B and D. The difference between D and A 
is then=7 qrs whereas previously it was=3; the difference between 
B and A=3 qrs, whereas previously it was=1; that between C and 
B=—1, whereas previously it was=+1, etc. But this arithmetic 
difference, which is decisive in differential rent I in so far as it 
expresses the difference in productivity with equal outlays of capi- 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT J1.—FIRST CASE 671 

tal, is here quite immaterial, because it is merely a consequence of 
different additional investments of capital, or of no additional 
investment, while the difference for each equal portion of capital 
upon the various plots of land remains unchanged. 

IIf. The additional capitals yield surplus-produce and thus form 
surplus-profit, but at a decreasing rate, not in proportion to their 
increase. 

TABLE ft 

aS OR) = ey a 2 Rent 
© os Capilal 2 om Output Ea 3 
as | 2 3 |23 Qrs Sil 3 [yz 
aR | 4 aloe dA | aA] S 
A /l 2 '4/'),| 3 1 3/3 0 | 0 
B 1) 2%+2%=5 | 1] 6 J24+1%=3' | 3 | 1045 [1%/ 445] 90% 
C |} 1) 2%+2%=5 | 1] 6 1342 =5 3115 [3 [9 | 180% 
D | 1/2%42%=5 | 1] 6 443%=7% | 3 | 22 4 1544/1644] 330% 

17 43%] 21 17 51 | 10] 30 

In the case of this third assumption, it is again immaterial 
whether the additional second investments of capital are uniformly 
distributed among the various soils or not; whether the decreasing 
production of surplus-profit takes place proportionately or not; 
whether the additional investments of capital are all in the same 
rent-bearing type of soil, or whether they are distributed equally 
or unequally among rent-bearing plots of land of varying quality. 
All these circumstances are immaterial for the law that is to be 
developed. The only assumption is that additional investments of 
capital yield surplus-profit upon any one of the rent-bearing soils, 
but in decreasing proportion to the amount of the increase in capi- 
tal, The limits of this decrease, in the table before us, are between 
4 quarters=£12, the output from the first outlay of capital on the 
best soil D, and | quarter=£3, the output from the sate outlay 
of capital in the worst soil A. The output [rom the best soil in case 
of the investment of capital I constitutes the top limit, and the 
output from the same outlay of capital in the worst soil A, which 
yields neither rent nor surplus-profit, is the bottom limit of out- 
put, which successive investments of capital yield upon any of the 
soil types producing surplus-profit with decreasing productivity of 
successive investments of capital. Just as assumption II corresponds 
to the case in which new plots of the same quality are added from 
the better soils to the cultivaled area, in which the quantity of 

672 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

any one of the cultivated soils is increased, so assumption ITI 
corresponds to the case in which additional plots are cultivated 
whose various degrees of fertility are distributed among soils rang- 
ing [rom D to A, i.e., from the best to the worst soils. If the suc- 
cessive outlays of capital are made exclusively in soil D, they may 
include the existing differences between D and A, then differences 
between D and C. and likewise between D and B. If they are all 
made in soil C, then only differences between C and A, and C and 
B: if exclusively in B, then only differences between B and A. 

But this is the law: The rent increases absolutely upon all these 
soils, even if not in proportion to the additional capital invested. 

The rate of surplus-profit, considering both the additional capi- 
tal and the total capital invested in the soil, decreases; but the 
absolute magnitude of the surplus-profit increases; just as the de- 
creasing rate of profit on capital in general is, in the main, accompa- 
nied by an increase in the absolute amount of profit. Thus the aver- 
age surplus-profit of a capital invested in B=90% on the capital, 
whereas it was=120°% for the first outlay of capital. But the total 
surplus-profit increases [rom | qr to 1% qrs, or from £3 to £4%. 
The total rent—considered by itself rather than in relation to 
the doubled magnitude olf the advanced capital—has risen abso- 
lutely. The differences in rents [rom various soils and their relative 
proportions may vary here; but this variation in differences is a 
consequence, not cause, of the increase in rents in relation to one 
another. 

IV, The casein which additional investments of capital in the 
better soils yield more produce than the original ones requires no 
further analysis. It goes without saying that under this assumption 
the rent per acre will increase, and proportionately more than the 
additional capital, no matter in which kind of soil the outlay has 
been made, In this case, the additional investment of capital is 
accompanied by improvements. This includes the cases in which an 
additional outlay of less capital produces the same or a greater effect 
than an additional outlay of more capital did formerly. This case 
is not quite identical with the former one, and the distinction is 
important in all investments of capital. For instance, if 100 
yields a profit of 10, and 200 employed in a certain form 
yields a profit of 40, then the profit has risen [rom 10% to 20%, 
and to that extent it is the same as though 50 employed in 
a more effective form yields a profit of 10 instead of 5. We assume 
here that the profit is associated with a proportional increase in 
output, But the difference is that I must double the capital in the 
one case, whereas in the other, the effect I produce is doubled with 

. DIFFERENTIAL RENT IJ.—FIRST CASE 673 

the capital employed hitherto. It is by no means the same whether 
I produce: 1) the same output as before with half as much living 
and materialized labour, or 2) twice the output as before with the 
same labour, or 3) four times the former output with twice the la- 
bour.. In the first case, labour—in a living or materialized form— 
is released, and may be employed otherwise; the power to dispose 
of capital and labour increases. The release of capital (and labour) 
is in itself an augmentation of wealth; it has exactly the same effect 
as though this additional capital has been obtained by accumula- 
tion, but it saves the labour of accumulation. 

Assume that a capital of 100 has produced an output of ten me- 
tres. The 100 includes constant capital, living labour and profit. 
Thus a metre costs 10. Now, if I can produce 20 metres with the 
same capital of 100, then a metre costs 5. If, on the other hand, I 
can produce 10 metres with a capital of 50, then a metre likewise 
costs 5, and should the former supply of commodities suffice a cap- 
ital of 50 is released. If I have to invest a capital of 200 in order 
to produce 40 metres, then a metre also costs 5. The determination 
of value, and also the price, does not permit any difference to be 
discerned here; no more than the amount of output proportional to 
the outlay of capital. But in the first case, additional capital is 
saved* to be used perhaps to double production if necessary; in 
the second case, capital is released, ** in the third case, the increased 
output can only be obtained by augmenting the invested cap- 
ital, although not in the same proportion as when the increased 
output was to have been supplied by the old productive power. 
(This belongs in Part 1.) 

From the viewpoint of capitalist production, the employment of 
constant capital is always cheaper than that of variable capital, 
not as regards increasing the surplus-value, but rather as re- 
gards reducing the cost-price—and saving of costs even in the ele- 
ment creating surplus-value, in labour, performs this service for 
the capitalist and makes profit for him so long as the regulating 
price of production remains the same. This presupposes, in fact, 
the development of credit and an abundance of loan capital cor- 
responding to the capitalist mode of production. On the one hand, 
I eniploy £100 additional constant capital, if £100 is the output 
of five labourers during the year; onthe other hand, £100 in vari- 
able capital. If the rate of surplus-value=100%, then the value 
created by the five labourers=£200; on the other hand, tlie value 
of £100 constant capital=£100 and as capital it is perhaps= 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: capital is released.— Ed. 
* (vid.: additional capital is saved.—&d. 

23 —2757 

674 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

=£105, if the interest rate=5%. The same sums of money express 
very different values, from the viewpoint of the output they pro- 
duce, depending on whether they are advanced to production as 
magnitudes of value of constant or of variable capital. Furthermore, 
as regards the cost of the commodities from the viewpoint of the 
capitalist, there is also this difference, that of the £100 constant 
capital only the wear and tear enters into the value of the commodi- 
ty in so far as this money is invested in fixed capital, whereas the 
£100 invested in wages must be completely reproduced in the com- 
modity. 

In the case of colonists, and independent small producers in gener- 
al, who haveno access to capital at all or only at high interest rates, 
that part of the output which represents wages is their revenue, 
whereas for the capitalist it constitutes an advance of capital. The 
former, therefore, regards this expenditure of labour as the indis- 
pensable prerequisite for the labour-product, which is the thing 
that interests him above all. But, as regards his surplus-labour, 
after deducting the necessary labour, it is evidently realized in the 
surplus-product; and as soon as he can sell the latter, or use it for 
himself, he looks upon it as something that cost him nothing, be- 
cause it cost him no materialized labour. It is only the expenditure 
of the latter which appears to him as alienation of wealth, Of 
course, he tries to sell as high as possible; but even a sale below val- 
ue and below the capitalist price of production still appears to him 
as profit, unless this profit is anticipated by debts, mortgages, etc. 
For the capitalist, on the other hand, the investment of both vari- 
able and constant capital represents an advance of capital. The 
relatively larger advance of the latter reduces the cost-price, and 
in fact the value of the commodities, everything else being equal. 
Hence, although profit arises only from surplus-labour, consequent- 
ly only {rom the employment of variable capital, it may ‘still seem 
to the individual capitalist that living labour is the most expensive 
element in his priceof production which should be reduced toa mini- 
mum before all else. This is but a capitalistically distorted form of 
the fact that the relatively greater use of congealed labour, as com- 
pared with living labour, signifies an increase in the productivity 
of social labour and a greater social wealth. From the viewpoint 
of competition, everything appears thus distorted and turned topsy- 
turvy. 

Assuming prices of production to remain unchanged, the addi- 
tional investments of capital in the better soils, that is, in all soils 
from B upward may be made with unaltered, increasing, or decreas- 
ing productivity. For soil A this would only be possible under the 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT IT.—FLRST CASE 675 

conditions assumed by us, if productivity remains the saine—where- 
by the land continues to yield no rent—and also if productivity 
increases; a portion of the capital invested in A would then yield 
rent, while the remainder would not. But it would be impossible 
if productivity on A were to decrease, for then the price of produc- 
tion would not remain unchanged, but would rise. Yet in all these 
cases, i.e., whether the surplus-product yielded by the additional 
investments is proportional to the latter or is greater or smaller than 
this proportion—whether, therefore, the rate of surplus-profit on the 
capital remains constant, rises or falls when this capital increases, 
the surplus-product and the corresponding surplus-profit per acre 
increases, and hence also the potential rent in grain and money. 
The growth in the mere quantity of surplus-profit or rent, calculat- 
ed per acre, that is, an increasing quantity calculated on the basis 
of some constant unit—in the present case on a definite quantity 
of land such as an acre or a hectare—expresses itself as an increas- 
ing ratio. Hence the magnitude of the rent, calculated per acre, 
increases under such circumstances simply in consequence of the 
increase in the capital invested in the land. This takes place, tu 
be sure, assuming the prices of production remain the same, and, 
on the otlier hand, regardless of whether the productivity of the 
additional capital remains unaltered, or whether it decreases or 
increases. The latter circumstances modify the range in which the 
magnitude of rent per acre increases but not the existence of this 
increase itself. This is a phenomenon peculiar to diflerential rent 
II, and distinguishing it Irom differential rent I. If the additional 
investments of capital were made successively in space, side by side 
in new additional soi! of corresponding quality, rather than 
successively in time in the same soil, the quantity of the rental 
would have increased, and, as previously shown, so would the aver- 
age rent [rom the total cultivated area, but not the magnitude of 
the rent per acre. Given thesame result sofar as quantity and value 
of total production and surplus-product are concerned, the concen- 
tration of capital upon a smaller area of land increases the amount 
of rent per acre, whereas under the same conditions, its dispersion 
over a larger area, all other conditions being equal, dees not pro- 
duce this effect. But the more the capitalist mode of production 
develops, the more does the concentration of capital upon the same 
area of land develop, and, therefore, tlle more does the rent, cal- 
culated per acre, increase. Consequently, given two countries in 
which the prices of production are identical, the differences in soil 
type are identical, and the same amount of capital is invested— 
but in the one country more in the form of successive outlays upon 

23" 

476 TRANSFORMATION OF SURI'LUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

a limited area of land, whereas in the other more in the form of co- 
ordinated outlays upon a larger area—then the rent per acre, and 
thereby the price of land, would be higher in the first country and 
lower in the second, although the tota] rent would be the same for 
both countries. The difference in magnitude of rent could thus not 
be explained here to bea result of a difference in the natural 
fertility of the various soils, nor a result of a difference in the 
quantity of employed labour, but solely a result of different ways 
in which the capital is invested. 

When we refer to surplus-product here, this should always be 
understood to mean that aliquot part of the output which repre- 
sents surplus-profit. Ordinarily, we mean by excess product or sur- 
plus-product that portion of the output which represents the total 
surplus-value, or in some cases that portion which represents the 
average profit. The specific meaning which this term assumes in 
the case of rent-bearing capital gives rise to misunderstanding, as 
previously pointed out. 

CUAPTER XLII 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT {J].—SECOND CASE: 
FALLING PRICE OF PRODUCTION 

The price of production may fall when additional investments 
of capital take place with an unaltered, falling, or rising rate of 
productivity. 

I. Productivity of the additional investment of capital remains 
the same. 

In this case, the assumption, therefore, is that the output in- 
creases proportionally to the capital invested in the various soils 
and in accordance with their respective qualities. This means for 
constant differences in soils that the surplus-product increases in 
proportion to the increased investment of capital. This case, then, 
excludes any additional investment of capital in soil A which might 
affect the differential rent. For this soil, the rate of surplus-profit =0; 
thus, it remains=0 since we have assumed that the productiveness 
of the additional capital, and therefore the rate of surplus-profit, 
remain the same. 

But under these conditions the regulating price of production can 
only fall, because it is the price of production of the next best soil, 
of B, or any better soil than A, rather than that of A, which becomes 
the regulator; so that the capital is withdrawn from A, or perhaps 
from A and Bif the price of production of C should become the 
regulating one, and thus all soils inferior to C would be eliminated 
from the competition among grain-producing soils. The prerequisite 
for this is, under the assumed conditions, that the additional yield 
from the additional investments of capital satisfy the demand, so 
that the output from the inferior soil A, etc., become superfluous 
for the re-establishment of a full supply. 

Thus, let us take, for instance, Table II, but in such a way that 
18 qrs instead of 20 satisfy the demand. Soi! A would drop out; 
B* and its price of production of 30 shillings per quarter would 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: D.—&a. 

678 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROPIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

become regulating. The differential rent then assumes the follow- 
ing form: 

TABLE iv 

S Py Rent L 
7 mH z ra = 
8 i i S Fal 5 aS 
3 a]. |73 | g | ze] 2) 2 | sR] te 
e < 3 x aa ° LE e fale He ar 
B 4 14 6 0 0 0 
Cc 1 5 1 G [% 9 2 3 60% 
D 1 5 I 8 1 12 4 G | 120% 
a ee ee oe oe 
Tota} 3 is | 3 | 18 18 | 2” 0 | 9 

Compared with Table II, the ground-rent would hence have fall- 
en from £36 to £9, and in grain [rom 12 qrs to 6 qrs; total output 
would have fallen only by 2 qrs, [rom 20 to 18. The rate of 
surplus-profit calculated on the capital would have fallen to one- 
third, i.e., from 180% to 60%.* Thus, the fall in the price of pro- 
duction is accompanied here by a decrease of the rent in grain and 
money. 

Compared with Table I, there is merely a decrease in money- 
rent; the rent in grain is in both cases 6 qrs; but in the one case 
it=£18, and in the other £9. For soilC,** the rent in grain, com- 
pared with Table I, has remained the same. In fact, it is owing to the 
additional production resulting from the uniformly acting additional 
capital that the yield from A has been excluded from the market, and 
thereby soil A has been eliminated as a competing producing agent, 
and it is owing to this fact that a new differential rent 1 has 
been formed in which the better soil B plays the same role as did 
formerly the inferior soil A. Consequently, on the one hand, the 
rent from B has disappeared; on theother hand, nothing has been 
altered in the differences between B, C and D by the investment 
ol additional capital—in accordance with our assumption. For this 
ir part of the output which is transformed into rent is 
reduced. 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: one half, from 180% to 90% .—Ed 
** Ibid. for soil © and D.—Ed. : ° 

DIFFRRENTIAL RENT I1.—SECOND CASE 679 

If the above result—the satisfaction of the demand with A 
excluded—had been accomplished, perchance, by the investment 
of more than double the capital in C or D, or in both, then the mat- 
ter would assume a different aspect. For example, if the third 
investment of capital were made in C: 

TABLE Iva 
= } 9 Rent 
cs wi} fen| g]E |) oS : E 
: 7 = ~ | 28] 3 /e at ke Bell Se 
a} 2) es] S$] e3] 4] g |6, | £¥] ez 
e 4 5 a |ag] 6 | @RW| = | eS | eb] ee 
B 5 1 6 4 
c 1 | 7%l im] 9 9 
D 1|o5 1 6 8 
Total} 3 | 17%] 3%] a | 2 

In this case, compared with Table IV, the output from C has 
risen from 6 to 9 qrs, the surplus-product [rom 2 to 3 qrs, and the 
money-rent [rom £3 to £4%. Compared with Table II,* where 
the latter was £12, and Table I, where it was £6, the money- 
rent has, on the other hand, decreased. The total rental in grain= 
7 qrs and has fallen compared with Table I] (12 qrs) and risen com- 
pared with Table I (6 qrs); in money (£104) it has fallen compared 
with both (£18 and £36). 

If the third investment of capital of £2% had been employed 
on- soil B, it would indeed have altered the quantity of produc- 
tion, but would not have affected the rent, since, according to our 
assumption, the successive investments do not produce any 
differences upon the same soil and soil B does not yield any 
rent, 

If we assume, on the other hand, that the third investment 
of capital takes place upon D instead of C, we have the [ol- 

lowing: 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 1.—Ed, 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

680 
TABLE 1V6 

= Ks 3. re g an Rent a 
& Sa Wee i tea BE e 7 > aS 
3 3 - | %6& s |eR!] F | s Bag | oa 
2/2] 22 |] 2/2 | & |e. |e" | g8 
e}; 2] 8 é |#3 | 6 |8 a | so | ard 
B 5 1 4 1% 6 0 0 0 
Cc 1 5 1 6 6 1% 9 2 3 60% 
D 1 7% 1% 9 12 1% 18 6 9 | 120% 

Total 3 | 17% 3% 21 | 22 33 8 12 

Here the total product is 22 qrs, more than double that of Table I, 
although the invested capital is only £174 as against £10, that is, 
not twice the amount. The total product is also larger by 2 qrs 
than that of Table II, although the invested capital in the latter 
is larger—namely, £20. 

Compared with Table J, the rent in grain from soil D has in- 
creased from 3* to 6 qrs, whereas the money-rent, £9, has re- 
mained the same. Compared with Table II, the grain-rent from 
D is the same, namely, 6 qrs, but the money-rent has fallen from 
£18 to £9. 

Comparing the total rents, the grain-rent from Table IVb =8 qrs is 
larger than that from Table I=6qrs and than that from Table 
IVa=7 qrs; but it is smaller than that from Table II=12 qrs. The 
money-rent from Table IVb=£12 is larger than that from Table 
IVa~£10%, and smaller than that from Table l=£18 and that 
from Table 1]=£36. 

In order that the total rental may, under the conditions of Table 
IVb (with the elimination of rent from B), be equal to that of TableI, 
we need £6 more of surplus-product, that is, 4 qrs at £1%, 
which is the new price of production. We then have a total rental 
of £18 again as in Table I. The magnitude of the required addition- 
al capital will vary according to whether we invest it in C or D, 
or divide it between the two. 

On C, £5 capital yields 2.qrs of surplus-product; consequently, 
£10 additional capital yields 4 qrs of additional surplus-product. 

* [n the German 1894 edition this reads: 2.—Ed. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.—SECOND CASE 681 

On D, £5 additional capital would suffice to produce 4 qrs of addi- 
tional grain-rent under the conditions assumed here, namely that 
the productivity of the additional investments of capital remains 
the same. We should then obtain the following results: 

TABLE Ive 
fo] o 

= 2 “ 2 RQ Rent L 

B psd ee Wester Oe ca og ag 
iS: = i Oc = be as] si 
2] 2{/ a] 3i¢] 2/2 | £] 2} a] ss 
e 4 3 a [a2 6/8 & o a 
B 5 1 6 4 | | 6 0 0 | 0 
c 1 | 15 3 ig | tg | 1% | 27 6 9 | 60% 
D 1] 7%] Im] 9 | 12 | MH] 18 6 9 | 120% 

Total] 3 |27%| 5%] 33 | 34 51 | 12 | 1a 
TABLE IVd 

= é g % R a 

3 ala ler] ¢ lz eam De 
bc) es <4 pa a es 
8 3 = a2 z | e% 3 a | os 
>| &{ $] 2 |ee | 2 1a e | § Es 
e < fa a as (s) a a e eo 
B 1] 5 l 6 4] ly 0 0 | 0 
Cc 1] 5 1 6 6} ml] 9 2 3 | 60% 
D 1 }12%| 2%] 15 | 20 | 1%] 30 | 10 | 15 | 120% 

Total/ 3 | 92% | 4% | 27 | 30 | 45 | 12 | 18 

The total money rental would be exactly one half of what it was 
in Table II, where the additional capitals were invested at constant 
prices of production. : 

The most important thing is to compare the above tables with 
Table J. 

We find that while the price of production has fallen by one 
half, i.e., [rom 60 shillings to 30 shillings per quarter, the total 

682 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RKENT 

money rental has remained thesame, namely=£18, and the grain- 
rent has correspondingly doubled from 6 to 12 qrs. Upon B the rent 
has disappeared; upon C the money-rent has risen by one half in 
IVe, but has fallen by one half in Vd; upon D in IVc, it has remained 
the same, =£9, and has risen from £9 to £15 in IVd. The pro- 
duction has risen from 10 to 34 qrs in IVe, and to 30 qrs in IVd; 
the profit from £2 to £544 in IVc and to £4% in IVd. The total 
investment of capital has risen in the one case from £10 to £27%, 
and in the other from £10 to £2214; i.e., in both cases it has more 
than doubled. The rate of rent, that is, the rent calculated on the 
invested capital, is in all tables from IV to IVd everywhere the 
same for each kind ofsoil—which was already implied in the assump- 
tion that the rate of productivity for the two successive investments 
of capital remains the same for each soil type. But compared with 
Table I this rate has fallen, both for the average of all kinds of soil 
and for each one of them individually. In Table I it was=180% 

on an average, whereas in IVc it=,!8 x 100=65° % and inIVd 
Die AL 

itr x 100=80%. The average money-rent per acre has risen. 
Formerly, in Table I, its average was £4% per acre from all four 
acres, whereas in I Vc and IVd it is £6 per acre upon the three acres. 
Its average upon the rent-bearing land was formerly £6, whereas 
now it is £9 per acre. Hence the money-value of the rent per acre 
has risen and now represents twice as much grain as it did for- 
merly; but the 12 qrs of grain-rent are now less than one half of the 
total output of 34 and 30* qrs respectively, whereas in Table I 
the 6 qrs represent *;, of the total oulput of 10 qrs. Consequently, 
although therent as an aliquot part of the total output has fallen, 
and has also fallen when calculated on the invested capital, its 
money-value calculated per acre has risen, and still more its value 
as a product. If we take soil D in Table IVd, we find that the 
price of production corresponding to the capital outlay here=£15, 
of which £12% is invested capital. The money-rent=£15. In 
Table I, for the sare soil D, the price of production was=£3, 
the invested capital=£2%, and the money-rent=£9; that is, the 
latter was three times the price of production and almost four times 
the capital. In Table IVd, the money-rent for D, £15, is exactly 
equal tothe price of production and larger than the capital by only 
"J, Nevertheless, the money-rent per acre is */, larger, namely, £15 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 33 and 27.—Ed. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT [].— SECOND CASE G83. 

instead of £9. In Table J, the grain-rent of 3 qrs=*/, of the total 
product of 4 qrs; in Table [Vd it is 10 qrs, or one half the total product 
(20 qrs) per acre of D. This shows that the money-value and grain 
value of the rent per acre may rise, although it constitutes a smaller 
aliquot part of the total yield and has fallen in proportion to the 
invested capital. 

The value of the total product in Table 1=£30; the rent=£18, 
or more than one half of it. The value of the total product in IVd= 
==£45—of which the rent=£18, or less than one half. 

Now, the reason why in spite of the fall in price by £1 % per quar- 
ter, i.e., a fall of 50%, and in spite of the reduction in competing 
soil [rom 4 to 3 acres, the total money-rent remains the same and 
the total grain-rent is doubled, while, calculated per acre, both the 
grain-rent and money-rent rise, is that more quarters of surplus- 
product are produced. The price of grain falls by 50%, and the 
surplus-product increases by 100%. But in order to obtain this 
result, the total production under the conditions assumed by us 
must be trebled, and the investment of capital in the superior soils 
must be more than doubled. At what rate the latter must 
increase depends in the first place upon the distribution of addition- 
al capital investments among the better and best soils, always 
assuming that the productivity of thecapital invested in each soil 
type increases proportionately to its magnitude. 

If the fall in price of production were smaller, less additional 
capital would be required to produce the same money-rent. If the 
supply required to throw soil A out of cultivation—and this de- 
pends not merely upon the output per acre of A, but also upon the 
share held by A in the entire cultivated area—thus, if the supply 
required for this purpose were larger, and thereby also the amount 
of additional invested capital required in soils better than A, then, 
other circumstances remaining the same, the money and grain rents 
would have increased still more, although soil B would have ceased 
yielding money and grain rents. 

If the capital eliminated from A had been=£5, the tables to be 
compared for this case would be Tables I] and Vd. The total prod- 
uct would have increased from 20 to 30 qrs. The money-rent would 
be only half as large, or €18 instead of £36; the grain-rent would 
be the same, namely=12 qrs. 

If a total product of 44 qrs=£66 could be produced upon D with 
a capital=£27%—corresponding to the old rate for D, 4 qrs per 
£214 capital—then the total rental would once more reach the level 
attained in Table II, and the table would appear as follows: 

684 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

i EE EEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEE 

Type of Soll Caplital eet pale Rent Money: Rent 
B 5 4 0 ) 
Cc 5 6 2 3 
D 27% 44 22 33 
Total 37% 54 24 | 36 

The total production would be 54 qrs as against 20 qrs in TablellI, 
and the money-rent would be the same,~£36. But the total 
capital would be £374, whereas in Table II it was=20. The total 
invested capital would be double almost, while production would 
be nearly treble; the grain-rent would be double and the money- 
rent would remain the same. Hence, if the price falls—while pro- 
ductivity remains the same—as a result of the investment of addi- 
tional money-capital in the better soils which yield rent, that is, 
all soils better than A, then the total capital has a tendency not to 
increase at the same rate as production and grain-rent; thus the 
increase in grain-rent may compensate for the loss in money-rent 
due to the falling price. The same law also manifests itself in that 
the invested capital must be proportionately larger as more is 
invested in C than D, i.e., in soils yielding less rent rather than in 
soils yielding more rent. The point is simply this: in order that the 
money-rent may remain the same or rise, a definite additional quan- 
tity of surplus-product must be produced, and the greater the fer- 
tility of the soils yielding surplus-product, the less capital this re- 
quires, If the difference between B and C, and C and D, were 
still greater, still less additional capital would be required. The 
specific proportion is determined by 1) the ratio of fall in price, 
in other words, by the difference between soil B, which does not 
yield rent now, and soil A, which formerly was the soil not 
yielding rent; 2) the ratio of the differences between the soils 
better than B upwards; 3) the amount of newly invested addi- 
tional capital, and 4) its distribution among the soils of varying 
quality. 

In fact, we see that this law merely expresses what was already 
ascertained in the first case: When the price of production is given, 
no matter what its magnitude, the rent may increase as a result 
of additional capital investment. For owing to the elimination ol A, 
we now have a new diflerential rent I with B as the worst soil and 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 11.—SECOND CASE 685 

£1% per quarter as the new price of production. This applies to 
Table IV as well as to Table II. It is the same law, except that our 
point of departure is sail B instead of A, and our price of production 
is taken as £1 % instead of £3. 

The important thing here is this: To the extent that so much 
and so much additional capital was necessary in order to withdraw 
the capital from soil A and create the supply without it, we find 
that this may be accompanied by an unaltered, rising, or falling 
rent per acre, if not from all plots of land then at least fromsome, 
and so far as the average of the cultivated plots is concerned. We 
have seen t hat grain-rent and money-rent do not maintain a unilorm 
relation to one another. It is merely due to tradition that grain- 
rent is still of any importance in economics. One might demon- 
strate equally well that, e.g.,a manufacturer can buy much more of 
his yarn with his profit of £5 than he could formerly with a profit 
of £10. It shows at any rate, that messieurs landlords, when they 
are simultaneously owners or shareholders in manufacturing estab- 
lishments, sugar-refineries, distilleries, etc., may in their capacity 
as producers of their own raw materials still make a considerable 
profit when the money-rent is falling.** 

11. Decreasing rate of productivity of the addilional capital. 

This introduces nothing new into the problem, in so far as the 
price of production may also fall in this case, as in the case just 
considered, only when additional investments of capital in better 
soils than A render the output from A superfluous and the capital 
is therefore withdrawn from A, or A is employed for the production 
of other products. This case has been exhaustively discussed above. 

* The above tables 1Va to 1Vd had to be recalculated due to an error incom- 
putation which ran through al] of them. While this did not affect the theoretical 
conclusions drawn from these tahles, it introduced, in part, quite monstrous 
numerical values for production per acre. Even these are not objectionable in 
prineiple: For all relief and topographical maps it is customary to choose a much 
arger scale for the vertical than lor the horizontal. Nevertheless, should any one 
feel that his agrarian Teelings have been injured thereby, he is at liberty to mul- 
tiply the number of acres by any numerical value that will satisfy him. One might 
also choose 10, 12, 14, 16 bushels (8 bushels=1 quarter) per acre in Table | in 
stead of 1, 2, 3, 4 quarters, and the derived numerical values in the other tables 
would remain within the limits of probability; it will be found that the result, 
ie., the ratio of rent increase to capital increase, is exactly the same. This has 
been done in the tables included by the editor in the next chapter.—F. & 

686 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

lt was shown that the rent in grain and money per acre may in- 
crease, decrease, or remain unchanged. 
For convenience in making comparisons we reproduce the follow- 

ing table: 
TABLE lV 
Capi- Price of out. | Grain: | Mi 4 
Type of Profit | Predue- ut raln Oney-| Rate of Sur 
Soil Acres 2 : tien. per Ors nen Rent plus-Profit 
A 1 24 yy 3 1 Q 0 0 
B | | 2%| % 1% 2 1 3 120% 
Cc 1 Qo % I 3 2 6 240% 
D 1 | 2%] % Is 4 3 9 360% 
Total 4 10 10 6 18 180% 
average 

Now let us assume that a quantity of 16 qrs supplied by B, C, 
and D at a decreasing rate of productivity suffices to exclude A Irom 
cultivation. In such case, Table II] is transformed into the follow- 

ing: 
TABLE V 
or a e a 
z =~ S < A le le cL 
é ge |R) Sf le) es JE le] 28 
S| ¢ Ze |S FA wh EF |eels Fe 
Salle) SNE || Se ate | ese teal. 28 
= S =c |® ic) a a |o |z eB 
B 24.42% | 1/894+1%=3y%/15,) 6 [0 |0 0 
c ) |2349%] 1/342 =5 [1%] Bt, | 1%] 2) 51s %* 
D ! 2'54-2te | 1 1443%=7% | 1%), | 125), | 4 6%, | 1377/,%** 
7 eae 
Total) 3*** 15 16 273}, [5% | 9%, | 942, %%*** 
average 

* In the German 1894 edition thi > BL. — 
[bid BP ee edition this reads: 517/,.—Fd. 
*** Ibid.. 4.—Ed. 

eee 7 . +. 
ign ee 947/19. The land which yields no rent is left out of considera- 

DLETERENTIAL RENT I].—SECOND CASE 687 

Here, at a decreasing rate of productivity of the additional capi- 
tal, and a varying decrease for the various soil types, the regulating 
price of production has fallen from £3 to £1°/,. The investment of 
capital has risen by one half—from £10 to £15. The money-rent 
has fallen by almost one half—from £18 to £9°/,, but the grain- 
rent has fallen by only '/,,—Irom 6 qrs to 5% qrs. The total 
output has risen from 10 to 16, or by 60%. The grain-rent constitutes 
a little more than one-third of the total product. The advanced 
capital isto the money-rent as 15:9°/,, whereas formerly this 
ratio was 10:18. , 

111. Rising rate of productivity of the additiona! capital, 

This differs from Variant I at the beginning of this chapter, 
where the price of production falls while the rate of productivity 
remains the same, merely in that when a given amount of additional 
produce is required to exclude soil A this occurs here more 
quickly. 

The effect may vary in accordance with the distribution of in- 
vestments among the various soils for a falling, as well as an in- 
creasing, productivity of the additional capital investments. In so 
lar as this varying effect balances out the differences, or accentuates 
them, the differential rent of the better soils, and thereby the total 
rental too, will fall or rise, as was already the case in differential 
rent I. In other respects, everything depends upon the magnitude of 
the land area and capital excluded together with A, and upon the 
relative magnitude of advanced capital required with a rising pro- 
ductivity in order to produce the additional output to meet the de- 
mand. 

The only point worth-while analysing here, and which real- 
ly takes us back to the investigation of the way in which this 
differential profit is transformed into differential rent, is the 
following: 

In the first case, where the price of production remains the same 
the additional capital which may be invested in soil A does not 
effect the differential rent as such, since soil A, as before, does not 
yield any rent, the price of its produce remains the same, and it 
continues to regulate the market. 

In the second case, Variant I, where the price of production falls 
while the rate of productivity remains the same, soil A will neces- 
sarily be excluded, and still more so in Variant II (falling price of 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

688 
roduction with [falling rate of productivity), since otherwise the 
a iditional capital invested in soil A would have had to raise the 

price of production. But here, in Variant III of the second case, 
where the price of production falls because the productivity of 
the additional capital rises, this additional capital may under 
certain circumstances be invested in soil A as well as in the better 
ae us assume that when invested in soil A an additional capital 
of £21% produces 1'/, qrs instead of | qr. 

TABLE Vi 
= $ 2 g a Rent & 
3 oR mn an a ts a BE 
% 5 35 = wo | E | oo sé 
2] 3 = = |¢es & = 2 & |R] oF 
als s fies Fa a 2 aa 
ele 1s) a [as ° n a ea 
A] 1 [2%+2%=5/1 | 6|1+17,=2'/,) 2%, | 6] 0 ol o 
B | 1 |2%+2%=5] | 6 | 2+27/,=47/,| 2°, | 12) 2%.) 6 | 120% 
C jl j24+2%=5} | 6 |3+3°/,=64,| 2°, | 18 | 4%), | 12 | 240% 
D] I [2%+2%=5] 1 | 6 /444*/=84,] 2%, | 24) 6%, | 18 | 360% 
4 | 20 | 4 | 24 | 22 60 | 13'/, | 36 | 240% 

Aside from being compared with the basic Table I, this table 
should be compared with Table II, where a two-fold investment of 
capital is associated with a constant productivity, proportional to 
the investment of capital. 

In accordance with our assumption, the regulating price of pro- 
duction falls. If it were to remain constant, =£3, then the worst 
soil A, which used to yield no rent with an investment of only £24, 
would now yield rent without worse soil being brought under culti- 
vation. This would have occurred due to an increase in the produc- 
tivity of this soil, but only for a part of the capital, not for the orig- 
inal capital invested, The first £3 of production price yield 1 qr; 
the second yield 1/, qrs; but the entire output of 2'/, qrs is now sold 
at ils average price. Since the rate of productivity increases with 
the additional investment of capital, this presupposes an im- 
provement. The latter may consist of a general increase in capital 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT {1.—SECOND CASE 689 

invested per acre (more fertilizer, more mechanized labour, etc.), 
or it may be that only through this additional! capital it is at all 
possible to bring about a qualitatively different more productive 
investment of the capital. In both cases, the investment of £5 of 
capital per acre yields an output of 27/, qrs, whereas the investment 
of one half of this capital, ie., £2%, yields only | qr of produce. 
The produce from soil A could, regardless of transient market con- 
ditions, only continue to be sold at a higher price of production in- 
stead ol at the new average price, as long as a considerable area of 
type A soil continued tobe cultivated with a capital of only £2% 
per acre. But as soon as the new relation of £5 of capital per acre, 
and thereby the improved management, becomes universal, the 
regulating price of production would have to fall to £2°/,,. The 
difference between the two portions of capital would disappear, and 
then, in fact, the cultivation of an acre of soi] A with a capital 
of only £2% would be abnormal, i.e., would not correspond to the 
new conditions of production. It would then no longer bea differ- 
ence between the yields from different portions of capital invested 
in the sare acre, but between a sufficient and an insufficient total 
investment of capital per acre. This. shows, first of all, that insuffi- 
cient capital in the hands of a large number of tenant farmers (it 
must be a large number, for a small number would simply be com- 
pelled to sell below their price of production) produces the same 
effect as a differentiation of the soils thernselves in a descending line. 
The inferior cultivation of inferior soil increases the rent fron supe- 
rior soils; it may even lead to rent being yielded from better culti- 
vated soil of equally poor quality, which would otherwise not be 
yielded. It shows, secondly, that differential rent, in so far as it 
arises from successive investments of capital in the same total 
area, resolves itself in reality into an average, in which the effects of 
the various investments of capital are no longer recognizable and 
distinguishable, and therefore do not result in rent being yielded 
from the worst soil, but rather: 1) make the average price of the total 
yield for, say, an acre of A, the new regulating price and 2) appear 
as alteration in the total quantity of capital per acre required 
under the new conditions for the adequate cultivation of the soil; 
and in which the individual successive investments of capital, as 
well as their respective effects, will appear indistinguishably blend- 
ed together. It is exactly the same with the individual differential 
rents from the superior soils. In each case, they are determined by 
the diflerence between the average output from the soi] in question 
and the output from the worst soil at the increased capital invest- 
ment—which has now become normal. 

690 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

No soil yields any produce without an investment of capital. 
This is the case even for simple differential rent, differential 
rent I; when it is said that one acre of soil A, which regulates the 
price of production, yields so much and so much produce at such 
and such a price, and that superior soils B, C and D yield so much 
differential produce, and therefore so much and so much money- 
rent at the regulating price of production, it is always assumed that 
a definite amount of capital is invested which, under the prevailing 
conditions of production, is considered normal. In the same way, 
a certain minimum capital is required for every individual branch 
of industry in order that the commodities may be produced at 
their price of production. 

If this minimum is altered as a result of successive investments 
of capital associated with improvements on the same soil, it occurs 
gradually. So long as a certain number of acres, say, of A, do not 
receive this additional working capital, a rent is produced upon 
the better cultivated acres of A due to the unaltered price of produc- 
tion, and the rent from all superior soils, B, C andD, is increased. 
But as soon as the new method of cultivation has become general 
énough to be the normal one, tke price of production falls; the rent 
from the superior plots declines again, and that portion of soil A 
that does not possess the working capital, which has now become the 
average, must sell its produce below its individual price of produc- 
tion, i.e., below the average profit. 

In the case of a falling price of production, this also occurs even 
with decreasing productivity of the additional capital—as soon 
as the required total product is supplied, in consequence of increased 
investment of capital, by the superior soils, and thus, e.g., the work- 
ing capital is withdrawn from A, i.e., A no longer competes in 
the production of this particular product, e.g., wheat. The quantity 
of capital which is now required, on an average, to be invested 
in the better soil B, the new regulator, now becomes normal: 
and when one speaks of the varying fertility of plots of land, it 
is assumed that this newnormal quantity of capital per acre is 
employed. 

On the other hand, it is evident that this average investment of 
capital, say, in England, of £8 per acre prior to 1848, and £12 
subsequent to that year, will constitute the standard in concluding 
leases. For the farmer expending more than this, the surplus-profit 
is not transformed into rent for the duration of the contract. Wheth- 
er this takes place after expiration of the contract or not will de- 
pend upon the competition among the farmers who are in a position 
to make the same extra capital advance. We are not referring here 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.—SECOND CASE 691 

to such permanent soil improvements that continue to provide the 
increased output with the same or even with a decreasing outlay 
of capital. Such improvements, although products of capital, 
have the same effect as natural differences inthe quality of the 
land. 

We see, then, that a factor comes into consideration in the case of 
differential rent II which does not appear in the case of differential 
rent I as such, since the latter can continue to exist independently 
of any change in the normal investment of capital per acre. It is, 
on the one hand, the blurring of results [rom various investments 
of capital in regulating soil A, whose output now simply appears as 
a normal average output per acre. It is, on the other hand, the change 
in the normal minimum, or in the average magnitude ol! invest- 
ed capital per acre, so that this change appears as a property of 
the soil. It is, finally, the difference in the manner of transforming 
surplus-profit into the form of rent. 

Table VI shows, furthermore, compared with tables I and II, 
that the grain-rent has more than doubled in relation to I, and has 
increased by 1'/, qrs in relation to IJ; while the money-rent has 
doubled in relation to I, but has not changed in relation to II. It 
would have increased considerably if (other conditions remaining 
the same) more of the additional capital had been allocated to the 
superior soils, or if on the other hand the effect of the additional 
capital on A had been less appreciable, and thus the regulating 
average price per quarter from A had been higher. 

If the increase in productiveness by means of additional capital 
should produce varying results for the various soils, this would 
produce a change in their differential rents. 

In any case, it has been shown that the rent per acre, for instance 
with a doubled investment ol capital, may not only double, but may 
more than double—while the price of production falls in consequence 
of an increased rate of productivity of tle additional capital in- 
vested, i.e., when this productivity grows at a higher rate than the 
advanced capital. But it may also fall if the price of production 
should fall much lower as a result of a more rapid increase in pro- 
ductiveness of soil A. 

Let us assume that the additional investments of capital, for in- 
stance in B and C, do not increase the productivity at ihe samerate 
as they do for A, so that the proportional differences decrease for B 
and C and the increase in output does not make up for the fall in 
price. Then, compared with Table II, the rent from D would rise, 
and that from B and C would fall. 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

692 
TABLE Via 
° 
3 aR a ge Fe R | 5 
wo ag a 2 2 a4 
Zl) @ 5 = 3 eat) 2 |e bee 
gf) 2 (| de fe | glee | 
& < 5 a ford B a oy | =a 
A 1 2%+2%=5] | I+ 3 =4 1%} 6 0 0 
B 1 ]2%+2%=5] 1 2+ 24=4%|] Ihe] OY, % uP 
Cc 1 2%429%=5| 1 3+ 5 =8 1% | 12 4 6 
D 1 |2%+2%—5) 1 [4412 =16 | 1% | 24 12 18 
Total | 4 20 | 52% | 1G% | 24°), 

Finally, the money-rent would rise if more additional capital 
were invested in the superior soils with the same proportional in- 
crease in productiveness than in A, or if the additional investments 
of capital in the superior soils were effective at an increasing rate 
of productivity. In both cases the diflerences would increase. 

The money-rent falls when the improvement due to additional 
investment of capital reduces the diflerences completely, or in part, 
and affects A more than B and C. Thesmaller the increase in pro- 
ductivity of the superior soils, the more it falls. It depends upon 
the extent of inequality produced, whether the grain-rent shall 
rise, fall or remain stationary. 

The money-rent rises, and similarly the grain-reni, either when— 
the proportional difference in additional fertility of the various 
soils remaining unaltered—more capital is invested in the rent- 
bearing soils than in rentless soil A, and more in soils yielding high- 
er rent than in those yielding lower rents; or when the fertility— 
the additional capital remaining equal—increases more on the better 
and best soils than on A, i.e., the money and grain rents rise in pro- 
portion to this increase in fertility of the better soils above that 
of the poorer ones. 

But under all circumstances, there is a relative rise in rent when 
increased productive power is the result of an addition of capital, 
and not merely the result of increased fertility with unaltered 
investment of capital. This is the absolute point of view, which 
shows that here, as in all former cases, the rent and increased rent 
per acre (as in the case of differential rent I on the entire culti- 
vated area—the magnitude of the average rental) are the result of 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.—SECOND CASE 693, 

an increased investment of capital in land, no matter whether this 
capital functions with a constant rate of productivity at constant or 
decreasing prices or with a decreasing rate of productivity at con- 
stant or falling prices, or with an increasing rate of productivity at 
falling prices. For our assumption: constant prices with a constant, 
falling, or rising rate of productivity of the additional capital, and 
falling prices with a constant, falling, or rising rate of productivity, 
resolves itself into: a constant rate of productivity of the additional 
capital at constant or falling prices, a falling rate of productivity at 
constant or falling prices, and a rising rate of productivity at con- 
stant and falling prices. Although the rent may remain stationary, 
or may fall, in all these cases, it would fall more if the additional 
investment of capital, other circumstances remaining the same, 
were not a prerequisite for the increased productiveness. The addi- 
tional capital, then, is always the cause for the relatively high rent, 
although absolutely it may have decreased. 

CHAPTER XLII 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT JJ.— THIRD CASE: 
RISING PRICE OF PRODUCTION 

{A rising price of production presupposes that the productivity 
oi the poorest quality land yielding no rent decreases. The assumed 
regulating price of production cannot rise above £3 per quarter 
unless the £2%% invested in soil A produce less than | qr, or the £5— 
less than 2 qrs, or unless an even poorer soil than A has to be taken 
under cultivation. ; 

For constant, or even increasing, productivity of the second in- 
vestment of capital this would only be possible if the productivity 
of the first investment of capital of £2% had decreased. This case 
occurs often enough. For instance, when with superficial ploughing 
the exhausted top soil yields ever smaller crops, under the old 
method of cultivation, and then the subsoil, turned up through 
deeper ploughing, produces better crops than before with more ra- 
tional cultivation. But, strictly speaking, this special case does 
not apply here. The decrease in productivity of the first £2% of 
invested capital signifies for the superior soils, even when the condi- 
tions are assumed to be analogous there, a decrease in differential 
rent I; yet here we are considering only differential rent II. But 
since this special case cannot occur without presupposing the exist- 
ence of differential rent II, and represents in fact the reaction of 
a modification of differential rent I upon II, we shall give an illus- 
tration of it [see Table VI[—Ed.]. 

The money-rent and proceeds are the same as in Table II. The 
increased regulating price of production makes good what has been 
lost in quantity of produce; since this price and the quantity of prod- 
uce are inversely proportional, it is evident that their mathemati- 
cal product will remain the same. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.— THIRD CASE 695 

TABLE Vil 
S e é any 2 = 
& Invested a £ 5 § 4 
3 2 Capital 2 35 Culpur a9 3 a = s 
ae 3 [ss ¢ | 8] 2/3) 3 
C < a |oo a ia OF |2uR ing 
A | 1 [24%+2%] 1] GJ wFINj=I¥ 355] 6] 0 o! o 
Bo [i /2%+2%] 1) 6] 1 +2%=3%] 3%,] 12] 1%] 6 | 120% 

C Yl [2u+2%] LY] 6 l44+3%), 54) 3%, | 18] 3% | 12 | 240% 

D | 1 j2%+2%] 1] 6] 2+5=7 3, | 24) 5%, | 18 | 360% 
| 20 | | | 17% | 10% | 36 | 240% 

In the above case, it was assumed that the productiveness of the 

second investment of capital was greater than the original productiy- 
ity of the first investment. Nothing changes if we assume the second 
investment to have only the same productivity as the first, as shown 
in the following table: 

TABLE VII 
& ¢ a — 
5 “Captiat | Rl sH! cup [Ets | se |2 
v £ z jes Qrs aH) g é S 
& | € 2 3. |£5 =] | 5. |= 
eo] 4 a |&e a [a | £o [EH 
A LJoy+oey—s} 1] 6] w+l=1n%l 4] 6] 0 o| o 
B 1/2%+2%=5] |] 6] | 4+2=3 4] 12 1% | 6 | 120% 
Cc 1 }2%+2%=5] 1 6} 1+3=44,} 4) 18] 3 12 | 240% 
D 1 }2%42%=5) 1] 6] 2+4=6 | 4] 294] 4% | 18 [360% 
20 5 | | 9 | 36 | 240% 

Here, too, the price of production rising at the same rate com- 
pensates in full for the decrease in productivity in the case of yield 
as well as money-rent. ; 

The third case appears in its pure form only when the productiv- 
ity of the second investment of capital declines, while that of the 
first remains constant—which was always assumed in the first and 
second cases. Here differential rent I is not affected, i.e., the change 

696 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

i i i i II. We 

ts only that part which arises from differential rent 
hal bie on illustrations: in the first we assume that the produc- 
tivity of the second investment of capital has been reduced to %, 

in the second to *} 

oo TABLE IX 
7 & oR se E 
a 1 d io a » 2 > m% 
Capital oH cla Output vy 13 | 3 5 3 
£ é = \ is EA) > | On ae 2 
a Be & |ee Ble | sé [sh & 
A 1 lottoy%—5| 1] 6/14 %=1%] 4] 6] 9 0 
B 1 Joumtoy—5; 1] 6/at1 =3 | 4] 12} 1%] 6] 120% 
Cc Llowtoy—es} 1] 6/34im%—4%| 4] is] 3 | 12 | 240% 
D 1 /2%+2%=5| 1] 6/442 =6 4/¢ 4% | 18 |360% 

20 15 | 9 36 | 240% 

Table IX is the same as Table VIII, except for the fact that the 
decrease in productivity in VIII occurs for the first, and in IX for 
the second investment of capital. 

TABLE X 
= 2 Rent = 
3 = ia ~ | # 
5 Cpa [Risa oun |S fe] e [2 | 5 

“ = [og Qrs & 8 c 2 : 

g | 5 l28 ER) 8 | Fe 3 

e|é & [@e & |e | so [ER] € 

A 1{2%+2y%=5| 1] 6] 1447,=17, |44/,| 6] 0 0! o 
B 1])2%+2%—=—5) 1) 6] 24+%=2% /4*,| 12] 14, ] 6 | 120% 
c 1/2%4+2%=—5] 1] 6] 34+5/,=3), }44] 1g | 2% | 12 | 240% 
D 1/2%+2%=5) 1] 6/441 =5 [44/,] 94 | 3°, | 18 | 360% 
| 20 | 4 | 12% 60] 7% | 36 | 240% 

In this table, too, the total proceeds, the money-rent and rate of 
rent remain the same as in tables II, VII and VIII, because produce 
and selling price are again inversely proportional, while the invest- 
ed capital remains the same. 

But how do matters stand in the other possible case when the 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 11.-—THIRD CASE 697 

price of production rises, namely, in the case of a poor quality soil 
not worth cultivating until then that is taken under cultivation? 

Let us suppose that a soil of this sort, which we shall designate 
by a, enters into competition. Then the hitherto rentless soil A would 
yield rent, and the foregoing tables VII, VIII and X would assume 
the following forms: 

TABLE Vile 

= g Rent 

3 a oR 

” Ps a 

> Caplial | A | san Outpu a | 3 & 

é £ | Qrs g él o¢# 8 
B | £ 3 |28 eH g} co |R) 
al < a wa wn a = 

a I 5 | t] 6 14) 4; 6] 0 | o 0 

A 1 [2%4+2%] 1] 6; MEIM=PAP 4] 7] Ys} 1 ! 

B 1/2%+2%] 1 6] 1+2%=3%| 4] 14] 2 8} 1+7 

c 1 |2%+2%] 1] G6 [144s )=54.{ 4] 21] 3%] 15 | 1+2x7 
D 1/2%449%| 1] 612 +5 =7 | 4) 28) 5%] 22 | 14+3x7 

30 19 76 | 11%] 46 
TABLE Villa 

3 2 Jal 

bd a 

P:} Capita! | A a Output to ? Fd 

= ; ce £ a 

[2 = (fe aE] S|) 

B < a faa Ww Oo, = 

a |l 5 1] 6 4, 144,16 lo | 0 0 

A fl ]2%4+2%] 1] GO] wrl=iy | ly) Pst Ya | Us "Is 
B | 1 }2%4+2%] 1] @]t +2=3 [49.4% tiey, | 8) 1Y+74, 
C HL 2% +2%] 1] 6 L1H 4B=4 | 447, [O18 6f3t/.]1 5%] I +2 x 74g 
D | 1 j2%+2%] 1] 6/2 +4=6 | 4%), [28%/5/45/, |22%/.) 1et+-3x7%, 
1 5 | | 30 | 16%, 78 |lo**}48 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 2'/,.— Ed, 
“* Ibid.: 9.—Ed. 

698 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

TABLE Xa 
ei Canin Rent 
5 = fa Heater 
Sif) Sarge = = con Bo aie 3 
oe << oe eo! ” ie = 
a fd 1] 6 ry, /5%,/6 ]o }o 0 
A 1 Py 67 147 =I), 1543] 6s} Ve] 7/s "ls 
B | 1 1| 6 | 24+%=2% 154, [13.1%] 745) Yot-67, 
c /1 1! 6 | 34%,=3, 157,\20 |2%/,|14 | 7/,4+-2%6%, 
D}i 1{ 6|4+1=5 — |5'/,|26%/,| 37/, |207/,} 2/,4-3x67/, 
30 13%/, 727.) 8 |422/, 

By interpolating soi] a there arises a new differential rent I; 
upon this new basis, differential rent II likewise develops in an al- 
tered form. Soil a has different fertility in each of the above three 
tables; the sequence of proportionally increasing fertilities begins 
only with soil A. The sequence of rising rents also behaves similarly. 
The rent of the worst rent-bearing soil, previously rentless, is a 
constant which is simply added to all higher rents. Only alter de- 
ducting this constant does the sequence of differences clearly become 
evident for the higher rents, and similarly its parallel! in the fertility 
sequence of the different soils. In all the tables, the fertilities from 
A to Dare related as 1:2: 3:4, and correspondingly the rents: 
in Va, as-l :14+7:142x7:14+37, 
in VINa, as 1/2 14/477, 2 1+2X7Y, 2 Vf 4+3X74),, 
and in Xa, as */): */,+6%/, :7/,+2x6%/,:°/,+3x6%/,. 

In brief, if the rent from A=n, and the rent from the soil of next 
higher fertility=n-+-m, then the sequence is as follows: n: n4+m: 
in+2m:n+3m, ete.—F. E.] 

{Since the foregoing third case had not been elaborated in the 
manuscript—only the title is there—it was the task of the editor 
to fill in the gap, as above, to the best of his ability. However, in 
addition, it still remains for him to draw the general conclusions 
from the entire foregoing analysis of differential rent II, consisting 
of three principal cases and nine subcases. The illustrations pre- 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT I].—THIRD CASE 699 

sented in the manuscript, however, do not suit this purpose very 
well. In the first place, they compare plots of land whose yields for 
equal areas are related as 1: 2:3: 4; i.e., differences, which exag- 
gerate greatly from the very first, and which lead to utterly mon- 
strous numerical values in the further development ol the assumptions 
and calculations made upon this basis. Secondly, they create a com- 
pletely erroneous impression. If for degrees of fertility related as 
1:2:3:4, ete., rents are obtained in the sequence 0: 1:2: 3, 
etc., one feels tempted to derive the second sequence from the first, 
and to explain the doubling, tripling, etc., of rents by the doubling, 
tripling, etc., of the total yields. But this would be wholly incor- 
rect. The rents are related as 0: | : 2: 3: 4 even when the degrees 
of fertility are related as n:n+l:n+2:n+3:n+4, The 
rents are mot related as the degrees of fertility, but as the 
iiilerentees of fertility—beginning with the rentless soil as the zero 
point. 

The original tables had to be offered to illustrate the text. But 
in order to obtain a perceptual basis for the following results of 
the investigation, I present below a new series of tables in which 
the yields are indicated in bushels ('/, quarter, or 36.35 litres) and 
shillings (=marks). 

The first of these, Table XI, corresponds to the former Table I. 
It shows the yields and rents for soils of five different qualities, 
AtoE, with a firsé capital investment of 50 shillings, which added 
to 10 shillings profit—60 shillings total price of production per acre. 
The yields in grain are made low: 10, 12, 14, 16, 18 bushels per 
acre. The resulting regulating price of production is 6 shillings 
per bushel. 

The following 13 tables correspond to the three cases of differen- 
tial rent II treated in this and the two preceding chapters with an 
additional invested capital of 50 shillings per acre in the same soil 
with constant, falling and rising prices of production. Each of these 
cases, in turn, is presented as it takes shape for: 1) constant, 
2) falling, and 3) rising productivity of the second investment of 
capital in relation to the first. This yields a few other variants, 
which are especially useful for illustration purposes. 

For case I: Constant price of production—we have: 

Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment of capital remains 
the same (Table XII). 

” 9: Productivity declines. This can take place only when no 
second investment of capital is made in soil A, i.e., 
in such a way that 

a) soil B likewise yields no rent (Table XIII) or 

700 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

b) soil B does not become completely rentless (Table 
XIV). 

Variant 3: Productivily increases (Table XV). This case likewise 
excludes a second investment of capital in soil A. 
For case II: Falling price of production—we have: 

Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment of capital remains 
the same (Table XVI). 

” 9: Productivity declines (Table XVIJ). These two variants 
require that soil A be eliminated from competition, 
and that soil B become rentless and regulate the price 
of production. 

” 3: Productivity increases (Table XVIII). Here soil A re- 
mains the regulator. 

For case III: Rising price of production—two eventualities are 
possible: soil A may remain rentless and continue to regulate the 
price, or poorer soil than A enters into competition and regulates 
the price, in which case A yields rent. 

First eventuality: Soil A remains the regulator. 

Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment remains the same 
(Table XIX). This is admissible under the conditions 
assumed by us, provided the productivity of the first 
investment decreases. 

2: Productivity of the second investment decreases (Table 
XX). This does not exclude the possibility that the 
first investment may retain the same productivity. 

” 3: Productivity of the second investment increases (Table 
XXI*). This, again, presupposes falling productivity 
of the first investment. 

Second eventuality: An inferior quality soil (designated as a) enters 
into competition; soil A yields rent. 

Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment remains the same 
(Table XXII). 

"2: Productivity declines (Table X XIII). 

i: 3: Productivity increases (Table X XIV). 
These three variants conform to the general conditions of the prob- 
lem and require no further comment. 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: XIX.—Ed. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT II.—THIRD CASE 701 

TABLE XI 
[ Rane 
rice OI 
Selling 
Type of Produc- Output - Proceeds { 
Soil _ Bushels Felce Sh. Rn ee 
7 : 

A 60 10 6 60 0 0 
B 60 12 6 72 12 12 
Cc 60 14 6 84 24 2x 12 
D 60 16 6 96 36 3x 12 
E 60 18 6 108 48 4x12 

| 120 | 10x12 | 

The tables now [ollow: 
For second capital invested in the same soil: 
First Case: Price of production remains unaltered. 
Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment of capital remains 

the same. 
TABLE XI} 

Pri f Setli 
Tagsot | preduction | Quipsy | “Price | Presets | Game | ete 
A 604-GO=120 | 104+-10=20 6 120 0 0 
B 60-+-60=120 | 12-12-24 6 144 24 24 
Cc GO+60=120 | 14-+414=28 6 168 48 2x24 
D 60+60=120 | 16+16=32 6 192 72 3x24 
E 60+60=120 | 18+-18=36 6 216 96 4x24 
240 10X24 

702 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

Variant 2: Productivity of the second investment of capital de- 

clines; no second investment in soil A. 

1) Soil B ceases to yield rent. 

TABLE XII? 

a, 

; f : Selling 
Tah | prcein | Surpus, | “Bele | Praseeas | emt | Rent 
A 60 10 6 60 0 Q 
B 60+60=120 | 12+ 8= 20 6 120 0 tt) 
Cc 60+60=120 | 14-+-91/,=231/, 6 140 20 20 
D | 60-+60=120 |16-4-10*/,=26"/, 6 160 40 | 2x20 
E 60-+60=120 | 18+12*= 30 6 180 60 3x20 
| | 120 | 6x20 
2) Soil B does not become completely rentless. 
TABLE XIV 
TBP | ereasee | gui | SHURE | 26 | ent | Rem 
Soil Sh. Bushels Sh. Sh. h. Increase 
A 60 10 ) 60 0 0 
B 60-+-60=120 | 12+ 9=21 6 126 6 6 
C |604+60=120 | 14+10%=24% 6 147 | 27 6+21 
D 60-+-60=120 | 16-+12 =28 6 168 48 6+2x21 
E 60+60=120 | 18-+-13%=31% 6 189 69 6+3x 21 
| 50 |4x6+6x21 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 20.—Ed. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT [1.—THIRD CASE 703 

Variant 3: Productivity of the second investment of capital in- 
creases, here, too, no second investment in soil A, 

TABLE XV 

Type Price of Output Selli Pro- 
soil Progielion Bushels Brice ae wt tmereae 
A 60 10 6 60 0 0 
B 60+60=120 | 12+15 =27 6 162 42 42 
Cc 604+60=120 | 14+174%=31% 6 189 69 42-427 
D 60-+60=120 | 16420 =36 6 216 96 4242 27 
E 60-+ 60=120 | 18+22%=40% 6 243 123 424-3X 27 

| | 390 | 4424-627 

Second Case: Price of production declines. 
Variant |: Productivity of the second investment of capital remains 
the same. Soil A is excluded from competition and soil 
B becomes rentless. 

TABLE XVI 
Type Price of Produc- } Selling bain Rent Rent 
i rice ceeds S 

soil ‘Si, Bushels Sh. Sho} hey dnerease 
B 60-++ 60= 120 19+ 129=24 5 120 0 0 
Cc 60+ 60=120 14+ 14=28 5 140 | 20 20 
D 60-+60=120 16 + 16=32 5 160 | 40 | 2x20 
E 60+ 60~120 18+ 18=36 5 180 } 60 3X20 

704. TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

Variant 2: Productivity of the second investment of capital de- 
clines; soil A is excluded from competition and soil B 
becomes rentless. 

TABLE XV 

T Price of Produc- Selling Pro- | Rent Rent 
oy Yon Buskels Price’ | exeds | ‘Sh | increase 
B 60+460=120 |124+ 9 =21 55), 120 0 0 
GC 60+60=120 | 144+10%=24% 5°}, 140 20 20 
D 60+60=120 |164+12 =28 5, 160 40 2x20 
E 60-+-60=120 | 18+13%=31% 5), 180 60 3x20 
| 120 6x20 
kL 

Variant 3: Productivity of the second investment of capital in- 
creases; soil A remains in competition; soil B yields 

rent. 
TABLE XVHI 

[Type Price of Produc- Output Selling | Pro- | Ren Renl 

oh Hen, Bushels Price | ceeds / Sh. | Increase 

A 60-+60=120 10+ 15=25 44), 120 0 0 

B 60-+-60=120 12+ 18==30 44}, 144 24 24 

G 60+4-60=120 144+21=35 44s 168 48 2x24 

D 60+60=120 16424-=40 44, 192 72 3x24 

E 60+ 60= 120 18+27=45 4, 216 96 4x24 

Third Case: Price of production rises. 
A) Soil A remains reniless and continues to regulate the price. 
Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment of capital remains 
the same: this requires decreasing productivity of the 
first investment of capital. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT Il.— THIRD CASE 705 

TABLE XIX 

Type Price of Produc- Selling Pro- | Rent 
sh {en Swim. | PRES | eggs | OSH! | sntfease 
A 60+60= 120 7% +10=17% 6, 120 0 0 
B 60-+60= 120 9 +12=21 6, 144 24 24 
Cc 60+60=120 | 10%+14=24% 6, 168 48 2x 24 
D 60-+60=120 |12 +16=28 6%, 192 72 3X 24 
E 60+60=120 |13%+18=31% 6"), 216 96 4X24 
240° | 10x24 

Variant 2: Productivity of the second investment of capital de- 
creases; which does not exclude constant productivity 
of the first investment. 

TABLE XX 
Type Price of Produc- Selling Pro- R Re 
sf ter | Qutpas Pace’ | egeds | Sit! | increase 
\ 
60-+-60 = 120 10-+5=15 120 0 i) 
60+60=120 12+-6=18 144 24 24 

168 48 2x24 
Iso 72 3M 24 
216 96 4x24 

60+60= 120 16--8=24 
60+-60= 120 184-9=27 

oO OH Oo 

A 
B 
Cc 60-+60= 120 14+47=21 
D 
E 

240) {0x24 

Variant 3: Productivity of the second investment of capital rises; 
under the assumed conditions this presupposes declining 
productivity of the first investment. 

* In the German !894 edition figures from Table XXI were erroneously insert- 
ed under this head. They have been changed to suit the case.—Ed. 

24 — 2787 

706 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

TABLE XX! 

Type | Price of Produc- Selling | Pro- | Rent Rent | 
gh Pare" | gates | Rice Peete | SR | ance 
A 60+60=120 | 5+12%—-17% | 6, | 120] 0 0 
B 60+60=120 | 6415 =21 ve 144 24 24 
Cc 60+60= 120 7+ 17142416 64, 168 48 2% 24 
D 60-+60=120 | 8420 28 6; 12 | 72 | 3x94 
E 604+-60=120 | 9429%=—31%] 6, | 216 | 96 | 4yat 
| “240 | 10 24 

B) An inferior soil (designated as a) becomes the price regulator 
and soil A thus yields rent. This makes admissible for all vari- 
ants constant productivity of the second investment. 

Variant 1: Productivity of the second investment of capital re- 
mains the same. 

TABLE XXU 

Type Pri f Produc: Selling Pro- Rent Rent 
gy | Hew) Output] Price” | cguds | "SH | increase 
a 120 16 7% 120 0 ft) 
A 60+-60=120 10+10=20 1% 150 30 30 
B 60+-60=120 124-1224 7% 180. 60 2x30 
Cc 60-++-60= 120 14+14=28 7M 210 90 3x30 
D 60-+-60=120 16+ 16=32 7% 240 120 4x30 
E 60+60=120 18-+ 18=36 7% 270 150 5x30 
450 15x30 

Variant 2: Productivity of the second investment of capital declines, 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 

1T.— TIITRD CASE 

707 

TABLE XXII} 

Price of Pro- Qulput 4 R : 
a ductton Bushels Falce sce ae eens 
a 120 15 8 120 0 0 
A |60+60=120] 10+ 7%4=17% 8 140 20 20 
Bj} 60-+-60=120] 12-- 9 =21 8 168 | 48 20-+-28 
Cc 60-+60= 120 | 14-1 1044=24 ta 8 196 75 20-+2 x 28 
D_ |60--60=120)16+12 =28 8 224 | 104 20-3 >< 28 
E 60-+-60= 120 | 18--1344=314% 8 252 | 132 20-4 x 28 
| 380 5 x 20-10 « 28 

Variant 3: Productivity of the second investment increases, 

These tables lead to the following conclusions: 

In the first place, the sequence of rents behaves exactly as the 
sequence of fertility diflerences—taking the rentless regulating soil 
as the zero point. It is not the absolute yield, but only the differ- 
ences in yield which are the factors determining rent. Whether the 
various soils yield 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 bushels, or whether they yield 11, 12, 
13, 14, 15 bushels per acre, the rents in both cases form the sequence 
0, 1, 2, 3, 4 bushels, or their equivalent in money. 

But far more important is the result with respect to the total rent 
yields for repeated investment of capital in the same !and. 

24” 

TABLE XXIV 
Type Pri f Pro- Output Selling | Pro- R 
aa “duction = Bushels pile seeds on faerenné 
a 120 16 74 | 190 0 0 
A |60-+60= 120] 10--12%=22%| 71% | 168%/,] 48%] 154+33%), 
B |60+60=120/12+15 =27 7% 20215] 82% 15-++2 x 335/, 
C |60-+-60=120] 14+17%=314%| 7% | 236%.) 1164,] 15+3x33, 
D /|60-+60=120/16+20 =36 7% {270 |150 15-+4 x 33°/, 
E | 60-+-60~120] 18-+22%=40%| 7% |3037/,| 183%/,) 15+5>x 33%/, 
| | 58117, 5x 15+ 15x 3397/4) 

708 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

In five out of the thirteen analysed cases, the total rent doubles 
when the investment of capital is doubled; instead of 1012 shil- 
lings it becomes 1024 shillings=240 shillings. These cases are: 

Case I, constant price, variant 1: constant production rise 
(Table XI). 

Case II, falling price, variant 3: increasing production rise 
(Table XVITI). 

Case III, increasing price, first eventuality (where soil A remains 
tlie regulator), in all three variants (tables XIX, XX and XX\). 

In four cases the rent more éhan doubles, namely: 

Case |. variant 3, constant price, but increasing production rise 
(Table XV). The total rent climbs to 330 shillings. 

Case 11], second eventuality (where soil A yields rent), in all 
three variants (Table XXII, rent=15x30=450 shillings; Table 
XXIII, rent=5 x 20+-10 x 28=380 shillings; Table XXIV, rent= 
=5<154-15x33°/,=581/, shillings). 

In one case the rent rises, but not to twice the amount yielded 
by the first investment of capital: 

Case |, constant price, variant 2: falling productivity of the sec- 
ond investment, under conditions whereby B does not become 
completely rentless (Table XIV, rent=46--6 x 21 =150 shillings). 

Finally, only in three cases does the total rent remain at the 
same level with a second investment—for all soils taken together— 
as with the first investment (Table XI); these are the cases in which 
soil A is excluded from competition and B becomes the regulator 
and thereby rentless soil. Thus, the rent for B not only vanishes 
but is also deducted from every succeeding term of the rent sequence; 
the result is thus determined. These cases are: 

Case I, variant 2,when the conditions are such that soil A is exclud- 
ed (Table XIII). The total rent is 620, or 10X12=120, as in 
Table XI. 

Case I], variants | and 2. Here soil A ts necessarily excluded in 
accordance with the assumptions (tables XVI and XVII) and the 
total rent is again 6% 20=10%12=120 shillings. 

Thus, this means: In the great majority of all possible cases the 
rent rises—per acre of rent-bearing land as well as particularly in 
its total amount—as a result of an increased investment of capital 
in the land. Only in three out of the thirteen analysed cases does 
its total remain unallered. These are the cases in which the lowest 
quality soil—hitherto the regulator, and rentless—is eliminated 
from competition and the next quality soil takes its place, i-e., 
becomes rentless. But even in these cases, the rents upon the supe- 
rior soils rise in comparison with the rents due to the first capital 
investment; when the rent for C falls from 24 to 20, then those for 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 11.—THIRD CASE 709 

D and E rise from 36 and 48 to 40 and 60 shillings respectively. 

A fall in the total rents below the level for the first investment 
of capital (Table XI) would be possible only if soil B as well as soil 
A were to beexcluded from competition and soil C were to become 
regulating and rentless. 

Thus, the more capital is invested in the land, and the higher 
the development of agriculture and civilization in general in a given 
country, the more rents rise per acre as well as in total amount, 
and the more immense becomes the tribute paid by society to the big 
landowners in the form of surplus-profils—so long as the various soils, 
once taken under cultivation, are all able to continue competing. 

This law accounts for the amazing vitality of the class of big land- 
lords. No social class lives so sumptuously, no ather class claims the 
right it does to traditional luxury in keeping with its “estate.” regard- 
less of where the money for this purpose may be derived, and no 
other class piles debt upon debt so light-heartedly. And yet it always 
lands again on its feet—thanks to the capital invested by other 
people in the land, which yields it arent, completely out of propor- 
tion to the profits reaped therefrom by the capitalist. 

However, the same law also explains why the vitality of the big 
landlord is gradually being exhausted. 

When the English corn duties were abalished in 1846, the English 
manufacturers believed that they had thereby turned the landown- 
ing aristocracy into paupers. Instead, they became richer than 
ever. How did this occur? Very simply. In the first place, the farm- 
ers were now compelled by contract to invest £12 per acre annual- 
ly instead of £8. And secondly, the landlords, being strongly repre- 
sented in the Lower House too, granted themselves a large govern- 
ment subsidy for drainage projects and other permanent improve- 
ments on their land. Since no total displacement of the poorest soil 
took place, but rather, at worst, it became employed for other pur- 
poses—and mostly only temporarily—rents rose in proportion to 
the increased investment of capital, and the landed aristocracy 
consequently was better off than ever before. 

But everything is transitory. Transoceanic steamships and the 
railways of North and South America and India enabled some very 
singular tracts of land to compete in European grain markets. These 
were, on the one hand, the North American prairies and the Argen- 
tine pampas—plains cleared for the plough by Nature itself, and 
virgin soil which offered rich harvests for years to come even with 
primitive cultivation and without fertilizers, And, on the other 
hand, there were the land holdings of Russian and Indian communist 
communities which had to sell a portion of their produce, and a con- 

710 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

stantly increasing one al that. for the purpose of obtaining money 
for taxes wrung from them—Irequently by means of torture—by 
a ruthless and despotic state. These products were sold without 
regard to price of production, they were sold at the price which the 
dealer offered, because the peasant perforce needed money without 
fail when taxes became due. And in face of this competition—com- 
ing from virgin plains as well as from Russian and Indian 
peasants ground down by taxation—the European tenant farmer 
and peasant could not prevail atthe old rents. A portion of the 
land in Europe fell decisively out of competition as regards grain 
cultivation, and rents fell everywhere: our second case, variant 
2—falling prices and falling productivity of the additional invest- 
ment of capital—became the rule for Europe; and therefore the la- 
ment of landlords fram Scotiand to Italy and from southern France 
to East Prussia. Fortunately, the plains are lar [rom being entirely 
brought under cultivation; there are enough left to ruin all the big 
landlords of Europe and the small ones into the bargain.—F. E.| 

The headings under which rent should be analysed are: 

A. Differential rent. 

1) Conception of differential rent. Water-power as an illus- 
tration. Transition to agricultural rent proper. 

2) Differential rent I, arising from the varying [ertility, of 
various plots of land. 

3) Differential rent [1]. arising fram successive investments 
of capital in the same land. Differential rent 1] should be 
analysed: 

a) with a stationary, 

b) falling, 

c) and rising price of production. 

And also 

d) transformation of surplus-profit into rent. 

4) Influence of this rent upon the rate of profit. 

B. Absolute rent. 

C. The price of land. 

D. Final remarks concerning ground-rent. 

Over-all conclusions to be drawn from the consideration of differ- 
ential rent in general are the following: 

First, the formation of surplus-profit may take place in various 
ways. On the one hand, based on differential rent I, that is, on the 
investment of the entire agricultural capital in land consisting of 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT H.—THIRD CASE 711 

soils of varying fertility. Or, in the form of differential rent II, 
based on the varying differential productivity of successive invest- 
ments of capital in the same land, i.e., a greater productivity— 
expressed, e.g., in quarters of wheat—than is secured with the same 
investment of capital in the worst land—rentless, but which regu- 
lates the price of production. But no matter how this surplus-profit 
may arise, its transformation into rent, i.e., its transfer from farm- 
er to landlord, always presupposes that the various actual indi- 
vidual production prices of the partial outputs of the individual 
successive investments of capital (i.e., independent of the general 
price of production by which the market is regulated) have previous- 
ly been reduced to an individual average price of production. The 
excess ol the general regulating production price of the output per 
acre over this individual average production price constitutes and 
is a measure of the rent per acre. In the case of differential rent 1, 
ihe differential results are in themselves distinguishable because 
they take place upon different portions of land—distinct from one 
another and existing side by side—given an investment of capital 
per acre and a degree of cultivation considered normal. In the case 
of differential rent II, they must first be made distinguishable; 
they must in fact be transformed back into diflerential rent [, and 
this can only take place in the indicated way. For example, let us 
take Table III, S. 226*. 

Soil B yields for the first invested capital of £242—2 quarters 
per acre, and for the second investment of equal magnitude—] 4 
quarters; together—3% quarters from the same acre. It is not pos- 
sible to distinguish which part of these 3% quarters is a product 
of invested capital I and which part a product of invested capital 
II, for it is all grown upon the same soil. In fact, the 3% quarters is 
the yield from the total capital of £5; and the actual fact of the mat- 
ter is simply this: a capital of £2% yielded 2 quarters, and a capi- 
tal of £5 yielded 3% quarters rather than 4 quarters. The situation 
would be just the same if the £5 yielded 4 quarters, i.e., if the yield 
from both investments of capital were equal; similarly, if the yield 
were even 5 quarters, i.e., if the second investment of capital were 
to yield a surplus of 1 quarter. The price of production of the 
first 2 quarters is £1% per quarter, and that of the second 11% 
quarters is £2 per quarter. Consequently the 3% quarters together 
cost £6. This is the individual price of production of the total prod- 
uct, and, on the average, amounts to £1 14*/,s. per quarter, i.e., 
approximately £1°/,. With the general price of production de- 

* Present edition: p. 671,—Ed, 

712 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

termined by soil A, namely £3, this results in a surplus-profit of 
£11", per quarter, and thus for the 3% quarters, a total of £4),. 
At the average price of production of B this corresponds to about 
1% quarters. Inother words, the surplus-profit from B is represent - 
ed by an aliquot portion of the output from B, i.e., by the 1% 
quarters, which express the rent in terms of grain, and which sell— 
in accordance with the general price of production—for £4%. But 
on the other hand, the excess product from an acre of B over that 
from an acre of A does not automatically represent surplus-profit, 
and thereby surplus-product. According to our assumption, an acre 
of B yields 313 quarters, whereas an acre of A yields only | quarter. 
Excess product [rom B is, therefore, 2% quarters but the surplus- 
product is only 1% quarters; for the capital invested in B is twice 
that invested in A, and thus its price of production is double. If an 
investment of £5 were also to take place in A, and the rate of pro- 
ductivity were to remain the same, then the output would be 2 quar- 
ters instead of 1 quarter, and it would then be seen that the actual 
surplus-product is determined by comparing 3% with 2, not 3% 
with |; i.e., it is only 1% quarters, not 2% quarters. Furthermore, 
if a third investment of capital, amounting to £2%, were made in 
B, and this were to yield only | quarter—this quarter would then 
cost £3 as in A—its selling price of £3 would only cover the price of 
production, would provide only the average profit, but no surplus- 
profit, and would thus yield nothing that could be transformed into 
rent. The comparison of the output per acre from any given soil 
type with the output per acre from soil A does not show whether 
it is the output from an equal or from a larger investment of capital, 
nor whether the additional output only covers the price of pro- 
duction or is due to greater productivity of the additional 
capital. 

Secondly, assuming a decreasing rate of productivity for the addi- 
tional investments of capital whose limit, so far as the new [or- 
mation of surplus-profit is concerned, is that investment of capital 
which just covers the price of production, i.e., which produces a 
quarter as dearly as the same investment of capital in an acre of 
soil A, namely, at £3, according to our assumption—it follows from 
what has just been said: that the limit, where the total investment 
ol capital in an acre of B would no longer yield any rent, is reached 
when the individual average production price of output per acre 
of B would rise to the price of production per acre of A. 

It only investments of capital are made in B that yield the price 
of production, i.e., yield no surplus-profit nor new rent, then this 
indeed raises the individual average price of production per quarter, 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT [1.—TILURD CASE 713 

but does not affect the surplus-profit, and eventually the rent, 
formed by previous investments of capital. For the average price of 
production always remains below that of A, and when the price ex- 
cess per quarter decreases, the number of quarters increases propor- 
tionately, so that the total excess in price remains unaltered. 

In the case assumed, the first two investments of capital in B 
amounting to £5 yield 3% quarters, thus according to our assump- 
tion 1% quarters of rent—£4%. Now, if a third investment of 
£2% is made, but one which yields only an additional quarter, 
then the total price of production (including 20% profit) of the 4% 
quarters = £9; thus the average price per quarter=£2. The average 
price of production per quarter upon B has thus risen from £1*/, to 
#2, and the surplus-profit per quarter, compared with the regulat- 
ing price of A, has fallen from £1*/, to £1. But 1x4%=£4% 
just as formerly 17/,x3%=£4%. 

Let us assure that a fourth and fifth additional investment of 
capital, amounting to £2's each, are made in B, which do no more 
than produce a quarter at its general price of production. The total 
product per acre would then be 6% quarters and their price of pro- 
duction #15. The average price of production per quarter for B 
would have risen again—lrom £2* to £2'/,,—and the surplus- 
profit per quarter, compared with the regulating price of production 
of A, would have dropped again—from £1to#°/,,. But these 
£°/,, would now have to be calculated upon the basis of 6% quar- 
ters instead of 4% quarters. And °/,, «G'),=1X4'/,=£4"'),. 

It follows from this, firstly, that no increase in the regulating 
price of production is necessary under these circumstances, in order 
to make possible additional investments of capital in the rent- 
bearing soil—even to the point where the additional capital com- 
pletely ceases to produce surplus-profit and continues to yield only 
the average profit. It follows furthermore that the total surplus- 
profit per acre remains the same here, no matter how much surplus- 
profit per quarter may decrease; this decrease is always balanced 
by a corresponding increase in the number of quarters produced per 
acre. In order that the average price of production might reach the 
level of the general price of production (hence £3 for soil B), it is 
necessary that supplementary investments be made whose output 
has a higher price of production than the regulating one of £3. 
But we shall see that this alone does not suffice without further ado 
to raise the average price of production per quarter of B to the 
general price of production of £3. 

Let us assume that soil B produced: 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: 1.—Ed. 

714 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

1) 344 quarters whose price of production is, as before, £6, i.e., 
two investments of capital amounting to £2% each both yielding 
surplus-profit, but of decreasing amount. 

2) 1 quarter at £3; an investment of capital in which the individ- 
ual price of production is equal to the regulating price of production. 

3) | quarter at £4; an investment of capital in which the individ- 
ual price of production is higher by 25% than the regulating price. 

We should then have 5'4 quarters per acre for £13 with an in- 
vestment of a capital of £10*/,*; this is four times the original 
invested capital, but not quite three times the output of the first 
investment of capital. 

54% quarters at £13 gives an average price of production of £2*',, 
per quarter, i.e., anexcess of £7/,, per quarter, assuming the regu- 
lating price of production of #3. This excess may be transformed 
into rent. 54% quarters sold at the regulating price of 
production of £3 vield £16%. After deducting the production price 
of £13, a surplus-profit, or rent, of £3% remains, which, calculated 
at the present average price of production per quarter of B, that is, 
at £2*/,, per quarter, represents 1*/,, quarters. The money-rent would 
be lower by £1 and the grain-rent by about % quarter, but in spite 
of the fact that the fourth additional investment of capital in B not 
only fails to yield surplus-profit, but yields less than the average 
profit, surplus-profit, and rent still continue to exist. Let us as- 
sume that, in addition to investment 3), investment 2) also produces 
at a price exceeding the regulating price of production. Then the 
total production is: 3% quarters for £6+-2 quarters Jor #8; total 
5‘ quarters for £14 production price. The average price of produc- 
tion per quarter would be £2°/,,and would leave an excess of £°/,,. The 
5% quarters, soldat £3, givea total of £164; deducting the £14 
production price leaves £2% forrent. At the present average price 
of production upon B, this would be equivalent to ‘*/,, of a quarter. 
In other words, rent is still yielded although less than before. 

This shows, at any rate, that with additional investments ol cap- 
ital in the better soils whose output costs more than the regulating 
price of production the rent does not disappear—at least not within 
the bounds of admissible practice—although it must decrease. It 
will decrease in proportion, on the one hand, to the aliquot part 
formed by this less productive capital in the total investment of 
capital, and on the other hand, in proportion to the decrease in its 
productiveness. The average price of its produce would still lie below 
the regulating price and would thus still permit surplus-profit to 
be formed that could be transformed into rent. 

*In the German 1894 edition this reads: 10.—Ed. 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 1.—THIRD CASE 715 

Let us now assume that, as a result of four successive invest 
| ; , ment 
of capital (£2%, £2%, £5 and £5) with decreasing productivity, 
the average price per quarter of B coincides with the general price 
of production. 

Price of Surplus [ 
Capital Profit Oulput Production Selling Pro- “Rent x 
£ Qrs soe ousas | | Price ceeds. 
per Qr! Total Z 
els See 
t 

) | 24] % 2 1%} 3 3 6 1 | 3 
2) QM Vy 1% 2 3 3 4% Ye | Ib 
3) 5 ! ly 4 6 3 44) ] —% |-l'e 
4) | 5 | I 1 6 6 3 3 {—1 |-3 
| 15 3 | 6 | | 18 | 18 g Q 

The farmer, in this case, sells every quarter at its individual price 
of production, and consequently the total number of quarters al 
their average price of production per quarter, which coincides with 
the regulating price of £3. Hence he still makes a profit of 20% = 
=£3 upon his capital of #15. But the rent is gone. What has 
become of the excess in this equalization of the individual prices 
of production per quarter with the general price of production? 

The surplus-profit from the first £2% was £3, from the second 
£2% it was £14; total surplus-profil from '/, of the invested capital, 
that is, from £5=£4%=90%. 

In the case of investment 3), the £5 not only fails to yield sur- 
plus-profit, but ils output of 144 quarters, sold at the general price 
of production, gives a deficit of £1%. Finally, in the case of invest- 
ment 4), which likewise amounts to £5, ils output of | quarter, 
sold at the general price of production, gives a deficit of £3. Both 
investments of capital together thus give a deficit of £414, which 
is equal lo the surplus-profit of £4%2, realized from investments 
1) and 2). 

The surplus-profit and deficit balance out. Therefore the rent 
disappears. In fact, this is possible only because the elements of 
surplus-value, which formed surplus-profit or rent, now enter into 
the formation of the average profit. The farmer makes this average 
profit of £3 on £15, or 20%, at the expense of the rent. ; 

The equalization of the individual average price of production 
of B to the general price of production of A, which regulates the 

716 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

market-price, presupposes that the difference of the individual 
price of the produce from the first investments of capital below the 
regulating price is more and more compensated and finally balanced 
out by the difference of the price of the produce from the subse- 
quent investments of capital above the regulating price. What 
appears as surplus-profit, so long as the produce from the first in- 
vestments of capital is sold by itself, thus gradually becomes part of 
its average price of production, and thereby enters into the jorma- 
tion of the average profit, until it is finally completely absorbed by it. 

If only £5 are invested in B instead of £15 and the additional 2% 
quarters oi the last table are produced by taking 2% new acres of 
A under cultivation with an investment of £2% per acre, then the 
additional invested capital would amount to only #6*/,, i-e., the 
total investment in A and B for the production of these 6 quarters 
would be only £11'/,, instead of £15, and their total price of produc- 
tion, including profit, £13'/,. The 6 quarlers would still be sold 
for £18, but the investment of capital would have decreased by 
£3°:,. and the rent from B would be £4'/, per acre, as before. It 
would be different if the production of the additional 2’ quarters 
required that a soil inferior to A, for instance, A—1 and A—2, 
be taken under cultivation; so that the price of production per quar- 
ter would be: for 1% quarters on soil A—I1=#£4, and for the last 
quarter on soil A—2=£6. In this case, £6 would be the regulating 
price of production per quarter. The 3% quarters from B would 
then be sold for £21 instead of £10%, which would mean a rent of 
£15 instead of £4%, or, a rent in grain of 2% quarters instead of 
1% quarters. Similarly, a quarter on A would now yield a rent of 
£3= % quarter. 

Before discussing this point further, another observation: 

The average price of a quarter from B is equalized, i.e., coincides 
with the general production price of £3 per quarter, regulated by A, 
as soon as that portion of the total capital which produces the excess 
of 1% quarters is balanced by that portion of the total capital which 
produces the deficit of 1% quarters. How soon this equalization is 
effected, or how much capital with under-productiveness must be 
invested in B for this purpose, will depend, assuming the surplus- 
productivity of the first investments of capital to be given, upon 
the relative under-productiveness of the later investments com- 
pared with an investment of the same amount in the worst, regu- 
lating soil A, or upon the individual price of production of their 
produce, compared with the regulating price, 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT TL— THIRD CASE 717 

The following conclusions can now be drawn from the foregoing: 

First: So long as the additional capitals are invested in the 
same land with surplus-productivity, even if the surplus-productiv- 
ity is decreasing, ihe absolute rent per acre in grain and money 
increases, although it decreases relatively, in proportion to the ad- 
vanced capital (in other words, the rate of surplus-profit or rent). 
The limit is established here by that additional capital which yields 
only the average profit, or for whose produce the individual price 
of production coincides with the general price of production. The 
price of production remains the same under these circumstances, 
unless the production [rom the poorer soils becomes superfluous 
as a result of increased supply. Even when the price is falling, 
these additional capitals may within certain limits still produce 
surplis-profit, though Jess of it. 

Secondly: The investment of additional capital yielding only 
the average profit, whose surplus-productivity therefore==-0, does 
not alter in any way the amount of the existing surplus-profit, 
and consequently of rent. The individual average price per quar- 
ter increases thereby upon ihe superior soils; the excess per quar- 
ter decreases, but the number of quarters which contain this de- 
creased excess increases, sothat the mathematica! product remains 
the same. 

Thirdly: Additional investments of capital, the produce of 
which has an individual price of production exceeding the regulat- 
ing price—the surplus-productivity is therefore not merely=0, 
but less than zero, or a negative quantity, that is, less than the prod- 
uctivity of an equal investment of capital in the regulating soil 
A—bring the individual average price of production of the total 
output from the superior soil closer and closer to the general price 
of production, i.e., reduce more and more the difference between 
them which constitutes the surplus-profit, or rent. An increasing- 
ly greater part of what constituted surplus-profit or rent enters 
into the formation of the average profit. But nevertheless, the to- 
tal capital invested in an acre of Bcontinues to yield surplus-prof- 
it, although the latter decreases as the amount of capital with 
under-productiveness increases and to the extent of this under- 
productiveness. The rent, with increasing capital and increasing 
production, in this case decreases absolutely per acre, not merely 
relatively with reference {o the increasing magnitude of the 
invested capital, as in the second case. 

The rent can be eliminated only when the individual average 
price of production of the total output from the better soil B coin- 
cides with the regulating price, so that the entire surplus-profit 

718 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

from the first more productive investments of capital is consumed 
in the formation of average profit. 

The minimum limit of the drop in rent per acre is that point 
at which it disappears. But this point does not occur as soon as 
the additiona! investments of capital are under-productive, but 
rather as soon as the additional investment of under-productive 
capital becomes so large in magnitude that its effect is to 
cancel the over-productiveness of the first investments of cap- 
ital. so that the productiveness of the total invested capital be- 
comes the same as that of the capital invested in A, and the indi- 
vidual average price per quarter of B becomes therefore the same 
as that per quarter of A. 

In this case too, the regulating price of production, £3 per 
quarter, would remain the same, although the rent had disap- 
peared. Only beyond this point would the price of production have 
to rise in consequence of an increase either in the extent of under- 
productiveness of the additional capital or in the magnitude of 
the additional capital of equa) under-productiveness. For instance, 
il, in the above table (S. 265*) 2’/, quarters were produced instead 
of 11s quarters upon the same soil at £4 per quarter, wewould 
have had a total of 7 quarters for £22 priceof production: a quarter 
would have cost £3'/,; it would thus be £*/, above the general 
price of production, and the latter would therefore have to rise, 

For along time, then, additional capital with under-productive- 
ness, or even increasing under-productiveness, might be invest- 
ed until the individual average price per quarter from the best 
soils became equal to the general price of production, until the ex- 
cess of the latter over the former—and thereby the surplus- 
profit and the rent—entirely disappeared. 

And even then, the disappearance of rent from the better soils 
would only signily that the individual average price of their 
produce coincides with the general price of production, so that an 
increase in the latter would not yet be required. 

In the above illustration, upon better soil B—which is how- 
ever the lowest in the sequence of better or rent-bearing soils— 
3'', quarters were produced by a capital of £5 with surplus-pro- 
ductiveness and 27}, quarters by a capital of £10 with under- 
productiveness, i.e., a total of 6 quarters; 5°/,, of this total is 
thus produced by the latter portions of capital with under-produc- 
liveness. And it is only at this point that the individual average 
price of production of the 6 quarters rises to £3 per quarter and thus 
coincides with the general price of production. 

* Present edition; p. 715,—Ed, 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT If.—THIRD CASE 719 

Under the law of landed property, however, the latter 2") 
quarters could not have been produced in this way at £3 per quar- 
ter, except when they could be produced upon 2'/, new acres of 
soil A. The case in which the additional capital produces only at 
the general price of production, would have constituted the limit 
Beyond this point, the additional investment of capital in the same 
land would have had to cease. 

Indeed, if the farmer once pays £4'!, rent for the first two in- 
vestments of capital, he must continue to pay it, and every in- 
vestment of capital which produced a quarter for more than £3* 
would result ina deduction from his profit. The equalization of the 
individual average price, in the case of under-productiveness, is 
thereby prevented. 

Let us take this case in the previous illustration, where the price 

of production for soi! A, £3 per quarter, regulates the price for B. 
Selling Price 
Cavl- Prof-| Price of mee of | Surplus 
tal it Produc- Oulput “ten uc- Toiat Profit Loss 
£ £ ies Qrs tt ed per Qr| Tota £ 
2% % 3 % 1M 3 6 3 _ 
2% % 3 ly, 2 3 4 IM a 
5 1 6 1% ase 3 4% _ It, 
5 1 6 1 6 3 3 _ 3 
15 3 18 18 4 4h, 
fe I et eet 
The price of production for the 3'/, quarters in the first two in- 

vestments of capital is likewise £3 per quarter for the farmer, since 
he has to pay arent of £4'/,; thus the difference between his 
individual price of production and the general price of production 
is not pocketed by him. For him, then, the excess in produce price 
for the first two investments of capital cannot serve to balance out 
the deficit incurred by the produce in the third and fourth invest- 
ments of capital. 

The 1?/, quarters from investment 3) cost the farmer £6, profit 
included; but at the regulating price of £3 per quarter, he can sell 
them for only £4%/,. In other words, he would not only lose his 

* In the German 1894 edition this reads: for less than £3.—£c. 

** loid.: 3. — Ed. 

720 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

whole profit, but £'/,, or 10% of his invested capital of £5, over 
and above it. The loss of profit and capital in the case olf invest- 
ment 3) would amount to £1'/,, and in the case of investment 
4) to #3, i.e., a total of £47/,, or just as much as the rent from 
the better investments of capital; the individual price olf produc- 
tion for the latter, however, cannot take part in equalizing the in- 
dividual average price of production of the total product from B, 
because the excess ‘is paid out as rent to a third party. 

If it were necessary, to meet the demand, to produce the addi- 
tional 1’, quarters by the third investment of capital the regulat- 
ing market-price would have to rise to £4 per quarter. In conse- 
quence of this rise in the regulating market-price, the rent [rom 
B would rise for the first and second investments, and rent would 
be formed upon A. 

Thus although differential rent is but a formal transformation 
oi surplus-profit into rent, and property in land merely enables 
the owner in this case to transfer the surplus-profit of the farmer 
{o hiinseli, we find nevertheless that successive investment of cap- 
ital in the same land, or, what amounts to the same thing, the 
increase in capital invested in the same land, reaches its limit far 
more rapidly when the rate of productiveness of the capital de- 
creases and the regulating price remains the same; in fact a 
more or less artificial barrier is reached as a consequence ol the 
mere formal transformation of surplus-profit into ground-rent, 
which is the result of landed property. The rise in the general price 
of production, which becomes necessary here within more nar- 
row limits than otherwise, is in this case not merely the cause of 
the increase in differential rent, but the existence of differential 
rent as rent is at the same time thereason for the earlier and more 
rapidrise in the general price of production—in order to ensure 
thereby the increased supply of produce that has become necessary. 

The following should furthermore be noted: 

By an additional investment of capital in soil B, the regulat- 
ing price could not, as above, rise to £4 if soil A were to supply 
the additional produce below £4 by a second investment of capi- 
tal, or if new and worse soil than A, whose price of production were 
indeed higher than £3 but lower than £4, were to enter into com- 
petition. We see, then, that differential rent I and differential rent 
II, while the first is the basis of the second, serve simultaneously 
as limits for one another, whereby now a successive investment 
of capital in the same land, now an investment of capital side by 
side in new additional land, is made. In like manner they limit 
cach other in other cases; for instance, when better soil is taken up. 

CHAPTER XLIV 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT 
ALSO ON THE WORST CULTIVATED SOIL 

Let us assume the demand for grain is rising, and the supply 
can only result [rom successive investments of capital under 
conditions of under-productiveness in the rent-bearing soils, or 
by additional investment of capital, also with decreasing produc- 
tivity, in soil A, or by the investment of capital in new lands of 
inferior quality than A. 

i: us take soil B as representative of the rent-bearing 
soils. 

The additional investment of capital demands an increase in 
the market-price above the hitherlo prevailing price of production 
of £3 per quarter, in order lo make possible the increased produc- 
tion upon B of one quarter (which may here stand for one mil- 
lion quarters, just as every acre may stand for one million acres). 
Increased output may also be yielded by soils C and D, etc., the 
soils bearing the highest rent, but only with decreasing surplus- 
productiveness; but it is assumed that the quarter from B is necessary 
in order to meet the demand. If this quarter is more cheaply pro- 
duced by investing more capital in B than with the same addition of 
capital to A, or by descending to soil A—l, which may, e.g.. 
require £4 lo produce a quarter, whereas the addition to capital 
A might do so for £3", then the additional capital on B will 
regulate the market-price. 

A produces a quarter for £3, as heretofore. Similarly B, as be- 
fore, produces a total of 3':, quarters at an individual price of 
production of £6 for ils tolal output. Now, if an additional #4 
of production price (including profil) becomes necessary on B in 
order to produce an additional quarter, whereas it could have been 
produced on A for £3"), then it would naturally be produced 

-99 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

on A, rather than on B. Let us assume, then, that it can be pro- 
duced on B with the additional price of production of £3'/,. In 
this case, £3"', would become the regulating price for the entire 
output. B would now sel] its present ouiput of 4"), quarters for 
£15"',. Of this £6 is the price of production for the first. 3°), 
quarters and the £3!) for the last quarter, i.e., a total of £9'/,. 
This leaves a surplus-profit for rent=£6"/, as against the former 
£4": . In this case, an acre of A would also yield arent of £1:,; 
but it would not be the worst soil A, but rather the better soil B 
that would regulate the price of production of £3'/,. Of course, 
we assume here that new soil of quality A and equally favourable 
location as that hitherto cultivated is not available, but that ei- 
ther a second investment of capital in the already cultivated plot 
A at a higher priceof production, or the cultivation of an even 
poorer soil A—1, is required. As soon as differential rent I] comes 
into force through successive investments of capital, the limits 
of the rising price of production may be regulated by better soil; 
and the worst soil, the basis of differential rent I, may also yield 
rent. Thus, even with a single differential rent, all cultivated land 
would yield rent. We would then have the following two tables, 
where by price of production we mean the sum of the invested capi- 
tal plus 20% profit; in other words, on every £2'j, of capital £'/, 
of profit or a total of £3. 

Ty Pri { Selli - Grain. Pa 
or Acres Production omen Price” Rae Rent Mean 
Soil 2 Qrs 
A 1 3 i 3 3 0 0 
B 1 6 3% 3 10% lly 4% 
Cc 1 6 5% 3 16% 3% 10% 
D ] 6 7% 3 22% 5% 16% 
Total 4 2) 174%, 52% | 10% 31% 

_ This is the state of affairs before the new capital of £3'/,, which 
yields only one quarter, is invested in B. After this investment, 
the situation looks as follows: 

DIVFERENTIAL RENT ON WORST SOIL 723 

T Pri ( Selii \. “ 
aP | acres | reduc: | Calg | SBE | Sis | Spun ne, | 
Soil tlon £ £ Qrs 

A \ 3 1 3Y% 3M uy Y, 

B 1 9% 4% 3% | 15%, | iy, 6, 

Cc | 6 5% 3% 19"), ay 13" 

D I 6 1% 3% 26', aM 20" 
Total 4 24% 1845 | 643), Illy 404, 

[This, again, is not quite correctly calculated. First of all, the 
cos; of the 4"/, qrs for farmer B is, in the first place, £9'), in price 
of production and, szcondly, £4'/, inrent, i.e., a total of £14; average 
per quarter=£3?/,. This average price of his total production thus 
becomes the rectlatne market-price. Thus, the rent on A would 
amount to £’/, instead of £'/,, and that on B would remain £4°), 
as herelolore; 4'/, qrs at £3'/, =£14 and, if we deduct £9'/, in price 
of production, £4’/, remain for surplus-profit. We see, then, that 
in spite of the required change in numerical values this illustra- 
tion shows how, by means ol differential rent II, better soil, already 
yielding rent, may regulate the price and thus transform all 
soil, even hitherto rentless, into rent-bearing soil.—F. £.] 

The grain-rent must rise as soon as the regulating price of pro- 
duction of the grain rises, i.e, as soon as the price of 
production of a quarter of grain from the regulating soil, 
or the regulating invested capital in one oj the various 
soil types, rises. It is the same as though all soils had become 
less productive and produced, eg., only */, quarter instead of 
1 quarter with every new investment of £2'/,. Whatever else they 
produce in grain with the same investment of capital is trans- 
formed into surplus-product, which represents the surplus-profit and 
therefore the rent. Assuming the rate of profit remains the same, 
the farmer can buy less grain with his profit. The rate of profit 
may remain the same il wages do not rise—either because they 
are depressed to the physical minimum, i.e., below the normal 
value of labour-power; or because the other articles of consump- 
tion needed by the labourer and supplied by manufacture lave be- 
come relatively cheaper; or because the working-day has become 
longer or more intensive, so that the rate of profit in non-agricul- 

724 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

tural lines of production, which, however, regulates the agricul- 
tural profit, has remained the same or has risen; or, finally, because 
more constant and less variable capital is employed in agricul- 
ture, even though the amount of capital invested is the same. 

We have thus considered the first method by which rent may 
arise on the hitherto worst soil A without taking still worse soil 
under cultivation; that is, rent may arise [rom the difference be- 
tween its individual, hitherto regulating, price of production and 
the new, higher price of production, whereby the last additional 
capital employed under conditions of under-productiveness upon 
the better soil supplies the necessary additional produce. 

li the additional produce had to be supplied by soil A—1, 
which cannot produce a quarter for less than £4, then the rent 
per acre of A would have risen to £1. But, in this case, soil A—} 
would have taken the place of A as the worst cultivated soil, and 
{he latter would have moved into the lowest position in the se- 
quence ol rent-bearing soils. Differential rent I would have changed. 
This case, then. is not included in the consideration of differen- 
tial rent II, which arises from the varying productiveness of succes- 
sive investments of capital in the same piece of land. 

But aside from this, differential rent may arise on soil A in two 
other ways. 

With the price unchanged—any given price, even a lower one 
compared to former ones—when the additional investment of 
capital results in surplus-productiveness, which prima facie, and up 
to a certain point must always be the case precisely on the worst soil. 

Secondly, however, when the productiveness of successive in- 
vestments of capital in soil A decreases. 

It is assumed in both cases that the increased production is re- 
quired to meet demand. 

But from the point of view of differential rent, a peculiar difficul- 
ty arises here owing to the previously developed law—according 
to which it is always the individual average price of production 
per quarter for the total production (or the total outlay of capital) 
which acts as the determining factor. In the case of soil A, how- 
ever, there isnot, as inthe cases of the better soils, another price 
of production which limits for new investments of capita] the 
equalization of the individual with the general price of produc- 
tion. For the individual price of production of A is precisely the 
general price of production regulating the market-price. 

Let us assume: 

1) When the productiveness of successive investments of capital 
is increasing, | acre of A will produce 3 qrs instead of 2 qrs given 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT ON WORST SOIL 725 

an investment of £5—corresponding to a price of production of 
£6. The first investment of £2'/, yielded 1 gr, the second—2 qrs. 
In this case, a price of production of £6 will yield 3 qrs, so that the 
average cost of a quarter will be £2; i.e., if the 3 qrs are sold at 
£2 per quarter, then A, as heretofore, does not yield any rent, but 
only the basis of differential rent IT has been altered; the regulat- 
ing price of production is now £2 instead of £3; a capital of £2"), 
now produces an average of 1'/, qrs on the worst soil, instead of 
1 qr, and now this is the official productivity for all better soils 
given an investment of £2'/,. From now on, a portion of their 
former surplus-product enters into the formation of their necessary 
output, just as a portion of their surplus-profit enters into forming 
the average profit. 

On the other hand, if the calculation is made upon the basis of 
better soils, where the average calculation does not alter the ab- 
solute surplus at all, because for ther the general price of produc- 
tion is the limit for the investment of capital, then a quarter 
from the first investment of capital costs £3 and the 2 qrs from 

the second investment cost only git each. This would thereby 

give rise to a grain-rent of 1 qr and a money-rent of £3 on A, but 
the 3 qrs would be sold for the old price of £9. If a third investment 
of £2'/, were made under conditions of the same productiveness 
as the second investment, then the total would be 5 qrs lor a price 
of production of £9. If the individual average price of production 
of A should remain the regulating price, then a quarter would now 
be sold at £1*/,. The average price would have fallen once more— 
not through a new rise in productiveness of the third investment 
of capital, but merely through the addition of a new investment 
of capital having the sarne additional productiveness as the second. 
Instead of raising the rent as on the rent-bearing soils, the succes- 
sive investments of capital in soil A of higher, but constant pro- 
ductiveness would proportionally lower the price of production 
and thereby, everything else being equal, the differential rent 
on all other soils. On the other hand, il the first investment of cap- 
ital which produces | qr at a price of production of £3 should in 
itself remain regulating, then 5 qrs would be sold for £15, and the 
differential rent of the later investments of capital in soil A would 
amount to £6. The additional capital per acre of soil A, however 
it is applied, would be an improvement in this case, and would 
make the original portion of capital more productive. It would 
be ridiculous to say that */, of the capital had produced 1 qr and 
the other */,—4 qrs. For £9 per acre would always produce 5 qrs, 

796 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

while £3 would produce only 1 qr. Whether or not a rent would 
arise here, whether or not a surplus-profit would be derived, would 
depend wholly upon the circumstances. Normally the regulating price 
of production would have to fall. This would be the case, if this im- 
proved but more expensive cultivation of soil A should occur only 
because it also takes place on the better soils, in other words, if 
a general revolution in agriculture should occur; so that when we 
now refer to the natural fertility of soil A, it is assumed that it is 
worked with £6 or £9 instead of £3. This would particularly ap- 
ply il the bulk of cultivated acres of soil A, which furnish the main 
supply of a given country, should employ this new method. But 
if the improvement should at first extend only to a small area of 
A, then this better cultivated portion would yield a surplus-profit, 
which the landlord would be quick to transform wholly or in part 
into rent, and to fix in the form of rent. In this way—if the de- 
mand kept pace with ihe increasing supply—as more and more of 
soil A began to employ the new method of cultivation, rent might 
be gradually formed on all soil of quality A, and the surplus-pro- 
ductivity might be eliminated wholly or in part, depending on 
market conditions. The equalization of the price of production of 
A to the average price of its produce obtained under conditions of 
increased outlay of capital might thus be prevented by fixing the 
surplus-profit of this increased investment of capital in the form 
of rent. Thus, as was previously seen to be the case for the better 
soils when the productiveness of the additional capital decreased, 
it would again be the transformation of surplus-profit into ground- 
rent, j.e., the intervention of property in land, which would raise 
the price of production, instead of the differential rent merely be- 
ing the result of the diflerence between the individual and the gen- 
eral price of production. It would prevent, in the case of soil A, 
the coincidence of both prices because it would interfere with the 
regulation of the price of production by the average price of produc- 
tion on A; it would thus maintain a higher price of production 
than necessary and thereby create rent. Even if grain were freely 
imported from abroad, the same result could be brought about or 
perpetuated by compelling farmers to use soil capable of competing 
in grain cultivation without yielding rent, at the price of production 
regulated from abroad, for other purposes, e.g., pasturage, so that 
only rent-bearing soils would be used for grain cultivation, i.e., 
only soils whose individual average price of production per quar- 
ter were below that determined from abroad. On the whole, it is 
to be assumed that in the given case, the price of production will 
fall, but not to the level of its average; it will be higher than the 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT ON WORST SOIL 727 

average, but below the price of production of the worst cultivated 
soil A, so that the competition from new soil A is limited. 

2) When the preductiveness of additivnal capitals is decreasing. 

Let us assume that soil A—I requires £4 to produce the addition- 
al quarter, whereas soil A produces it for £3°/,, i.e., more cheap- 
ly, but still £*;, more dearly than the quarter produced by its 
first investment of capital. In this case, the total price of the two 
quarters produced upon A would=£6"/,; thus the average 
price per quarter=£3°/,. The price of production would rise, but 
only by #"/,, whereas it would rise by another £*/,, or to £3°/,, if 
the additional capital were invested in new land which produced 
at £37/,, and it would thus bring about a proportional increase 
in all other differential rents. 

The price of production of £3°/, per quarter for A would thus 
be equalized to its average price of production with an increased 
investment of capital, and would be the regulating price; thus, 
it would not yield any rent, since it would not produce any sur- 
plus-profit. 

However, if this quarter, produced by the second investment 
of capital, were sold for £3°/,. soil A would now yield a rent of 
#£°/,, and indeed, on all acres of A in which no additional invest- 
ment of capital had taken place and which thus would still produce 
at £3 per quarter. So long as any uncultivated fields of A remain, 
the price could rise only temporarily to £3°/,. Competition from 
new fields of A would hold the price of production at £3 until all 
land of type A, whose [favourable location enables it to produce 
a quarter at less than £3°/,, would be exhausted. This is then what 
we would assume, although the landlord, so long as an acre of land 
yields rent, will not let a tenant farmer have another acre rent- 
tree. 

It would again depend ta what extent a second investment of 
capital in the available soil A had become general, whether the 
price of production is equalized at the average price or whether the 
individual price of production of the second investment of capital 
becomes regulating at £3°/,. The latter occurs only when the land- 
owner has sufficient time until demand is satisfied to fix as rent 
the surplus-profit derived at the price of £3°/, per qr. 

Concerning decreasing productiveness of the soil with succes- 
sive investments of capital, see Liebig. We have observed that 
the successive decrease in surplus-productiveness of invested capital 
invariably increases the rent per acre, so long as the price of pro- 

728 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

duction remains constant, and that this may occur even with a 
falling price of production. 

But, in general, the following is to be noted. 

From the standpoint of the capitalist mode of production, a 
relative increase in the price of products always takes place when 
these products cannot be secured unless an expenditure or payment 
not previously made is incurred. For by the replacement of capital 
consumed in production we mean only the replacement of values 
represented by certain means oi production. Natural elernents en- 
tering as agents into production, and which cost nothing, no matter 
what role they play in production, do not enter as components 
of capital, but as a free gilt of Nature to capital, that is, as a free 
gift of Nature’s productive power to labour, which, however, ap- 
pears as the productiveness of capital, as all other productivity 
under the capitalist mode of production. Therefore, if such a-natu- 
ral power, which originally costs nothing. takes part in production, 
it does not enter into the determination of price, so long as the 
product which it helped to produce suffices to meet the demand. 
But if in the course of development, a larger output is demanded 
{han that which can be supplied with the help of this natural 
power, i.e., if this additional output must be created without the 
help of this natural power, or by assisting it with human labour- 
power, then a new additional element enters into capital. A 
relatively larger investment of capital is thus required in order to 
secure the same output. All other circumstances remaining the 
same, a rise in the price of production takes place. 

(From a note-book “begun in mid-February 1876.”) 

Differential rent and rent as mere interest on capital incor po- 
rated in the soil. 

The so-called permanent improvements—which change the 
physical, and, in part, also the chemical conditions of the soil by 
means of operations requiring an expenditure of capital, and which 
may be regarded as an incorporation of capital in the soil—near- 
ly all amount to giving a particular piece of land in a certain limit- 
ed locality such properties as are naturally possessed by some 
other piece of land elsewhere, sometimes quite near by. One piece 
of land is naturally level, another has to be levelled; one possesses 
natural drainage, another requires artificial drainage; one is 
endowed by Nature with a deep layer of top soil, another needs 
artificial deepening; one clay soil is naturally mixed with the prop- 
er amount of sand, another has to be treated to obtain this pro- 

DIFFERENTIAL RENT ON WORST SOIL 729 

portion; one meadow is naturally irrigated or covered with layers 
of silt, another requires labour to obtain this condition, or, inthe 
language of bourgeois economics, it requires capital. 

It is indeed a truly amusing theory, whereby here, in the case of 
one piece of land whose comparative advantages have been ac- 
quired, rent is interest, whereas in the case of another piece of land 
which possesses these advantages naturally, it is not interest. 
(In fact, this is so distorted in practice that since rent really coin- 
cides in the one case with interest, it is falsely also called interest 
in the other cases, where this is positively not the case.) However, 
land yields rent after capital is invested not because capital is 
invested, but because the invested capital makes this land more 
productive than it formerly was. Assuming that all the land of a 
given country requires this investment of capital, every piece of 
land which has not received it must first pass through this stage, 
and the rent (interest yielded in the given case) borne by land al- 
ready provided with investment of capital constitutes differen- 
tial rent just as though it naturally possessed this advantage and 
the other land had first to acquire it artificially. 

This rent too, which may be resolved into interest, becomes 
pure differential rent as soon as the invested capital is amor- 
tized. Otherwise, one and the same capital would have to exist 
twice as capital. 

A most amusing phenomenon is that all opponents of Ricardo 
who oppose the idea that value delermination is based exclusively 
on labour, rather than regarding differential rent as arising [rom 
differences in soil, point out that here Nature rather than labour 
determines value; but at the same time they credit this determina- 
tion to the location of the land, or—and to an even greater ex- 
tent—the interest on capital put into the land during its culti- 
vation. The same labour produces the same value in a product cre- 
ated during a given period of time; but the magnitude or quantum 
of this product, and consequently also the portion of value asso- 
ciated with some aliquot part of this product, depends lor a given 
quantity of labour solely upon the quantum of product, and the 
latter, in turn, depends upon the productivity of the given quan- 
tum of labour rather than the absolute magnitude of this quan- 
tum. It is immaterial whether this productivity is due to Nature 
or to society. Only in the case when the productivity itself costs 
labour, and consequently capital, dues it Increase the price of pro- 
duction by a new element—which Nature by itseli does not do. 

CHAPTER XLV 
ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 

In the analysis of differential rent we proceeded from the assump- 
tion that the worst soil does not pay any ground-rent; or, to 
put it more generally, only such land pays ground-rent whose 
product has an individual price of production below the price of 
production regulating the market, so that in this manner a sur- 
plus-profit arises which is transformed into rent. It is to be noted, to 
begin with, that the law of differential rent as such is entirely inde- 
pendent of the correctness or incorrectness of this assumption. 

Let us call the general price of production, by which the market 
is regulated, P. Then, P coincides with the individual price of pro- 
duction of the output of the worst soil A; i.e., its price pays for 
the constant and variable capital consumed in production plus 
the average profit (=profit of enterprise plus interest). 

The rent in this case is equal to zero. The individual price of 
production o/ the next better soil B is=P’, and P>>P’; that is, 
P pays for more than the actual price of production of the product 
of soil B. Let us now assume that P—P’=d; d, the excess of P 
over P/ is therefore the surplus-profit which the farmer of soil 
type B realizes. This d is transformed into rent, which must be 
paid to the landlord. Let P’’ be the actual price of production of 
the third type of soil C, and P—P’’=2d; then this 2d is convert- 
ed into rent; similarly, let P’’’ be the individual price of produc- 
tion of the fourth type of soil D, and P—P’’’=3d, which is trans- 
formed into ground-rent, etc. Now let us assume the premise for 
soil A, that rent=0 and therefore the price of its product =P+0, 
is erroneous, Assume rather that it, too, yields rent=r. In that 
case, two different conclusions lollow. 

First: The price of the product of soil A would not be regulated 
by the price of production on the latter, but would include an ex- 
cess above this price, i.e., would be=P-+r. Because assuming the 
capitalist mode of production to be functioning normally, that is, 

ARSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 731 

assuming that the excess r which the farmer pays to the landlord 
represents neither a deduction from wages nor from the average 
profit of capital, the farmer can only pay it by selling the product 
above its price of production, thus, yielding him surplus-profit 
if he did not have to turn over this excess to the landlord in 
the form of rent. The regulating market-price of the total out- 
put on the market derived from all soils would then not be the 
price of production which capital generally yields in all spheres 
of production, i.e., a price equal to costs plus average profit, but 
rather the price of production plus therent, P+r, andnot P. For the 
price of the product of soil A represents generally the limit of the 
regulating general market-price, i.e., the price at which the total 
product can be supplied, and to that extent it regulates the price 
of this total product. 

But secondly: Although the general price of agricultural products 
would in this case be significantly modified, the law of differen- 
tial rent would nevertheless in no way lose its force. For if the 
price of the product of soil A, and thereby the general market- 
price=P-++r, the price for soils B, C, D, etc., would likewise= 
=P-+r. But since P—P’=d for soil B, then (P+r)—({P’+r) 
would likewise=d, and P—P’’=(P--r)—(P’’-+r)=2d for soil 
C; and finally P—P’’’=(P--r)—(P’’+r)=3d for soil D, etc. 
Thus the differential rent would be the same as before and would 
be regulated by the same law, although the rent would include 
an element independent of this law and would show a general in- 
crease together with the price of the agricultural product. It fol- 
lows, then, that no matter what the case may be as regards the rent 
of the least fertile soils, the law of differential rent is not only in- 
dependent of it, but that the only manner of grasping differential 
rent in keeping with its character is to let the rent on soi! A=0. 
Whether this actually=0 or > 0 is immaterial so far as the difler- 
ential rent is concerned, and, in fact, does not come into consid- 
eration. 

The law of differential rent, then, is independent of the results 
of the following study. 

If we were now to inquire more deeply into the basis of the as- 
sumption that the product of the worst soil A does not yield any 
rent, the answer would of necessity be as lollows: If the market- 
price of the agricultural product, say grain, attains that level where 
an additional investment of capital in soil A results in the usu- 
al price of production, i.e., the usual average profit on the capital 
is yielded, then this condition suffices for investing the addition- 
al capital in soil A. In other words, this condition is sufficient 

732. TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

for the capitalist to invest new capital yielding the usual profit 
and to employ it in the normal manner. 

It should be noted here that in this case, too, the market-price 
must be higher than the price of production of A. For as soon as 
the additional supply is created, it is evident that the relation be- 
tween supply and demand becomes altered. Formerly the supply 
was insufficient. Now it is sufficient. Hence the price must fall. 
In order to fall, it must have been higher than the price of produc- 
tion of A. But due to the fact that soil A newly taken under cul- 
tivation is less jertile, the price does not fall again as low as when 
the price of production of soil B regulated the market. The price 
oi production of A constitutes the limit, not for the temporary but 
for the relatively permanent rise of the market-price. On the other 
hand, if the new soil taken under cultivation is more fertile than 
the hitherto regulating soil A, and yet only suffices to meet the in- 
creased demand. then the market-price remains unchanged. The 
investigation of the question whether the poorest type of soil yields 
rent, however, coincides in this case too with our present inquiry, 
for here too the assumption that soil A does not yield any rent 
would be explained by the fact that the market-price is sulticient 
for the capitalist farmer to exactly cover, with this price, the 
invested capital plus the average profit; in brief, it would be ex- 
plained by the fact thal the market-price yields him the price of 
production of his commodities. 

At any rate, the capitalist farmer can cultivate soil A under 
these conditions, inasmuch as he, as capitalist, has such power of 
decision. The prerequisite for the normal expansion of capital in 
soil A is now present. But from the premise that the capitalist 
farmer can now invest capital in soil A under average conditions lor 
the expansion of capital, even if he did not have to pay any rent, 
it nowise follows that this land, belonging to category A, is now at 
the disposal of the farmer without further ado. The fact that the 
tenant farmer could realize the usual profit on his capital did he 
not have to pay any rent, is by no means a basis for the landlord 
to lend his land gratis to the farmer and to become so philanthrop- 
ic as to grant erédit gratuit for the sake of a business friendship. 
Such an assumption would mean the abstraction of landed prop- 
erty, the elimination of landownership, and it is precisely the 
existence of the latter that constitutes a limitation to the invest- 
ment of capital and the free expansion of capital in the land. This 
limitation does not at all disappear before the simple reflection 
of the farmer that the level of grain prices would enable him to 
realize the usual profit from the investment of his capital in the 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 733 

exploitation of soil A didhe not have to pay any rent; in other words 
if he could proceed in eflect as though landed property did not 
exist. But differential rent presupposes the existence of a monop- 
oly in landownership, landed property as a limitation to capital, 
for without it surplus-profit would not be transformed into ground- 
rent nor fall to the share of the landlord instead of the farmer. 
And landed property as a limitation continues to exist even when 
rent in the form of differential rent disappears, i.e., on soil A. If 
we consider the cases in a country with capitalist production, where 
the investment of capital in the land can take place without pay- 
ment of rent, we shall find that they are all based on a de facto 
abolition of landed property, if not also the legal abolition; this, 
however, can only take place under very specific circumstances 
which are by their very nature accidental. 

First: When the landlord is himself a capitalist, or the capital- 
ist is himself a landlord. In this case he may himself manage his 
land as soon as market-price has risen sufficiently to enable him 
to get, fram what is now soil A, the price of production, that is, 
replacement of capital plus average profit. But why? Because 
for him landed property does not constitute an obstacle to the in- 
vestment of capital. He can treat his land simply as an element 
of Nature and therefore be guided solely by considerations of 
expansion olf his capital, by capitalist considerations. Such cases 
occur in practice, but only as exceptions. Just as capitalist culti- 
vation of the soil presupposes the separation of functioning capital 
from landed property, so does it as a rule exclude self-management 
of landed property. It is immediately evident that this case is a 
purely accidental one. If the increased demand for grain requires 
the cultivation of a larger area of soil type A than is in the hands 
of self-managing proprietors, in other words, if a part of it must 
be rented to be at all cultivated, then this hypothetical lifting of 
the limitation created by landed property to the investment of 
capital at once collapses. It is an absurd contradiction to start 
out with the differentiation under the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion between capital and land. farmers and landlords, and then 
to turn round and assume that landlords, as a rule, manage their 
own land wherever and whenever capital would not draw rent 
from the cultivation of the soil if landed property were not separate 
and distinct from it. (See the passage by Adam Smith concern- 
ing mining rent, quoted below.*) This abolition of landed prop- 
erty is fortuitous. It may or may not occur. 

* Present edition: p. 756.— Fd. 

34 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

Secondly: In the total area of a leasehold there may be certain 
portions which do not yield any rent at the existing level of mar- 
ket-prices, so that they are in fact loaned gratis; but the landlord 
does not Jook upon it in that light, because he sees the total rent- 
al of the leased land, not the specific rent of the individual com- 
ponent plots. In this case, as regards the rentless component plots 
of the leasehold, landed property as a limitation to the investment 
of capital is eliminated for the capitalist farmer; and this, indeed, 
hy contract with the landlord himself. But he does not pay rent 
for these plots merely because he pays rent for the land associated 
with them. A combination is here presupposed whereby poorer 
soil A does not have to be resorted to as a distinctly new field 
of production in order to produce the deficit supply, but rather 
whereby it merely constitutes an inseparable part of the bet- 
ter land. But the case to be investigated is precisely that in 
which certain pieces of land of soil type A must be independently 
managed, i.e., for the conditions generally prevailing under 
the capitalist mode of production, they must be independently 
leased. 

Thirdly: A farmer may invest additional capital in the same 
leasehold even if the additional product secured in this manner 
yields him only the price of production at the prevailing market- 
prices, i.e., provides him with the usual profit but does not enable 
him to pay any additional rent. He thus pays ground-rent with 
one portion of the capital invested in the land, but not with the 
other. How little this assumption helps ta solve the problem, how- 
ever, is seen Irom the following: If the market-price (and the fer- 
tility of the soil} enables him to obtain an additional yield with 
his additional capital, which, as in the case of the old capital, yields 
a surplus-profit in addition to the price of production, he is able 
to pocket this surplus-profit so long as his lease does not expire. 
But why? Because the limitation placed by landed property on 
the investment of his capital in land has been eliminated lor the 
duration of the lease. But the simple fact that additional soil of 
Poorer quality must be independently cleared and independently 
leased in order for him to secure this surplus-profit proves irrefu- 
tably that the investment of additional capital in the old soil no 
longer suffices to prodtice the required increased supply. One as- 
sumption excludes the other. It is true that now one might say: The 
rent on the worst soil A is itself differential rent—whether the com- 
parison is made with respect to the land cultivated by the owner 
himself (this occurs, however, as a purely chance exception) or 
with respect to the additional investment of capital in the old 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 735 

Jeaseholds which do not yield any rent. However, this would be 
1) a differential rent which does not arise from the difference in 
fertility of the various categories of soil, and which therefore would 
noé presuppose that soil A does not yield any rent and its prod- 
uce sells at the price of production; and 2) the circumstance 
whether additional investments of capital in the same lease- 
hold yield rent or not is just as irrelevant to the question as to wheth- 
er the new soil of class A to be taken under cultivation pays rent 
or not, as it is irrelevant to, say, the establishment of a new and 
independent manufacturing business whether another manufactur- 
er in the same line invests a portion of his capital in interest-bear- 
ing paper because he cannot use all oi it in his business, or wheth- 
er he makes certain improvements which do not yield him the 
full profit, but nevertheless do yield more than jnierest. This is 
of secondary importance to him. The additional new establish- 
ments, on the other hand, must yield the average profit and are 
organized in the hope of obtaining this average profit. It is true, 
to be sure, that the additional investments of capital in the old 
leaseholds and the additional cultivation of new land of soil type 
A mutually restrict one another. The limit, up to which addition- 
al capital may be invested in the same leasehold under less [a- 
vourable conditions of production, is determined by the competing 
new investments in soil A; on the other hand, the rent which this 
category of soil can yield is limited by the competing additional 
investments of capital in the old leaseholds. 

But all this dubious subterfuge does not solve the problem, which, 
simply stated, is this: Assume the market-price of grain (which 
in this inquiry stands for products of the soil in general) to be suf- 
ficient to permit taking portions of soil A under cultivation and that 
the capital invested in these new fields could return the price of pro- 
duction, i.e., replace capital plus average profit. Thus assume that 
conditions exist for the normal expansion of capital on soil A. Is 
this sufficient? Can this capital then really be invested? Or must 
the market-price rise to the point where even the worst soil A yields 
rent? In other words, does the landowner’s monopoly hinder the 
investment of capital which would not be the case from the purely 
capitalist standpoint in the absence of this monopoly? It follows 
from the way in which the question itself is posed that if, eg., 
additional capitals are invested in the old leaseholds, yielding 
the average profit at the given market-price, but no rent, this cir- 
cumstance ia no way answers the question whether capital may 
now really be invested in soil A, which also yields the average 
profits but no rent. But this is precisely the question before us. The 

736 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

fact {hat additional investments of capital not yielding any rent 
do not satisfy the demand is proved by the necessity of taking new 
land of soil type A under cultivation. Just two alternatives are 
possible if the additional cultivation of soil A takes place only 
in so far as it vields rent, that is, yields more than the price of pro- 
duction. Either the market-price must be such that even the last 
additional investments of capital in the old leaseholds yield sur- 
plus-profil, whether pocketed by the farmer or by the landlord. 
This rise in price and this surplus-profit from the last additional 
investments of capital would then result from the fact that soil 
A cannot be cultivated without yielding rent. For if the price of 
production were sulficient for cultivation to take place, merely 
yielding average profit, the price would not have risen so high, 
and competition from new plots would have been felt as soon as 
they just yielded this price of production. Competing with the ad- 
ditional investments in old leaseholds not yielding any rent would 
then be investments in soil A, which likewise do not yield any rent. 
—Or, the last investments in the old leaseholds do not yield any 
rent, but neveriheless the market-price has risen sufficiently to make 
it possible for soil A to be taken under cultivation and to yield rent. 
In this case, the additional investment of capital not yielding any 
rent was only possible because soil A cannot be cultivated until 
the market-price permits it to pay rent. Without this condition, 
its cultivation would have already begun at a lower price level; 
and those later investments of capital in the old Jeaseholds, which 
require the high market-price in order to yield the usual profit 
without rent, could not have taken place. At the high market- 
price, if is true, they yield only the average profit. At a lower mar- 
ket-price, which would have become the regulating price of produc- 
tion [rom the time soi! A came under cultivation, they would 
thus not have yielded this average profit, i.e., the investments 
would thus not have taken place at all under such conditions. In 
this way, the rent from soil A would indeed constitute differential 
rent compared with the invesiments in the old leaseholds not 
yielding any rent. But that such differential rent is formed on 
the land areas of A is but a consequence of the fact that the lat- 
ter are not at all available to cultivation, unless they yield rent; 
i.e., that the necessity for this rent exists, which, in itself, is not 
determined by any differences in soil types, and which constitutes 
the barrier to possible investment of additional capitals in the old 
leaseholds. In either case, the rent from soil A would not be sim- 
ply a consequence of the rise in grain prices, but, conversely, the 
fact that the worst soil must yield rent in order to make its culti- 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 737 

vation at all possible, would be the cause for the rise in the grain 
price to the point where this condition may be fulfilled. 

Differential rent has the peculiarity that landed property here 
merely intercepts the surplus-profit which would otherwise flow 
into the pocket of the farmer, and which the latter may actually 
pocket under certain circumstances during the period of his lease. 
Landed property is here merely the cause for transferring a por- 
tional the commodity-price which arises without the property hav- 
ing anything to do with it (indeed, in consequence of (he fact that 
the price of production which regulates the market-price is deter- 
mined by competition) and which resolves itself into surplus- 
profit—the cause for transferring this portion of the price [rom one 
person to another, from the capitalist to the landlord. But landed 
property is not the cause which creates this portion of the price, or 
the rise in price upon which this portion of the price is premised. 
On the other hand, if the worst soil A cannot be cultivated— 
although its cultivation would yield the price of production—until 
it produces something in excess of the price of production, rent, 
then landed property is the creative cause of ‘his rise in price. 
Landed property iiself has created rent. This fact is not altered, if, 
as in the second case mentioned, the rent now paid on soil A consti- 
tutes differential rent compared with the last additional investment 
of capital in old leaseholds, which pay only the price of production. 
For the circumstance that soil A cannot be cultivated until the reg- 
ulating market-price has risen high enough to permit rent to be 
yielded from soil A—only this circumstance is the basis here 
for the fact that the market-price rises to a point which enables 
the last investments in the old leaseholds to yield, indeed, only 
their price of production, but a price of production which, at 
the same time, yields rent on soil A. The fact that the latter 
has to pay rent at all is, in this case, the cause for the differ- 
ential rent between soil A and the last investments in the old 
leaseholds. 

When stating, in general, that soil A does not pay any rent— 
assuming the price ol! grain is regulated by the price of production— 
we mean rent in the categorical sense of the word. If the farmer 
pays “lease money” which constitutes a deduction from the normal 
wages of his labourers, or from his own normal average profit, 
he does not pay rent, i.e., an independent component of the price 
of his commodities distinct from wages and profit. We have al- 
ready indicated that this continually takes place in practice. In 
so far as the wages of the agricultural labourers in a given country 
are, in general, depressed below the normal average level of wages, 

26 ~29757 

738 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

so that a deduction irom wages, a part of the wages, as a general 
rule enters into rent, this does nol constitute an exceplional case 
for the farmer cullivating the worst soil. In the same price of pro- 
duction which makes cultivation of the worst soil possible these 
low wages already form a constituent element, and the sale of the 
product at the price of production does not therefore enable the farm- 
er cultivating this soil to pay any rent. The landlord can also 
lease his land to sore labourer, who may be salisfied to pay to 
the former in the form of rent, all or the largest part of that which 
he realizes in the selling price over and above the wages. In all 
these cases, however, no real rent is paid in spite of the fact that 
lease money is paid. But wherever conditions correspond to those 
under the capitalist mode of production, rent and lease money 
must coincide. Yet it is precisely this normal condition which must 
be analysed here. 

Since even the cases considered above—where, under the cap- 
italist mode of production, investments of capital in the land 
may actually take place without yielding rent—do not contrib- 
ute to the solution of our problem, so much less does reference to 
colonial conditions. The criterion establishing a colony as a colo- 
ny—we are referring here only to true agricultural colonies—is 
not merely the prevailing vast area of fertile land in a natural 
state. It is rather the circumstance that this and has not been ap- 
propriated, has not been subjected to private ownership. Herein lies 
the enormous difference, as regards the land, between old coun- 
tries and colonies: the legal or actual non-existence of landed prop- 
erty, as Wakefield®> correctly remarks, and as Mirabeau pére, 
the physiocrat, and other elder economists, had discovered Jong 
before him. It is quite immaterial here whether the colonists sim- 
ply appropriate the land, or whether they actually pay to the state, 
in the form of a nominal land price, a fee for a valid legal title 
to the land. It is also immaterial that the colonists already set- 
tled there may be the legal owners of the Jand. In fact, landed prop- 
erty constitules no limitation here to the investment of capital— 
and also of labour without capital; the appropriation of some of 
the land by the colonists already established there does not pre- 
vent the new-comers from employing their capital or their la- 
bour upon new land. Therefore, when it is necessary to investigate 
the influence of landed property upon the prices of products of 
the land and upon rent—in those cases where landed property re- 

** Wakefield, England and America, London, 1833. Compare also Dus Kapital. 
Buch 1, Kap. XXV [English edition: Ch. XXX{l— Ed | ees 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 739 

stricts land as an investment sphere of capital—it is highly absurd 
to speak of free bourgeois colonies w'iere, in agriculture, neither 
the capitalist mode of production exisis, nor the form of landed 
property corresponding to it—which, in fact, does not exist at all. 
Ricardo, e.g., does so in his chapter on ground-rent. In the pref- 
ace he states that he intends to investigate the effect of the 
appropriation of land upon the value of the products ol the soil, 
and directly thereafter he takes the colonies as an illustration, 
whereby he assumes that the land exists in a relatively elementary 
form and that its exploitation is not limited by the monapoly of 
landed property. 

The mere legal ownership of land does not create any ground- 
rent for the owner. But it does, indeed, give him the power {o with- 
draw his land from exploitation until economic conditions permit 
him to utilize it in such a manner as to yield him a surplus, be it 
used for actual agricultural or other production purposes, such as 
buildings, etc. He cannot increase or decrease the absolute magni- 
tude of this sphere, but he can change the quantity of land 
placed on the market. Hence, as Fourier already observed, it is a 
characteristic fact that in all civilized countries a comparatively 
appreciable portion of land always remains uncultivated. 

Thus, assuming the demand requires that new land be taken un- 
der cultivation, whose soil, let us say, is less fertile than that hith- 
erto cultivated—will the landlord lease it for nothing, just be- 
cause the market-price of the product of the land has risen suffi- 
ciently to return to the farmer the price of production, and thereby 
the usual profit, on his investment in this land? By no means. The 
investment of capital must yield him rent. He does not lease his 
land until he can be paid lease money for it. Therefore, the market- 
price must rise to a point above the price of production, i.e., to 
P-+r, so that rent can be paid to the landlord. Since according to 
our assuinption, landed property does not yield anything until 
it is leased, is economically valueless until then, a small rise in 
the market-price above the price of production sulfices to bring 
the new land of poorest quality on the market. 

The following question now arises: Does it follow from the fact 
that the worst soil yields ground-rent which cannot be derived from 
any difference in fertility that the price of the product of the land 
is necessarily a monopoly price in the usual sense, or a price into 
which the rent enters like a tax, with the sole distinction that {he 
landlord levies the tax instead of the state? It goes without saying 
that this tax has its specific economic limits. It is limited by addi- 
tional investments of capital in the old leaseholds, by competi- 

25* 

740 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

lion from products of the land coming from abroad—assuming 
their import is unrestricted—by competition among the landlords 
themselves, and finally by ihe needs of the consumers and their 
ability to pay. But this is not the question here. The point is wheth- 
er the rent paid on the worst soil enters into the price of the prod- 
ucts of this soil—which price regulates the general market-price 
according to our assumption—in the same way as a tax placed 
on a commodity enters into its price, i.e., as an element that is in- 
dependent of the value of the commodity. 

This, by no means, necessarily follows, and the contention that 
it does has been made only because the distinction between the 
value of commodities and their price of production has heretofore 
not been understood. We have seen that the price of production of 
a commodity is not at all identical with its value, although the 
prices of production of commodities, considered in their totality, 
are regulated only by their total value, and although the move- 
ment of production prices of various kinds of commodities, 
all other circumstances being equal, is determined exclusively by 
the movement of their values. It has been shown that the price of 
production of a commodity may lie above or below its value, and 
coincides with its value only by way of exception. Hence, the fact 
that products of the land are sold above their price of production 
does not at all prove ihat they are sold above their value; just as 
the fact that products of industry, on the average, are sold at their 
price of production does not prove that they are sold at their value. 
It is possible for agricultural products to be sold above their price 
of production and below their value, while, on the other hand, 
many industrial products yield the price of production only be- 
cause they are sold above their value. : 

The relation of the price of production of a commodity to its 
value is determined solely by the ratio of the variable part of the 
capital with which the commodity is produced to its constant part, 
or by the organic composition of the capital producing it. If the 
composition of the capital in a given sphere of production is 
lower than that of the average social capital, i.e., if its variable 
portion, which is used for wages, is larger in its relation to the con- 
stant portion, used for the material conditions of labour, than is 
the case in the average social capital, then the value of its product 
must lie above the price of production, In other words, because 
such capital employs more living labour, it produces more sur- 
plus-value, and {herefore more profit, assuming equal exploita- 
tion of labour, than an equally large aliquot portion of the social 
average capital. The value of its product, therefore, is above the 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 74) 

price of production, since this price of production is equal to cap- 
ital replacement plus average profil, and the average profit is 
lower than the profit produced in this commodity. The surplus- 
value produced by the average social capital is less than the sur- 
plus-value produced by a capital of this lower composition. The 
opposite is the case when the capital invested in a certain sphere 
of production is of a higher composition than the social average 
capital. The value of commodities produced by it lies below their 
price of production, which is generally the case with products of 
the most developed industries. 

If the capital in a certain sphere of production is of a lower com- 
position than the average social capital, then this is, in the first 
place, merely another way of saying that the productivity of the 
social labour in this particular sphere of production is below the 
average; for the level of productivity attained is manifested in 
the relative preponderance of constant over variable capital, or 
in the continual decrease—for the given capital—of the portion 
used for wages. On the other hand, if the capital in a certain 
sphere of production is of a higher composition, then this reflects 
a development of productiveness that is above the average. 

Leaving aside actual works of art, whose consideration by their 
very nature is excluded from our discussion, it is self-evident, more- 
over, that different spheres of production require different pro- 
portions of constant and variable capital in accordance with their 
specific technical features, and that living labour must play a 
bigger role in some, and smaller in others. For instance, in the ex- 
tractive industries, which must be clearly distinguished from agri- 
culture, raw material as an element of constant capital is wholly 
absent, and even auxiliary material rarely plays an important role. 
In the mining industry, however, the other part of constant capi- 
tal, i.e., fixed capital, plays an important role. Nevertheless, here 
too, progress may be measured by the relative increase of constant 
capital in relation to variable capital. 

If the composition of capital in agriculture proper is lower than 
that of the average social capital, then, prima facie, this expresses 
the fact that in countries with developed production agriculture 
has not progressed to the same extent as the processing indus- 
tries. Such a fact could be explained—aside from all other circum- 
stances, including in part decisive economic ones—by the ear- 
lier and more rapid development of the mechanical sciences, and 
in particular their application compared with the later and in part 
quite recent development of chemistry, geology and physiology, 
and again, in particular, their application to agriculture. Inci- 

742 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

dentally, it is an indubitable and long-known faci** that the prog- 
ress of agriculture itself is constantly expressed by a relative growth 
of constant capital as compared with variable capital. Whether the 
composition of agricultural capital is lower than that of the average 
social capital in a specific country where capitalist production pre- 
vails, for instance England, is a question which can only be decid- 
ed statistically, and for our purposes it is superfluous to go into 
ii in detail. In any case, it is theoretically established that the value 
of agricultural products can be higher than their price of produc- 
tion only on this assumption. In other words, a capital of a certain 
size in agriculture produces more surplus-value, or what amounts 
to the same, sets in motion and commands more surplus-labour 
(and with it employs more living labour generally) than a capital 
of the same size of average social composition. 

This assumption, then, suffices for that form of rent which we 
are analysing here, and which can obtain only so long as this as- 
sumption holds good. Wherever this assumption no longer holds, 
the corresponding form of rent likewise no longer holds. 

However, the mere existence of an excess in the value of agri- 
cultural products over their price of production would not in it- 
self suffice to explain the existence of a ground-rent which is in- 
dependent of differences in fertility of various soil types and in 
successive investments of capital on the same land—a rent, in short, 
which is to be clearly distinguished in concept Irom differential rent 
and which we may therefore call absolute rent. Quite a number of 
manufactured products are characterized by the fact that their value 
is higher than their price of production, without thereby yielding 
any excess above the average profit, or a surplus-profit, which could 
be converted into rent. Conversely, the existence and concept of 
price of production and general rate of profit, which it implies, 
rest upon the fact that individual commodities are not sold at their 
value. Prices of production arise from an equalization of the values 
of commodities. After replacing the respective capital-values used 
up in the various spheres of production, this distributes the en- 
tire surplus-value, not in proportion to the amount produced in 
the individual spheres of production and thus incorporated in their 
commodities, but in proportion to une magnitude of advanced cap- 
itals. Only in this manner do average profit and price of produc- 
tion arise, whose characteristic element the former is. It is the 
perpetual tendency of capitals to bring about through competi- 
tion this equalization in the distribution of surplus-value produced 

~ " See Dombasle and R. Jones. 

ANSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 743 

by the total capital, and to overcome all obstacles to this equal- 
ization. Hence it is their tendency to tolerate only such surplus- 
profits as arise, under all circumstances, not from the difference 
between the values and prices of production of commodities, but 
rather from the difference between the general price of production 
governing the market and the individual prices of production differ- 
ing [rom il; surplus-profits which obtain within a certain sphere 
of production, therefore, and not between two different spheres, 
and thus do not affect the general prices of production of the vari- 
ous spheres, i.e., the general rate of profit, but rather presuppose 
the transformation of values into prices of production and a gen- 
eral rate of profit. This supposition rests, however, as previously 
discussed, upon the constantly changing proportional distribution 
of the total social capital among the various spheres of produc- 
lion, upon the perpetual inflow and outflow of capitals, upon their 
transferability from one sphere to another, in short, upon their free 
movement between the various spheres of production, which rep- 
resent so many available fields of investment for the independent 
components of the total social capital. The premise in this case 
is that no barrier, or just an accidental and temporary barrier, 
interferes with the competition of capitals—for instance, in a 
sphere of production, in which the commodity-values are higher 
than the prices of production, or where the surplus-value produced 
exceeds the average profit—lo reduce the value to the price of 
production and thereby proportionally distribule the excess sur- 
plus-value of this sphere of production among all spheres exploit- 
ed by capital. But if the reverse occurs, if capital meets an alien 
force which it can but partially, or not at all, overcome, and which 
limits its investment in certain spheres, admitting it only under 
conditions which wholly or partly exclude that general equaliza- 
tion of surplus-value to an average profit, then it isevident that the 
excess of the value of commodities in such spheres of production 
over their price of production would give rise to a surplus-profit, 
which could be converted into rent and as such made independent 
with respect to profit. Such an alien force and barrier are presented 
by landed property, when confronting capital in its endeavour to 
invest in land; such a force is the landlord vis-a-vis the capitalist. 

Landed property is here the barrier which does not permit any 
new investment of capital in hitherto uncultivated or unrented 
land without levying a tax, or in other words, without demanding 
a rent, allhough the land to be newly brought under cultivation 
may belong to a category which does not yield any differential rent 
and which, were it not lor landed property, could have been cul- 

744 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS:PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

tivated even at a small increase in market-price, so that the regu- 
lating market-price would have netted to the cultivator of this 
worst soil solely his price of production. But owing to the barrier 
raised by landed property, the market-price must rise toa level at 
which the land can vield a surplus over tlie price of production, 
i.e., yield a rent. However, since the value of the commadities 
produced by agricultural capital is higher than their price of pro- 
duction, according to our assumption, this rent (save for one case 
which we shall discuss forthwith) forms the excess of value over 
the price of production, or a part of ii. Whether the rent equals 
the entire difference between the value and price of production, or 
only a greater or lesser part of it, will depend wholly on the rela- 
tion between supply and demand and on the area of land newly 
taken under cultivation. So long as the rent does not equal the ex- 
cess of the value of agricultural products over their price of produc- 
tion, a portion of this excess will always enter into the general 
equalization and proportional distribution of all surplus-value 
among the various individual capitals. As soon as the rent does 
equal the excess of the value over the price of production, this 
entire portion of surplus-value over and above the average profit 
will be withdrawn from this equalization. But whether this abso- 
lute rent equals the whole excess of value over the price of pro- 
duction, or just a part of it, the agricultural products will always 
be sold at a monopoly price, not because their price exceeds their 
value, but because it equals their value, or because their price is 
lower than their value but higher than their price of production. 
Their monopoly would consist in the fact that, unlike other prod- 
ucts of industry whose value is higher than the general price of 
production, they are not levelled out to the price of production. 
Since one portion of the value, as well as of price of production, 
is an actually given constant, namely the cost-price, representing 
the capital=k used up in production, their difference consists in 
the other. the variable portion, the surplus-value, which equals 
p, the profit, in the price of production, i.e., equals the total sur- 
plus-value calculated on the social capital and on every individu- 
al capital as an aliquot part of the social capital; but which in the 
value of commodities equals the actual surplus-value created by 
this particular capital, and forms an integral part of the commodity- 
values produced by this capital. If the value of commodities is 
higher than their price of production, then the price of production= 
=k ++ p, and the value=k +p + d,sothat p+ d =the surplus-value 
contained therein. The difference between the value and the price 
of production, therefore,= d, the excess of surplus-value created by 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 745 

this capital over the surplus-value allocated to it through the gen- 
eral rate of profit. It follows from this that the price of agricultur- 
al products may lie higher than their price of production, without 
reaching their value. It follows, furthermore, that a permanent in- 
crease in the price of agricultural products may take place up to 
a certain point, before their price reaches their value. It follows 
likewise that the excess in the value of agricultural products over 
their price of production can become a determining element of 
their general market-price solely as a consequence of the monop- 
oly in landed property. It follows, finally, that in this case the 
increase in the price of the product is not the cause of rent, but ra- 
ther that rent is the cause of the increase in the price of the product. 
If the price of the product from a unit area of the worst soil=P-r, 
then all differential rents will rise by corresponding multiples of 
r, since the assumption is that P + r becomes the regulating market- 
price. 

If the average composition of the non-agricultural social capital 
were = 85, + 15,, and the rate of surplus-value=100%, then the 
price of production would=115. If the composition of the agri- 
cultural capital were=75,+-25, and the rate of surplus-value were 
the same, then the value of the agricultural product and the regu- 
lating market-price would=125. Ji the agricultural and the non- 
agricultural product should be equalized to the same average price 
(we assume for the sake of brevity the total capital in both lines 
of production to be equal), then the total surplus-value would= 
=40, or 20%, on the 200 of capital. The product of the one as 
well as the other would be sold at 120. In an equalization into 
prices of production, the average market-prices of the non-agricul- 
tural product would thus lie above, and those of the agricultural 
product below, their value. If the agricultural products were sold 
at their full value, they would be higher by 5, and the industrial 
products lower by 5, than they are in the equalization. If market 
conditions do not permit the sale of the agricultural products at 
their full value, to the full surplus above the price of production, 
then the effect lies between the two extremes; the industrial prod- 
ucts are sold somewhat above their value, and the agricultural 
products somewhat above their price of production. 

Although landed property may drive the price of agricultural 
proiluce above its price of production, it does not depend on this, 
but rather on the general state of the market, to what degree mar- 
ket-price exceeds the price of production and approaches the value, 
and to what exlent therefore the surplus-value created in agricul- 
ture over and above the given average profit shall either be trans- 

746 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

formed into rent or enter into the general equalization of the sur- 
plus-value to average profit. At any rate this absolute rent arising 
out of the excess of value over the price of production is but a por- 
tion of the agricultural surplus-value, a conversion of this surplus- 
value into rent, its being filched by the landlord; just as the differ- 
ential rent arises out of the conversion of surplus-profit into rent, 
its being filched by the landlord under a generally regulating price 
of production. These two forms of rent are the only normal ones. 
Apart irom them the rent can be based only upon an actual monop- 
oly price, which is determined neither by price of production nor 
by value of commodities, but by the buyers’ needs and ability to 
pay. Its analysis belongs under the theory of competition, where 
the actual movement of market-prices is considered. 

If all the land suitable for agriculture in a certain country were 
leased—assuming the capitalist mode of production and normal 
conditions to be general—there would not be any land not paying 
rent: but there might be some capitals, certain parts of capitals 
invested in land, that might not yield any rent. For as soon as the 
land has been rented, landed property ceases to act as an absolute 
barrier against the investment of necessary capital. Still, it con- 
tinues to act as a relative barrier even after that, in so [ar as the 
reversion to the landlord of the capital incorporated in the land cir- 
cumseribes the activity of the tenant within very definite limits. 
Only in this case all rent would be transformed into differential 
rent, although this would not be a differential rent determined by 
any difference in soil fertility, but rather by the difference between 
the surplus-profits arising from the last investments of capital in a 
particular soil type and the rent paid for the lease of the worst 
quality land. Landed property acts as an absolute barrier only to 
the extent that the landlord exacts a tribute for making land at 
ail accessible to the investment of capital. When such access has 
been gained, he can no longer set any absolute limits to the size 
of any investment of capital in a given plot of land. In general, 
housing construction meets a barrier in the ownership by a third 
party of the land upon which the houses are to be built. But, once 
this land has been Jeased for the purpose of housing construction, it 
depends upon the tenant whether hewill build a large or a smal! house. 

If the average composition of agricultural capital were equal 
to, or higher than, that of the average social capital, then absolute 
rent—again in the sense just described—would disappear; 
i.e., rent which differs equally from differential rent as well as 
that based upon an actual monopoly price. The value of agricultur- 
al produce, then, would not lie above its price of production, and 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 747 

the agricultural capital would not set any more labour in motion, 
and therefore would also not realize any more surplus-labour than 
the non-agricultural capital. The same would take place, were 
the composition of agricultural capital to become equal to that 
of the average social capital with the progress of civilization. 

Tt seems to be a contradiction, at first glance, to assume that, 
on the one hand, the composition of agricultural capital rises, in 
other words, that its constant component increases with respect 
to its variable, and, on the other hand, that the price of the agri- 
cultural product should rise high enough to permit rent to be yield- 
ed by new and worse soil than that previously cultivated, a rent 
which in this case could originate only from an excess of market- 
price over the value and price of production, in short, a rent de- 
rived solely from a monopoly price of the product. 

It is necessary to make a distinction here. 

In the first place, it was noted in considering the manner in 
which rate of profit is formed, that capitals, which have the same 
composition technologically speaking, i.e., which set equivalent 
amounts of labour in motion relative to machinery and raw mate- 
rials, may nonetheless have different compositions owing to different 
values of the constant portions of these capitals. The raw materials 
or machinery may he dearer in one case than in another. For the 
same quantity of labour to be set in motion (and this would be re- 
guired, according to our assumption, to work up the same mass 
of raw materials), a larger capital would have to be advanced in 
ihe one case than in the other, since the same amount of labour 
cannot be set in motion with, say, a capital of 100 if the cost of raw ma- 
terial, which must be covered out of the 100, is 40 in one case and 20 
in another. But it would become immediately evident that these 
{wo capitals are of the same technical composition, as soon as 
the price of the dearer raw material fell to the level of the cheaper 
one. The value ratio between constant and variable capital would 
have become the same in that case, although no change had taken 
place in the technical proportions between the living labour and 
the mass and nature of the conditions of labour employed by this 
capital. On (he other liand, a capital of lower organic composition 
could assume the appearance of being in the same class with 
one of a higher organic composition, merely from a rise in the val- 
ue of its constant portions, solely from the viewpoint of its value- 
composition. Suppose one capital=60,+40,, because it employs 
much inachinery and raw material compared to living labour- 
power, and another capital=40,+60,, because it employs much 
living labour (60%), liltle machinery (e.g., 10%) and compared 

748 TRANSFORMATION GF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

to labour-power less and cheaper raw material (e.g., 30%). Then 
asimple rise in the value of raw and auxiliary materials from 30 
to 80 could equalize the composition, so that now the second capi- 
tal would consist of 80 raw material and 60 labour-power for 10 
in machines, or 90,+60,, which, in percentages, would also= 
= 60.4-40,, with no change having taken place in the technical 
composition. In other words, capitals of equal organic composition 
may be of different value-composition, and capitals with iden- 
tical percentages of value-composition may show varying degrees 
of organic composition and thus express different stages in the 
development of the social productivity of labour. The mere cir- 
cumstance, then, that agricultural capital might be on the general 
level of value-composition, would not prove that the social produc- 
tivity of labour is equally high-developed in it. It would merely 
show that its own product, which again forms a part of its condi- 
tions of production, is dearer, or that auxiliary materials, such as fer- 
tilizer, which used to be close by, must now be brought [rom alar, etc. 

But aside from this, the peculiar nature of agriculture must be 
taken into account. 

Suppose labour-saving machinery, chemical aids, etc., are more 
extensively used in agriculture, and that therefore constant capi- 
tal increases technically, not merely in value, but also in mass, 
as compared with the mass of employed labour-power, then in agri- 
culture (as in mining) it is not only a matter of the social, but also 
of the natural, productivity of labour which depends on the natural 
conditions of labour. It is possible for the increase of social produc- 
tivity in agriculture to barely compensate, or not even compen- 
sate, for the decrease in natural power—this compensation will 
nevertheless be effective only for a short time—so that despite 
technical development there, no cheapening of the product occurs, 
but only a still greater increase in price is averted. It is also pos- 
sible that the absolute mass of products decreases with rising grain 
prices, while the relative surplus-product increases; namely, in 
the case of a relative increase in constant capital which consists 
chiefly of machinery or animals requiring only replacement of wear 
and tear, and with a corresponding decrease in variable capital 
which is expended in wages requiring constant replacement in full 
out of the product. 

Moreover, it is also possible that with progress in agriculture 
only a moderate rise in market-price above the average is neces- 
sary, in order to cultivate and draw a rent from poorer soil, which 
would have required a greater rise in market-price if technical aids 
were less developed. 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 749 

The fact that in larger-scale cattle-raising, for example, the mass 
ol employed labour-power is very small compared with constant 
capital as represented in cattle itself, could be taken to refute the 
assertion that more tabour-power, on a percentage basis, is 
set in motion by agricultural capital than by the average social 
capital outside of agriculture. Butit should be noted here that we 
lave taken as determining for rent analysis that portion ol agricultur- 
al capital which produces the principal plant foodstuffs provid- 
ing the chief means of subsistence among civilized nations. Adam 
Smith—and this is one of his merits—has already demonstrat- 
ed that a quite diflerent determination of prices is to be observed 
in cattle-raising, and, for that matter, generally for capitals in- 
vested in land which are not engaged in raising the principal 
means of subsistence, e.g., grain. Namely in that case the price is 
determined in such a way that the price of the product of the land— 
which is used for cattle-raising, say as an artificial pasture, but 
which could just as easily have been transformed into cornfields 
of a certain quality—must rise high enough to produce the same 
rent as on arable land of the same quality. In other words, the rent 
of cornfields becomes a determining element in the price of cattle, 
and for this reason Ramsay has justly remarked that the price of 
cattle is in this manner artificially raised by the rent, by the eco- 
nomic expression o! landed property, in short, through landed 
property. 

“By the extension of cultivation the unimproved wilds become 
insufficient to supply the demand lor butcher’s meat. A great part 
of the cultivated lands must be employed in rearing and fattening 
cattle, of which the price, therefore, must be sufficient to pay, 
not only the labour necessary for tending them, but the rent which 
the landlord and the profit which the farmer could have drawn from 
sucht land, employed in tillage. The cattle bred upon the most un- 
cultivated moors, when brought to the same market, are, in pro- 
portion to their weight or goodness, sold at the same price as Lhose 
which are reared upon the most improved land. The proprietors 
of those moors profit by it, and raise therent of their land in pro- 
portion to the price of their cattle.” (Adam Smith, Book I, Ch. 
XI, Part 1.) In this case, likewise, as distinct from grain-rent, 
the differential rent is in favour of the worst soil. 

Absolute rent explains some phenomena, which, at first sight, 
seem to make merely a monopoly price responsible for the rent. 
To go on with Adam Smith's example, take the owner of some Nor- 
wegian forest, for instance, which exists independent of human ac- 
tivity, i.e, it is not a product of silviculture. If the proprietor of 

750 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

(his forest receives a rent from a capitalist who has the timber 
felled, perhaps in consequence of a demand from England, or if this 
owner lias the timber felled himself acting in the capacity of capi- 
(alisl, then a greater or smaller amount of rent will accrue to him 
in timber, apart {rom the profit on invested capital. This appears 
to be a pure monopoly charge derived from a pure product of Na- 
iure. But, as a matter of fact, the capital here consists alrnost ex- 
clusively of a variable component expended in labour, and thus 
seis more surplus-labour in motion than another capital of the 
same size. The value of the timber, then, contains a greater surplus 
of unpaid labour, or of surplus-value, than that of a product of 
a capital of a higher organic composition. For this reason the aver- 
age profit can be derived from this timber, and a considerable sur- 
plus in the form of rent can fall to the share of Lhe owner of the for- 
est. Conversely, it may be assumed that, owing to the ease with 
which timber-felling may be extended, in other words, its produc- 
tion rapidly increased, the demand must rise very considerably 
for the price of timber to equal its value, and thereby for the en- 
tire surplus of unpaid labour (over and above that portion which 
falls to the capitalist as average profit) to accrue to the owner in 
the form of rent. 

We have assumed that the land newly brought under cultiva- 
lion is of still inferior quality than the worst previously cultivat- 
ed. If it is better, it yields a differential rent. But here we are ana- 
lysing precisely the case wherein rent does not appear as a differ- 
ential rent. There are only two cases possible: The newly culti- 
vated soil is either inferior to, or just as good as the previously cul- 
tivated soil. If inferior, then the matter has already been analysed. 
It remains only to analyse the case in which it is just as good. 

As already developed in our analysis ol differential rent, the prog- 
ress of cultivation may just as well bring equally good, or even 
better soils under the plough as worse soil. 

First. Because in differential rent (or any rent in general, since 
even in the case of non-differential rent the question always 
arises whether, on the one hand, che soil fertility in general, and, 
on the other hand, its location, admit of its cultivation at the reg- 
ulating market-price so as to yield a profit and rent) two condi- 
tions work in opposing directions, now cancelling one another, 
now alternately exerting ihe determining influence. The rise in 
market-price—provided ihe cost-price of cultivation has not 
fallen, i.e., no technical progress has given a new impetus to fur- 
ther cultivation—may bring under cultivation more fertile soil 
formerly excluded from competition by virtue of its location. Or 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 75l 

it may so enhance the advantage of the location of the inferior soil 
that its lesser fertility is counterbalanced by it. Or, without any 
tise in market-price the location may bring better soils into com- 
petition through improvement in means of communication, as 
can be observed on a large scale in the prairie States of North Amer- 
ica. In countries of older civilization the same also takes place 
constantly if not to the same extent as in the colonies, where, as 
Wakefield correctly observes, location is decisive. To sum up, 
then, the contradictory influences of location and fertility, and the 
variableness of the location factor, which is continually counter- 
balanced and perpetually passes through progressive changes tend- 
ing towards equalization, alternately carry equally good, better 
or worse Jand areas into new competition with the older ones under 
cultivation. 

Secondly. With the development of natural science and agronomy 
the soil fertility is also changed by changing the means through 
which the soil constituents may be rendered immediately 
serviceable. In this way, light soil types in France and in the east- 
ern counties of England, which were regarded as inferior at one 
time, have recently risen to first place. (See Passy.) On the other 
hand, soil considered inferior not for bad chemical composition 
but for certain mechanical and physical obstacles that hindered its 
cultivation, is converted into good land as soon as means to over- 
come these obstacles have been discovered. 

Thirdly. In all ancient civilizations, old historical and tradi- 
tional relations, for instance, in the form of state-owned lands, com- 
munal lands, etc., have purely arbitrarily withheld from cul- 
tivation large tracts of land, which only return to it little by lit- 
tle. The succession in which they are brought under cultivation 
depends neither upon their good quality nor siting, but upon wholly 
exlernal circumstances. In tracing the history of English commu- 
nal lands turned successively into private property through the 
Enclosure Bills and brought under the plough, nothing would 
be more ridiculous than the fantastic idea that a modern agricul- 
tural chemist, such as Liebig, had indicated the selection of 
land in this succession, designating certain fields for cultivation 
owing to chemical properties and excluding others. What was more 
decisive in this case was the opportunily which makes the thie}; 
the more or less plausible legalistic subterluges of the big landlords 
to justify their appropriation. 

Fourthly. Apart from the fact that the stage of development 
reached at any time by the population and capital increase sets 
certain limits, even though elastic, to the extension of cultivation, 

752 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

and apart from chance effects which temporarily influence the 
market-price—such as a series of good or bad seasons—the ex- 
tension of agriculture over a larger area depends on the over-all 
state of the capital market and business conditions in a country. 
in periods of stringency it will not suffice for uncultivated soil to 
vield the tenant an average profit—no matter whether he pays 
any rent or not—in order that additional capital be invested in 
agriculture. In other periods when there is a plethora of capital, 
it will pour into agriculture even without a rise in market-price 
if only other normal conditions are present. Better soil than hith- 
erto cultivated would in fact be excluded from competition solely 
on the basis of unfavourable location, or if hitherto insurmount- 
able obstacles to its employment existed, or through chance. For 
this reason we should only concern ourselves with soils which are 
just as good as those last cultivated. However, there still exists 
the difference in cost of clearing for cultivation between the new 
soil and the one last cultivated. And it depends upon the level of 
market-prices and credit conditions whether this will be undertak- 
en or not. As soon as this soil then actually enters into competi- 
tion, the market-price will fall once more to its former level, as- 
suming other conditions to be equal, and the new soil will then 
vield the same rent as the corresponding old soil. The assumption 
that it does not yield any rent is proved by its advocates by assum- 
ing precisely what they are called upon to prove, namely that the 
last soil did not yield any rent. One might prove in the saine 
manner that houses which were the last built do not yield any rent 
for the building outside of house-rent proper, evan though they are 
leased. In fact, however, they do yield rent even before yielding 
any house-rent, when they frequently remain vacant for a long 
period. Just as successive investments of capital in a certain 
piece of land may bring a proportional surplus and thereby the 
same rent as the first investment, so fields of the same quality 
as those last cultivated may bring ihe same proceeds for the same 
cost. Otherwise it would be altogether inexplicable how fields of 
the same quality are ever brought successively under cultivation; 
it seems that either it would be necessary to take all together, or 
rather not a single one of them, in order not to bring all the remain- 
ing ones into competition. The landlord is always ready to draw 
a rent, i.e., to receive something for nothing. But capital requires 
certain conditions to fulfil his wish. Competition between pieces 
of land does not, therefore, depend upon the landlord desiring 
them to compete, but upon the capital existing which seeks 
to compete with other capitals in the new fields. 

ABSOLUTE GROUND-RENT 753 

To the extent that the agricultural rent proper is purely a mo- 
nopoly price, the fatter can only be small, just as the absolute 
rent can only be small here under normal conditions whatever the 
excess of the product’s value over its price of production. The es- 
sence of absolute rent, therefore, consists in this: Given the same 
rate of surplus-value, or degree of labour exploitation, equally 
large capitals in various spheres of production produce different 
amounts of surplus-value, in accordance with their varying aver- 
age composition. In industry these various masses of surplus-value 
are equalized into an average profit and distributed uniformly 
among the individual capitals as aliquot parts of the social cap- 
ital. Landed property hinders such an equalization among capi- 
tals invested in land, whenever production requires land for ei- 
ther agriculture or extraction of raw materials, and takes hold of 
a portion of the surplus-value, which would otherwise take part in 
equalizing to the general rate of profit. The rent, then, forms a 
portion of the value, or, more specifically, surplus-value, of com- 
modities, and instead of falling into the lap of the capitalists, who 
have extracted it from their labourers, it falls to the share of the 
landlords, who extract it from the capitalists. It is hereby assumed 
that the agricultural capital sets more labour in motion than an 
equally large portion of non-agricultural capital. How far the dis- 
crepancy goes, or whether it exists at all, depends upon the rela- 
tive development ol agriculture as compared with industry. It 
is in the nature of the case that this difference must decrease with 
ihe progress of agriculture, unless the proportionate decrease of 
variable as compared with constant capital is still greater in 
the case of industrial than in the case of agricultural capital. 

This absolute rent plays an even more important role in the ex- 
tractive industry proper, where one element of constant capital, 
raw material, is wholly lacking and where, excluding those lines 
in which capital consisting of machinery and other fixed capital 
is very considerable, by far the lowest composition of capital pre- 
vails. Precisely here, where the rent appears entirely attributable 
to a monopoly price, unusually favourable market conditions are 
necessary for commodities to be sold at their value, or for rent to 
equal the entire excess of a commodity’s surplus-value over its 
price of production. This applies, for instance, to rent from fish- 
eries, stone quarries, natural forests, etc.” 

% Ricardo deals with this very superficially. See {he passage directed against 
Adam Smith concerning forest rent in Norway, at the very beginning of 
Chapter II, in Principles. 

CUAPTER XLVI 

BUILDING SITE RENT, RENT IN MINING. 
PRICE OF LAND 

Wherever rent exists at all, cifferential rent appears at all times, 
and is governed by ihe same laws, as agricultural differential 
rent. Wherever natural forces can be monopolized and guarantee 
a surplus-profit to the industrial capitalist using them, be it 
waterfalls, rich mines, waters teeming with fish, or a favourably 
located building site, there the person who by virtue of title to 
a portion of the globe has become the proprietor of these natural 
objects will wrest this surplus-profit from functioning capital 
in the form of rent. Adam Smith has set forth, as concerns land 
for building purposes, that the basis of its rent, like that of all 
non-agricultural land, is regulated by agricultural rent proper 
(Book I, Ch. XI, 2 and 3). This rent is distinguished, in the first 
place, by the preponderant influence exerted here by location upon 
differential rent (very significant, e.g.,in vineyards and building sites 
in large cities); secondly, by the palpable and complete passive- 
ness of the owner, whose sole activity consists (especially in mines) 
in exploiting the progress of social development, toward which 
he contributes nothing and for which he risks nothing, unlike the 
industrial capitalist; and finally by the prevalence of monopoly 
prices in many cases, particularly through the most shameless ex- 
ploitation of poverty (for poverty is more lucrative for house-rent 
than the mines of Potosi ever were for Spain‘*), and the monstrous 
power wielded by landed property, when united hand in hand with 
industrial capital, enables it to be used against labourers engaged 
in their wage struggle as a means of practically expelling them from 
the earth as a dwelling-place.** One part of society thus exacts 

* Laing, Newman. 
s., ae nator Strike. Engels, Lage der arbeitenden Klasse in England, 

BUILDING SITE AND MINING RENT. PRICE OF LAND 755 

tribute [rom another for the permission to inhabit the earth, as 
landed property in general assigns the landlord the privilege of 
exploiting the terrestrial body, the bowels of the earth, the air, and 
thereby the maintenance and development of lile. Not only the 
population increase and with it the growing demand for shelter 
but also the development of fixed capital, which is either incor: 
porated in land, or takes root in it and is based upon it, such as 
all industrial buildings, railways, warehouses, factory buildings, 
docks, etc., necessarily increase the building rent. A confusion of 
house-rent, in so far as it constitutes interest and amortization on 
capital invested in a house, and rent for the mere land, is not pos- 
sible in this case, even with all the goodwill of a person like Ca- 
rey, particularly when landlord and building speculator are differ- 
ent persons, as is true in England. Two elements should be consid- 
ered here: on the one hand, the exploitation of the earth for the 
purpose of reproduction or extraction; on the other hand, the space 
required as an element of all production and all human activity. 
And property in land demands its tribute in both senses. The de- 
mand for building sites raises the value of Jand as space and foun- 
dation, while thereby the demand for elements of the terrestrial 
body serving as building material grows simultaneously.” 

That it is the ground-rent, and not the house, which forms the 
actual object of building speculation in rapidly growing cities, 
especially where construction is carried on as an industry, e.g., 
in London, has already been illustrated in Book II, Chapter XII, 
in the testimony of a big building speculatorin London, Edward 
Capps, given before the Select Committee on Bank Acts of 1857. 
He stated there, No. 5435: “I think a man who wishes to rise in 
the world can hardly expect to rise by following out a [air trade 
.. it is necessary for him to add speculative building to it, and that 
must be done not on a small scale; ... for the builder makes very 
little profit out of the buildings themselves; he makes the princi- 
pal part of the profit out of the improved ground-rents. Perhaps 
he takes a piece of ground, and agrees to give £300 a year for it; 
by laying it out with care, and putting certain descriptions of build- 
ings upon it, he may succeed in making £400 or £450 a year out 
of it, and his profit would be the increased ground-rent of £100 
or £150 a year, rather than the profit of the buildings which ..., 
in many instances, he scarcely looks at at all.” And parentheti- 

4° “The paving ol the streets of London has enabled the owners of some har- 
ren rocks on the coast of Scotland to draw a rent from what never afforded any be- 
fore.” Adam Smith, Book 1, Chapter XI, 2. 

756 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROOND-RENT 

cally it should not be forgotten that after the lapse of the lease, 
generally at the end of 99 years, the land with all its buildings and 
its ground-rent—usually increased in {he interim twice or three 
times, reverts [rom the building speculator or his legal successor 
to the original last landlord. 

Mining rent proper is determined in the same way as agricul- 
tural rent. “There are some mines, of which the produce is barely 
sufficient to pay the labour and replace, together with its ordi- 
nary profits, the stock employed in working them. They afford 
some profit to the undertaker of the work, but no rent to the land- 
lord. They can be wrought advantageously by nobody but the land- 
lord. who, being himself the undertaker of the work, gets the or- 
dinary profit of the capital which he employs in it. Many coal- 
mines in Scotland are wrought in this manner, and can be wrought 
in no other. The landlord wil! allow nobody else to work them with- 
out paying some rent, and nobody can afiord to pay any.” (Adam 
Smith, Book I, Ch. XI, 2.) 

It must be distinguished, whether the rent springs from a monop- 
oly price, because a monopoly price of the product or the land exists 
independently of it, or whether the products are sold at a mo- 
nopoly price, because a rent exists. When we refer to a monopoly 
price, we mean in general a price determined only by the purchas- 
ers’ eagerness to buy and ability to pay, independent of the price 
determined by the general price of production, as well as by the 
value of the products. A vineyard producing wine of very extraor- 
dinary quality which can be produced only in relatively small 
quantities yields a monopoly price. The wine-grower would realize 
a considerable surplus-profit from this monopoly price, whose 
excess over the value of the product would be wholly determined 
by the means and fondness of the discriminating wine-drinker. This 
surplus-profit, which accrues from a monopoly price, is converted 
into rent and in this form falls into the lap of the landlord, thanks 
to his title to this piece of the globe endowed with singular proper- 
ties. Here, then, the monopoly price creates the rent. On the other 
hand, the rent would create a monopoly price if grain were sold 
not merely above its price of production, but also above its value, 
owing to the Jimits set by landed property to the investment of 
capital in uncultivated land without payment of rent. That it 
is only the title of a number of persons to the possession of the globe 
enabling them to appropriate to themselves as tribute a portion 
of the surplus-labour of society and furthermore to a constantly 
increasing extent with the development of production, is concealed 
by the fact that the capitalized rent, i.e., precisely this capital- 

BUILDING SITE AND MINING RENT, PRICE OF LAND 757 

ized tribute, appears as the price of land, which may therefore he 
sold like any other article of commerce. The buyer, therefore, 
does not Jeel that his title to the rent is obtained gratis, and with- 
out the labour, risk, and spirit of enterprise of the capitalist, but 
rather that he has paid for it with an equivalent. To the buyer, 
as previously indicated, the rent appears merely as interest on the 
capilal with which he has purchased the land and consequently 
his title to the rent. In the same way, the slave-holder considers 
a Negro, whom he has purchased, as his property, not because the 
institution of slavery as such entitles him to that Negro, but be- 
cause he has acquired him like any other commodity, through sale 
and purchase. But the title itself is simply transferred, and not 
created by the sale. The title must exist before it can be sold, 
and a series olf sales can no more create this title through contin- 
ued repetition than a single sale can. What created it in the first 
place were the production relations. As soon as these have reached 
a point where they must shed their skin, the material source of 
the title, justified economically and historically and arising Irom 
the process which creates social life, falls by the wayside, along 
with all transactions based upon it. From the standpoint of a high- 
er economic form ol society, private ownership of the globe by 
single individuals will appear quite as absurd as private owner- 
ship of one man by another. Even a whole society, a nation, or even 
all simultaneously exisling socielies taken together, are not the 
owners of the globe. They are only its possessors, its usulructu- 
aries, and, like boni patres familias, they must hand it down to 
succeeding generations in an improved condition. 

In the following analysis of the price of land we leave out of con- 
sideration all fluctuations of competition, all land speculation, 
and also small landed property, in which land forms the principal 
instrument of producers and must, therefore, be bought by them 
at any price. 

I. The price of land may rise without the rent rising, namely: 

1) by a mere Jall in inlerest rate, which causes the rent to be 
sold more dearly, and thereby the capitalized rent, or price olf 
land, rises; 

2) because the interest on capital incorporated in the land rises. 

I]. The price of land may rise, because tlie rent increases. 

The rent may increase, because the price of the product of the 
land rises, in which case the rate of differential rent always rises, 
whether the rent on the worst cultivated soil be large, smal] or 

758 TRANSFORMATION OF SURDL.US-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

non-existent. By rate we mean the ratio of that portion of surplus- 
value converted into rent to the invested capital which produces 
the agricultural product. This differs from the ratio of surplus- 
product to total product, for the total product does not comprise 
the entire invested capital, namely, the fixed capital, which contin- 
ues to exist alongside the product. On the other hand, it covers 
the fact that on soils yielding differential rent an increasing por- 
tion of the product is transformed into an excess of surplus-product. 
The increase in price of agricultural product of the worst soil first 
creates rent and thereby the price of land. 

The rent, however, may also increase without a rise in price of 
the agricultural product. This price may remain constant, or even 
decrease. 

If the price remains constant, the rent can grow only (apart from 
monopoly prices) because, on the one hand, given the same amount 
of capital invested in the old lands, new lands of better quality 
are cultivated, which merely suffice, however, to cover the increased 
demand, so that the regulating market-price remains unchanged. 
In this case, the price of the old lands does not rise, but the 
price of the newly cultivated lands rises above that of the old ones. 

Or, on the other hand, the rent rises because the mass of capital 
exploiting the land increases, assuming that the relative productiv- 
ity and market-price remain the same. Although the rent thus 
Temains the same compared with the invested capital, still its 
mass, for instance, may be doubled, because the capital itself has 
doubled. Since no fail in price has occurred, the second investment 
of capital yields a surplus-profit just as well as the first, and it 
likewise is transformed into rent after the expiration of the lease. 
The mass of rent rises here, because the mass of capital producing 
a rent increases. The contention that various successive invest- 
ments of capital in the same piece of land can produce rent only 
in so far as their yield is unequal, so that a differential rent thus 
arises, is reduced to the contention that when two capitals of £1,000 
each are invested in two fields of equal productivity, only one of 
them can produce a rent, although both fields belong to a better 
soil type, which produces differential rent. (The mass of rental, 
the total rent of a country, grows therefore with the mass of capi- 
tal invested, without the price of the individual pieces of land, or 
the rate of rent, or even the mass of rent on individual pieces of 
land, necessarily increasing; the amount of rental grows in this case 
with the extension of cultivation over a wider area. This may even 
be combined with a decrease in rent on individual holdings.) Oth- 
erwise, this contention would lead to the other, namely, that the 

BUILDING SITE AND MINING RENT. PRICK OF LAND 759 

investment of capital in two diflerent pieces of land existing side 
by side follows different laws than the successive investment of 
capital in the same plot, whereas diflerential rent is derived precise- 
ly from the identity of the law in both cases, from the increased 
productiveness of capital invested either in the same field or in 
different fields. The only modification which exists here and is 
overlooked is that successive investments of capital, when applied 
to different pieces of land, meet the barrier of landed property, 
which is not the case with successive investments of capital in the 
same piece of land. This accounts for the opposing tendencies by 
which these two different forms of investment curb each other in 
practice. No difference in capital ever appears here. If the composi- 
tion of the capital remains the same, and similarly the rate of sur- 
plus-value, the rate of profit remains unaltered, so that the mass 
of profit is doubled when the capital is doubled. In like manner 
the rate of rent remains the same under the assumed conditions. 
If acapital of £1,000 produces a rent of x, then a capital of £2,000, 
under the assumed conditions, produces a rent of 2x. But calcu- 
lated with reference to the area of Jand, which has remained unal- 
tered, since, according to our assumption, the doubled capital oper- 
ates in the same field, the level of rent has also risen as a conse- 
quence of ils increase in mass. The same acre which yielded a rent 
of £2, now yields £4." 

The relation of a portion of the surplus-value, of money-rent— 
for money is the independent expression of value—to the land is 
in itself absurd and irrational; for the magnitudes which are here 
measured by one another are incommensurable—a particular 
use-value, a piece of land of so many and so many square feet, on 
the one hand, and value, especially surplus-value, on the other. 
This expresses in fact nothing more than that, under the given con- 

“1 It is one of the merits of Rodbertus whose important work on rent we shal! 
discuss in Book IV to have developed this point. He commits the one error, how- 
ever, of assuming, inthe first place, that as regards capital an increase in profil 
is always expressed by an increase in capital, so that the ratio remains the 
same when the mass of profit increases. But this is erroneous, since the rate of 
profit may increase, given a changed composition of capital, even if the exploi- 
tation of labour remains the same, precisely because the proportional value of 
the constant portion of capital compared with its variable portion falls. Second- 
ly, he commits the mistake of dealing with the ratio of money-rent to a quanti- 
tatively definite piece of land,e.g., an acre, as though it had been the general 
premise of classical economics in its analysis of the rise or fall of rent. This, again, 
Is erroneaus. Classical economics always treats the rate of rent, in so far as 
it considers rent in its natural form, with reference to the product, andin so far 
as it considers rent as money-rent, with reference to the advanced capital, be- 
cause these are in fact the rational expressions. 

760 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

ditions, the ownership of so many square feet of land enables the 
landowner to wrest a certain quantity of unpaid labour, which 
the capital wallowing in these square feet like a hog in potatoes 
has realized. [Written in the manuscript here in brackets, but 
crossed out, is the name “Liebig.”] But prima facie the expression 
is the same as if one desired tospeak of the relation of a five-pound 
note to the diameter of the earth. However, the reconciliation of 
irrational forms in which certain economic relations appear and 
assert themselves in practice does not concern the active agents 
of these relations in their everyday life. And since they are accus- 
tomed to move about in such relations, they find nothing strange 
therein. A complete contradiction offers not the least mystery to 
them. They feel as much at home as a fish in water among mani- 
festations which are separated from their internal connections and 
absurd when isolafed by themselves. What Hegel says with refer- 
ence to certain mathematical formulas applies here: that which 
seems irrational to ordinary common sense is rational, and that 
which seems rational to it is itself irrational. 

When considered in connection with the land area itself, a rise 
in the mass of rent is thus expressed in the same way as a rise in 
the rate of rent, and hence the embarrassment experienced when 
the conditions which would explain the one case are lacking in the 
other. 

The price of land, however, may also rise even when the price 
of the agricultural product decreases. 

In this case, the differential rent, and with it the price of the bet- 
ter lands, may have risen, owing to further diflerentiations. Or, 
if this is not. the case, the price of the agricultural product may 
have fallen by virtue of greater labour productivity but in such a 
manner that the increased production more than counterbalances 
this. Let us assume that one quarter cost 60 shillings. Now, if the 
same acre, with the same capital, should produce two quarters 
instead of one, and the price of one quarter should fall to 40 shil- 
lings, then two quarters would cost 80 shillings, so that the value 
of the product of the same capital invested in the same acre would 
have risen by one-third, despite the fall in price per quarter by 
one-third. How this is possible without selling the product above 
its price of production or abave its value, has been developed in 
the analysis of diferential rent. As a matter of fact it is possible 
only in two ways. Either bad soil is excluded from competition, 
but the price of the better soil increases with the increase in differ- 
ential rent, i.e., the general improvement affects the various soil 
types differently. Or, the same price of production (and the same 

BUILDING SITE AND MINING RENT. PRICE OF LAND 76k 

value, if absolute rent is paid) expresses itself on the worst soil 
through a larger mass of products, when labour productivity has 
become greater. The product represents the same value as before, 
but the price of its aliquot parts has fallen, while their number 
has increased. This is impossible when the same capital has been 
employed; for in this case the same value always expresses itself 
through any portion of the product. It is possible, however, when 
additional capital has been expended for gypsum, guano, etc., 
in short, for improvements the effects of which extend over several 
years. The stipulation is that the price of an individual quarter 
falls, but not to the same extent as the number of quarters in- 
creases. 

III. These different conditions under which rent may rise, and 
with it the price of land in general, or of particular kinds of land, 
may partly compete, or partly exclude one another, and can only 
act alternately. But it follows from the foregoing that the conse- 
quence of a rise in the price of land does not necessarily signify 
also a rise in rent, or that a rise in rent, which always brings with 
it a rise in the price of land, is not necessarily contingent upon an 
increase in the agricultural product.** 

Rather than tracing to their origin the real natural causes lead- 
ing to an exhaustion of the soil, which, incidentally, were unknown 
to all economists writing on differential rent owing to the level of 
agricultural chemistry in their day, the shallow conception was 
seized upon that any amount of capital cannot be invested in a 
limited area of land; as the Wesfminster Review, for instance, argued 
against Richard Jones that all of England cannot be fed through 
the cultivation of Soho Square. If this be considered a special 
disadvantage of agriculture, precisely the opposite is true. It is 
possible to invest capital here successively with fruitful results, 
because the soil itself serves as an instrument of production, which 
is not the case with a factory, or holds only to a limited extent, 
since it serves only as a foundation, as a place and a space providing 
a basis of operations, It is true that, compared with scattered 
handicrafts, large-scale industry may concentrate much production 
in a small area. Nevertheless, a definite amount of space is 
always required at any given level of productivity, and the con- 
struction of tall buildings also has its practical limitations. Beyond 
this any expansion of production also demands an extension of 

* Concerning the actual fall in the price of land when rent rises, see Passy. 

762 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

land area. The fixed capital invested in machinery, etc., does not 
improve through use, but on the contrary, wears out. New inventions 
imay indeed permit some improvement inthis respect, but with any 
given development in productive power, machines will always dete- 
riorate. If productivity is rapidly developed, all of the old machin- 
ery must be replaced by the more advantageous; in other words, 
it is lost. The soil, however, if properly treated, improves all the 
time. The advantage of the soil, permitting successive investments 
of capital to bring gains without loss of previous investments, im- 
plies the possibility of differences in yield from these successive 
investments of capital. 

CHAPTER XLYVII 
GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 

IL. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS 

We must clarify in our minds wherein lies the real difficulty in 
analysing ground-rent from the viewpoint of modern economics, 
as the theoretical expression of the capitalist mode of production. 
Even many of the more modern writers have not as yet grasped 
this, as evidenced by each renewed attempt to “newly” explain 
ground-rent. The novelty almost invariably consists in a relapse 
into long out-of-date views. The difficulty is not to explain the 
surplus-product produced by agricultural capital and its corre- 
sponding surplus-value in general. This question is solved in the 
analysis of the surplus-value produced by all productive capital, 
in whatever sphere it may be invested. The difficulty consists 
tather in showing the source of the excess of surplus-value paid 
the landlord by capital invested in land in the form of rent, after 
equalization of the surplus-value to the average profit among the 
various capitals, after the various capitals have shared in the total 
surplus-value produced by the social capital in all spheres of 
production in proportion to their relative size; in other words, 
the source subsequent to this equalization and the apparently 
already completed distribution of all surplus-value which, in 
general, is to be distributed. Quite apart from the practical motives, 
which prodded modern economists as spokesmen of industrial 
capital against landed property to investigate this question—mo- 
tives which we shall point out more clearly in the chapter on his- 
tory of ground-rent—the question was of paramount interest 
to them as theorists. To admit that the appearance of rent for capi- 
tal invested in agriculture is due to some particular effect pro- 
duced by the sphere of investment ilself, due to singular quali- 
ties of the earth’s crust itself, is tantamount to giving up the 
conception of value as such, thus tantamount to abandoning all 
attempts at a scientific understanding of this field. Even the simple 

764 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 
764 

observation that rent is paid out of the price of agricultural prod- 
uce—which takes place even where rent is paid in kind if 
the farmer is to recover his price of production—showed the ab- 
surdity of attempting to explain the excess of this price over the 
ordinary price o! production; in other words, to explain the rela- 
tive dearness of agricultural products on the basis of the excess of 
natural productivity of agricultural production over the produc- 
tivity of other lines of production. Fur the reverse is true: the 
more productive labour is, the cheaper is every aliquot part of 
its product, because so much greater is the mass of use-values 
incorporating the same quantity of labour, i.e., the same value. 

The whole difficulty in analysing rent, therefore, consists in 
explaining the excess of agricultural profit over the average profit, 
not the surplus-value, but the excess of surplus-value characteris- 
tic of this sphere of production; in other words, not the “net prod- 
uct,” but the excess of this net product over thenet product of other 
branches of industry. The average profit itself is a product formed 
under very definite historical production relations by the move- 
ment of social processes, a product which, as we have seen, requires 
very complex adjustment. To be able to speak at all of a surplus 
over the average profit, this average profit itself must already be 
established as a standard and as a regulator of production in general 
as is the case under capitalist production. For this reason there can 
be no talk of rent in the modern sense, a rent consisting of a surplus 
over the average profit, i.e., over and above the proportional 
share of each individual capital in the surplus-value produced by 
the total social capital, in social formations where it is not capital 
which performs the function of enforcing all surplus-labour and 
appropriating directly all surplus-value. And where therefore capi- 
tal has not yet completely, or only sporadically, brought social 
labour under its control. It reflects naiveté, e.g., of a person like 
Passy (see below), when he speaks of rent in primitive society as 
a surplus over profit—a historically defined social form of surplus- 
value, but which, according to Passy, might almost as well exist 
without any society. 

For the older economists, who in general merely begin analysing 
the capitalist mode of production, ‘still undeveloped in their day, 
the analysis of rent offers either no difficulty at all, or only a diffi- 
culty of a completely different kind. Petty, Cantillon, and in gener- 
al those writers who are closer to feudal times, assume ground-rent 
to be the normal form of surplus-value in general, whereas profit 
to them is still amorphously combined with wages, or at best appears 
lo be a portion of surplus-value extorted by the capitalist from 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 765 

the landlord. These writers thus take as {heir point of departure a 
situation where, in the first place, the agricultural population still 
constitutes the overwhelming majority of the nation, and, secondly, 
the landlord still appears as the person appropriating at first 
hand the surplus-labour of the direct producers by virtue of his 
monopoly of landed property, where landed property, therefore, 
still appears as the main condition of production. For these writers 
the question could not yet be posed, which, inversely, seeks to 
investigate from the viewpoint of capitalist production how landed 
property manages to wrest back again [rom capital a portion of the 
surplus-value produced by it (that is, filehed by it from the direct 
producers) and already appropriated directly. 

The physiocrats are troubled by dilficulties of another nature. 
As the actually first systematic spokesmen of capital, they attempt 
to analyse the nature of surplus-value in general. For them, this 
analysis coincides with the analysis of rent, the only form of sur- 
plus-value which they recognize. Therefore, they consider rent- 
yielding, or agricultural, capital to be the only capital producing 
surplus-value, and the agricultural] labour set in motion by it, the 
only labour producing surplus-value, which from a_ capitalist 
viewpoint is quite properly considered the only productive labour. 
They are quite right in considering the creation of surplus-value 
as decisive. Apart from other merits to be set forth in Book IV, 
they deserve credit primarily for going back from merchant’s 
capital, which functions solely in the sphere of circulation, to 
productive capital, in opposition to the mercantile system, which, 
with its crude realism, constitutes the actual vulgar economy of 
that period, pushing into the background in favour of its own prac- 
lical interests the beginnings of scientific analysis made by Petty 
and his successors. In this critique of the mercantile system, inci- 
dentally, only its conceptions of capital and surplus-value are 
dealt with. It has already been indicated previously thal the 
monetary system correctly proclaims production for the world- 
market and the transformation of the oulput into commodities, 
and thus into money, as the prerequisite and condition of capi- 
talist production. In this system’s further development into the 
mercantile system, it is no longer the transformation of commodity- 
value into money, but the creation of surplus-value which is 
decisive—but from the meaningless viewpoint of the circulation 
sphere and, at the same time, in such manner that this surplus- 
value is represented as surplus money, as the balance of trade sur- 
plus. At the same time, however, the characteristic feature of 
the interested merchants and manufacturers of that period, which 

766 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

is in keeping with the stage of capitalist development represented 
by them, is that the transformation of feudal agricultural societies 
into industrial ones and the corresponding industrial struggle of 
nations on the world-market depends on an accelerated development 
of capital. which is not to be arrived at along the so-called natural 
path, but rather by means of coercive measures. It makes a tremen- 
dous difference whether national capital is gradually and slowly 
transformed into industrial capital, or whether this development 
is accelerated by means of a tax which they impose through pro- 
tective duties mainly upon landowners, middle and smal! peasants, 
and handicraftsmen, by way o! accelerated expropriation of the 
independent direct producers, and through the violently acceterat- 
ed accumulation and concentration of capital, in short by means 
of the accelerated establishment of conditions of capitalist produc- 
tion. It simultaneously makes an enormous difference in the capi- 
talist and industrial exploitation of the natural national produc- 
tive power. Hence the national character of the mercantile system 
is not merely a phrase on the lips of ils spokesmen. Under the 
pretext of concern solely for the wealth of the nation and the 
resources of the state, they, in fact, pronounce the interests of the 
capitalist class and the amassing of riches in general to be the 
ultimate aim of the state, and thus proclaim bourgeois society in 
place of the old divinestate. But at thesame time they are conscious- 
ly aware that the development of the interests of capital and of 
the capitalist class, of capitalist production, forms the foundation 
of national power and national ascendancy in modern society. 

The physiocrats, furthermore, are correct in stating that in fact 
all production of surplus-value, and thus all development of 
capital, has for its natural basis the productiveness of agricul- 
tural labour. If man were not capable of producing in one work- 
ing-day more means of subsistence, which signifies in the strict- 
est sense more agricultural products than every labourer needs 
for his own reproduction, if the daily expenditure of his entire 
labour-power sufficed merely to produce the means of subsistence 
indispensable for his own individual requirements, then one could 
not speak at all either of surplus-product or surplus-value. An 
agricultural labour productivity exceeding the individual require- 
ments of the labourer is the basis of all societies, and is‘above all 
the basis of capitalist production, which disengages a constantly 
increasing portion of society from the production of basic food- 
stuffs and transforms them into “free heads,” as Steuart has it, 
making them available for exploitation in other spheres. 

But what can be said of more recent writers on economics, such 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 767 

as Daire, Passy, etc., who parrot the most primitive conceptions 
concerning the natural conditions of surplus-labour and thereby 
surplus-value in general, in the twilight of classical economy, 
indeed on its very death-bed, and who imagine that they are thus 
propounding something new and striking on ground-rent long 
alter this ground-rent has been investigated as a special form and 
become a specific portion of surplus-value? It is particularly char- 
acteristic of vulgar economy that it echoes what was new, origi- 
nal, profound and justified during a specific outgrown stage of 
development, in a period when it has turned platitudinous, 
stale, and false. It thus confesses its complete ignorance of 
the problems which concerned classical economy. It confounds 
them with questions that could only have been posed on a lower 
level of development of bourgeois society. The same holds true 
of its incessant and sell-complacent rumination of the physio- 
cratic phrases concerning free trade. These phrases have long 
‘since lost all theoretical interest, no matter how much they may 
engage the practical attention of this or that state. 

In natural economy proper, when no part of the agricultural 
product, or but a very insignificant portion, enters into the process 
of circulation, and then only a relatively small portion of that part 
of the product which represents the landlord's revenue, as, e.g., 
in many Roman latilundia, or upon the villas of Charlemagne, 
or more or less during the entire Middle Ages (see Vincard, His- 
toire du travail\, the product and surplus-product of the large 
estates consist by no means purely of products of agricultural 
labour. It encompasses equally well the products of industrial 
labour. Domestic handicrafts and manufacturing labour, as second- 
ary occupations of agriculture, which forms the basis, are the 
prerequisite of that mode of production upon which natural econ- 
omy rests—in European antiquity and the Middle Ages as well 
as in the present-day Indian community, in which the traditional 
organization has not yet been destroyed. The capitalist mode of 
production completely abolishes this relationship; a process which 
may be studied on a large scale particularly in England during 
the last third of the 18th century. Thinkers like Herrenschwand,who 
had grown up in more or less semi-leudal societies, still consider, 
e.g., as late as the close of the 18th century, this separation of 
manufacture [rom agriculture as a foolhardy social adventure, as 
an unthinkably risky mode of existence. And even in the agricul- 
tural economies of antiquity showing the greatest analogy to capi- 
talist agriculture, namely Carthage and Rome, the similarity to 
a plantation economy is greater than to a form corresponding to 

768 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

the really capitalist mode of exploitation.*** A formal analogy, 
which, simultaneously, however, turns out to be completely illusory 
in all essential points to a person familiar with the capitalist mode 
of production, who does not, like Herr Mommsen,** discover a 
capitalist mode of production in every monetary economy, is not 
to be found at all in continental Italy during antiquity, but at 
best only in Sicily, since this island served Rome as an agricultural 
{tributary so that its agriculture was aimed chiefly at export. 
Farmers in the modern sense existed there. 

An erroneous conception of the nature of rent is based upon the 
fact that rent in kind, partly as tithes to the church and partly as a 
curiosity perpetuated by long-established contracts, has been 
dragged over into modern times from the natural economy of the 
Middle Ages, completely in contradiction to the conditions of the 
capitalist mode ol production. I1 thereby creates the impression 
that rent does not arise from the price of the agricultural product, 
but irom its mass, thus not from social conditions, but from the 
earth. We have previously shown that although surplus-value is 
manifested in a surplus-product the converse does not hold that a 
surplus-product, representing a mere increase in the mass of prod- 
uct, constitutes surplus-value. I{ may represent a minus quantity 
in value. Otherwise the cotton industry of 1860, compared with 
that of 1840, would show an enormous surplus-value, whereas on 
the contrary the price of the yarn has fallen. Rent may increase 
enormously as a result of a succession of crop failures, because the 
price of grain rises, although this surplus-value appears as an ab- 
solutely decreasing mass of dearer wheat. Conversely, the rent may 
fall in consequence of a succession of bountiful years, because the 
price falls, although the reduced rent appears as a greater mass of 
cheaper wheat. As regardsrent in kind, it should be noted now that, 
in the first place, it is a mere tradition carried over from an obsolete 
mode of production and managing to prolong its existence as a sur- 

“ta Adam Smith emphasizes how, in his time (and this applies also to the plan- 

tations in tropical and subtropical countries in our own day), rent and profit 
were not yet divorced from one another, for the landlord was simultaneously 
a capitalist, just as Cato, for instance, was on his estates. But this separalion is 
precisely the prerequisite for the capitalist mode of production, to whose con- 
ception the basis of slavery moreover stands in direct contradiction. 
__*° Herr Mommsen, in his Roman history, by no means uses the term capital- 
ist in the sense employed by modern economics und modern society, but rather 
in the manner of popular conception, such as still continues to thrive, though 
not in England or America, but nevertheless on the European continent, as an 
ancient tradition reflecting bygone conditions. = 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 769 

vival, Its contradiction to the capitalist mode of production is shown 
by its disappearance of itself from private contracts, and its being 
forcibly shaken off as an anachronism, wherever legislation was 
able to intervene asin the case of church tithes in England. Second- 
ly, however, where rent in kind persisted on the basis of capitalist 
production, it was no more, and could be no more, than an expres- 
sion of money-rent in medieval garb. Wheat, for instance, is quoted 
at 40 shillings per quarter. One portion of this wheat must replace 
the wages contained therein, and must be sold to become available 
for renewed expenditure. Another portion must be sold to pay 
its proportionate share of taxes. Seed and even a portion of fertiliz- 
er enter as commodities into the process of reproduction, wherever 
the capitalist mode of production and with it division of social labour 
are developed, i, e., they must be purchased for replacement purposes; 
and therefore another portion of this quarter must be sold to obtain 
meney for this. In so far as they need not be bought as actual 
commodities, but are taken out of the product itself in kind, 
in order to enter into its reproduction anew as conditions of produc- 
tion—as occurs not only in agriculture, but in many other lines 
of production producing constant capital—they figure in the 
books as money of account and are deducted as elements of the 
cost-price. The wear and tear of machinery, and of fixed capital 
in general, must be made good in money. And finally comes profit, 
which is calculated on this sum, expressed as costs either in actual 
money or in money of account. This profit is represented by a defi- 
nite portion of the gross product, which is determined by its price. 
And the excess portion which then remains forms rent. If the rent 
in kind stipulated by contract is greater than this remainder de- 
termined by the price, then it does not constitute rent, but a de- 
duction from profit. Owing to this possibility alone, rent in kind 
is an obsolete form, in so far as it does not reflect the price of the 
product, but may be greater or smaller than the real rent, and thus 
may comprise not only a deduction from profit, but also from those 
elements required for capital replacement. In fact, this rent in 
kind, so far as it is rent not merely in name but also in essence, is 
exclusively determined by the excess of the price olf the product 
over its price of production. Only it presupposes that this variable 
is a constant magnitude, But it is such a comforting reflection that 
the product in kind should suffice, first, to maintain the labourer, 
secondly, to leave the capitalist tenant farmer more food than he 
needs, and finally, that the remainder should constitute the natural 
rent. Quite like a manufacturer producing 200,000 yards of cotton 
goods. These yards of goods not only suffice to clothe his labour- 

26 —2757 

770 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

ers: fo clothe his wife, all his offspring and himself abundantly; 
but also leave over enough cotton for sale, in addition to paying an 
enormous rent in terms of colton goods. It is all so simple! Deduct 
the price of production from 200,000 yards of cotton goods, and a 
surplus of cotton goods musi remain for rent. But it is indeed 
a naive conception to deduct the price of production of, say, £10,000 
from 200,000 yards of cotton goods, without knowing the selling price, 
to deduct money Irom cotton goods. to deduct an exchange-value 
from a use-value as such. and thus to determine the surplus of yards 
oi cotton goods over pounds sterling. It is worse than squaring 
the circle, which is at least based upon the conception that there 
is a limit at which straight lines and curves imperceptibly flow 
together. But such is the prescription of M. Passy. Deduct money 
from colton goods, before the colton goods have been converted 
into money, either in one’s mind or in reality! What remains is 
the rent, which, however, is to be grasped naturalifer (see, for 
instance, Karl Arnd) and not by deviltries of sophistry. The entire 
restoration of rent in kind is finally reduced to this foolishness, the 
deduction of the price of production from so many and so many 
bushels of wheat, and the subtraction of a sum of money from a 
cubic measure. 

iI, LABOUR RENT 

Ii we consider ground-rent in its simplest form, that of labour 
rent, where the direct producer, using instruments of labour (p!ough, 
cattle, etc.) which actually or legally belong to him, cultivates 
soil actually owned by him during part of the week, and works 
during the remaining days upon the estate of the feudal lord with- 
out any compensation from the feudal lord, the situation here is 
still quile clear, for in this case rent and surplus-value are identi- 
cal. Rent, not profit, is the form here through which unpaid sur- 
plus-labour expresses itself. To what extent the labourer (a sell- 
sustaining ser) can secure in this case a surplus above his indis- 
pensable necessities of life, i.e., a surplus above that which we 
would call wages under the capitalist mode of production, depends, 
cther circumstances remaining unchanged, upon the proportion in 
which his labour-time is divided into labour-time for himself and 
enforced Jabour-time for his feudal lord. This surplus above the 
indispensable requirements of life, the germ of what appears as 
profil under the capitalist mode of production, is-therefore wholly 
delermined by the amount of ground-rent, which in this case is 
not only directly unpaid surplus-labour, but also appears as such. 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 771 

It is unpaid surplus-labour for the “owner” of the means of produc: 
tion, which here coincide with the land, and so far as they differ 
from it, are mere accessories to it. That the product of the serf 
must here suffice to reproduce his conditions of labour, in addition 
to his subsistence, is a circumstance which remains the same under 
all modes of production. For it is not the result of their specific 
form, but a natural requisite of all continuous and reproductive 
Jabour in general, of any continuing production, which is always 
simultaneously reproduction, i.e., including reproduction of its 
own operating conditions. It is furthermore evident that in all 
forms in which the direct labourer remains the “possessor” of the 
means of production and labour conditions necessary for the pro- 
duction of his own means of subsistence, the property relationship 
must simultaneously appear as a direct relation of lordship and 
servitude, so that the direct producer is not free; a lack of freedom 
which may be reduced from serfdom with enforced labour to a 
mere tributary relationship. The direct producer, according to 
our assumption, is to be found here in possession of his own means 
ol production, the necessary material labour conditions required 
for the realization of nis labour and the production of his means 
of subsistence. He conducts his agricultural activity and the rural 
home industries connected with it independently. This independence 
is not undermined by the circumstance that the small peasants 
may form among themselves a more or less natural production 
community, as they do in India, since it is here merely a question 
of independence from the nominal lord of the manor. Under such 
conditions the surplus-labour for the nominal owner of the land 
can only be extorted from them by other than economic pressure, 
whatever the form assumed may be.** This differs from slave or 
plantation economy in that the slave works under alien conditions 
of production and not independently. Thus, conditions of personal 
dependence are requisite, a lack of personal freedom, no matter to 
what extent, and being tied to the soil as ils accessory, bondage in 
the true sense of the word. Should the direct producers not he 
confronted by a private landowner, but rather, as in Asia, 
under direct subordination {o a state which stands over them as 
their Jandlord and simultaneously as sovereign, then rent and 
taxes coincide, or rather, there exists no tax which differs from 
this form of ground-rent. Under stich circumstances, there need 
exist no stronger political or economic pressure than that common 

* Following the conquest of a country, the immediate aim of a conqueror 
was also to convert its people to his own use. Cf. Linguet. See also Méser. 

26" 

472 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

to all subjection to that stale. The state is then the supreme lord, 
Sovereignty here consists in the ownership of land concentrated on 
a national scale. But, on the other hand, no private ownership of 
land exists, although there is both private and common possession 
and use of land. 

The specific economic form, in which unpaid surplus-labour is 
pumped out of direct producers, determines the relationship of 
rulers and ruled, as it grows directly out of production itself and, 
in turn, reacts upon it as a determining element. Upon this, how- 
ever, is founded the entire formation of the economic community 
which grows up out of the production relations theinselves, thereby 
simultaneously its specific political form, It is always the direct 
relationship of the owners of the conditions of production to the 
direct producers—a relation always naturally corresponding to 
a definite slage in the development of the methods of labour and 
thereby its social productivity—which reveals the innermost 
secret, the hidden hasis of the entire social structure, and with it 
the political form of the relation of sovereignty and dependence, 
in short, the corresponding specific form of the state. This does not 
prevent the same economic basis—the same from the standpoint 
of its main conditions—due to innumerable different empiricai 
circumstaiices, natural environment, racial relations, external 
historical influences, etc., from showing infinite variations and 
gradations in appearance, which can be ascertained only by anal- 
ysis of the empirically given circumstances. 

So much is evident with respect to labour rent, the simplest and 
most primitive form of rent: Rent is here the primeval form of 
surplus-labour and coincides with it. But this identity of sur- 
plus-value with unpaid labour of others need not be analysed here, 
because it still exists in its visible, palpable form, since the labour 
of the direct producer for himself is still separated in space and 
time from his labour for the landlord, and the latter appears di- 
rectly in the brutal form of enforced labour for a third person. 
In the same way the “attribute” possessed by the soil to produce 
rent is here reduced to a tangibly open secret, for the disposition to 
furnish rent here also includes human labour-power bound to the 
soil, and the property relation which compels the owner of Jabour- 
power to drive it on and activate it beyond such measure as is 
required to satisfy his own indispensable needs. Rent consists 
directly in the appropriation of this surplus expenditure of labour- 
power by the landlord; for the direct producer pays him no addi- 
{ional rent. Here, where surplus-value and rent are not only identi- 
ca] but where surplus-value has the tangible form of surplus-labour, 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 773 

ihe natural conditions or limits of rent, being those of surplus- 
value in general, are plainly clear. The direct producer must 
1) possess enough labour-power, and 2) the natural conditions of 
his labour, above all the soil cultivated by him, must be productive 
enough, in a word, the natural productivity of his labour must be 
big enough to give him the possibility of retaining some surplus- 
labour over and above that required for the satisfaction of his own 
indispensable needs. It is not this possibility which creates the 
rent, but rather compulsion which turns this possibility into re- 
ality. But the possibility itself is conditioned by subjective and 
objective natural circumstances. And here too lies nothing at all 
mysterious. Should labour-power be minute, and the natural con- 
ditions of labour scanty, then the surplus-labour is small, but in 
such a case so are the wants of the producers on the one hand and 
the relative number of exploiters of surplus-labour on the other, 
and finally so is the surplus-product, whereby this barely produc- 
tive surplus-labour is realized for those few exploiting landowners. 

Finally, labour rent in itself implies that, all other circum-tances 
remaining equal, it will depend wholly upon the relat:ve amount 
of surplus-labour, or enforced Jabour, to what extent the direct 
producer shall be enabled to improve his own condition, to acquire 
wealih, to produce an excess over and above his indispensable 
means of subsistence, or, if we wish to anticipate the capitalist 
mode of expression, whether he shall be able to produce a profit 
for himself, and how much ol a profit, i.e., an excess over his 
wages which have been produced by himself. Rent here is the nor- 
mal, all-absorbing, so to say legitimate form of surplus-labour, 
and far from being excess over profit, which means in this case 
being above any other excess over wages, it is rather that the 
amount of such profit, and even its very existence, depends, other 
circumstances being equal, upon the amount of rent, i.e., the ea- 
forced surplus-labour to be surrendered to the landowners. 

Since the direct producer is not the owner, but only a possessor, 
and since all his surplus-labour de jure actually belongs to the 
landlord, some historians have expressed astonishment that it 
should be at all possible for those subject to enforced labour, or 
serfs, to acquire any independent property, or relatively speaking, 
wealth, under such-circumstances. However, it is evident that tra- 
dition must play a dominant role in the primitive and undeveloped 
circumstances on which these social production relations and the 
corresponding mode of production are based. It is furthermore 
clear that here as always it is in the interest of the ruling section 
of society to sanction the existing order as law and to legally estab- 

774 THANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

lish its limits given through usage and tradition. Apart from all 
else, this, by the way, Comes about ol itsell as soon as the constant 
reproduction of the basis of the existing order and its fundamental 
relations assumes a regulated and orderly form in the course of time. 
And such regulation and order are themselves indispensable elements 
ol any mode of production, if it is to assume social stability and 
independence from mere chance and arbitrariness. These are pre- 
cisely the form of its social stability and therefore its relative 
freedom [rom mere arbitrariness and mere chance. Under back- 
ward conditions of the production process as well as the corre- 
sponding social relations, it achieves this form by mere 
repetition of their very reproduction. If this has continued on for 
some time, it entrenches itself as custom and tradition and is 
finally sanctioned as an explicit law. However, since the form of 
this surplus-labour, enforced labour, is based upon the imperfect 
development of all social productive powers and the crudeness of 
the methods of labour itsell, 1t will naturally absorb a relatively 
much smaller portion of the direct producer’s total labour than 
under developed modes of production, particularly the capitalist 
mode of production. Take it, for instance, that the enforced labour 
for the landlord originally amounted to two days per week. These 
two days of enforced labour per week are thereby fixed, are a con- 
stant magnitude, legally regulated by prescriptive or written law. 
But the productivity of the remaining days of the week, which are 
at the disposal of the direct producer himself, is a variable mag- 
nitude, which must develop in the course of his experience, just 
as the new wants he acquires, and just as the expansion of the 
market for his product and the increasing assurance with which 
he disposes of this portion of his labour-power will spur him on to 
a greater exertion of his labour-power, whereby it should not be 
forgotten that the employment of his labour-power is by no means 
confined ta agriculture, but includes rural home industry. The 
possibility is here presented for definite economic development 
taking place, depending, of course, upon favourable circumstances, 
inborn racial characteristics, etc. 

Il. RENT IN KIND 

The transformation of labour rent into rent in kind changes 
nothing from the economic standpoint in the nature of ground- 
rent. The latter consists, in the forms considered here, in that rent 
is the sole prevailing and normal form of surplus-value, or surplus- 
labour. This is further expressed in the fact that it is the only 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 775 

surplus-labour, or the only surplus-product, which the direct pro- 
ducer, who is in possession of the labour conditions needed for his 
own reproduction, must give up to the owner of the land, which in 
this situation is the all-embracing condition of labour. And, fur- 
thermore, that land is the only condition of labour which confronts 
the direct producer as alien property, independent of him, and 
personified by the Jandlord. To whatever extent rent in kind is the 
prevailing and dominant form of ground-rent, it is furthermore al- 
ways more or less accompanied by survivals of the earlier form, 
i-e., of rent paid directly in labour, corvée-labour, no matter whet- 
her the landlord be a private person or the state. Rent in kind 
presupposes a higher stage ol civilization for the direct producer, i.e., 
a higher level of development of his labour and of society in gen- 
eral. And it is distinct [rom the preceding form in that surplus- 
Jabour needs no longer be performed in its natural form, thus no 
longer under the direct supervision and compulsion of the landlord 
or his representatives; the direct producer is driven rather by 
force of circumstances than by direct coercion, through legal 
enactment rather than the whip, to perform it on his own respon- 
sibility. Surplus-production, in the sense of production beyond the 
indispensable needs of the direct producer, and within the field 
of production actually belonging to him, upon the land exploited by 
himself instead of, as earlier, upon the nearby lord’s estate beyond 
his own land, has already become a self-understood rule here. In 
this relation the direct producer more or less disposes of his entire 
labour-time, although, as previously, a part of this labour-time, 
at first practically the entire surplus portion of it, belongs to the 
landlord without compensation; except that the landlord no longer 
directly receives this surplus-labour in its natural form, but rather 
in the products’ natural form in which it is realized. The burden- 
some, and according to the way in which enforced labour is regulat- 
ed, more or less disturbing interruption by work for the landlord 
(see Buch I, Kap. VII, 2)* (“Manufacturar and Bovard”)} stops 
wherever rent in kind appears in pure form, or at least it is reduced to 
a few short intervals during the year, when a continuation of some 
corvce-labour side by side with rent in kind takes place. The labour 
of the producer for himself and his labour for the landlord are no 
longer palpably separated by lime and space. This rent in kind, 
in its pure form, while it may drag fragments along into more 
highly developed modes of production and production relations, 
still presupposes for its existence a natural economy, i.e., that 

* English edition: Ch. X, 2.-—£d. 

776 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFLT INTO GROUND-RENT 

the conditions of tle economy are either wholly or for the over- 
whelming part produced by the economy itself, directly replaced and 
reproduced out of its gross product. Jt furthermore presupposes the 
combination of rural home industry with agriculture. The surplus- 
product, which forms the rent, is the product of this combined 
agricultural and industrial family labour, no matter whether rent 
in kind contains more or less of the industrial product, as is often 
the case in the Middle Ages, or whether it is paid only in the form 
of actual products of the land. In this form of rent it is by no means 
necessary for rent in kind, which represents the surplus-labour, to 
fully exhaust the entire surplus-labour of the rural family. Compared 
with labour rent, the producer rather has more room for action 
to gain time for surplus-labour whose product shall belong to 
himself, as well as the product of his labour which satisfies his 
indispensable needs. Similarly, this form will give rise to greater 
differences in the economic position of the individual direct pro- 
ducers. At least the possibility for such a differentiation exists, 
and the possibility for the direct producer to have in turn 
acquired the means to exploit other labourers directly. This, 
however, does not concern us here, since we are dealing with rent in 
kind in its pure form; just as in general we cannot enter into the end- 
less variety of combinations wherein the various forms of rent 
may be united, adulterated and amalgamated. The form of rent 
in kind, by being bound to a definite type of product and produc- 
tion itself and through its indispensable combination of agri- 
culture and domestic industry, through its almost complete self- 
sufficiercy whereby the peasant family supports itself through 
its independence from the market and the movement of production 
and history of that section of society lying outside of its sphere, in 
short owing to the character of natural economy in general, this 
form is quite adapted to furnishing the basis for stationary social 
conditions as we see, e.g., in Asia. Here, as in the earlier form of 
labour rent, ground-rent is the normal form of surplus-value, and 
thus of surplus-labour, i.e., of the entire excess labour which the 
direct producer must perform gratis, hence actually under compul- 
sion although this compulsion no longer confronts him in the old 
brutal form—for the benefit of the owner of his essential condi- 
tion of labour, the land. The profit, if by erroneously anticipating 
we may thus call that portion of the direct producer’s labour excess 
over his necessary labour, which he retains for himself, has so 
little to do with determining rent in kind, that this profit, on the 
contrary, grows up behind the back of rent and finds its natural 
limit in the size of rent in kind. The latter may assume dimen- 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 777 

sions which seriously imperil reproduction of the conditions of la- 
bour, tle means of production themselves, rendering the expansion 
of production more or less impossible and reducing the direct pro- 
ducers to the physical minimum of means of subsistence. This is 
particularly the case, when this form is met with and exploited by 
a conquering commercial nation, e.g., the English in India. 

IV. MONEY-RENT 

By money-rent—as distinct from industrial and commercial 
ground-rent based upon the capitalist mode of production, which 
is but an excess over average profit—we here mean the ground- 
rent which arises [rom a mere change in form of rent in kind, just 
as the latter in turn is but a modification of labour rent. The direct 
producer here turns over instead of the product, its price to the 
landlord (who may be either the state or a private individual). 
An excess of products in their natural form no longer suffices; 
it must be converted from its natural form into money-form. 
Although the direct producer still continues to produce at least 
the greater part of his means of subsistence himself, a certain por- 
tion of this product must now be converted into commodities, 
must be produced as commodities. The character of the entire mode 
of production is thus more or less changed. It loses its independence, 
its detachment from social connection. The ratio of cost of produc- 
tion, which now comprises greater or lesser expenditures of money, 
becomes decisive; at any rate, the excess of that portion of gross 
product io be converted into money over that portion which must 
serve, on the one hand, as means of reproduction again, and, on the 
other, as means of direct subsistence, assumes a determining role. 
However, the basis of this type of rent, although approaching its 
dissolution, remains the same as that of rent in kind, which 
constitutes its point of departure. The direct producer as before is 
still possessor of the land. either through inheritance or some other 
traditional right, and must perform for his lord, as owner of his 
most essential condition of production, excess corvée-labour, that 
is, unpaid labour for which no equivalent is returned, in the form 
of a surplus-product transformed into money. Ownership of the con- 
ditions of labour as distinct from land, such as agricultural imple- 
ments and other goods and chattels, is transformed into the prop- 
erty of the direct producer even under the earlier forms of rent, first 
in fact, and then also legally, and even more so is this the precon- 
dilion for the form of money-rent. The transformation of rent in 
kind into money-rent, taking place first sporadically and then on 

778 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

a more or less national scale, presupposes a considerable develop- 
ment of commerce, of urban industry, of commodity-production 
in general, and thereby of money circulation. It furthermore as- 
sumes a market-price for products, and that they be sold at prices 
roughly approximating their values, which need not at all be the 
case under earlier forms. In Eastern Europe we may still partly 
observe this transformation taking place under our very eyes. 
How unfeasible it can be without a certain development of social 
labour productivity is proved by various unsuccessful attempts to 
carry it through under the Roman Empire, and by relapses into 
rent in kind after seeking to convert at least the state tax portion 
of this rent into money-rent. The same transitional difficulties 
are evidenced, e.g., in pre-revolutionary France, when money- 
rent was combined with and adulterated by, survivals of its 
earlier forms. 

Money-rent, as atransmuted form of rent in kind, and in antith- 
esis to it, is, nevertheless, the final form, and simultaneously the 
form of dissolution of the type of ground-rent which we have hereto- 
fore considered, namely ground-rent as the normal form of surplus- 
value and of the unpaid surplus-labour to be performed for the owner 
of the conditions of production. In its pure form, this rent, like 
labour rent and rent in kind, represents no excess over profit. It ab- 
sorbs the profit, as it is understood, In so far as profit arises beside 
it practically as a separate portion of excess labour, money-rent 
like rent in its earlier forms still constitutes the normal limit of 
such embryonic profit, which can only develop in relation to the 
possibilities of exploitation, be it of one’s own excess labour or 
that of another, which remains after the performance of the sur- 
plus-labour represented by money-rent. Should any profit actually 
arise along with this rent, then this profit does not constitute the 
limit of rent, but rather conversely, the rent is the limit of the 
profit. However, as already indicated, money-rent is simultane- 
ously the form of dissolution of the ground-rent considered thus 
far, coinciding prima facie with surplus-value and surplus-labour, 
ath ground-rent as the normal and dominant form of surplus- 
value. 

In its further development money-rent must lead—aside from 
all intermediate forms, e.g., the small peasant tenant farmer— 
either to the transformation of land into peasants’ freehold, or 
to the form corresponding to the capitalist mode of production, 
that is, to rent paid by the capitalist tenant farmer. 

With money-rent prevailing, the traditional and customary 
legal relationship between landlord and subjecls who possess and 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 779 

cultivate a part of the land, is necessarily turned into a pure money 
relationship fixed contractually in accordance with the rules of 
positive law. The possessor engaged in cultivation thus becomes 
virtually a mere tenant. This transformation serves on the one 
hand, provided other general production relations permit, to 
expropriate more and more the old peasant possessors and to sub- 
stitute capitalist tenants in their stead. On the other hand, it leads 
to the former possessor buying himsell free [rom his rent obligation 
and to his transformation into an independent peasant with com- 
plete ownership of the land he tills. The transformation of rent in 
kind into money-rent is furthermore not only inevitably accompa- 
nied, but even anticipated, by the formation of a class of property- 
less day-labourers, who hire themselves out for money. During 
their genesis, when this new class appears but sporadically, the 
custom necessarily develops among the more prosperous peasants 
subject to rent payments of exploiting agricultural wage-labourers 
for their own account, much as in feudal times, when the more well- 
to-do peasant serfs themselves also held serfs. In this way, they grad- 
ually acquire the possibility of accumulating a certain amount 
of wealth and themselves becoming transformed into [uture capi- 
talists. The old self-employed possessors of land themselves thus 
give rise to a nursery school for capitalist tenants, whose develop- 
ment is conditioned by the general development of capitalist pro- 
duction beyond the bounds of the country-side. This class shoots 
up very rapidly when particularly favourable circumstances come 
to its aid, as in England in the 16th century, where the then pro- 
gressive depreciation of money enriched them under the customary 
long leases at the expense of the landlords. 

Furthermore: as soon as rent assumes the form of money-rent, 
and thereby the relationship between rent-paying peasant and 
landlord becomes a relationship fixed by contract—a develop- 
ment which is only possible generally when the world-market, 
commerce and manulacture have reached a certain relatively 
high level—the leasing of Jand to capitalists inevitably also makes 
its appearance. The latter hitherto stood beyond the rural 
limits and now carry over to the country-side and agriculture the 
capital acquired in the cities and with it the capitalist mode of 
operation developed—i.e., creating a product as a mere com- 
modity and solely as a means of appropriating surplus-value. This 
form can become the general rule only in those countries which 
dominate the world-market in the period of transition [rom the 
feudal to the capitalist mode of production. When the capitalist 
tenant farmer steps in between landlord and actual tiller of the 

7E0 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

soil, all relations which arose out of the old rural mode of produc- 
tion are torn asunder. The farmer becomes the actual commander 
of these agricultural labourers and the actual exploiter of their 
surplus-labour, whereas the !andlord maintains a direct relation- 
ship, and indeed simply a money and contractual relationship, 
solely with this capitalist tenant. Thus, the nature of rent is also 
transiormed, not merely in fact and by chance, as occurred in 
part even under earlier forms, but normally, in its recognized and 
prevailing form. From the normal form of surplus-value and 
surplus-labour, it descends to a mere excess of this surplus-labour 
over that portion of it appropriated by the exploiting capital- 
ist in the form of profit; just as the total surplus-labour, profit 
and excess over profit, is extracted directly by him, collected in 
the form of the total surplus-product, and turned into cash. It is 
only the excess portion ol this surplus-value which is extracted by 
him [rom the agricultural labourer by direct exploitation, by 
means ol his capital, which he turns over to the landlord as rent. 
How much or how little he turns over to the latter depends, on the 
average, upon the limits set by the average profit which is realized 
by capital in the non-agricultural spheres of production, and by 
the prices of non-agricultural production regulated by this average 
profit. From a normal form of surplus-value and surplus-labour, 
rent has now become translormed into an excess over that portion 
of the surplus-labour claimed in advance by capital as its legiti- 
mate and normal share, and characteristic of this particular sphere 
of production, the agricultural sphere of production. Profit, instead 
of rent, has now become the normal form of surplus-value and 
rent still exists solely as a form, not of surplus-value in gener- 
al, but of one of its offshoots, surplus-profit, which assumes an 
independent form under particular circumstances. It is not neces: 
sary to elaborate the manner in which a gradual transformation in 
ihe mode of production itself corresponds to this transformation. 
This already follows from the fact that it is normal for the capi- 
talist tenant farmer to produce agricultural products as commodi- 
ties, and that, while formerly only the excess over his means of 
subsistence was converted into commodities, now but a relatively 
insignificant part of these commodities is directly used by him as 
means of subsistence. It is no longer the land, but rather capital, 
which has now brought even agricultural labour under its direct 
sway and productiveness. 

The average profit and the price of production regulated thereby 
are formed outside of relations in the country-side and within the 
sphere of urban trade and manufacture. The profit of the rent- 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 781 

paying peasant does not enter into it as an equalizing factor, for 
his relation to the landlord is not a capitalist one. In so far as he 
makes profit, i.e., realizes an excess above his necessary means 
of subsistence, either by his own labour or through exploiting other 
people’s labour, it is done behind the back of the normal relation- 
ship, and other circumstances being equal, the size of this profit 
does not determine rent, but on the contrary, it is delermined by 
the rent as its limit. The high rate of profit in the Middle Ages is 
not entirely due to the low composition of capital, in which the 
variable component invested in wages predominates. It is due to 
swindling on the land, the appropriation of a portion of the land- 
lord’s rent and of the income of his vassals. If the country-side 
exploits the town politically in the Middle Ages, wherever feudal- 
ism has not been broken down by exceptional urban develop- 
ment—as in Italy, the town, on the other hand, exploits the land 
economically everywhere and without exception, through its 
monopoly prices, its system of laxation, ils guild organization, 
its direct commercial fraudulence and its usury. 

One might imagine that the mere appearance of the capitalist 
farmer in agricultural production would prove that the price of 
agricultural products, which from time immemorial have paid 
rent in one form or another, must be higher, at least at the time of 
this appearance, than the prices of production of manufacture 
whether it be because the price of such agricultural products has 
reached a monopoly price level, or has risen as high as the value 
of the agricultural products, and their value actually is above the 
price of production regulated by the average profit. For were this 
not so, the capitalist farmer could not at all realize, at the existing 
prices of agricultural produce, first the average profit out of the 
price of these products, and then pay out of the same price an ex- 
cess above this profit in the form of rent. One might conclude from 
this that the general rate of profit, which guides the capitalist 
farmer in his contract with the landlord, has been formed without 
including rent, and, therefore, as soon as it assumes a regulating 
role in agricultural production. it finds this excess at hand and pays 
it to the landlord. It is in this traditional manner that, for instarice, 
Herr Rodbertus explains the matter. But: 

First. This appearance of capital as an independent and leading 
force in agriculture does not take place all at once and generally, 
but gradually and in particular lines of production. It encompasses 
at first, not agriculture proper, but such branches of production as 
cattle-breeding, especially sheep-raising, whose principal product, 
wool, offers at the early stages a constant excess of market-price 

782 TRANSFORMATION GF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

over price of production during the rise of industry, and this does 
not level out until later. Thus in England during the 16th century, 

Secondly. Since this capitalist production appears at first but 
sporadically, the assumption cannot be disputed that it first ex- 
tends only to such Jand categories as are able, through their partic- 
ular fertility, or their exceptionally iavourable location, to gener- 
ally pay a differential rent. 

Thirdly. Let us even assume that at the time this mode of produc- 
lion appeared—and this indeed presupposes an increasing pre- 
ponderance of urban demand—the prices of agricultural products 
were higher than the price of production, as was doubtless the case 
in England during the last third of the 17th century. Nevertheless, 
as soon as this mode of production has somewhat extricated itself 
from the mere subordination of agriculture to capital, and as soon 
as agricultural improvement and the reduction of production costs, 
which necessarily accompany its development, have taken place, 
the balance will be restored by a reaction, a fall in the price of 
agricultural produce, as happened in England in the first half of 
ihe 18th century. 

Rent, thus, as an excess over the average profit cannot be ex- 
plained in this traditional way. Whatever may be the existing 
historical circumstances at the time rent first appears, once it has 
struck root it cannot exist except under the modern conditions 
earlier described. 

Finally, it should be noted in the transformation of rent in kind 
into money-rent that along with it capitalized rent, or the price of 
land, and thus its alienability and alienation become essential [ac- 
tors, and that thereby not only can the former peasant subject 
to payment of rent be transformed into an independent peasant 
proprietor, but also urban and other moneyed people can buy real 
estate in order to lease it either to peasants or capitalists and thus 
enjoy rent as a form of interest on their capital so invested; 
that, therefore, this circumstance likewise facilitates the transfor- 
mation of the former mode of exploitation, the relation between 
owner and actual cultivator of the land, and of rent itself. 

V. METAYAGE AND PEASANT PROPRIETORSHIP 
OF LAND PARCELS 

We have now arrived al the end of our elaboration of ground- 
rent. 

In all these forms of ground-rent, whether labour rent, rent in 
kind, or money-rent (as merely a changed form of rent in kind), 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 783 

the one paying rent is always supposed to be the actual cultivator 
and possessor of the land, whose unpaid surplus-labour passes di- 
rectly into the hands of the landlord. Even in the last form, money- 
rent in so far as it is “pure,” i.e., merely a changed form of rent 
in kind—this is not only possible, but actually takes place. 

As a transitory form from the original form of rent to capitalist 
rent, we may consider the métayer system, or share-cropping, un- 
der which the manager (farmer) furnishes labour (his own or an- 
other’s), and also a portion of working capital, and the landlord 
furnishes, aside [rom land, another portion of working capital 
(e.g., cattle), and the product is divided between tenant and land- 
lord in definite proportions which vary from country to country. 
On the one hand, the farmer here lacks sufficient capital required 
for complete capitalist management. On the other hand, the share 
here appropriated by the landlord does not bear the pure form of 
rent. [t may actually include interest on the capital advanced by 
him and an excess rent. It may also absorb practically the entire 
surplus-labour of the fariner, or leave him a greater or smaller 
portion of this surplts-labour. But, essentially, rent no longer 
appears here as the normal form of surplus-value in general. On the 
one hand, the sharecropper, whether he employs his own or an- 
otlier’s labour, is to lay claim toa portion of the product not in his 
capacity as labourer, but as possessor of part of the instruments of 
labour, as his own capitalist. On the other hand, the landlord claims 
his share not exclusively on the basis of his landownership, but 
also as lender of capital.*' 

A survival of the old communal ownership of land, which had 
endured alter the transition to independent peasant farming, e.g., 
in Poland and Rumania, served there as a subterfuge for effecting 
a transition to the lower forms of ground-rent. A portion of the land 
belongs to the individual peasant and is tilled independently by 
him. Another portion is tilled in common and creates a surplus- 
product, which serves partly to cover community expenses, partly as 
a reserve in cases of crop failure, etc. These last two parts al the 
surplus-product, and ultimately the entire surplus-product inelud- 
ing the land upon which it has been grown, are more and more 
usurped by state officials and private individuals, and thus the 
originally free peasant proprietors, whose obligation to till this 
land in common is maintained, are transformed into vassals sub- 
ject either to corvée-labour or rent in kind, while the usurpers of 
common land are transformed into owners, not only of the usurped 

‘a Cl. Buret, Tocqueville, Sismondi. 

734 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

common lands, but even the very lands of the peasants them- 
selves. 

We need not further investigate slave economy proper (which 
likewise passes through a metamorphosis from the patriarchal 
system mainly for home use to the plantation system for the 
world-market) nor the management of estates under which the 
landlords themselves are independent cultivators, possessing all 
instruments of production, and exploiting the labour of free or 
unfree bondsmen, who are paid either in kind or money. Landlord 
and owner of the instruments of production, and thus the direct 
exploiter of labourers included among these elements of production, 
are in this case one and the same person. Rent and profit likewise 
coincide then, there occurring no separation of the different forms 
of surplus-value. The entire surplus-labour of the labourers, which 
is manifested here in the surplus-product, is extracted from them 
directly by the owner ol all instruments of production, to which 
belong the Jand and, under the original form of slavery, the 
immediate producers themselves. Where the capitalist outlook 
prevails, as on American plantations, this entire surplus-value is 
regarded as profit; where neither the capitalist mode of production 
itself exists, nor the corresponding outlook has been transferred 
from capitalist countries, it appears as rent. At any rate, this 
form presents no difficulties. The income of the landlord, whatever 
it may be called, the available surplus-product appropriated by 
him, is here the normal and prevailing form, whereby the entire 
unpaid surplus-labour is directly appropriated, and landed prop- 
erty forms the basis cf such appropriation. 

Further, proprietorship of land parcels. The peasant here 
is simultaneously the free owner of his land, which appears as his 
principal instrument of production, the indispensable field of em- 
ployment for his labour and his capital. No lease money is paid 
under this form. Rent, therefore, does not appear as a separate form 
of surplus-value, although in countries in which otherwise the 
capitalist mode of production is developed, it appears as a surplus- 
profit compared with other lines of production; but as surplus- 
profit which, like all proceeds of his labour in general, accrues to 
the peasant. 

. This form of landed property presupposes, as in the earlier older 
forms, that the rural population greatly predominates numerically 
over the town population, so that, even if the capitalist mode of 
production otherwise prevails, it is but relatively little developed, 
and thus also in the other lines of production the concentration of 
capital is restricted to narrow limits and a fragmentation of capi- 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 785 

tal predominates. In the nature of things, the greater portion of 
agricultural produce must be consumed as direct means of subsist- 
ence by the producers themselves, the peasants, and only the excess 
above that will find its way as commodities into urban commerce, 
No matter how the average market-price of agricultural products may 
here be regulated, diflerential rent, an excess portion of com- 
modity-prices from superior or more favourably located land, must 
evidently exist here much as under the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion. This diflerential rent exists, even where this [orm appears 
under social conditions, under which no general market-price has 
as yet been developed; it appears then in the excess surplus- 
product. Only then it flows into the pockets of the peasant whose 
Jabour is realized under more favourable natural conditions. The 
assumption here is generally to be made that no absolute rent 
exists, i.e., that the worst soi] does not pay any rent—precisely 
under this form where the price of land enters as a factor in the 
peasant’s actual cost of production whether becatise in the course 
of this form’s further development either the price of land has been 
computed al a certain money-value, in dividing up an inheritance, 
or, during the constant change in ownership ol an entire estate, 
or of its component parts, the land has been bought by the culti- 
vator himsel!, largely by raising money on mortgage; and, there- 
fore, where the price of land, representing nothing more than capi- 
talized rent, is a factor assumed in advance, and where rent thus 
seems to exist independently of any diflerentiation in fertility 
and location of the land. For, absolute rent presupposes either 
tealized excess in product value above its price of production, or a 
monopoly price exceeding the value of the product. But since agri- 
culture here is carried on largely as cultivation for direct subsist- 
ence, and the land exists as an indispensable field of employment 
for the labour and capital of the majority of the population, the 
regulating market-price of the product will reach its value only 
under extraordinary circumstances. But this value will, gener- 
ally, be higher than its price of production owing to the preponder- 
ant element of living labour, although this excess of value over 
price of production will in turn be limited by the low composition 
even of non-agricultural capital in countries with an economy com- 
posed predominantly of land parcels. For the peasant owning a 
parcel, the limit of exploitation is not set by the average profit of 
capilal, in so far as he is a small capitalist; nor, onthe other hand, 
by the necessity of rent, in so far as he is a landowner. The abso- 
lute limit for him as a small capitalist is no more than the wages 
he pays to himself, after deducting his actual costs. So long as the 

TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

786 

price of the product covers these wages, he will cultivate his land, 
and often at wages down to a physical minimum. As for his ca- 
pacity as land proprietor, the barrier of ownership is eliminated for 
him, since it can make itself felt only vis-a-vis a capital (includ- 
ing labour) separated from landownership, by erecting an obstacle 
to the investment of capital. It is true, to be sure, that interest on 
the price of land —which generally has to be paid to still another 
individual, the mortgage creditor — isa barrier. But this interest 
can be paid precisely out of that portion of surplus-labour which 
would constitute profit under capitalist conditions. The rent anti- 
cipated in the price of land and in the interest paid for it can there- 
fore be nothing but a portion of the peasant’s capitalized surplus- 
labour over and above the labour indispensable for his subsistence, 
without this surplus-labour being realized in a part of the commodity- 
value equal to the entire average profit, and still less in an excess 
above the surplus-labour realized in the average profit, i.e., in a sur- 
plus-profit. The rent may be a deduction from the average profit, 
or even the only portion of it which is realized. For the peasant 
parcel holder to cultivate his land, or to buy land for cultivation, 
it is therefore not necessary, as under the normal! capitalist mode of 
production, that the market-price of the agricultural products 
rise high enough to afford him the average profit, and still less a 
fixed excess above this average profit in the form of rent. It is not 
necessary, therefore, that the market-price rise, either up to the 
value or the price of production of his product. This is one of the 
reasons why grain prices are lower in countries with predominant 
small peasant land proprietorship than in countries with a capi- 
talist mode of production. One portion of the surplus-labour of 
the peasants, who work under the least favourable conditions, is 
bestowed gratis upon society and does not at all enter into the 
regulation of price of production or into the creation of value 
in general. This lower price is consequently a result of the 
Puce: poverty and by no means of their labour produc- 
Ivity. 

This form of free self-managing peasant proprietorship of land 
parcels as the prevailing, normal form constitutes, on the one hand, 
the economic foundation of society during the best periods of ctas- 
sical antiquity, and on the other hand, it is found among modern 
nations as one of the forms arising [rom the dissolution of feudal 
tandownership. Thus, the yeomanry in England, the peasantry in 
Sweden, the French and West German peasants. We do not include 
colonies here, since the independent peasant there develops under 
different conditions. 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 787 

The free ownership of the self-managing peasant is evidently the 
most normal form of landed property for small-scale operation, 
i.e., for a mode of production, in which possession of the land is 
a prerequisite for the labourer’s ownership of the product of his 
own labour, and in which the cultivator, be he free owner or vas- 
sal, always must produce his own means ol subsistence independent- 
ly, as an isolated labourer with his family. Ownership of the land 
is as necessary for full development of this mode of production as 
ownership of tools is for [ree development of handicratt production. 
Here is the basis for the development of personal independence. 
It is a necessary transitional stage for the development olf agricul- 
ture itself. The causes which bring about its downfall show its 
limitations. These are: Destruction of rural domestic industry, 
which forms its normal supplement as a result of the development 
of large-scale industry; a gradual impoverishment and exhaus- 
tion of the soil subjected to this cultivation; usurpation by big 
landowners of the common lands, which constitute the second sup- 
plement of the management of land parcels everywhere and which 
alone enable it to raise cattle; competition, either of the plantation 
system or large-scale capitalist agriculture. Improvements in 
agriculture, which on the one hand cause a [all in agricultural prices 
and, on the other, require greater outlays and more extensive 
material conditions of production, also contribute towards this, as 
in England during the first’ half of the 18th century. 

Proprietorship of land parcels by its very nature excludes the 
development of social productive forces of labour, social forms of 
labour, social concentration of capital, large-scale cattle-raising, 
and the progressive application of science. 

Usury and a taxation system must impoverish it everywhere. 
The expenditure of capital in the price of the land withdraws 
this capital from cultivation. An infinite [ragmentation of means 
of production, and isolation of the producers themselves. Mon- 
strous waste of human energy. Progressive deterioration of condi- 
tions of production and increased prices of means of production— 
an inevitable law of proprietorship of parcels. Calamity of seasonal 
abundance for this mode o! production.** 

One ol the specific evils of small-scale agriculture where it iscom- 
bined with free landownership arises [rom the cultivator’s invest- 
ing capital in the purchase of land. (The same applies also to the 
transitory form, in which the big landowner invests capital, first, 
to buy land, and second, to manage it as his own tenant farmer.) 

43 See ihe speech from the throne of the King of France in Tooke. 

788 TRANSPORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GHOUND-RENT 

Owing to the changeable nature which the land here assumes as 
a mere commodity, the changes of ownership increase,** so that the 
land, from the peasant’s viewpoint, enters anew as an investment 
of capital with each successive generation and division of estates, 
ie., it becomes land purchased by him. The price of land here 
forms a weighty element of the individual unproductive costs of 
production or cost-price of the product for the individual pro- 
ducer. 

The price of land is nothing but capitalized and therefore antic- 
ipated rent. If capitalist methods are employed by agriculture, so 
that the landlord receives only rent, and the farmer pays nothing 
for land except this annual rent, then it is evident that the capital 
invested by the landowner himself in purchasing the land consti- 
tutes indeed an interest-bearing investment of capital for him, but 
has absolutely nothing to do with capital invested in agriculture 
itself. It forms neither a part of the fixed, nor of the circulating, 
capital employed here; 4? it merely secures for the buyer a claim 
to receive annual rent, but has absolutely nothing to do with the 
production of the rent itself. The buyer of land just pays his capi- 
tal out to the one who sells the land, and the seller in return relin- 
quishes his ownership of the land. Thus this capital no longer exists 
as the capital of the purchaser; he no longer has it; therefore it 
does not belong to the capital which he can invest in any way in 
the land itself. Whether he bought the land dear or cheap, or wheth- 
er he received it for nothing, alters nothing in the capital invested 
by the farmer in his establishment, and changes nothing in the 
rent, but merely alters the question whether it appears to him as 
interest or not. or as higher or lower interest respectively. 

Take, for instance, the slave economy. The price paid for a slave 
is nothing but the anticipated and capitalized surplus-value or 
profit to be wrung out of the slave. But the capital paid for the 
purchase of a slave does not belong to the capital by means of 

* See Mounier and Rubichon. 

“ Dr. H. Maron (Exdensiv oder Intensiv?) {no further information given about 
this pamphlet] starts irom the false assumption of the adversaries he opposes. 
He assumes that capital invested in the purchase of land is “investment capital,” 
and then engages in a controversy about the respective definitions of investment 
capital and working capital, that is, fixed and circulating capital. His wholly 
amateurish conceptions of capital in general, which may be excused incidental- 
ty in one who is not an economist in view of the state of German political econo- 
my, conceal [rom him that this capital is neither investment nor working capi- 
tal, any more than the capital which someone invests at the Stock Exchange in 
purchasing stocks or government securities, and which, for him, represeits a 
Personal investment of capital, is “invested” in any branch of production. 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 789 

which profit, surplus-labour, is extracted from him. On the contrary, 
It is capital which the slave-holder has parted with, it is a deduc- 
tion from the capital which he has available for actual production, 
It has ceased to exist for him, just as capital invested in purchas- 
ing land has ceased to exist for agriculture. The best proof! of this 
is that it does not reappear for the slave-holder or the landowner 
except when he, in turn, sells his slaves or land. But then the 
same situation prevails for the buyer. The fact that he has bought 
the slave does not enable him to exploit the slave without further 
ado. He is only able to do so when he invests some additional capi- 
tal in the slave economy itself. 

The same capital does nol exist twice, once in the hands of the 
seller, and a second time in the hands of the buyer of the land. It 
pacses from the hands of the buyer lo those of the seller, and there 
the matter ends. The buyer now no longer has capital, but in its 
stead a piece of Jand. The circumstance that the rent produced by 
a real investment of capital in this land is calculated by the new 
landowner as interest on capital which he has not invested in the 
land, but given away to acquire the land, does not in the least 
alter the economic nature of the land factor, any more than the 
circumstance that someone has paid £1,000 for 3% consols has 
anything to do with the capital out of whose revenue the interest 
on the national debt is paid. 

In fact, the money expended in purchasing land, like that in 
purchasing government bonds, is merely capital in céself, just as 
any value sum is capital in itself, potential capital, on the basis 
of the capitalist mode of production. What is paid for land, like 
that for government bonds or any other purchased commodity, is a 
sum of money. This is capital in itself, because it can be converted 
into capital. It depends upon the use put to it by the seller whether 
the money obtained by him is really transformed into capital or 
not. For the buyer, it can never again function as such, no more 
than any other money which he has definitely paid out. It figures 
in his accounts as interest-bearing capital, because he considers 
the income, received as rent from the land or as interest on state 
indebtedness, as interest on the money which the purchase of the 
claim to this revenue has cost him. He can only realize it as capital 
through resale. But then another, the new buyer, enters the same 
relationship maintained by the former, and the money thus expend- 
ed cannot be transformed into actual capital for the expender 
through any change of hands. 

In the case of small landed property the illusion is fostered still 
more that land itself possesses value and thus enters as capital 

720 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

into the price of production of the product, much as machines or 
raw materials. But we liave seen that rent, and therefore capital- 
ized rent, the price of and, can enter as a determining factor into 
the price of agricultural products in only two cases. First, when as 
a consequence of the composition of agricultural capital—a capi- 
{al which has nothing to do with the capital invested in purchasing 
land—the value of the products of the soil is higher than their 
price of production, and market conditions enable the landlord to 
realize this difference. Second, when there is a monopoly price. 
And both are least of all the case under the management of land par- 
cels and small landownership because precisely here production to 
a large extent satisfies the producers’ own wants and is carried on 
independently of regulation by the average rate of profit. Even 
where cultivation of land parcels is conducted upon leased land, 
the lease money comprises, far more so than under any other condi- 
tions, a portion of the profit and even a deduction from wages; 
this money is then only a nominal rent, not rent as an independent 
category as opposed to wages and profit. 

The expenditure of money-capital for the purchase of land, then, 
is not an investment of agricultural capital. It is a decrease pro 
tanto in the capital which small peasants can employ in their own 
sphere of production. It reduces pro fanto the size of their means 
o! production and thereby narrows the economic basis of reproduc- 
tion. It subjects the small peasant to the money-lender, since 
credit proper occurs but rarely in this sphere in general. It is a 
hindrance to agriculture, even where such purchase takes place 
in the case of large estates. It contradicts in jact the capitalist mode 
of production, which is on the whole indiflerent to whether the 
landowner is in debt, no matter whether he has inherited or pur- 
chased his estate. The nature of management of the leased estate 
itself is not altered whether the landowner pockets the rent himself 
or whether he must pay it out to the holder of his mortgage. 

We have seen that, in the case of a given ground-rent, the price 
of land is regulated by the interest rate. If the rate is low, then the 
price of land is high, and vice versa. Normally, then, a high price 
of land and a low interest rate should go hand in hand, so that if 
the peasant paid a high price for the land in consequence of a low 
interest rate, the same low rate of interest should also secure his 
working capital for him on easy credit terms. But in reality, things 
turn out differently when peasant proprietorship of land parcels 
is the prevailing form. In the first place, the general Jaws of credit 
are not adapted to the farmer, since these laws presuppose a capi- 
talist as the producer. Secondly, where proprietorship of land parcels 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 791 

predominates—we are not referring to colonies: here—and the 
small peasant constitutes the backbone of the nation, the formation 
of capital, i.e., social reproduction, is relatively weak, and still 
weaker is the formation of loanable money-capital, in the sense 
previously elaborated. This presupposes the concentration and 
existence of a class of idle rich capitalists (Massie). Thirdly, 
here where the ownership of the land is a necessary condition for 
the existence of most producers, and an indispensable field of 
investment for their capital, the price of land is raised independent- 
ly of the interest rate, and often in inverse ratio to it, through 
the preponderance of the demand for landed property over its 
supply. Land sold in parcels brings a far higher price in such 
a case than when sold in large tracts, because here the number of 
small buyers is large and that of large buyers is small (Bandes 
Noires,* Rubichon; Newman). For all these reasons, the price of 
land rises here with a relatively high rate of interest. The relatively 
low interest, which the peasant derives here from the outlay of 
capital for the purchase of land (Mounier), corresponds here, on 
the other side, to the high usurious interest rate which he himself 
has to pay to his mortgage creditors. The Irish system bears out 
the same thing, only in another form. 

The price of land, this element foreign to production in itself, 
may therefore rise here to such a point that it makes production 
impossible (Dombasle). 

The fact that the price of land plays such a role, that purchase and 
sale, the circulation of land as a commodity, develops to this 
degree, is practically a result of the development of the capital- 
ist mode of production in so far as a commodity is here the general 
form of all products and all instruments of production. On thie 
other hand, this development takes place only where the capi- 
talist mode of production has a limited development and does not 
unfold all of its peculiarities, because this rests precisely upon the 
fact that agriculture is no longer, or not yet, subject to the capital- 
ist mode of production, but rather to one handed down Irom ex- 
tinct forms of sociely. The disadvantages of the capitalist mode of 
production, with ils dependence of the producer upon the money- 
price of his product, coincide here therefore with the disadvantages 
occasioned by the imperfect development of the capitalist mode of 
production. The peasant turns merchant and industrialist without 
the conditions enabling him to produce his products as commodi- 
ties. 

* Associations of profiteers, — Ed. 

799 TRANSFORMATION OF SURPLUS-PROFIT INTO GROUND-RENT 

The conflict between the price of land as an element in the pro- 
ducers’ cost-price and no element in the price of production (even 
though the rent enters as a determining factor into the price of the 
agricultural product, the capitalized rent, which is advanced for 
90 years or more, by no means enters as a determinant) is but one 
of the forms manifesting the general contradiction between pri- 
vate landownership and a rational agriculture, the normal social 
utilization of the soil. But on the other hand, private landowner- 
ship, and thereby expropriation of the direct producers from the 
land—private landownership by the one, which implies lack of 
ownership by others—is the basis of the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction. 

Here, in small-scale agriculture, the price of land, a form and 
result of private Jandownership, appears as a barrier to produc- 
tion itself. In large-scale agriculture, and large estates operating 
on a capitalist basis, ownership likewise acts as a_ barrier, 
because it limits the tenant farmer in his productive investment of 
capital. which in the final analysis benefits not him, but the 
Jandlord. In both forms, exploitation and squandering of the vi- 
tality of the soil (apart from making exploitation dependent upon 
the accidental and unequal circumstances of individual producers 
tather than the attained level of social development) takes the 
piace of conscious rational cultivation of the soil as eternal commu- 
nal property, an inalienable condition for the existence and repro- 
duction of a chain of successive generations of the human race. 
In the case of small property, this results from the lack of means 
and knowledge of applying the social labour productivity. In the 
case of large property, it results from the exploitation of such 
means for the most rapid enrichment of farmer and proprietor. 
In the case of both through dependence on the market-price. 

All critique of small landed property resolves itself in the final 
analysis into a criticism of private ownership as a barrier and hin- 
drance to agriculture. And similarly all counter-criticism of large 
landed property. In either case, of course, we leave aside all sec- 
ondary political considerations. This barrier and hindrance, which 
are erected by all private landed property vis-a-vis agricultural 
production and the rational cultivation, maintenance and improve- 
ment of the soil itself, develop on both sides merely in different 
forms, and in wrangling over the specific forms of this evil its 
ultimate cause is forgotten. 

Small landed property presupposes that the overwhelming 
majority of the population is rural, and that not social, but isolated 
labour predominates; and that, therefore, under such conditions 

GENESIS OF CAPITALIST GROUND-RENT 793 

wealth and development of reproduction, both of its material and 
spiritual prerequisites, are out of the question, and thereby also the 
prerequisites for rational cultivation. On the other hand, large 
landed property reduces the agricultural population to a constant- 
ly falling minimum, and confronts it with a constantly growing 
industrial population crowded together in large cities. It thereby 
creates conditions which cause an irreparable break in the coher- 
ence of social interchange prescribed by the natural laws of life. 
As a result, the vitality of the soil is squandered, and this prodi- 
gality is catried by commerce far beyond the borders of a partic- 
ular state (Liebig). 

While small landed property creates a class of barbarians stand- 
ing halfway outside of society, a class combining all the crude- 
ness of primitive forms of society with the anguish and misery of 
civilized countries, large landed property undermines labour- 
power in the last region, where its prime energy seeks refuge and 
stores up its strength as a reserve fund for the regeneration of the 
vital force of nations—on the land itself. Large-scale industry 
and large-scale mechanized agriculture work together. IF origi- 
nally distinguished by the fact that the former lays waste and de- 
stroys principally Jabour-power, hence the natural force of human 
beings, whereas the latter more directly exhausts the natural 
vitality of the soil, they join hands in the further course of devel- 
opment in that the industrial system in the country-side also ener- 
vates the labourers, and industry and commerce on their part 
supply agriculture with the means for exhausting the soil. 

a SS 

PART Vil 

REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

CHAPTER XLVI 
THE TRINITY FORMULA 

14 

Capital—profit (profit of enterprise plus interest), !and—ground- 
rent, labour—wages, this is the trinity formula which comprises 
all the secrets of the social production process. 

Furthermore, since as previously demonstrated interest appears 
as the specific characteristic product of capital and profit of enter- 
prise on the contrary appears as wages independent of capital, 
{he above trinity formula reduces itself more specifically to the 
following: 

Capital—interest, land—ground-rent, Jabour—wages, where 
profit, the specific characteristic form of surplus-value belonging 
to the capitalist mode of production, is fortunately eliminated. 

On closer examination of this economic trinity, we find the fol- 
lowing: 

First, the alleged sources of tlie annually available wealth be- 
long to widely dissimilar spheres and are not at al] analogous with 
one another. They have about the same relation to each other as 
lawyer’s fees, red beets and music. 

Capital, land, labour! However, capital is not a thing, but rath- 
er a definite social production relation, belonging to a definite 
historical formation of society, which is manifested in a thing and 
lends this thing a specific social character. Capital is not the 
sum of {he material and produced means of production. Capital 
is rather the means of production transformed into capital, which 
in themselves are no more capital than gold or silver in itself is 
money. It is {he means of production monopolized by a certain 
section of society, confronting living labour-power as products 

“ The following three fragments were found in different parts of the manu- 
script for Part VI.—F. E. 

TRINITY FORMULA 795 

and working conditions rendered independent of this very labour- 
power, which are personified through this antitiesis in capital. 
It is not merely the products of labourers turned into independent 
powers, products as rulers and buyers of their producers, but rath- 
er also the social forces and the future ...[? illegible] form of 
this labour, which confront the labourers as properties of their 
products. Here, then, we have a definite and, at first glance, very 
mystical, social form of one of the factors in a historically pro- 
duced social production process. 

And now alongside of this we have the land, inorganic nature 
as such, rudis indigesiaque moles, in all its primeval wildness. 
Value is labour. Therefore surplus-value cannot be earth. Absolute 
fertility of the soil effects nothing more than the following: a cer- 
tain quantity of labour produces a certain product—in accordance 
with the natural fertility of the soil. The difference in soil fer- 
tility causes the same quantities of labour and capital, hence the 
same value, to be manifested in different quantities of agricultur- 
al products; that is, causes these products to have different indi- 
vidual values. The equalization oj these individual values into 
market-values is responsible for the fact that the “advantages 
of fertile over inferior soil ... are transferred [rom the cultivator 
or consumer to the landlord.” (Ricardo, Principles. p. 6.) 

And finally, as third party in this union, a mere ghost—‘“the” 
Labour, which is no more than an abstraction and taken by itself 
does not exist at all, or, if we take .,. [illegible], the productive 
activity of human beings in general, by which they promote the 
interchange with Nature, divested not only of every social form and 
well-defined character, but even in its bare natural existence, 
independent of society, removed from all societies, and as an ex- 
pression and confirmation of life which the still non-social man in 
general has in common with the one who is in any way social. 

Capital—interest; landed property, private ownership of the 
Earth, and, to be sure, modern and corresponding to the capitalist 
mode of production—rent; wage-labour—wages. The connection 
between the sources of revenue is supposed to be represented in 
this form. Wage-labour and landed property, like capital, are his- 
torically determined social forms; one of labour, the other of mo- 
nopolized terrestrial globe, and indeed both forms corresponding to 
capital and belonging to tlie same economic formation ol society, 

796 REVENUES AND TILFIR SOURCES 

The first striking thing about this formula is that side by side 
with capital, with this lorm of an element of production belong- 
ing to a definite mode of production, to a definite historical form 
of social process of production, side sy side with an element of 
production amalgamated with and represented by a definile so- 
cial form are indiscriminately placed: the ]Jand on the one hand and 
Jabour on the other, two elements of the real labour-process, which 
in this material form are common to all modes of production, which 
are the material elements of every process of production and have 
nothing to do with its social form. 

Secondly. In the formule: capital—interest, land—ground-rent, 
labour—-wages, capital, land and Jabour appear respectively 
as sources of interest (instead of profit), ground-rent and wages, 
as their products, or Iruits; the former are the basis, the lat- 
ter the consequence, the former are the cause, the latter the effect; 
and indeed, in such a manner that each individual source is relat- 
ed to its product as to that which is ejected and produced by it. 
All the proceeds, interest (instead of profit), rent, and wages, are 
three components of the value of the products, i.e., generally speak- 
ing, components of value or expressed in money, certain money 
components, price components. The formula: capital—interest 
is now indeed the most meaningless formula of capital, but still 
one of its formulas. But how should land create value, i.e., a so- 
cially defined quantity of labour, and moreover that particular 
portion of the value of its own products which forms the rent? 
Land, e.g., takes part as an agent of production in crealing a use- 
value, a material product, wheat. But it has nothing to do with 
the production of the value of wheat. In so far as value is represent- 
ed by wheat, the latter is merely considered as a definite quanti- 
ty of materialized social labour, regardless of the particular sub- 
stance in which this labour is manifested or of the particular use- 
value of this substance. This nowise contradicts that 1) other cir- 
cumstances being equal, the cheapness or dearness o] wheat depends 
upon the productivity of the soil. The productivity of agricultural 
labour is dependent on natural conditions, and the same quantity 
of labour is represented by more or fewer products, use-values, 
in accordance with such productivity. How large the quantity of 
labour represented in one bushel of wheat depends upon the number 
of bushels yielded by the same quantity of labour. It depends, 
in this case, upon the soil productivity in what quantities of prod- 
uct the value shall be manifested. But this value is given, independ- 
ent of this distribution. Value is represented in use-value; and 
use-value is a prerequisite for the creation of value; but it is folly 

TRINITY FORMULA 797 

to create an antithesis by placing a use-value, like land, on one 
side and on the other side value, and a particular portion of value 
at that. 2) ... {here the manuscript breaks off]. 

WwW 

Vulgar economy actually does no more than interpret, system- 
atize and defend in doctrinaire fashion the conceptions of the 
agents of bourgeois production who are entrapped in bourgeois 
production relations. It should not astonish us, then, that vul- 
gar economy feels particularly at home in the estranged outward 
appearances of economic relations in which these prima facie ab- 
surd and perfect contradictions appear and that these relations 
seem the more self-evident the more their internal relationships are 
concealed from it, although they are understandable to the popu- 
lar mind. But all science would be superfluous if the outward ap- 
pearance and the essence of things directly coincided. Thus, vul- 
gar economy has not the slightest suspicion that the trinity which 
it takes as its point of departure, namely, Jand—rent, capital— 
interest, Iabour--wages or the price of labour, are prima jacie 
three impossible combinations. First we have the use-value dand, 
which has no value, and the exchange-value ren¢: so that a social 
relation conceived as a thing is made proportional to Nature, i.e., 
two incommensurable magnitudes are supposed to stand in a given 
ratio to one another. Then capital—interest. If capital is conceived 
as a certain sum of values represented independently by money, 
then it is prima facie nonsense to say that a certain value should 
be worth more than it is worth. It is precisely in the form: capital— 
interest that all intermediate links are eliminated, and capital is 
reduced to its most general formula, which therefore in itself is 
also inexplicable and ahsurd. The vulgar economist prefers the for- 
mula capital—interest, with its occult quality of making a 
value unequal! to itself, to the formula capital—profit, precisely 
for the reason that this already more nearly approaches actual cap- 
italist relations. Then again, driven by the disturbing thought 
that 4 is not 5 and that 100 taler cannot possibly be 110 taler, he 
flees from capital as value to the material substance of capital; 
to its use-value as a condition of production of labour, to machin- 
ery, raw materials, etc. Thus, he is able once more to substitute 
in place of the first incomprehensible relation, whereby 4==5, a 
wholly incommensurable one between a use-value, a thing on one 
side, and a definite social production relation, surplus-value, on 
the other, as in the case of landed property. As soon as the vulgar 

798 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

economist arrives at this incommensurable relation, everything 
becomes clear to him, and he no longer feels the need lor further 
thought. For he has arrived precisely at the “rational in bour- 
geois conception. Finally, fabour—wages, or price of labour, is an 
expression, as shown in Book 1, which prima facie contradicts the 
conception of value as well as of price—the latter generally being 
but a definite expression of value. And “price of labour” is just 
as irrational as a yellow logarithm. But here the vulgar economist 
is all the more satisfied, because he has gained the profound insight 
of the bourgeois, namely, that he pays money for labour, and since 
precisely the contradiction between the formula and the concep- 
tion of value relieves him from all obligation to understand the 
latter. 

We have seen that the capitalist process of production is a his- 
torically determined form of the social process of production in 
general. The latter is as much a production process of material con- 
ditions of human life as a process taking place under specific his- 
torical and economic production relations, producing and repro- 
ducing these production relations themselves, and thereby also 
the bearers of this process, their material conditions of existence 
and their mutual relations, i.e., their particular socio-economic 
form. For the aggregate of these relations, in which the agents 
of this production stand with respect to Nature and to one another, 
and in which they produce, is precisely society, considered trom the 
standpoint of its economic structure. Like all its predecessors, 
the capitalist process of production proceeds under definite mate- 
tial conditions, which are, however, simultaneously the bearers 
of definite social relations entered into by individuals in the proc- 
ess of reproducing their life, Those conditions, like these relations, 
are on the one hand prerequisites, on the other hand results and cre- 
ations of the capitalist process of production; they are produced 
and reproduced by it. We saw also that capital—and the capital- 
ist is merely capital personified and functions in the process of 
production solely as the ageni of capital—in its corresponding 
social process of production, pumps a definite quantity of surplus- 
labour out of the direct producers, or labourers; capital obtains 
this surplus-labour without an equivalent, and in essence it al- 
ways femains forced labour—no matter how much it may seem to 
result from free contractual agreement. This surplus-labour ap- 

* Beginning of Chapter XLVIIL according to the manuscript.—F. £, 

TRINITY FORMULA 799 

pears as surplus-value, and this surplus-value exists as a surplus- 
product. Surplus-labour in general, as labour performed over and 
above the given requirements, must always remain. In the capital- 
ist as well as in the slave system, ete., it merely assumes an antag- 
onistic form and is supplemented by complete idleness of a stra- 
tum of society. A definite quantity of surplus-labour is required 
as insurance against accidents, and by the necessary and progres- 
sive expansion of the process of reproduction in keeping with the 
development of the needs and the growth of population, which is 
called accumulation from the viewpoint of the capitalist. It is 
one of the civilizing aspects of capital that it enforces this surplus- 
labour in a manner and under conditions which are more advanta- 
geous to the development of the productive forces, social rela- 
tions, and the creation of the elements for a new and higher form 
than under the preceding forms of slavery, serfdom, etc. Thus it 
gives rise to a stage, on the one hand, in which coercion and monopo- 
lization of social development (including its material and intel- 
lectual advantages) by one portion of society at the expense of 
ihe other are eliminated; on the other hand, it creates the mate- 
tial means and embryonic conditions, making it possible in a 
higher form of society to combine this surplus-labour with a greater 
reduction of time devoted to material labour in general. For, de- 
pending on the development of labour productivity, surplus-la- 
bour may be large in a small total working-day, and relatively 
small in a large total working-day. If the necessary labour-time= 
=3 and the surplus-labour=3, then the total working-day=6 and 
the rate of surplus-labour=100%. If the necessary labour=9 
and the surplus-labour=3, then the total working-day=12 and 
the rate of surplus-labour only=33'/,%. In that case, it depends 
upon the labour praductivity how much use-value shall be pro- 
duced ina definite time, hence alsoin a definite surplus labour-time. 
The actual wealth of society, and the possibilily of constantly 
expanding its reproduction process, therefore, do not depend upon 
the duration of surplus-labaur, but upon its productivity and the 
more or less copious conditions of production under which it is 
performed. In fact, the realm of freedom actually begins only where 
Jabour which is determined by necessity and mundane considera- 
tions ceases; thus in the very nature of things it lies beyond the 
sphere of actual material production. Just as the savage must 
wrestle with Nature to satisfy his wants, to maintain and repro- 
duce life, so must civilized man, and he must do so in all social 
formations and under all possible modes of production. With his 
development this reatm of physical necessity expands as a result 

g0U REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

of his wants; but, at the same time, the forces of production which 
satisiy these wants also increase. Freedom in this field can only 
consist in socialized man, the associated producers, rationally reg- 
ulating their interchange with Nature, bringing it under (heir 
common control, instead of being ruled by it as by the blind forces 
oi Nature; and achieving this with the least expenditure of energy 
and under conditions most favourable to, and worthy of, their 
human nature. But it nonetheless still remains a realm of neces- 
sity. Beyond it begins that development of human energy which 
is an end in itself, the true realm of freedom, which, however, 
can blossom forth only with this realm of necessity as its basis. 
The shortening of the working-day is its basic prerequisite. 

In a capitalist society, this surplus-value, or this surplus-prod- 
uct (leaving aside chance fluctuations in its distribution and con- 
sidering only its regulating law, its standardizing limits), is divid- 
ed among capitalists as dividends proportionate to the share 
of the social capital each holds. In this form surplus-value appears 
as average profit which falls to the share of capital, an average 
profit which in turn divides into profit of enterprise and interest, 
and which under these two categories may fall into the laps of 
different kinds of capitalists. This appropriation and distribution 
of surplus-value, or surplus-product, on the part of capital, how- 
ever, has its barrier in landed property. Just as the operating capi- 
talist pumps surplus-labour, and thereby surplus-value and sur- 
plus-product in the form of profit, out of the labourer, so the land- 
lord in turn pumps a portion of this surplus-value, or surplus-prod- 
uct, out of the capitalist in the form of rent in accordance with 
the laws already elaborated. 

Hence, when speaking here of profit as that portion of surplus- 
value falling to the share of capital, we mean average profit (equal 
to profit of enterprise plus interest) which is already limited by 
the deduction of rent from the aggregate profit (identical in mass 
with aggregate surplus-value); the deduction of rent is assumed. 
Profit of capital (profit of enterprise plus interest) and ground- 
rent are thus no more than particular components of surplus-val- 
uz, categories by which surplus-value is differentiated depending 
on whether it falls to the share of capital or landed property, head- 
ings which in no whit however alter its nature. Added together, 
these form the sum of social surplus-value. Capital pumps the sur- 
plus-labour, which is represented by surplus-value and surplus- 
product, directly out of the labourers. Thus, in this sense, it may 
be regarded as the producer of surplus-value. Landed property has 
nothing to do with the actual process of production. Its role is 

‘TRINITY PORMULA 801 

confined to transferring a portion of the produced surplus-valué 
from the pockets of capital to its own. However, the landlord plays 
a role in the capitalist process of production not merely through 
the pressure he exerts upon capital, nor merely because large land- 
ed property is a prerequisite and condition of capitalist produc- 
tion since it is a prerequisite and condition of the expropriation 
of the labourer from the means of production, but particularly be- 
cause he appears as the personification of one of {he most essen- 
tial conditions of production. 

Finally, the labourer in the capacity of owner and seller of his 
individual labour-power receives a portion of the product under 
the label of wages, in which that portion of his labour appears 
which we call necessary labour, i.e., that required for the main- 
tenance and reproduction of this labour-power, be the conditions 
of this maintenance and reproduction scanty or bountiful, favoura- 
ble or unfavourable. 

Whatever may be the disparity of these relations in other re- 
spects, they all have this in common: Capital yields a profit year 
after year to the capitalist, land a ground-rent to the landlord, 
and labour-power, under normal conditions and so long as it re- 
mains useful labour-power, a wage to the labourer. These three 
portions of total value annually produced, and the corresponding 
portions of the annually created total product (leaving aside for 
the present any consideration of accumulation), may be annually 
consumed by their respective owners, without exhausting the 
source of their reproduction. They are like the annually consumable 
{fruits of a perennial tree, or rather three trees; they form the 
annual incomes of three classes, capitalist, landowner and labourer, 
revenues distributed by the functioning capitalist in his capac- 
ity as direct extorter of surplus-labour and employer of latour 
in general. Thus, capital appears to the capitalist, ‘and to the land- 
lord, and labour-power, or rather labour itself, to the labourer 
(since he actually sells labour-power only as it is manifested, and 
since the price of labour-power, as previously shown. inevitably ap- 
pears as the price of labour under the capitalist mode of production), 
as three different sources of their specific revenues, namely, profit, 
ground-rent and wages. They are really so in the sense that capital 
is a perennial pumping-machine of surplus-labour for the capital- 
ist, land a perennial magnet lor the landlord, attracting a portion 
of the surplus-value pumped out by capital, and finally, labour 
the constantly self-renewing condition and ever self-renewing means 
of acquiring under the title of wages a portion of the value cre- 
ated by the labourer and thus a part of the social product meas- 

27 — 9757 

802 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

ured by this portion of value, i-e., the necessities of life. They are 
so, furthermore, in the sense that capital fixes a portion of the val- 
ue and thereby oj the product of the annual Jabour in the form 
of profit; landed property fixes another portion in the form of rent; 
and wage-labour fixes a third portion in the jorm of wages, and pre- 
cisely by this transformation converts them into revenues of the 
capitalist, landowner, and labourer, without, however, creating 
the substance itself which is transformed into these various cate- 
gories. The distribution rather presupposes the existence of this 
substance, namely, the total value of the annual product, which 
is nothing but materialized social labour. Nevertheless, it is not 
in this form that the matter appears to the agents of production, the 
bearers of the various functions in the production process, but rath- 
er in a distorted form. Why this takes place will be developed in 
the further course of our analysis. Capital, landed property and 
labour appear to those agents of production as three diflerent, in- 
dependent sources, from which as such there arise three diflerent 
components of the annually produced value—and thereby the 
product in which it exists; thus, from which there arise not merely 
the diflerent forms of this value as revenues falling to the share 
of particular factors in the social process of production, but from 
which this value itself arises, and thereby the substance of these 
forms of revenue. 

(Here one folio sheet of the manuscript is missing. ] 

... Differential rent is bound up with the relative soil fertility, 
in other words, with properties arising from the soil as such. But, 
in the first place, in so far as it is based upon the different individ- 
ual values of the products of different soil types, it is but the 
determination just mentioned; secondly, in so far as it is based 
upon the regulating genera! market-value, which differs from 
{hese individual values, it is a social law carried through by means 
of competition, which has to do neither with the soil nor the differ- 
ent degrees of its fertility. 

It might seem as if a rational relation were expressed at least 
in “labour—wages.” But this is no more the case than with “land— 
ground-rent.” In so far as Jabour is value-creating, and is manifest- 
ed in the value of commodities, it has nothing to do with the dis- 
{tribution of this value among various categories. In so far as it 
has the specifically social character of wage-labour, it is not value- 
creating. It has already been shown in general that wages of la- 
bour, or price of Jabour, is but an irrational expression for the val- 
ve, or price of labour-power; and the specific social conditions, 
Under which this labour-power is sold, have nothing to do with 

TRINITY FORMULA 803 

labour as a general agent in production. Labour is also material- 
ized in that value component of a commodity which as wages forms 
the price of labour-power; it creates this portion just as much as 
the other portions of the product; but it is materialized in this 
portion no more and no differently than in the portions forming 
rent or profit. And, in general, when we establish labour as value- 
creating, we do not consider it in its concrete form as a condition 
of production, but in its social delimitation which differs from that 
of wage-labour. 

Even the expression “capilal—profit” is incorrect here. If cap- 
ital is viewed in the only relation in which it produces surplus- 
value, namely, its relation to the labourer whereby it extorts sur- 
plus-labour by compulsion exerted upon Jabour-power, i.e., the 
wage-labourer, then this surplus-value comprises, outside of prof- 
it (profit of enterprise plus interest), also rent, in short, the entire 
undivided surplus-value. Here, on the other hand, as a source of 
revenue, it is placed only in relation to that portion falling to the 
shere of the capitalist. This is not the surplus-value which it ex- 
tracts generally but only that portion which it extracts for the capi- 
talist. Still more does all connection vanish no sooner the formula 
is transformed into “capital—interest.” 

If we at first considered the disparity of the above three sources, 
we now note that their products, their offshoots, or revenues, on 
the other hand, all belong to the same sphere, that of value. How- 
ever, this is compensated for (this relation not only between in- 
commensurable magnitudes, but also between wholly unlike, mu- 
tually unrelated, and non-comparable things) in that capital, like 
land and labour, is simply considered as a material substance, 
that is, simply as a produced.means of production, and thus is 
abstracted both as a relation to the labourer and as value. 

Thirdly, if understood in this way, the formula, capital—in- 
terest (profit), land—rent, labour—wages, presents a uniform 
and symmetrical incongruity. In fact, since wage-labour does not 
appear as a socially determined form of labour, but rather all la- 
bour appears by its nature as wage-labour (thus appearing lo those 
in the grip of capitalist production relations), the definite specific 
social forms assumed by the material conditions of labour—the 
produced means of production and the land—with respect to wage- 
labour (just as they, in turn, conversely presuppose wage-labour), 
directly coincide with the material existence of these conditions of 
labour or with the form possessed by them generally in the actval 
labour-process, independent of its concrete historically determined 
social form, or indeed independent of any social form, The changed 

27* 

804 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

form of the conditions of labour, i.e., alienated from labour and con- 
fronting it independently, whereby the produced means of pro- 
duction are thus transformed into capital, and the land into mono- 
polized land, or landed property—this form belonging to a dei- 
inite historical period thereby coincides with theexistence and func- 
tion of the produced means of production and of the land in the 
process of production in general. These means of production are 
in themselves capital by nature; capital is merely an “economic 
appellation” for these means of production; and so, in itself land is 
by nature the earth monopolized by a certain number of land- 
owners. Just as products confront the producer as an_ inde- 
pendent force in capital and capitalists—who actually are but 
the personification of capital—so land becomes personified in 
the landlord and likewise gets on its hind legs to demand, as an in- 
dependent force, its share of the product created with its help. 
Thus, not the land receives its due portion of the product for the 
restoration and improvement of its productivity, but instead the 
landlord takes a share of this product to chafler away or squander. 
It is clear that capital presupposes Jabour as wage-labour. But it 
is just as clear that if Jabour as wage-labour is taken as the point 
of departure, so that the identity of labour in general with wage- 
labour appears to be self-evident, then capital and monopolized 
land must also appear as the natural form of the conditions of la- 
bour in relation to labour in general. To be capital, then, appears 
as the natural form of the means of labour and thereby as the pure- 
ly real character arising from their function in the labour-process 
in general. Capital and produced means of production thus become 
identical terms. Similarly, land and land monopolized through 
private ownership become identical. The means of labour as such, 
which are by nature capital, thus become the source of profit, 
much as the land as such becomes the source of rent. 

Labour as such, in its simple capacity as purposive productive 
activity, relates to the means of production, not in their social 
determinate form, but rather in their concrete substance, as mate- 
rial and means of labour; the latter likewise are distinguished from 
one another merely materially, as use-values, i.e., the land as un- 
produced, the others as produced, means of labour. If, then, la- 
bour coincides with wage-labour, so does the particular social form 
in which the conditions of labour confront labour coincide with 
their material existence. The means of labour as such are then cap- 
ital, and the land as such is landed property. The formal independ- 
ence of these conditions of Jabour in relation to labour, the unique 
form of this independence with respect to wage-labour, is then 

TRINITY FORMULA 805 

a property inseparable fram them as things, as material condi- 
tions of production, an inherent, immanent, intrinsic character of 
them as elements of production. Their definite social character 
in the process of capitalist production bearing the stamp of a definite 
historical epoch is a natural, and intrinsic substantive character 
belonging to them, as it were, from time immemorial, as elements 
of the production process. Therefore, the respective part played 
by the earth as the original field of activity of labour, as the realm 
of forces of Nature, as the pre-existing arsenal of all objects of la- 
bour, and the other respective part played by the produced means 
of production (instruments, raw materials, etc.) in the general proc- 
ess of production, must seem to be expressed in the respective shares 
claimed by them as capital and landed property, i.e., which 
fall to the share of their social representatives in the form of profit 
(interest) and rent, like to the labourer—the part his labour plays 
in the process of production is expressed in wages. Rent, profit 
and wages thus seem to grow out of the role played by the land, 
produced means of production, and labour in the simple labour- 
process, even when we consider this labour-process as one carried 
en merely between man and Nature, leaving aside any historical 
determination. lt is merely the same thing again, in another form, 
when it is argued: the product in which a wage-labourer’s labour 
for himself is manifested, his proceeds or revenue, is sim- 
ply wages, the portion of value (and thereby the social product 
measured by this value) which his wages represent. Thus, if wage- 
labour coincides with labour generally, then so do wages with the 
produce of labour, and the value portion representing wages with 
the value created by labour generally. But in this way the other 
portions of value, profit and rent also appear independent with 
respect to wages, and must arise from sources of their own, whicli 
are specifically different and independent of labour; they must 
arise from the participating elements of production, to the share 
of whose owners they fall; i.e., profit arises from the means of pro- 
duction, the material elements of capital, and rent, arises [rom the 
land, or Nature, as represented by the landlord (Roscher). 
Landed property, capital and wage-labour are thus transformed 
from sources of revenue—in the sense that capital attracts to 
the capitalist, in the form of profit, a portion of the surplus-value 
extracled by him from labour, that monopoly in land attracts for 
the landlord another portion in the form of rent; and that labour 
grants the labourer the remaining portion of value in the form of 
wages—from sources by means of which one portion of value is 
transformed into the form ol profit, another into the form of .rent, 

&06 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

and a third into the form of wages—into actual sources from 
which these value portions and respective portions of the product 
in which they exist, or for which they are exchangeable, arise 
themselves, and from which, therefore, in the final analysis, the 
value of the product itself arises.*° 

In the case of the simplest categories of the capitalist mode of 
production, and even of commodity-production, in the case of com- 
modities and money, we have already pointed out the mystifying 
character that transiorms the social relations, for which the mate- 
rial elements of wealth serve as bearers in production, into 
properties of these things themselves (commodities) and still more 
pronouncedly transforms the production relation itself into a thing 
(money). All forms of society, in so far as they reach the stage of 
commodity-production and money circulation, take part in this 
perversion. But under the capitalist mode of production and in 
the case of capital, which forms its dominant category, its deter- 
mining production relation, this enchanted and perverted world 
develops still more. If one considers capital, to begin with, in the 
actual process of production as a means of extracting surplus-la- 
bour, then this relationship is still very simple, and the actual con- 
nection impresses itself upon the bearers of this process, the capi- 
talists themselves, and remains in their consciousness. The violent 
struggle over the limits of the working-day demonstrates this strik- 
ingly. But even within this non-mediated sphere. the sphere of 
direct action between labour and capital, matters do not rest in 
this simplicity. With the development of relative surplus-value 
in the actual specifically capitalist mode of production, whereby 
{he productive powers of social labour are developed, these produc- 
tive powers and the social interrelations of labour in tlie direct 
labour-process seem transferred from labour to capital. Capital 
thus becomes a very mystic being since all of labour’s social pro- 
ductive forces appear to be due to capital, rather than labour as 
such, and seem to issue from the womb of capital itself. Then the 
process of circulation intervenes, with its changes of substance 
and form, on which all parts of capital, even agricultural capital, 
devolve to the same degree that the specifically capitalist mode 
of production develops. This is a sphere where the relations under 
which value is originally produced are pushed completely into the 

*° Wages, profit, and rent are the three original sources of all revenue, as well 
sae si! Pechianeee le value (A. Smith).—It is thus that the causes of material 
production are at {he same time the sources olf the origi y i ist. 
fStoreh, fy ne 280.) urces original revenues which exist. 

TRINITY FORMULA 807 

background. In the direct process of production the capitalist 
already acts simultaneously as producer of commodities and manag- 
er of commodity-production. Hence this process of production 
appears to him by no means simply as a process of producing sur- 
plus-value. But whatever may be the surplus-value extorted by cap- 
ital in the actual production process and appearing in comimodi- 
ties, the value and surplus-value contained in the commodities 
must first be realized in the circulation process. And both the 
restitution of the values advanced in production and, particularly, 
the surplus-value contained in the commodities seem not merely 
to be realized in the circulation, but actually to arise [rom it; an 
appearance which is especially reinforced by two circumstances: 
first, the profit made in selling depends on cheating, deceit, in- 
side knowledge, skill and a thousand [avourable market opportu- 
nities; and then by the circumstance that added here to la- 
bour-time is a second determining element—time of circula- 
tion. This acts, in fact, only as a negative barrier against the for- 
mation of value and surplus-value, but it has the appearance of 
being as definite a basis as labour itself and of introducing a de- 
termining element that is independent of labour and resulting 
from the nature of capital. In Book If we naturally had to present 
this sphere of circulation merely with reference to the form deter- 
minations which it created and to demonstrate the further develop- 
ment of the structure of capital taking place in this sphere. But in 
reality this sphere is the sphere of competition, which, considered 
in each individual case, is dominated by chance; where, then, the 
inner law, which prevails in these accidents and regulates them, 
is only visible when these accidents are grouped together in large 
numbers, where it remains, therefore, invisible and unintelligi- 
ble to the individual agents in producticn. But furthermore: the 
actual process of production, as a unity of the direct production 
process and the circulation process, gives rise to new formations, 
in which the vein of internal connections is increasingly lost, the 
production relations are rendered independent of one another, and 
the component values become ossified into forms independent of 
one another. 

The conversion of surplus-value into profit, as we have seen, 
is determined as much by the process of circulation as by the process 
of production. Surp!us-value, in the form of profit, is no longer 
related back to that portion of capital invested in labour [rom which 
it arises, but to the total capital. The rate of profit is regulated 
by laws of its own, which permit, or even require, it to change while 
the rate of surplus-value remains unaltered. All this obscures 

808 REVENURS AND TITEIR SOURCES 

more and more the true nature of surplus-value and thus the actual 
mechanism of capital. Still more is this achieved through the trans- 
formation of profit into average profit and of values into prices 
of production, into the regulating averages of market-prices. 
A complicated social process intervenes here, the equalization proc- 
ess of capitals, which divorces the relative average prices of the 
commodities from their values, as well as the average profits in 
the various spheres of production (quite aside from the individual 
investments of capital in each particular sphere of production) from 
the actual exploitation of labour by the particular capitals. Not 
only does it appear so, but it is true in fact that the average price 
of commodities differs from their value, thus from the labour real- 
ized in them, and the average profit of a particular capital differs 
from the surplus-value which this capital las extracted from the 
labourers employed by it. The value of commodities appears, di- 
rectly, solely in the intluence of fluctuating productivity of Jabour 
upon the rise and fall of the prices of production, upon their move- 
ment and not upon their ultimate limits. Profit seems to be de- 
termined only secondarily by direct exploitation of Jabour, in so 
far as the lalter permits the capitalist to realize a profit deviating 
from the average profit at the regulating market-prices, which ap- 
parently prevail independent of such exploitation. Normal aver- 
age profits themselves seer immanent in capital and independent 
of exploitation; abnormal exploitation, or even average exploi- 
tation under favourable, exceptional conditions, seems to determine 
only the deviations from average profit, not this profit itself. The 
division of profit into profit of enterprise and interest (not to men- 
tion the intervention of commercial profit and profit [rom money- 
dealing, which are founded upon circulation and appear to arise 
completely from it, and not from the process of production itself) 
consummates the individualization of the form of surplus-value, 
the ossification of its form as opposed to its substance, its essence. 
One portion of profit, as opposed to the other, separates itself en- 
tirely from the relationship of capital as such and appears as aris- 
ing not out of the function of exploiting wage-labour, but out of 
{he wage-labour of the capitalist himself. In contrast thereto, in- 
terest then seems to be independent both of the labourer'’s wage- 
labour and the capitalist’s own labour, and to arise from capital 
as its own independent source. If capital originally appeared on 
the surface of circulation as a fetishism of capital, as a value-creat- 
ing value, so it now appears again in the form of interest-bear- 
ing capital, as in its most estranged and characteristic form. Where- 
fore also the formula capital—interest, as the third to-land— 

TRINITY FORMULA 809 

rent and labour—wages, is much more consistent than capital— 
profit, since in profit there stil! remains a recollection of its ori- 
gin, which is not only extinguished in interest, but is also placed 
in a form thoroughly antithetical to this origin. 

Finally, capital as an independent source of surplus-value is 
joined by landed property, which acts as a barrier to average prof- 
it and transfers a portion of surplus-value to a class that neither 
works itself, nor directly exploits labour, nor can find morally edi- 
fying rationalizations, as in the case of interest-bearing capital, 
e.g., risk and sacrifice of lending capital to others. Since here a 
part of the surplus-value seems to be bound up directly with a nat- 
ural element, the land, rather than with social relations, the form 
of mutual estrangement and ossification of the various parts of 
surplus-value is completed, the inner connection completely dis- 
rupted, and its source entirely buried, precisely because the re- 
lations of preduction, which are bound to the various material 
elements of the production process, have been,rendered mutually 
independent. 

In capital—profit, or still better capital—interest, land— 
rent, labour--wages, in this economic trinity represented as 
the connection between the component parts of value and wealth 
in general and its sources, we have {ne complete mystification of 
the capitalist mode of production, the conversion of social rela- 
tions into things, the direct coalescence of the material production 
relations with their historical and social determination. It is an 
enchanted, perverted, topsy-turvy world, in which Monsieur le 
Capital and Madame la Terre do their ghost-walking as social char- 
acters and at the same time directly as mere things. It is the great 
merit of classical economy to have destroyed this false appear- 
ance and illusion, this mutual independence and ossification of 
the various social elements of wealth, this personification of things 
and conversion of production relations into entities, this religion 
of everyday life. It did so by reducing interest toa portion of profit, 
and rent to the surplus above average profit, so that both of them 
converge in surplus-value; and by representing the process of cir- 
culation as a mere metamorphosis of forms, and finally recucing 
value and surplus-value of commodities to labour in the direct 
production process. Nevertheless even the best spokesmen of clas- 
sical economy remain more or less in the grip of the world of illu- 
sion which their criticism had dissolved, as can not be otherwise 
from a bourgeois standpoint, and thus they all fall more or less 
into inconsistencies, half-truths and unsolved contradictions. On 
the other hand, it is just as natural for the actual agents of produc- 

810 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

tion to feel completely at home in these estranged and irrational 
forms of capital—interest, land—rent, labour—wages, since 
these are precisely the forms of illusion in which they move 
about and find their daily accupation. It is therefore just as natu- 
tal that vulgar economy, which is no more than a didactic, more 
or less dogmatic, translation of everyday conceptions of the actual 
agents of production, and which arranges them in a certain rational 
order, should see precisely in this trinity, which is devoid of all 
inner connection, the natural and indubitable lofty basis for its 
shallow pompousness. This formula simultaneously corresponds 
to the interests of the ruling classes by proclaiming the physical 
necessity and eternal justification of their sources of revenue and 
elevating them to a dogma. 

In our description of how production relations are converted into 
entities and rendered independent in relation to the agents of pro- 
duction, we leave aside the manner in which the interrelations, 
due 1o the world-market, its conjunctures, movements of market- 
prices, periods of credit, industrial and commercial cycles, alter- 
nations of prosperily and crisis, appear to them as overwhelming 
natural laws that irresistibly enforce their will over them, and 
confront them as blind necessity. We leave this aside because the 
actual movement of competition belongs beyond our scope, and 
we need present only the inner organization of the capitalist mode 
of production, in its ideal average, as it were. 

In preceding forms of society this economic mystification arose 
principally with respect to money and interest-bearing capital. 
In the nature of things it is excluded, in the first place, where pro- 
duction for the use-value, for immediate personal requirements, 
predominates; and, secondly, where slavery or serfdom form the 
broad foundation of social production, as in antiquity and during 
ihe Middle Ages. Here, the domination of the producers by the con- 
ditions of production is concealed by the relations of dominion 
and servitude, which appear and are evident as the direct mo- 
tive power of the process of production. In early communal sccie- 
ties in which primitive communism prevailed, and even in the an- 
cient communal towns, it was this communal society itself with 
its conditions which appeared as the basis of production, and its 
reproduction appeared as its ultimate purpose. Even in the medi- 
eval guild system neither capital nor labour appear untraimmelled, 
but their relations are rather defined by the corporate rules, and 
bythe same associated relations, and corresponding conceptions 

of professicnal duty, craftsmanship, ete. Only when the capitalist 
mode of production— 

CHAPTER XLIX 

CONCERNING TILE ANALYSIS 
OF THE PROCESS OF PRODUCTION 

For the purposes of the following analysis we may leave out of 
consideration the distinction between price of production and value, 
since this distinction disappears altogether when, as here, the value 
of the total annual product of labour is considered, i.e., the prod- 
uct of the total social capital. 

Profit (profit of enterprise plus interest) and rent are nothing 
but peculiar forms assumed by particular parts of the surplus-value 
of commodities. The magnitude of surplus-value is the limit of 
the total size of the parts into which it may be divided. Average 
profit plus rent are, therefore, equal to the surplus-value. It is 
possible for part of the surplus-labour, and thus surplus-value, con- 
tained in the commodities, not to take part directly in the equal- 
ization of an average profit, so that part of the commodity-value 
is not expressed at all in its price. But first, this is balanced eith- 
er by the fact that the rate of profit increases, when the commodi- 
ties sold below their value form an element of the constant capital, 
or by profit and rent being represented by a larger product, when 
commodities sold below their value enter into the portion of value 
consumed as revenuein the form of articles for individual consump- 
tion. Secondly, this is eliminated in the average movement. At 
any tate, even if a portion of surplus-value not expressed in the 
price of the commodity is lost lor the price formation, the sum of 
average profit plus rent in its normal form can never be larger than 
the tolal surplus-value, although it may be smaller. Its normal 
form presupposes wages corresponding to the value of labour-pow- 
er. Even monopoly rent, in so far as it is not a deduction from 
wages, i.e., does not constitute a special category, must always in- 
directly be a part of the surplus-value. If it is not part of the price 
excess above the price of production of the commodity itself, of 
which it is a constituent part (as in differential rent), or an excess 

&12 REVENUES AND TITEIR SOURCES 

portion of the surplus-value of the commodity itself, of which it 
is a constituent part, above that portion of its own surplus-value 
measured by the average profit (as in absolute rent), it is at least 
part of the surplus-value of other commodities, i.e., of commodi- 
ties which are exchanged for this commodity having a monopoly 
price. The sum of average profit plus ground-rent can never be 
greater than the magnitude of which they are components and which 
exists before this division. [1 is therefore immaterial for our dis- 
cussion whether the entire surplus-value of the commodities, i.e., 
all the surplus-labour contained in the commodities, is realized in 
their price or not. The surplus-labour is not entirely realized if 
only for the reason that due to a continual change in the amount 
of labour socially necessary to produce a certain commodity, re- 
sulting from the constant change in the productiveness of labour, 
some commodities are always produced under abnormal conditions 
and must. therefore, be sold below their individual value. At any 
rate, profit plus rent equal the total realized surplus-value (sur- 
plus-labour), and for purposes of this discussion the realized sur- 
plus-value inay be equated to all surplus-value; for profit and rent 
are realized surplus-value, or, generally speaking, the surplus-val- 
ue which passes into the prices of commodities, thus in practice 
all the surplus-value forming a constituent part of this price. 

On the other hand, wages, which form the third specific form of 
revenue, are always equal to the variable component part of cap- 
ital, i.e., the component part which is laid out in purchasing liv- 
ing labour-power, paying labourers rather than in ineans of la- 
bour. (The labour which is paid in the expenditure of revenue is 
itself paid in wages, profit, cr reni, and therefore does not form any 
value portion of commodities by which it is paid. Hence it is not 
considered in the analysis of commodity-value and of the compo- 
nent parts into which it is divided.) It is the materialization of 
{hat portion of the total working-day of the labourer in which the 
value of variable capital and thus the price of labour is reproduced; 
that portion of commodity-value in which the Jabourer reproduces 
the value of his own labour-power, or the price of his labour, The 
total working-day of the Jabourer is divided into two parts. One 
portion in which he performs the amount of labour necessary to 
reproduce the value of his own means of subsistence; the paid por- 
lion of his total labour, the portion necessary for pis own 
maintenance and reproduction. The entire remaining portion of the 
working-day, the entire excess quantity of labour performed above 
the value of the labour realized in his wages, is surpJus-labour, 
unpaid labour, represented in the surpJus-va!ue of his {otal commod- 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 813 

ily-production (and thus in an excess quantity of commodities) 
surplus-value which in turn is divided into differently named parts, 
into profit (profit of enterprise plus interest) and rent. , 

The entire value portion of commodities, then, in which the to- 
tal labour of the labourers added during one day, or one year, is 
realized, the total value of the annual product created by this la- 
bour, is divided into the value of wages, into profit and into rent. 
For this total labour is divided into necessary labour, by which 
the labourer creates that value portion of the product with which 
he is himself paid, that is, his wages, and into unpaid surplus- 
labour, by which he creates that value portion of the product which 
represents surplus-value and which is later divided into profit 
and rent. Aside from this labour, the labourer performs no labour, 
and aside from the total value of the product, which assumes the 
forms of wages, profit and reni, he creates no value. The value of 
the annual product, in which the new labour added by the Jabour- 
er during the year is incorporated, is equal tothe wage, or the 
value of the variable capital plus the surplus-value, which in turn 
is divided into profit and rent. 

The entire value portion of the annual product, then. which 
the labourer creates in the course of the year, is expressed in the 
annual value sum of the three revenues, the value of wages, profit, 
and rent. Evidently, therefore, the value of the constant portion 
of capital is not reproduced in the annually created value of prod- 
uct, for the wages are only equal to the value of the variable por- 
tion of capital advanced in production, and rent and profit are 
only equal to the surplus-value, the excess of value produced above 
the total value of advanced capital, which equals the value of the 
constant capital plus the value of the variable capital. 

It is completely irrelevant to the problem to be solved here that 
a portion of the surplus-value converted into the form of profit 
and rent is not consumed as revenue, but is accumulated. That por- 
tion which is saved up as an accumulation fund serves to creale 
new, additional capital, but not to replace the old capital, he it 
the component part of old capital laid out for labour-power or 
for means of labour. We may therefore assume here, for the sake 
of simplicity, that the revenue passes wholly into individual con- 
sumption. The difficulty is two-fold. On the one hand the value 
of the annual product, in which the revenues, wages, profit and rent, 
are consumed, contains a portion of value equal to the portion of 
value of constant capital used up in it. It contains this portion of 
value in addition to that portion which resolves itself into wages 
and that which resolves itself into profit and rent. Its value is 

84 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

{herelore=wages-+ profit+-rent-++C (its constant portion of value), 
How can an annually produced value, which only=wages-- profit + 
--rent, buy a product the value of which=(wages+ profii+ rent)+ 
=~ C? How can the annually produced value buy a product which 
has a higher value than its own? 

On the other hand, if we leave aside {hat portion of constant cap- 
ital which did not pass over into the product, and which there- 
fore continues to exist, although with reduced value, as before the 
annual production of commodities; in other words, temporarily 
leaving out of consideration the employed, but not ccnsumed, fixed 
capital, then the constant portion of advanced capital is seen to 
have been wholly transferred to the new product in the form of 
raw and auxiliary materials, whereas a part of the means of labour 
has been wholly consumed and another part only partially, and 
thus only a part of its value has been consumed in production. This 
entire portion of constant capital consumed in production must be 
replaced in kind. Assuming all other circumstances, particular- 
ly the productive power of Jabour, to remain unchanged, this por- 
tion requires the same amount of labour ior its replacement as 
before, i.e., it must be replaced by an equivalent value. If not, 
then reproduction itself cannot take place on the former scale. 
But who is obliged to perform this labour, and who does per- 
form it? 

As to the first difficulty: Who is obliged to pay for the constant 
portion of value contained in the product, and with what?—lt 
is assumed that the value of constant capital consumed in produc- 
tion reappears as a part of the value of the product. This does 
not contradict the assumptions of the second difficulty. For it has 
already been demonstrated in Book I (Kap. V)* (‘The Labour- 
Process and the Process of Producing Surplus-Value”) how the old 
value remains simultaneously preserved in the product through 
the mere addition of new Jabour, although this does not reproduce 
the old value and does no more than add to it, creates merely addi- 
tional value; but that this results from labour, not in so far asit 
is value-creating, i.e., labour in general, but in its function as def- 
inite productive labour. Therefore, no additional labour was nec- 
essary lo preserve the value of theconstant portion in the product, 
in which the revenue. i.e., the entire value created during the year, 
is expended. But to be sure, new additional labour is required to 
replace the value and use-value of constant capital consumed dur- 

* English edition: Ch. VII.—Ed. 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 815 

ing the preceding year, without the replacement of which no re- 
production at all is possible. 

All newly added labour is represented in the value newly creat- 
ed during the year, and this in turn is divided into the three rey- 
enues: wages, profit and rent.—Thus, on the one hand, no excess 
social labour remains for the replacement of the consumed constant 
capital, which must be replaced partially in kind and according 
to its value, and partially merely according to its value (for pure 
wear and tear on fixed capital). On the other hand, the value an- 
nually created by labour, divided into wages, profit and rent, and 
to be expended in this form, appears not to sulfice to pay for, or 
buy, the constant portion of capital, which must be contained, out- 
side their own value, in (he annual product. 

It is seen that the problem presented here has already been solved 
in the consideration of reproduction of the total social capital— 
Book II, Part II]. We return to it here, in the first place, because 
surplus-value had not been developed there in its revenue forms: 
profit (profit of enterprise plus interest) and rent, and could not, 
therefore, be treated in these forms; and then, also because precise- 
ly in the form of wages, profit and rent there is contained an in- 
credible blunder in analysis, which pervades all political economy 
since Adam Smith. 

We divided all capital there into two big classes: Class I, pro- 
ducing means of producticn, and Class [1, producing articles of 
individual consumption. The fact that certain products may serve 
equally well both for personal consumption and as means ol producti- 
on (a horse, grain, etc.) does not invalidate the absolute correctness of 
this division inany way. It is actually no hypothesis, but merely an 
expression of fact. Take the annual product of a country. One por- 
tion of the product, whatever its ability to serve as means of pro- 
duction, passes over into individual consumption. It is the prod- 
uct lor which wages, profit and rent are expended. This product 
is the product ol a definite department of the social capital. It is 
possible that this same capital may also produce products belong- 
ing to Class [. In so far as it does so, it is not the portion of this 
capital consumed in the products of Class 11, products belonging 
actually to individual constmption, which supplies the produc- 
tively consumed products belonging to Class I. This entire prod- 
uct II, which passes into individual consumption, and for which 
therefore the revenue is spent, is the existent form of the capital 
consumed in it plus the produced surplus. It is thus the product 
of a capital invested solely in the production of articles of consump- 
tion. And in the same way Department I of the annual product, 

816 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

which serves as means of reproduction—raw materials and instru- 
ments of labour—whatever capacity this product may otherwise 
possess naturatiter to serve as means of consumption, Is the prod- 
uct of a capital invested solely in the production of means of pro- 
duction. By far the greater part of products forming constant cap- 
ital exists also materially in a form in which it cannot pass into 
individual consumption. In so lar as this could be done, e.g., in 
so far as a farmer could eat his seed-corn, butcher his draught 
animals, etc., the economic barrier works the same for him as if 
this portion did not exist in consumable form. 

As already indicated, we leave out of consideration in both 
classes the fixed portion of constant capital, which continues to exist 
in kind and, so far as its value is concerned, independently of 
ihe annual product of both classes. 

In Class II, for the products of which wages, profit and rent are 
expended, in short, the revenues consumed, the product itself con- 
sists of three components sofar as its value is concerned. One com- 
ponent is equal to the value of the constant portion of capital con- 
sumed in production; a second component is equal to the value of 
the variable advanced capital laid out in wages; finally, a third 
component is equal to the produced surplus-value, thus=profit-+ 
-trent. The first component of the product of Class II, the value 
of the constant portion of capital, can be consumed neither by 
the capitalists of Class I], nor by the labourers of this class, 
nor by the landowners. It forms no part of their revenues, but must 
be replaced in kind and must be sold for this to occur. On the oth- 
er hand, the other two components of this product are equal to 
the salle of the revenues created in this class, =wages+ profit+ 
rent. 

In Class I the product consists of the same constituents, as re- 
gards form. But that part which here forms revenue, wages+prol- 
it--rent, in short, the variable portion of capital+surplus-value, 
is not consumed here in the natural form of products of this Class 
I. but in products of Class II. The value of the revenues of Class I 
must, therefore, be consumed in that portion of products of Class 
If which forms the constant capital of II to be replaced. The por- 
tion of the product of Class {1 which must replace its constant cap- 
ital is consumed in its natural form by the labourers, capitalists 
and landlords of Class I. They spend their revenue for this product 
of 11. On the other hand, tle product of I, to the extent that it rep- 
resents a revenue of Class I, is praductively consumed in its natu- 
tal form by Class II, whose constant capital it replaces in kind. 
Finally, the used-up constant portion of capital of Class I is re- 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 817 

placed out of the very products of this class, which consist precisely 
of means of labour, raw and auxiliary materials, etc., partly through 
exchange by capitalists of I among themselves, partly so that 
some of these capitalists can directly use their own product once 
more as means of production. 

Let us take the previous scheme (Book II, Chapter XX, II) for 
simple reproduction: 

1, 4,000, + 1,000,-+ 1,000, 6,000 ) 

I. 2,000,-+ 500,-++ 500,—3,000 J "0? 

According to this, the producers and landlords of II consume 500, + 
-+500,=1,000 as revenue; 2,000, remains to be replaced. This 
is consumed by the labourers, capitalists and those who draw rent 
from 1, whose income=1,000,+ 1,000,=2,000. The consumed prod- 
uct of II is consumed as revenue by I, and the portion of the rev- 
enue of I representing an unconsumable product is consumed as 
constant capital by If. It remains then to account for the 4,000. 
of I. This is replaced out of the product of I itself, which=6,000, 
or rather=6,000—2,000; for these 2,000 have already been convert- 
ed into constant capital for II. It should be noted, of course, that 
these numbers have been chosen arbitrarily, and so the relaticn 
between ihe value of the revenues of I and the value of the constant 
capital of II] appears arbitrary. It is evident, however, that so far 
as the process of reproduction is normal and takes place under oth- 
erwise equal circumstances, i.e., leaving aside the accumulation, 
the sum of the values of wages, profit and rent inClass I must equal 
the value of the constant portion of capital of Class I]. Other- 
wise either Class If will not be able to replace its constant capital, 
or Class | will not be able to convert its revenue from uncon- 
sumable into consumable form. 

Thus, the value of the annual commodity-product, just like the 
value of the commodity-product produced by some particular in- 
vestment of capital, and like the value of any individual commodity, 
resolves itself into two component parts: A, which replaces the val- 
ue of the advanced constant capital, and B, which is represented 
in {he form of revenune—wages, profit and rent. The latter compo- 
nent part of value, B, is counterposed to the former A, in so far as 
A, under otherwise equal circumstances: 1) never assumes the 
form of revenue and 2) always flows back in the form of cap- 
ital, and indeed constant capital. The other component of B, how- 
ever, carries within itself, in turn, an antithesis. Profit and rent 
have this in common with wages: all three are forms of revenue. 

818 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

Nevertheless they differ essentially in that profit and rent repre- 
sent surplus-value, i.e., unpaid labour, whereas wages represent 
paid labour. The portion of the value of the product which repre- 
sents wages expended thus replaces wages, and, under the condi- 
tions assumed by us, where reproduction takes place on the same 
scale and under the same conditions, is again reconverted into 
wages, flows back first as variable capital, as a component of the 
capital that must be advanced anew for reproducticn. This por- 
tion has a two-fold functicn. It exists first in the form of capital 
and is exchanged as such for labour-power. In the hands of the la- 
bourer. it is transformed into revenue which he draws out of the 
sale of his labour-power, is converted as revenue into means of 
subsistence and consumed. This double process is revealed through 
the mediation of money circulation. The variable capital is ad- 
vanced in money, paid out as wages. This is its first function as 
capital. It is exchanged for labour-power and transformed into the 
manilestation of this labour-power, into labour. This is the process 
as regards the capitalist, Secondly, however: with this money the 
labourers buy a part of the commodities produced by them, which 
is measured by this money, and is consumed by them as revenue. 
If we imagine the circulation of money to be eliminated, then a 
part of the labourer’s product is in the hands of the capitalist in 
ihe form of available capital. He advances this part as capital, 
gives it to the labourer for new labour-power, while the labourer 
consumes if as revenue directly or indirectly through exchange 
for other commodities. That portion of the value of the product, 
then, which is destined in the course of reproduction to be convert- 
ed into wages, into revenue for the labourers, first flows back into 
the hands of the capitalist in the form of capital, or more accurate- 
ly variable capital. It is an essential requirement that it should 
flow back in this form in order for labour as wage-labour, the 
means of production as capital, and the process of production itself 
as a capitalist process, to be continually reproduced anew. 

In order to avoid unnecessary difficulty, one should distinguish 
gross output and net output from gross income and net income. 

The gross output, or gross product, is the total reproduced prod- 
uct. With the exception of the employed but not consumed por- 
tion of fixed capital, the value of the gross output, or gross product, 
equals ihe value of capital advanced and consumed in production, 
that is, constant and variable capital plus surplus-value, which 
resolves itself into profit and rent. Or, if we consider ihe product 
of the total social capital instead of that of an individual capi- 
tal, the gross output equals the material elements forming the con- 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION a19 

stant and variable capital, plus the material elernents of the sur- 
plus-product in which profit and rent are represented. 

The gross income is that portion of value and that portion of the 
gross product measured by it which remains after deducting that 
portion of value and thal portion of the product of total production 
measured by it which replaces the constant capital advanced and 
consumed in production. The gross income, then, is equal to wages 
(or the portion of the product destined to again become the income 
of the labourer)-+-profit--rent. The net income, on the olher hand, 
is the surplus-value, and thus the surplus-product, which remains 
after deducting wages, and which, in fact, thus represents the sur- 
plus-value realized by capital and to be divided with the landlord, 
and the surplus-product measured by it. 

Thus, we saw that the value of each individual commodity and 
the value of the total commodity-product of each individual capi- 
tal is divided into two parts: one replaces only constant capital, 
and the other, although a [raction of it flows back as variable cap- 
ital—thus also flows back in the form of capital—nevertheless 
is destined to be wholly transformed into gross income, and to 
assume the form of wages, profit and rent, the sum of which makes 
up the gross income. Furthermore, we saw that the same is true of 
the value of the annual total product of a society. A difference 
belween the product of the individual capitalist and that of sc- 
ciely exists only in so far as: [rom the standpoint of the individu- 
al capitalist the net income differs from the gross income, for the 
latter includes the wages, whereas the former excludes them. View- 
ing the income of the whole society, national income consists 
of wages plus profit plus rent, thus, of the gross income, But even 
this is an abstraction to the extent thal the entire society, on the 
basis of capitalist production, bases itself on the capitalist stand- 
point and thereby considers only the income resolved into profit 
and rent as net income. 

On the other hand, the fantasy of men like Say, to the effect 
that the entire yield, the entire gross output, resolves itself into 
the net income of the nation or cannot be distinguished from it, 
thal this distinction therefore disappears from the national view- 
point, is but the inevitable and ultimate expression of the absurd 
dogma pervading political economy since Adam Smith, that in 
ihe final analysis the value of commodilies resolves ilself complete- 
ly inlo income, into wages, profit and rent.** 

3) Ricardo makes the following very apt comment on thoughtless Say: “Of 
nel produce and gross produce, M. Say speaks as follows: ‘The whole value pro- 

620 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

To comprehend, in the case of each individual capitalist, that 
a portion of his product must be transformed again into capital 
(even aside from the expansion of reproduction, or accumulation), 
indeed not only into variable capital, which is destined to again 
become in its turn income for the labourers, thus a form of reve- 
nue, but also into constant capital, which can never be trans- 
formed into revenue—such discernment is naturally extraordinar- 
ily easy. The simplest observation of the process of production 
shows this clearly. The difficulty first begins as soon as the process 
ol production is viewed as a whole. The value of the entire portion 
of the product which is consumed as revenue in the form of wages, 
profit and rent (it is entirely immaterial whether the consumption 
is individual or productive), indeed, completely resolves itself under 
analysis into the sum ol values consisting of wages plus profit plus 
rent, that is, into the total value of the three revenues, although 
the value of this portion of the product, just like that which does 
not enter into revenue, contains a value portion=C, equal to the 
value of the constant capital contained in these portions, and thus 
prima facie cannot be limited by the value of the revenue. This cir- 
cumstance which, onthe one hand. isa practically irrefutable fact, 
on the other hand, an equally undeniable theoretical contradiction 
presents a difficulty which is most easily circumvented by the 
assertion that commodity-value contains another portion of value, 
merely appearing to differ, fromthe standpoint of the individual 
capitalist, from the portion existing in the form of revenue. The 
phrase: that which appears as revenue lor one constitutes capital 
for another, relieves one o!f the necessity for any further reflection. 
But how, then, the old capital can he replaced when the value of 
the entire product is consumable in the form of revenue; and how 
the value of the product of each individual capital can be equal to 
the value sum of the three revenues plus C, constant capital, whereas 
the sum of the values of the products of all capitals is equal to the 

duced is the gross produce; this value, after deducting fram it the cost of produc- 
lion, is the net produce.’ (Vol. IJ, p. 491.) There can, then, be no net produce, 
because the cost of production, according to M. Say, consists of rent, wages and 
profits. On page 508 he says: ‘The value of a product, the value of a productive 
service, the value of the cost of production, are all, then, similar values, when- 
ever things are eft to their natural course.’ Take a whole from a whole, and noth- 
ing remains.” (Ricardo, Principles, Chapter XX11, p. 512, Note.)—By the way, 
we shal] see later that Ricardo nowhere refuted Smitli's false analysis of commodi- 
ty-price, its reduction to the sum of the values of the revenues. He does not both- 
er with it, and accepts its correctness so far in his analysis that he “abstracts" 
from (he constant portion of the value of commodities. He also falls back into 
the same way of looking at things from time to time. 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 821 

value sum of the three revenues plus 0—this appears, of course, 
as an insoluble riddle and must be solved by declaring that the 
analysis is completely incapable of unravelling the simple elements 
of price, and must be content to go around in a vicious circle making 
a spurious advance ad infinitum. Thus, that which appears as con- 
stant capital may be resolved into wages, profit and rent, but the com- 
modity-values in which wages, profit and rent appear, are determined 
in their turn by wages, profit and rent, and so lorth ad infinitem. * 

The fundamentally erroneous dogma to the effect that the val- 
ue of commodities in the last analysis may be resolved into wages-+ 
+profit--rent also expresses itself in the proposition that the 
consumer must ultimately pay lor the total value of the total prod- 
uct; or also that the money circulation between producers and con- 
sumers must ultimately be equal to the money circulation between 
the producers themselves (Tooke); all these propositions are as 
false as the axiom upon which they are based. 

The difficulties, which lead to this erroneous and prima facie 
absurd analysis, are briefly these: 

1) the fundamental relationship of constant and variable capital, 
hence also the nature of surplus-value, and thereby the entire ba- 
sis of the capitalist mode of production, are nol understood. The 
value of each partial product of capital, each individual commodity, 
contains a portion of value=constant capital, a portion of value= 
=variable capital (transformed into wages for Jabourers), and a por- 
tion of value=surplus-value (later split into profit and rent). 
Thus, how is it possible for the labourer with his wages, the capital- 
ist with his profit, the landlord with his rent, to be able to buy com- 
modities, each of which contains not only one of these constituent 

52 “In every society the price of every commodity finally resolves itself 
into some one or other, or all of those three parts [viz. wages, profits, rent]... A 
fourth part, it may perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing the stock of 
the farmer or for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring cattle, and oth- 
er instruments of husbandry. But it must be considered that the price of any 
instrument of husbandry, such as a labouring horse, is itself made up of the same 
three parts: the rent of the land upon which he is reared, the labour of tending 
and rearing him, and the profits of the farmer, who advances both the rent of his 
land and the wages of his labour. Though the price of the corn, therefore, may 
pay the price as well as the maintenance of the horse, the whole price still re- 
solves itself either immediately or ultimately into the same three parts of rent, 
labour [meaning wages] and profil.” (Adam Smith.)—We shal! show later on 
how Adam Smith himself feels the inconsistency and insufficiency of this sub- 
terfuge, for it is nothing but a subterfuge on his part to send us from Pontius 
to Pilate while nowhere does he indicate the real investment of capital, in which 
case the price of the product resolves itself ultimately into these three parts, 
without any further progressus. 

622 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

elements, but all three of them; and how is it possible for the sum 
af the values of wages, profit and rent, that is, the three sources 
of revenue together, to be able to buy the commodities which go 
to make up the total consumption of the recipients of these in- 
comes—commodities containing an additional component of val- 
ue, namely constant capital, outside these three components ol 
value? How should they buy a value of four with a value of three? ** 

We presented our analysis in Book II, Part III. 

2) The method is not grasped whereby labour, in adding a new 
value, preserves the old value in a new form without producing this 

old value anew. 

3) The pattern of the process of reproduction is not understood— 
how it appears not from the standpoint of individual capital, but 
rather from that of the total capital; the difficulty is not understood 
how it is that the product in which wages and surplus-value, in 

5° Proudhon exposes his inability to grasp this In the ignorant lormulation: 
Vouvrier ne peut pas racheter son propre produit (the labourer cannot buy back 
his own product), because the interest which is added to the prix-de-revient (cost- 
price) is contained in the product. But how does M. Eugéne Forcade teach him 
to know better? “If Proudhon's objection were correct, it would strike not only 
the profits of capital, but would eliminate the possibility even of industry. If 
the labourer is compelled to pay 100 for each article for which he has received 
only 80, if his wages can buy back only the value which he has put into a product, 
it could be said that the labourer cannot buy back anything, that wages cannot 
pay for anything. In fact, there is always something more than the wages of the 
labourer contained in the cost-price, and always more than the profits of enter- 
prise in the selling price, for instance, the price of raw materials, often paid to 
foreign countries. ... Proudhon has forgotten about the continual growth of na- 
tional capital; he has forgotten that this growth refers to al! labourers, whether 
in an enterprise or in handicrafts.” (Revue des deux Mondes, 1848, tome 24, p. 
998.) Here we have the optimism of bourgeois thoughtlessness in the form of 
sagacity that most corresponds to it. M. Forcade first believes that the labourer 
could not live did he not receive a higher value than that which 
he produces, whereas conversely the capitalist mode of production could not exist 
were he really to receive all the value which he produces. Secondly, he correctly 
generalizes the difficulty, which Proudhon expressed only from a narrow view- 
point. The price of commodities contains not only an excess over wages, but also 
over profit, namely, the constant portion of value. According to Proudhon’s 
Teasoning, then, the capitalist too could not buy back the commodities with his 
profit. And how does Forcade solve this riddle? By means of a meaningless phrase: 
the growth of capital. Thus the continual growth of capital is also supposed to 
be substantiated, among other things, in that the analysis of commodity-prices, 
which is impossible for the political economist as regards a capital of 100, 
becomes superfluous in the case of a capital of 10,000. What would be said of a 
chemist, who, on being asked: How is it that the product of the soil contains more 
carbon than the ‘soil? would answer: It comes from the continual! increase in agri- 
cultural production. The well-meaning desire to discover in the bourgeois world 
the best of all possible worlds replaces in vulgar economy all need for love of 
truth and inclination for scientific investigation. 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 823 

short, the entire value produced by all the labour newly added during 
{he year, is realized, replaces the constant part of its value and yet 
at the same time resolves itself into value limited solely by the 
Tevenues; amd furthermore how it is that the constant capital con- 
sumed in production can be replaced in substance and value by new 
capital, although the total sum of newly added labour is realized on- 
ly in wages and surplus-value, and is fully represented in the sum of 
the values of both. It is precisely here that the main difficulty lies, 
in the analysis of reproduction and the relations of its various com- 
ponent parts, both as concerns their material character and their 
value relationships. 

4) To these difficulties is added still another, which increases 
even more as soon as the various component parts of surplus-value 
appear in the form of mutually independent revenues. This diffi- 
culty consists in the definite designations of revenue and capital in- 
terchanging, and altering their position, so that they seem to be 
merely relative determinations from the point of view of the indi- 
vidual capitalist and to disappear when the total process of produc- 
tion is viewed as a whole. For instance, the revenue of the labour- 
ers and capitalists of Class 1, which produces constant capital, re- 
places in value and substance the constant capital of the capitalists 
of Class 11, which produces articles of consumption. One may, 
{herefore, squeeze out of the dilemma by remonstrating that what is 
revenue for one is capital for another and that these designations 
thus have nothing to do with the actual peculiarities of the value 
components of commodities. Furthermore: commodities which are 
ultimately destined to form the substantive elements of revenue 
expenditure, that is, articles of consumption, pass through various 
stages during the year, e. g., woollen yarn, cloth. In one stage they 
form a portion of constant capital, in the other they are consunied 
individually, and thus pass wholly into the revenue. One may 
therefcre imagine along with Adam Smith that constant capital is 
but an apparent element of commodity-value, which disappears 
in the total pattern. Thus, a further exchange takes place ol variable 
capital for revenue. The labourer buys witli his wages that portion 
of commodities which form his revenue. In this way he simulta- 
neously replaces for the capitalist the money-form of variable cap- 
ital. Finally: one portion of products which form constant capital 
is replaced in kind or through exchange by the producers of con- 
stant capital themselves; a process with which the consumers have 
nothing to do. When this is overlooked the impression is created that 
{he revenue of consumers replaces the entire product, i. e., including 
the constant portion of value. 

B24 REVENUES AND ‘THEIR SOURCES 

5) Aside from the confusion which the transformation of values 
into prices of production brings about, another arises due to the trans- 
formation of surplus-value into diflerent, special, mutually inde- 
pendent jorms of revenue applying to the various elements of pro- 
duction, i.e., into profit and rent. It is forgotten that the fact that the 
values of commodities are the basis, and that the division of these 
commodity-values into distinct constituent parts, and the further de- 
velopment of these constituents of value into forms of revenue, their 
transmutation into relations of various owners o! different factors of 
production to these individual components of value, their distribu- 
tion among these owners according to definite categories and titles, 
itself alters nothing in value determination and its law. Just as little 
is the law of value changed by the circumstance that the equaliza- 
tion of profit, i. e., the distribution of the total surplus-value among 
the various capitals, and the obstacles which landed property par- 
tially (in absolute rent) puts in ihe way of this equalization, bring 
about a divergence between the regulating average prices and the 
individual values of commodities. This again affects merely the 
addition of surplus-value to the various commodity-prices, but does 
not abolish surplus-value itself, nor the total value of commodities 
as the source of these various component parts of price. 

This is the quid pro gto which we shal! consider in the next chap- 
ter, and which is inevitably linked with the illusion that value 
arises out of its own component parts. And namely, the various com- 
ponent values of the commodity acquire independent forms as rev- 
enues, and as such revenues they are related back to the particular 
material elements of production as their sources of origin instead of 
to the value of the commodity as their source. They are actually 
related back to those sources—however, not as components of value, 
but rather as revenues, as components of value falling to the share 
of these particular categories of agents in production: the labourer, 
the capitalist and the landlord. But then one might fancy that these 
constituents of value, rather than arising out of the division of com- 
modity-value, conversely form it instead only through their combi- 
nation, which leads to the pretty and vicious circle, whereby the 
value of commodities arises out of the sum of the values of wages, 
profit and rent, and the value of wages, profit and rent, in its 
turn, is determined by the value of commodities, etc. 5* 

** “The circulating capital invested in materials, raw materials and fin- 
ished goods is itself composed of goods, the necessary price of which is formed 
ol the same elements; so that, viewing the total goods in one country, it would 
mean duplication to count this portion of circulaling capital among the elements 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 825 

Considering reproduction in its normal state, only a part of 
newly added labour is employed for production, and thus for re- 
placement of constant capital; precisely that part which Teplaces the 
constant capital used up in the production of articles of consump- 
tion, of material elements of revenue. This is balanced by the fact 
that this constant portion of Class II costs no additional labour. 
But, now, this constant capital (looking upon the total process of 
reproduction, in which then the above-mentioned equalization of 
Classes I and II is included), not representing a product of newly 
added labour, although this product could not be created without 
it—this constant capital, in the process of reproduction, considered 
from the standpoint of substance, is exposed to certain accidents 
and dangers which could decimate it. (Furthermore, however, con- 
sidered from the point of view of value as well, it may be depreciat- 
ed through a change in the productiveness of labour; but this re- 
fers only to the individual capitalist.) Accordingly, a portion of 
the profit, therefore of surplus-value and thereby also surplus-prod- 
uct, in which (as concerns value) only newly added labour is repre- 
sented, serves as an insurance fund. And it matters not whether 

of the necessary price.” (Storch, Cours d'Feonomie Politique, 11, p. 140.)—By 
these elements of circulating capital Storch means the value of constant capital 
(fixed capital is merely circulating in a different form. “It is true that the 
wages of the labourer, like that portion of profit of enterprise which consists of 
wages, if we consider them as a part of the means of subsistence, also consist of 
goods hought at current prices and which likewise comprise wages, interest on 
capital, ground-rent and profit of enterprise.... This observation merely serves 
to prove that it is impossible to resolve the necessary price into its simplest ele- 
ments.” (/6id. Note.)—In his Considérations sur fa nature du revenu national 
(Paris, 1824), Storch indeed realizes in his controversy with Say to what ab- 
surdity the erroneous analysis of commodity-value leads—when it resolves 
value into mere revenues. He correctly points out the folly of such results—not 
from the viewpoint of the individual capitalist, but from that of a nation—but 
himself goes no step further in his analysis of the prix nécessaire [rom that present- 
ed in his Cours, that it is impossible to resolve it into its actual elements, 
without resolving it into a spurious advance ad infinitum. “It is evident 
that the value of the annual product is divided partly into capitals and partly 
into profits, and that each one of these portions of value of the annual product 
regularly goes to huy the products needed by the nation, as much to preserve its 
capital as to renew ils consumption fund (pp. 134, 135).... Can it (a self-employed 
peasant family) live in its barns or stables, cat its seed and forage, clothe itself 
with its draught cattle, dispense with its agricultural implements? According 
to the thesis of M. Say one must answer all these questions in the affirmative (pp. 
135, 136).... [f it is admitted that the revenue of a nation is equal to its gross 
product, i.e., if no capital has to be deducted from it, then it must also be ad- 
mitted that a nation can spend the entire value of its annual product unproduc- 
lively without impairing its future income in the least (147). The products which 
constitute the capital of a nation are not consumable” (p. 150). 

826 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

this insurance fund is managed by insurance companies as a separate 
business or not. This is the sole portion of revenue which fs neither 
Consumed as such ncr serves necessarily as a fund for accumulation. 
Whether it actually serves as such. or covers merely a Joss in repro- 
duction. depends upon chance. This is also the only portion of 
surplus-value and surplus-product, and thus of surplus-labour, 
which would continue to exist, outside of that portion serving for 
accumulation, and hence expansion of the process of reproduction, 
even after the abolition of the capitalist mode of production. This, 
of course, presupposes that the portion regularly consumed by di- 
rect producers does not remain limited to its present minimum. 
Apart from surplus-labour for those who on account of age are not 
yet, of no longer, able to take part in production, all labour lo 
support those who do not work would cease. If we think back to the 
beginnings of society, we find no produced means of production, 
hence no constant capital, the value of which could pass into the 
product, and which, in reproduction on the same scale. would have 
to be replaced in kind out of the product and toa degree measured 
by its value. But Nature there directly provides the means of sub- 
sistence, which need not first be produced. Nature thereby also 
gives to the savage who has but lew wants to satisly the time, not to 
use the as yet non-existent means of production in new production, 
but to transform, alongside the labour required to appropriate nat- 
urally existing means of production, other products of Nature into 
means of production: bows, stone knives, boats, etc. This process 
among savages, considered merely [rom the substantive side, cor- 
responds to the reconversion of surplus-labour into new capital. In 
the process of accumulation, the conversion of such products of 
excess labour into capital obtains continually; and the circumstance 
that all new capital arises out of profit, rent, or other forms of rev- 
enue, i.e., out of surplus-labour, leads to the mistaken idea that all 
value of commodities arises from some revenue. This reconversion 
of profit into capital shows rather upon closer analysis that, 
conversely, the additional labour—which is always represented in 
the form of revenue—does not serve Jor the maintenance, or 
reproduction respectively, of the old capital value, but for the crea- 
tion of new excess capital so far as it is not consumed as revenue. 

The whole difficulty arises from the fact that all newly added la- 
hour, in so far as the value created by it is not resolved into wages, 
appears as profit—interpreted here as a form of surplus-value in 
general—i.e., as a value which costs the capitalist nothing and 
which, of course, therefore does not have to replace for him anything 
advanced, any capital whatever. This value thus exists in the form 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 827 

of available additional wealth, in short, from the viewpoint of the 
individual capitalist, in the form of his revenue. But this newly 
created value can just as well be consumed productively as individ- 
ually, equally well as capital or revenue. As a consequence of its 
natural form, some of it must be productively consumed. It is, there- 
fore, evident that the annually added labour creates capital as 
well as revenue; as becomes evident in the process of accumulation. 
However, the portion of labour-power employed in the creation 
of new capital (thus analogous to that portion of the working-day 
employed by a savage, not for acquiring subsistence, but to fashion 
tools with which to acquire his subsistence) becomes invisible in 
that the entire product of surplus-labour first appears in the form of 
profit; a designation which indeed has nothing to do with this sur- 
plus-product itself, but refers merely to the individual relation of 
the capitalist to the surplus-value pocketed by him. In fact, the 
surplus-value created by the labourer is divided into revenue and 
capital; i.e., into articles of consumption and additional means of 
production. But former constant capital taken over from the previ- 
ous year (leaving aside the portion impaired and thus pro tanto 
destroyed, thus so far as it does not have to be reproduced— 
and such disturbances in the process of reproduction fall under insur- 
a is nat reproduced as concerns value by the newly added 
abour. 

We see, furthermore, that a portion of the newly added labour is 
continually absorbed in the reproduction and replacement of con- 
sumed constant capital, allhough this newly added labour resolves 
itself solely into revenue, into wages, profit and rent. But it is there- 
by overlooked 1) that one value portion of the product of this 
labour és no product of this new additional labour, but rather pre- 
existing and consumied constant capital; that the portion of the prod- 
uct in which this part of value appears is thus also not trans- 
formed into revenue, but replaces the means of production of this 
constant capital in kind; 2) that the portion of value in which this 
newly added labour actually appears is not consumed as revenue 
in kind, but replaces the constant capital in another sphere, where 
it is transformed intc a natural form, in which it may be consumed 
as revenue, but which in its turn is again not entirely a product of 
newly added labour. 

In so far as reproduction obtains on the same scale, every con- 
sumed element of constant capital must be replaced in kind by 
a new specimen of the same kind, if not in quantity and form, then 
at least in effectiveness. If the productiveness of labour remains 
the same, then this replacement in kind implies replacing the same 

$28 REVENUES AND TITEIR SOURCES 

value which the constant capital had in its old form. But should the 
productiveness of labour increase, so that the same material elements 
may be reproduced with less labour, then a smaller portion of the 
value of the product can completely replace the constant part in 
kind. The excess may then be employed to form new additional 
capital, or a larger portion of the product may be given the form of 
articles of consumption, or the surplus-labour may be reduced. On 
the other hand, should the productiveness of labour decrease, then 
a larger portion of tlie product must be used for the replacement of 
the former capital, and the surplus-product decreases. 

The reconversion of profit, or generally of any form oi surplus- 
value, into capital shows—leaving aside the historically defined 
economic form and considering it merely as the simple formation 
of new means of production—that the situation still prevails where- 
by the labourer performs labour to produce means of production 
beyond the labour for acquiring his immediate means of subsistence. 
Transiormation of profit inte capital is no more than employing 
a portionof excess Jabour to form new, additional means of produc- 
tion. That this takes place in the shape of a transformation of 
profit into capital signifies merely that it is the capitalist rather 
than the labourer who disposes of excess labour. That this excess 
labour must first pass through a stage in which it appearsas revenue 
(whereas, e.g., in the case of a savage it appears as excess labour 
directly destined for the production of means of production) means 
simply that this labour, or its product, is appropriated by the non- 
worker, However, what is actually transformed into capital is not 
profit as such. Transformation of surplus-value into capital signifies 
merely that the surplus-value and surplus-product are not consumed 
individually as revenue by the capitalist. But, what is actually so 
transformed is value, materialized labour, or the product in which 
this value is directly manifested, or for which it is exchanged alter 
having been previously transformed into money. And when the 
profit is transformed back into capital, this definite form of surplus- 
value, or profit, does not form the source of the new capital. 
The surplus-value is thereby merely changed from one form into 
another. But it is not this change of form which turns it into 
capital. It is the commodity and its value which now function 
as capilal. However, that the value of the commodity is not 
paid for—and only by this means does it become surplus-value—is 
que irrelevant for the materialization of labour, the value 
itself. 

The misunderstanding is expressed in various forms. For instance, 
that the commodities which compose the constant capital also 

ANALYSIS OF PRODUCTION 829 

contain elements of wages, profit and rent. Or, on the other hand 
that what is revenue for the one is capital for another, and that there- 
fore ‘hese are but subjective relations. Thus the yarn of the spinner 
contains a portion of value representing profit for him. Should the 
weaver buy the yarn, he realizes the profit of the spinner, but [or 
himseli this yarn is merely a part of his constant capital, 

Aside from the previous remarks made concerning the relaticns 
between revenue and capital, the following is to be noted: That 
which as regards value, passes along with the yarn as a constituent 
element into the capital of the weaver, is the value of the yarn, 
In what manner the parts of this value have been resolved for the 
spinner himself into capital and revenue, or, in other words, into 
paid and unpaid labour, is completely irrelevant for the value de- 
termination of the commodity itself (aside from modifications 
through the average profit). Back of this still lurks the idea that 
the profit, or surplus-value in general, is an excess above the value 
of the commodity, which can only be made by an extra charge, 
mutual cheating, or gain through selling. When the price of produc- 
tion is paid, or even the value of the commodity, the component 
values of the commodity which appear to the seller in the form of 
revenue are naturally also paid. Monopoly prices, of course, are not 
referred to here. 

Secondly, it is quite correct to say that the component parts 
of commodities which make up the constant capital, like any other 
commodity-value, may be reduced to portions of value which re- 
solve themselves for the producers and the owners of the means 
of production into wages, profit and rent. This is merely 
a capitalist form of expression for the fact that all commodity- 
value is but the measure of the socially necessary labour contained 
in a commodity. But it has already been shown in Book I that this 
nowise prevents the commodity-product of any capital from being 
split into separate parts, of which one represents exclusively the 
constant portion of capital, another the variable portion of capital, 
and a third solely surplus-value. 

Storch expresses the opinion of many others when he says: “The 
saleable products which make up the national revenue must be 
considered in political economy in two different ways: relative to 
individuals as values, and relative to the nation as goods; for the 
revenue of a nation is not appraised, like that ofan individual, by 
its value, but by its utility or by the wants which it can satisfy.” 
(Considérations sur le revenu national, p. 19.) 

In the first place, it is a false abstraction to regard a nation 
whose mode of production is based upon value, and furthermore is 

830 REVENUES AND TIIEIR SOURCES 

capitalistically organized, as an aggregate body working merely for 
the satisfaction of the national wants. 

Secondly, after the abolition of the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion, but still retaining social production, the determination of 
value continues to prevail in the sense that the regulation of labour- 
time and the distribution of social labour among the various pro- 
duction groups, ultimately the book-keeping encompassing all this, 
become more essential than ever. 

CHAPTER L 
ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 

It has been shown that the value of commodities, or the price of 
production regulated by their total value, resolves itself into: 

1) A portion of value replacing constant capital, or representing 
past labour, which was used up in the form of means of production 
in making the commodity; in a word, the value, or price, which 
these means cf production carried into the production process of 
the commodities. We are not referring at all here to individual com- 
modities, but to commodity-capital, that is, the form in which the 
product of the capital during a definite period of time, say a year, 
manifests itself; the individual commodity forms one element of 
commodity-capital, which, moreover, so far as its value is con- 
cerned, resolves itself into the same analogous constituents. 

2) The portion of value representing variable capital, which meas- 
ures the income of the labourer and is transformed into wages for 
him; i.e., the labourer has reproduced these wages in this variable 
portion of value; in short, the portion of value which represents the 
paid portion of new labour added to the above constant portion in 
the production of the commodities. 

3) Surplus-value, i.e., the portion of value of the produced com- 
modities in which the unpaid labour, or surplus-Jabour, is incor- 
porated. This last portion of value, in its turn, assumes the inde- 
pendent forms which are at the same time forms of revenue: the 
forms of profit on capital (interest on capital as such and profit of 
enterprise on capital as functioning capital) and ground-rent, which 
is claimed by the owner of the land participating in the production 
process. The components 2) and 3), that is, the portion of value which 
always assumes the revenue forms of wages (of course only alter the 
latter have first gone through the orm of variable capital), profit and 
rent, is distinguished from the constant component 1) by the fact 
that in it is embodied that entire value in which the new additional 
labour added to the constant part, to the means of production of the 

832 REVENUES AND TITEIR SOURCES 

commodities, is materialized. Now, apart from the constant por- 
tion, it is correct to say that the value of a commodity, 1.e., tothe 
extent that it represents newly added labour, continually resolves 
itself into three parts, which constitute three forms of revenue, 
namely, wages, profit and rent,** the respective magnitudes of whose 
value, that is, the aliquot portions which they constitute in the to- 
tal value, are determined by various specific laws developed above. 
But. it would be a mistake to state the converse, namely, that the 
value of wages, rate of profit and rate of rent form independent 
constituent elements cl value, whose synthesis gives rise to the val- 
ue of commodities, apart {rom the constant component; in other 
words, it would be a mistake to say that they are constituent elements 
of the value of commodities, or of the price of production.*® 

The difference is easily seen. 

Let us assume that the value of the product of a capital of 500 is 
equal to 400,+-100,+-150,=650; Iet the 150,, in turn, be divided 
into 75 profil4+-75 rent. We will also assume, in order to [orestall 
useless difficulties, that this is a capital of average composition, so 
that its price of production and its value coincide; this coincidence 
always takes place whenever the product of such an individual 
capital may be considered as the product of some portion—corre- 
sponding to its magnitude—of the total capital. 

Here wages, measured by variable capital, form 20% of the 
advanced capital; surplus-value, calculated on the total capital, 

55 In breaking down the value added to the constant portion of capital into 
wages, profit and ground-rent, it goes without saying that these are portions of 
value. One may, indeed, conceive of them as existing in the direct product in 
which this value appears, i.e., in the direct product produced by labourers and 
capitalists in some particular sphere of production—for instance, yarn produ- 
ced in (he spinning industry. But in fact they do not materialize in this product 
any more or any less than in any other commodity, in any other component of 
the material wealth having the same value. And in practice wages are indeed 
paid in money, that is, in the pure expression of value; likewise interest and rent. 
For the capitalist, the transformation of his product inlo the pure expression 
of value is indeed very important; in the distribution itself this transformation 
is already assumed. Whether these values are reconverted into the same product, 
the same commodity, out of whose production they arose, whether the labourer 
buys back a partof the product directly produced by himself or buys the prod- 
uct of some other labour of a different kind, las nothing to do with the matter 
itself. Herr Rodbertus quite unnecessarily flies into a passion about this. 

* "It will be sufficient to remark that ihe same general rule which regulates 
the value of raw produce and manufactured commodities is applicable also to 
the metals; their value depending not on the rate ol profits, nor on the rate of 
wages, nor on the rent paid for mines, tut on the total quantity of labour neces- 

Pa a the metal and to bring it to market.” (Ricardo, Principles, Ch. Il, 
P- . 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 833 

forms 80%, vamely 15% profil and 15% rent. The entire value com- 
ponent of the commodity representing the newly added labour is 
equal to 100,+ 150,250. Its magnitude does not depend upon its 
division into wages, profit and rent. We see from the relation of 
these parts to each other that labour-power, which is paid with 
100 in money, say £100, has supplied a quantity of labour represent- 
ed by money to the amount of £250. We see from this that the la- 
bourer performed 1% times as much surplus-labour as he did labour 
for himself. If the working-day=10 hours, then he worked 4 hours 
for himself and 6 hours for the capitalist. Therefore, the labour of 
the labourers paid with £100 is expressed in a money-value of 
£250. Apart from this value of £250, there is nothing to divide be- 
tween labourer and capitalist, between capitalist and landlord. It is 
the total value newly added to the value of the means of production, 
i.e., 400. The specific commodity-value of 250 thus produced and 
determined by the quantity of labour materialized in it constitutes 
the limit, therefore, for the dividends which the labourer, capitalist 
and landlord will be able to draw from this value in the form of rev- 
enue—wages, profit and rent. 

Let us assume that a capital of the same organic composition, 
that is, the same pronortion between employed living |abour-power 
and constant capital set in moticn, is compelled to pay £150 instead 
of £100 [or the same labour-power which sets in motion the constant 
capital of 400. And let us further assume that profil and rent share 
in the surplus-value in different proportions. Since we have as- 
sumed that the variable capital of £150 sets the same quantity of 
labour in motion as did the variable capital of £100, the newly 
produced value would=250, as before, and the value of the total 
product would be 650, also as before, but we would then have 
400 +150,+100,; and these 100, would divide, say, into 45 profit 
and 55 rent. The proportion in which the newly produced total val- 
ue would be distributed as wages. profil and rent would now be 
very different; similarly, the magnitude of the advanced total cap- 
ital would be different, although it only sets the same total quantity 
ol labour in motion. Wages would amount to 27°/,,%, profit— 
8*/,,%, and rent—l0% of the advanced capital; thus, the total 
surplus-value would be somewhat over 18%o. 

As a result of the increase in wages, the unpaid portion of total 
labour would be different and thereby the surplus-value too. If the 
working-day contained 10 hours, the labourer would have worked 
6 hours for himself and only 4 hours for the capitalist. The propor- 
ticns of profit and rent would also be different; the reduced surplus- 
value would be divided in a different proportion between the capi- 

28 —2757 

834 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

talist and the landlord, Finally, since the value of the constant 
capital would have remained the same and the value of the advanced 
variable capital would have risen, the reduced surplus-value would 
express itself in a still more reduced rate of gross profit, by which 
we mean in this case the ratio of the total surplus-value to the total 
advanced capital. 

The change in the value of wages, in the rate of profit, and in the 
rate of rent, whatever the effect of the laws regulating the propor- 
tions of these parts to each other, could only move within the limits 
set by the newly produced commodity-value of 250. An exception 
could only take place if rent should be based on a monopoly price. 
This would nowise alter the law, but merely complicate the analysis. 
For if we consider only the product itself in this case, then only the 
division of surplus-value would be different. But if we consider its 
relative value as compared with other commodities, then we should 
find solely this difference —that a portion of the surplus-value 
had been transferred from them to this particular commodity. 

To recapitulate: 

rol Pakecieyod New anale of gale of 

alue of the Product Value jurplus- | Gross 
First Case: 400, +100,+150,=650} 950 150% | 30% 
Second Case. 400.+150,+100,=650] 950 667/,% | 187/1,% 

In the first place, the surplus-value falls one-third of what it was, 
i.e., from 150 to 100. The rate of profit falls by a little more than 
one-third, i.e., from 30% to 18%, because the reduced surplus- 
value must be calculated on an increased total advanced capital. 
But it by no means falls in the same proportion as the rate of sur- 

plus-value. The latter falls from oO tg that is, from 150% to 
150 100 

100 150° 

66°/,%, whereas the rate of profit only falls from 500 1° seq OF from 

30% to 18*!,,%. The rate of profit, then, falls proportionately more 
than the mass of surplus-value, but less than the rate of surplus- 
value. We find, furthermore, that value, as well as mass of products, 
remains the same, so long as the same quantity of labour is employed, 
although the advanced capital has increased due to the augmenta- 
tion of ils variable component. This increase in advanced capital 
would indeed be very much felt by a capitalist undertaking a new 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 835° 

enterprise. But considering reproduction as a whole, augmentation 
of the variable capital merely means that a larger portion of the 
value newly created by newly added labour is converted into wages, 
and thus, in the first place, into variable capital instead of into 
surplus-value and surplus-product. The value of the product thus 
remains the same, because it is 'imited on the one hand by the value 
of the constant capital—400, and on the other by the number 250, 
in which the newly added labour is represented. Both, however, 
remain unaltered. This product would, as before, represent the same 
amount of use-value in the same magnitude of value, to the extent 
that it would itself again enter into the constant capital; thus, the 
same mass of elements of constant capital would retain the same 
value. The matter would be different if wages were to rise not because 
the labourer received a larger share of his own labour, but if he 
received a larger portion of his own labour because the labour prod- 
uctivity had decreased. In this case, the total value in which the 
same labour, paid and unpaid, would be incorporated, would remain 
the same. But the mass of products in which this quantity of labour 
would be incorporated would have decreased so that the price of 
each aliquot portion of this product would rise, because each portion 
would contain more labour. The increased wages of 150 would not 
Tepresent any more product than the wages of 100 did before; the 
reduced surplus-value of 100 would represent merely */, the former 
product, i.e., 667/,% of the mass of use-values formerly represent- 
ed by 100. In this case, the constant capital would also become 
dearer to the extent that this product would enter into it. However, 
this would not be the result of the increase in wages, but rather the 
increase in wages would be a result of the increase in the price of 
commodities anda result of the diminished productivity of the same 
quantity of labour. It appears here as though the increase in wages 
had made the product dearer; however, this increase is not the cause, 
but rather the result, of a change in the value of the commodities, 
due to the decreased productivity of labour. 

On the other hand, all other circumstances remaining the same, 
i.e., if the same quantity of employed labour is still represented 
by 250, then, if the value of the means of production employed 
should rise or fall, the value of the same quantity of products would 
rise or fall by the same magnitude. 450,+ 100,+ 150, gives a prod- 
uct-value=700; but 350,-+100,4-150, gives a value for the same 
quantity of products of only 600, as against a former 650. Hence, 
if the advanced capital, set in motion by the same quantity of labour,” 
increases or decreases, then the value of the product rises or falls,: 
other circumstances remaining the same, if the increase or decrease 

28" — 2757 

836 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

in advanced capital is due to a change in the magnitude of the value 
of the constani portion of capital. On the other hand, the value of 
the product remains unchanged if the increase or decrease in ad- 
vanced capital is caused by achange in the magnitude of the value 
of the variable portion of capital, assuming the labour productivity 
remains the same. In the case of the constant capital, the increase 
or decrease in its value is not compensated for by any opposite move- 
ment. But in the case of the variable capital, assuming the labour 
productivity remains the same, an increase or decrease in its value is 
compensated for by the opposite movement on the part of the sur- 
plus-value, so that the value of the variable capital plus the surplus- 
value, i.e., the value newly added by labour to the means of pro- 
duction and newly incorporated in the product, remains the same. 

But if the increase or decrease in the value of the variable capital 
or wages is due to a rise or fall in the price of commodities, i.e., a 
decrease or increase in the productiveness of the labour employed 
by this investment of capital, then the value of the product is 
affected. But the rise or fal] in wages in this case is not a cause, but 
merely an effect. 

On the other hand, assuming the constant capital in the above 
illustration to remain=400,, if the change from 100,+150, to 
150,+100,, i.e., the increase in variable capital, should be due to 
a decrease in the productiveness of labour, not in this particular 
branch of industry, say, cotton spinning, but perhaps in agriculture 
which provides the labourer’s foodstuffs, i.e., due to a rise in the 
price of these foodstuffs, then the value of the product would remain 
unchanged. The value of 650 would still be represented by the same 
quantity of cotton yarn. 

It follows, furthermore, from the above: If the decrease in the 
expenditure of constant capital is due to economies, etc., in lines of 
Production whose products enter into the labourer’s consumption, 
then this, just like the direct increase in the productivity of the em- 
ployed labour itself, may lead toa decrease in wages due toa cheapen- 
ing of the means of subsistence of the labourer, and may lead, there- 
fore, to an increase in the surplus-value; so that the rate of profit 
in this case would grow for two reasons, namely, on the one hand, 
because the value of the constant capital decreases, and on the other 
hand, because the surplus-value increases. In our consideration of 
the transformation of surplus-value into profit, we assumed that 
wages do not fall, but remain constant, because there we had to in- 
vestigate the fluctuations in the rate of profit, independent of the 
changes in the rate of surplus-value. Moreover, the laws developed 
there are general ones, and also apply to investments of capital whose 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 837 

products do not enter into the labourer’s consumption, whereby 
changes in the value of the product, therefore, are without influence 
upon the wages. 

Thus, the separation and resolution of new value annually added 
by new labour to the means of production, or to the constant part 
of capital, into the various forms of revenue, viz., wages, profit 
and rent, do not at all alter the limits of the value itself, 
the total value to be distributed among these various cat- 
egories; any more than a change in the mutual relations of these 
individual parts can change their total, this given magnitude of 
value. The given number 100 always remains the same, whether it 
is divided into 50+50, or into 20+-70+10, or into 40-+-30+30. 
The portion of the value of the product which is resolved into these 
revenues is determined, just like the constant portion of the value of 
capital, by the value of the commodities, i.e., by the quantity of 
labour incorporated in them in each case. Given first, then, is the 
quantity of value of commodities to be divided among wages, profit 
and rent; in other words, the absolute limit of the sum of the por- 
tions of value of these commodities. Secondly, as concerns the indi- 
vidual categories themselves, their average and regulating limits are 
likewise given. Wages form the basis in this limitation. They are 
regulated on the one hand by a natural Jaw; their lower limit is de- 
termined by the physical minimum of means of subsistence required 
by the labourer for the conservation of his labour-power and for its 
reproduction; i.e., by a definite quantity of commodities. The value of 
these commodities is determined by the labour-time required for their 
reproduction; and thus by the portion of new labour added to the 
means of production, or by the portion of each working-day required 
by the labourer for the production and reproduction of an equivalent 
for the value of these necessary means of subsistence. For instance, 
if his average daily means of subsistence have a value=6 hours 
of average labour, then he must work on an average six hours per 
day for himself. The actual value of his labour-power deviates from 
this physical minimum; it differs according to climate and level of 
social development; it depends not merely upon the physical, but 
also upon the historically developed social needs, which become sec- 
ond nature. But in every country, at a given time, this regulating 
average wage is a given magnitude. The value of all other revenue 
{hus has its limit. It is always equal to the value in which the total 
working-day (which coincides in the present case with the average 
working-day, since it comprises the total quantity of labour set in 

“838 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

motion by the total social capital) is incorporated minus the por- 
tion of the working-day incorporated in wages. Its limit is therefore 
determined by the limit of the value in which the unpaid labour is 
expressed, that is, by the quantity of this unpaid labour. While 
the portion of the working-day which is required by the labourer for 
the reproduction of the value of his wages finds its ultimate limit in 
the physical minimum of wages, the other portion of the working- 
day, in which surplus-labour is incorporated, and thus the portion 
of value representing surplus-value, finds its limit in the physical 
‘maximum of the working-day, i.e., in the total quantity of daily 
labour-time during which the labourer can, in general, be active 
and still preserve and reproduce his labour-power. Since we are 
-here concerned with the distribution of the value which represents 
the total labour newly added per year, the working-day may he 
regarded here as a constant magnitude, and is assumed as such, no 
matter how much or how little it may deviate from its physical 
maximum. The absolute limit of the portion of value which forms 
Surplus-value, and which resolves itself into profit and ground- 
rent, is thus given. It is determined by the excess of the unpaid por- 
tion of the working-day over its paid portion, i.e., by the portion 
of the value of the total product in which this surplus-labour exists. 
If we call .the surplus-value thus limited and calculated on the ad- 
vanced total capital—the profit, as I have done, then this profit, 
so far as its absolute magnitude is concerned, is equal to the surplus- 
valueand, therefore, its limits are just as much determined by law as 
the latter. On the other hand, the level of the rate of profit is likewise 
a magnitude held within certain specific limits determined by the 
value of commodities. It is the ratio of the total surplus-value to the 
jotal social capital advanced in production. If this capital==500 
(say millions) and the surplus-value=1!00, then 20% constitutes 
the absolute limit of the rate of profit. The distribution of the social 
profit according to this rate among the capitals invested in the 
various spheres of production creates prices of production which 
deviate from the values of commodities and which are the real 
regulating average market-prices. But this deviation abolishes 
neither the determination of prices by values nor the regular limits 
of profit. Instead of the value of a commodity being equal to the 
capital consumed in its production plus the surplus-value contained 
in it, its price ol production is now equa! to the capital, c, consumed 
in its production plus the surplus-value falling to its share as a re- 
sult of the general rate of profit, for instance 20% on the capital ad- 
vanced in its production, counting hoth the consuined and the merely 
employed capital. But this additional amount of 20% is ilseif 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 839 

determined by the surplus-value created by the total social capital 
and its relation to the value of this capital; and for this reason it 
is 20% and not 10 cr 100. The transformation of values into 
prices of production, then, does not remove the limits on profit, 
but merely alters its distribution among the various particular cap- 
itals which make up the social capital, i.e., it distributes it uni- 
formly among them in the proportion in which they form parts of 
the value of this total capital. The market-prices rise above and [all 
below these regulating prices of production, but these fluctuations 
mutually balance each other. If one examines price lists over a 
more or less long period of time, and if one disregards those cases 
in which the actual value of commodities is altered by a change in 
the productivity of labour, and likewise those cases in which the 
process of production has been disturbed by natural or social acci- 
dents, one will be surprised, in the first place, by the relatively 
narrow limits of the deviations, and, secondly, by the regularity 
of their mutual compensation. The same domination of the regu- 
laling averages will be found here that Quetelet pointed out in the 
case of social phenomena. If the equalization of the values of com- 
modities into prices of production does not meet any obstacles, 
then the rent resolves itself into diflerential rent, i. e., it is limited 
to the equalization of the surplus-profits which would be given to 
some capitalists by the regulating prices of production and which 
are now appropriated by the landlord. Here, then, rent has its defi- 
nite limit of value in the deviations of the individual rates of prof- 
it, which are caused by the regulation of prices of production by the 
general rate of profit. If landed property obstructs equalization, of 
the values of commodities into prices of production, and appropri- 
ales absolute rent, then the latter is limited by the excess of the 
value of the agricultural products over their price of production, 
i. e., by the excess of the surplus-value contained in them over the 
rate of profil assigned to the capitals by the general rate of profit. 
This diflerence, then, forms the limit of the rent, which, as before, 
is but a definite portion of the given surplus-value contained in the 
commodities. 

Finally, if equalization of surplus-value into average profit meets 
with obstacles in the various spheres of production in the form of 
artificial or natural monopolies, and particularly monopoly in land- 
ed properly, so that. a monopoly price becomes possible, which 
rises above the price of production and above the value of the commod- 
ities aflected by such a monopoly, then the limits imposed by the 
value of the commodities would not thereby be removed. The mo- 
nopoly price of certain conmodities would merely transfer a portion 

810 REVENLES AND TIEIR SOURCES 

of the profit of the other commodity-producers to the commodities 
having the monopoly price. A local disturbance in the distribution 
of the surplus-value among the various spheres of production would 
indirectly take place, but it would leave the limit of this surplus- 
value itself unaltered. Should the commodity having the monopoly 
price enter into the necessary consumption of the labourer, it would 
increase {he wage and thereby reduce the surplus-value, assuming 
the labourer receives the value of his labour-power as before. It 
could depress wages below the value of labour-power, but only 
to the extent that the former exceed the limit of their physical min- 
imum. In this case the monopoly price would be paid by a deduc- 
tion from real wages (i.e., the quantity of use-values received by 
the labourer for the same quantity of labour) and from the profit 
of the other capitalists. The limits within which the monopoly price 
would affect the normal regulation of the prices of commodities 
would be firmly fixed and accurately calculable. 

Thus just as the division of the newly added value of commodities, 
and, in general, value resolvable into revenue, finds its given and 
regulating limits in the relation between necessary and surplus 
labour, wages and surplus-value, so does the division of surplus- 
value itself into profit and ground-rent find its limits in the laws 
regulating the equalization of therate of profit. As regards the di- 
vision into interest and profit of emterprise, the average profit 
itself forms the limit for both taken together. It furnishes the given 
magnitude of value which they may split among themselves and 
which alone can be so divided. The specific ratio of this division 
is here fortuitous, i.e., it is determined exclusively by conditions 
of competition. Whereas in other cases the balancing of supply and 
demand is equivalent to elimination of the deviations in market- 
prices from their regulating average prices, i.e., elimination of the 
influence of competition, it is here the only determinant. But why? 
Because the same production factor, capital, has to divide its share 
of the surplus-value between two owners of the same production 
factor. But the fact that there is no definite, regular limit here for 
the division of the average profit does not remove its limit as part 
of the commodity-value; just as the fact that (wo partners in a cér- 
tain business divide their profit unequally due to different exiernal 
circumstances does not affect the limits of this profit in any way. 

Hence, although the portion of the commodity-value in which 
the new labour added to the value of the means of production is 
incorporated is divided into various parts, which in the form of 
revenue assume mutually independent forms, this is no reason for 
now considering wages, profit and ground-rent as the constituent 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 841 

elements which, in combination or taken all together, are the source 
of the regulating price (natural price, prix nécessaire)ol the commodi- 
ties themselves; so that it is not the commodity-value, alter deduct- 
ing the constant portion of value, which would be the original 
unit that divides into (hese three parts, but rather, conversely, the 
price of each of these three parts would be independently deter- 
mined, and the price of the commodities would then be formed by 
adding these three independent magnitudes together. In reality, the 
commodity-value is the magnitude which precedes the sum of the 
total values of wages, profit and rent, regardless of the relative 
magnitudes of the latter. In the above erroneous conception, wages, 
profit and rent are three independent magnitudes of value, whose 
total magnitude produces, limits and determines the magnitude of 
the commodity-value. 

In the first place it is evident that if wages, profit and rent were to 
form the price of commodities, this would apply as much to the con- 
stant portion of the commodity-value as to the other portion, in 
which variable capital and surplus-value are incorporated. Thus, this 
constant portion may here be left entirely out of consideration, since 
the value of the commodities of which it is composed would likewise 
resolve itself into the sum of the values of wages, profit and rent. 
As already nated, this conception, then, denies the very existence 
of such a constant portion of value. 

It is furthermore evident that value loses all meaning here. Only 
the conception of price still remains, in the sense that a certain 
amount of money is paid to the owner of labour-power, capital and 
land. But what is money? Money is not a thing, but a definite form 
of value, hence, value is again presupposed. Let us say, then, that 
a definite amount of gold or silver is paid for these elements of 
production, or that it is mentally equated to them. But gold and 
silver (and the enlightened economist is proud of this discovery) 
are themselves commodities like all other commodities. The price 
of gold and silver is therefore likewise determined by wages, profit 
and rent. Hence we cannot determine wages, profit and rent by 
equating them to a certain amount of gold and silver, for the 
value of this gold and silver, by means of which they should be 
evaluated as in their equivalent, should be first delermined 
precisely by them, independently of gold and silver, i.e., independ- 
ently of the value of any commodity, which value is precisely the 
product of the above three factors. Thus, to say that the value of 
wages, profit and rent consists in their being equivalent to a certain 
quantity of gold and silver, would merely be saying that they are 
equal to a certain quantity of wages, profit and rent. 

842 REVENUES AND TILEIR SOURCES 

Take wages first. For it is necessary to make labour the point 
of departure, even in this view ol the matter. How, then, is the reg- 
ulating price of wages determined, the price about which its market- 
prices oscillate? 

Let us say that it is determined by the supply and demand of 
labour-power. But what sort of labour-power demand is this? It is 
a demand made by capital. The demand for labour is therefore tan- 
tamount to the supply of capital. In order to speak of a supply of 
capital, we should know above all what capital is. Of what does 
capital consist? If we take its simplest aspect, it consists of money 
and commodities. But money is merely a commodity-form. Capi- 
tal, then, consists of commodities. But the value of commodities, 
according to our assumption, is determined, in the first instance, by . 
the price of the labour producing the commodities, by wages. Wages 
are here presupposed and are treated as a constituent element of the 
price of commodities. This price then should be determined by the 
ratio of available IJabour to capital. The price of the capital itself 
is equal to the price of the commodities of which it is composed. 
The demand by capital for labour is equal to the supply of capital. 
And the supply of capital is equal to the supply of a quantity of com- 
modities of given price, and this price is regulated in the first place 
by the price of labour, and the price of labour in turn is equal to that 
portion of the commodity-price constituting the variable capital, 
which is granted to the labourer in exchange for his labour; and the 
price of the commodities constituting this variable capital is again 
determined, in turn, primarily by the price of labour; for it is de- 
termined by the prices of wages, profit and rent. In order to deter- 
mine wages, we cannot, therefore, presuppose capital, for the value 
of the capital is itself determined in part by wages. 

Moreover, dragging competition into this problem does not help 
at all. Competition makes the market-prices of labour rise or fall. 
But suppose supply and demand of labour are balanced. How are 
wages then determined? By competition. But we have just assumed 
that competition ceases to act as a determinant, that its influence 
is cancelled due to equilibrium between its two mutually opposing 
forces. Indeed, it is precisely the natural price of wages that we wish 
to find, i.e., the price of labour that is not regulated by competi- 
tion, but which, on the centrary, regulates the latter. 

Nothing remains but to determine the necessary price of labour 
by the necessary means of subsistence of the labourer. But these 
means of subsistence are commodities, which have a price. The price 
of labour is therefore determined by the price of the necessary means 
of subsistence and the price of the means of subsistence, like that 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION R43 

of all other commodities, is determined primarily by the price of 
labour. Therefore, the price of labour determined by the price of 
the means of subsistence is determined by the price of labour. The 
price of labour is determined by itself. In other words, we do not 
know how the price of labour is determined. Labour in this case has 
a price in general, because it is considered as a commodity. In or- 
der, therefore, to speak of the price of labour, we must know what 
price in general is. But we do not learn at all in this way what 
price in general is. 

Nevertheless, let us assume that the necessary price of labour is 
determined in this agreeable manner. Then how is the average 
profit determined, the profit of every capital under normal condi- 
tions, which constitutes the second element in the price of commod- 
ities? The average profit must be determined by an average rate of 
profit; how is this rale determined? By competition among the cap- 
italists? But the competition already presupposes the existence 
of profit. It presupposes various rates of profit, and thus various 
profits—either in the same or in different spheres of production. 
Competition can influence the rate of profit only tothe extent that 
it affects the prices of commodities. Competition can only make 
the producers within the same sphere of production sell their com- 
modities al the same prices, and make them sell their commodities 
in different spheres of production at prices which will give them the 
same profit, {he same proportional addition to the price of commodi- 
ties which has already been partially determined by wages. Hence 
competition can only equalize inequalities in the rate of profit. 
In order to equalize unequal rates of profit, profit must exist as an 
element in the price of commodities. Competition does not creale 
it. It lowers or raises its level, but does not create the level which 
is established when equalization has been achieved. And when we 
speak of a necessary rate of profit, what we wish to know is 
precisely the rate of profit independent of the movements of 
competition, which in turn regulates competition itself. The average 
rate of profit sets in when there is an equilibrium of forces among the 
competing capitalists. Competition may establish this equilibrium 
but not the rate of profit which makes its appearance with this 
equilibrium. When this equilibrium is established, why is the gener- 
al rate of profit now 10, or 20, or 100%? Because of competition? 
No, on the contrary, competition has eliminaled the causes produc- 
ing deviations from 10, 20, or 100%. It has brought about a commod- 
ity-price whereby every capilal yields the same profit in propor- 
tion to its magnitude. The magnitude of this profil itself, however, 
is independent of competition. The latter merely reduces, again 

844 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

and again, all deviations to this magnitude. One person competes 
with another, and competition compels him to sell his commodities 
at the same price as the other. But why is this price 10 or 20 or 
100? 

Thus, nothing remains but to declare rate of profit, and therefore 
profit, to be in some unaccountable manner a definite extra charge 
added to the price of commodities, which up to this point was deter- 
mined by wages. The only thing that competition tells us is that 
this rate of profit must be a given magnitude. But we knew 
this before—when we dealt with general rate of profit and “necessary 
price” of profit. 

It is quite unnecessary to wade through this absurd process anew 
in the case of ground-rent. One can see without doing this that, 
when carried out more or less consistently, it makes profit and rent 
merely appear as definite extra charges added by unaccountable 
laws to the price of commodities, a price primarily determined by 
wages. In short, competition has to shoulder the responsibility of 
explaining all the meaningless ideas of the economists, whereas it 
should rather be the economists who explain competition. 

Now, disregarding here the illusion of a profit and rent being 
created by circulation, i.e., price components arising through 
sale—and circulation can never give what it did not first receive— 
the matter simply amounts to this: 

Let the price of a commodity determined by wages =100; 
let the rate of profit be 10% of wages, and the rent 15% of wages. 
Then the price of the commodity determined by the sum of wages, 
profit and rent=125. This additional 25 cannot arise from the sale 
of the commodity. For all who sell one another commodities sell 
at 125 that which costs 100 in wages; which is the same as if they had 
all sold at 100. Thus, the operaticn must be considered independently 
of the circulation process. 

If the three share the commodity itself, which now costs 125—~ 
and it does not aller matters any if the capitalist first sells at 125, 
and then pays 100 to the labourer, 10 to himself, and 15 to the land- 
lord—the labourer receives */,=100 of the value and of the prod- 
uct. The capitalist receives */,, of the value and of the product, and 
the landlord */,,. Since the capitalist sells at 125 instead of 100, he 
gives the labourer only */, of the product incorporating the latter’s 
labour. Thus, it would be just the same as if he had given 80 to the 
labourer and retained 20—of which 8 would fall to his share and 12 
to the landlord. In this case he would have sold the commodity at 
its value, since in fact the additions to the price represent increases 
that are independent of the value of the commodity, which under 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 815 

the assumption made above is determined by the value of wages, 
This, in a roundabout way, amounts to saying that according to 
this conception the term “wages,” here 100, means the valueo! the 
product, i.e., the sum of money in which this definite quantity 
of labour is represented; but that this value in turn differs [rom the 
real wage and therefore leaves a surplus. But, here the surplus 
is realized by a nominal addition to the price. Hence, if wages 
were equal to 110 instead of 100, the profit would have to be=11 
and the ground-rent=16%, so that the price of the com- 
modity would=137%. This would leave the proportions unal- 
tered. Butsince the division would always be obtained by way of 
a nominal addition of definite percentages to wages, the price would 
tise and fall with the wages. Wages are here first set equal to the 
value of the commodity, and then divorced from it again. In fact, 
however, this amounts to saying in a roundabout and meaningless 
way that ihe value of the commodity is determined by the quantity 
of labour contained in it, whereas the value of wages is determined 
by the price of the necessary means of subsistence, and the excess 
of value above the wage forms profit and rent. 

The splitting of the value of commodities alter subtracting the 
value of the means of production consumed in their creation; the 
splitting of this given quantity of value, determined by the quantity 
of labour incorporated in the produced commodities, into three com- 
ponent parts, which assume, as wages, profit and rent, independent 
and mutually unrelated forms of revenue—this splitting appears in 
a perverted form on the surface of capitalist production, and conse- 
quently in the minds of those captivated by the latter. 

Let the total value of a certain commodity =300, of which 200 
is the value of the means of production, or elements of constant 
capital, consumed in its production. This leaves 100 as the amount 
of new value added to the commodity during its process ol produc- 
tion. This new value of 100 is all that is available for division 
among the three forms of revenue. If we let wages=x, profit=y 
and ground-rent=z, then the sum of x+y-+z will always=!00 
in our case. But to the industrialists, merchants and bankers, and 
to the vulgar economists, this appears quite different. For them, 
the value of the commodity, alter subtracting the value of the means 
of production cansumed by it, is not given=100, this 100 then being 
divided into x, y and z. But rather, ihe price of the commodity sim- 
ply consists of the value of wages, the value of profit and the value 
of rent, which magnitudes are determined independently of the 
value of the commodity and of each other, so that x, y and z are 
each given and determined independently, and only from the sum 

846 RNEVENURS AND THEIR SOURCES 

of these magnitudes, which may be smaller or larger than 100, is 
the magnitude of the value of the commodity itself obtained by 
adding these component values together. This guid pro quo is in- 
evitable because: 

First: The component parts of the value of a commodity, appear 
as independent revenues in relation to one another, and as such are 
related to three very dissimilar production factors, namely, labour, 
capital and land, and therefore they seem toarise from the latter. 
Ownership of labour-power, capitai and land is the cause for these 
various component values of commodities falling to the share of 
the respective owners, and thus transforming themselves into revenue 
for them. But the value does not arise from a transformation into 
revenue; it must rather exist before it can be converted into revenue, 
before it can assume this form. The illusion that the opposite is 
true is strengthened all the more as the determination of the rela- 
tive magnitudes of these three components in relation to one another 
follows different laws, whose connection with, and limitation by, 
the value of the commodities themselves nowise appear on the sur- 
lace. 

Secondly: We have seen that a general rise or fal! in wages, by 
causing a movement of the general rate of profit in the opposite 
direction—other circumstances remaining the same—changes the 
prices of production of the various commodities, i.e., raises some and 
lowers others, depending on the average composition of capital in 
the respective spheres of production. Thus, experience shows here 
that in some spheres of production, at any rate, the average price 
of a commodity rises because wages have risen, and falls because 
wages have fallen. But “experience” does not show that the value of 
commodities, which is independent of wages, secretly regulates these 
changes. However, if the rise in wages is local, if it only takes place 
in particular spheres of production as a result of special circum- 
stances, then a corresponding nominal rise in the prices of these com- 
modities may occur. This rise in the relative value of one kind of com- 
modity in relation to the others, for which wages have remained 
unchanged, is then merely a reaction against the local disturbance 
in the uniform distribution of surplus-value among the various 
spheres of production, a means of equalizing the particular rates of 
profit into the general rate.“Experience” shows in this case that wages 
again determine the price. Thus, in both of these cases experience 
shows that wages determine the prices of commodities. But “expe- 
rience” does not show the hidden cause of this interrelation. Fur- 
thermore: The average price of labour, i.e., the value of labour- 
power, is determined by the production price of the necessary means 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 847 

of subsistence. If the latter rises or falls, the former rises or falls: 
accordingly. Thus, experience again shows the existence of a connec- 
tion between wages and the price of commodities. But the cause 
may appear as an efiect, and the effect as a cause, which is also the 
case in the movernents of market-prices, where a rise of wages above 
their average corresponds to the rise of market-prices above the 
prices of production during periods of prosperity, and the subsequent 
fall of wages below their average corresponds toa fall of market- 
prices below the prices of production. To the dependence of prices of 
production upon the values of commodities prima facie there 
would always have to correspond, apart from the oscillatory move- 
ments of market-prices, the experience that whenever wages rise 
the rate of profit falls, and vice versa. But we have seen thet the rate 
of profit may be determined by movements in the value of constant 
capital, independently of the movements of wages; so that wages 
and rate of profit, instead of moving in opposite directions, may 
move in the same direction, may rise or fall together. If the rate of 
surplus-value were to directly coincide with the rate of profit, this 
would not be possible. Similarly if wages should rise as a result of 
a rise in the prices of the means of subsistence, the rate of profit 
may remain the same, or even rise, due to greater intensity of la- 
bour or prolongation of the working-day. All these experiences bear 
out the illusion created by the independent and distorted form of 
the component values, namely, that either wages alone, or 
wages and profit together, determine the value of commodities. 
Once such an illusion appears with respect to wages, once the price 
of labour and the value created by labour seem to coincide, the same 
automatically applies to profit and rent. Their prices, i.e., their 
money-expression, must then be regulated independently of lebour 
and of the value created by the latter. 

Thirdly: Let us assume that according to direct experience the 
values of a commodity, or the prices of production—which merely 
appear to be independent of the values—always coincide with the 
market-prices of the commodity rather than merely prevailing as 
the regulating average prices by constant compensation of the con- 
tinual fluctuations in market-price. Let us assume, furthermore, 
that reproduction always takes place under the same unaltered con- 
ditions, i.e,, labour productivity remains constant in all elements of 
capital. Finally, let us assume that lhe component value of the 
commodity-product, which is formed in every sphere of production 
by the addition of a new quantity of labour—i.e., a newly produced 
value—to the value of the means of production, always splits into 
constant proportions of wages, profit and rent, so that the wage 

848 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

actually paid always directly coincides with the value of labour- 
power, the profit actually realized—with the portion of the total 
surplus-value which falls to the share of every independently func- 
tioning part of the total capital by virtue of the average rate of 
profit, and the actual rent is always limited by the bounds within 
which ground-rent on this basis is normally confined. In a word, 
let us assume that the division of the socially produced values and 
the regulation of the prices of production takes place on a capitalist 
basis, but that competition is eliminated. 

Thus, under these assumptions, namely, if the value of commodi- 
ties were constant and appeared so, if the component value of the 
commodity-product which resolves itself into revenues were to re- 
main aconstant magnitude and always appeared as such, and finally, 
if this given and constant component value always split into con- 
stant proportions ol wages, profit and rent—even under {hese assump- 
{ions, the real movement would necessarily appear in distorted 
form; not as the splitting of a previously given magnitude of value 
into three parts which assume mutually independent forms of reve- 
nue, but, on the contrary, as the formation of this magnitude of 
value from the sumof the independent and separately determined, 
each by itself, constituent elements—wages, profit and ground-rent. 
This illusion would necessarily arise, because in the actual movement 
of individual capitals, and the commodities produced by them, not 
the value of commodities would appear to be a precondition of its 
splitting but, conversely, the components into which it is split 
function as a precondition of the value of the commodities. In the 
first place, we have seen that to every capitalist the cost-price of 
his commodities appears as a given magnitude and continually 
appears as such in the actual price of production. The cost-price, 
however, is equal tothe value of the constant capital, the advanced 
means of production, plus the value of labour-power, which, how- 
ever, appears to the agent of production in the irrational form of 
the price of labour, so that wages simultaneously appear as revenue 
of the labourer. The average price of labour is a given magnitude, 
because the value of labour-power, Jike that of any other commodity, 
is determined by the necessary ]abour-time required for its repro- 
duction. But as concerns that portion of the value of commodities 
which is embodied in wages, it does not arise from the fact that it 
assumes this form of wages, that the capitalist advances to the la- 
bourer his share of his own product in the form of wages, but from 
the fact that the labourer produces an equivalent for his wages, i.e., 
that a portion of his daily or annual labour produces the value con- 
tained in the price of his labour-power. But wages are stipulated by 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 849 

contract, before their corresponding value equivalent has been 
produced. As an element of price, whose magnitude is given before 
the commodity and its value have been produced, as a constituent 
part of the cost-price, wages thereby do not appear as a portion 
which detaches itself in independent form from the total value of 
the commodity, but rather, conversely, as a given magnitude, which 
predetermines this value, i.e., as a creator of price and value. A role 
similar to that of wages in the cost-price of commodities is played by 
the average profit in their price of production, for the price of pro- 
duction is equal to cost-price plus average profit on the advanced 
capital. This average profit figures practically, in the mind and 
calculation of the capitalist himself, as a regulating element, not 
merely in so far as it determines the transfer of capitals from one 
sphere of investment into another, but also in all sales and contracts 
which embrace a process of reproduction extending over long peri- 
ods. But so far as it figures in this manner, it is a pre-existent magni- 
tude, which is in fact independent of the value and surplus-value 
produced in any particular sphere of production, and thus even 
more so in the case of any individual investment of capital in any 
sphere of production. Rather than appearing as a result of a split- 
ting of value, it manifests itself mich more as a magnitude independ- 
ent of the value of the produced commodities, as pre-existing in 
the process of production of commodities and itself determining the 
average price of the commodities, i.e., as a creator of value. In- 
deed, the surplus-value, owing to the separation of its various por- 
tions into mutually, completely unrelated forms, appears in still 
more concrete form as a prerequisite for creating commodity-value. 
A part of the average profit in the form of interest confronts the func- 
tioning capitalist independently as an assumed element in the pro- 
duction of commodities and of their value. No matter how much the 
magnitude of the interest fluctuates, at each moment and for every 
capitalist it is a given magnitude entering into the cost-price of 
the commodities produced by him as individual capitalist. The 
same role is played by ground-rent in the form of lease money fixed 
by contract for the agricultural capitalist, and in the form of rent 
for business premises in the case of other entrepreneurs. These por- 
tions into which surplus-value is split, being given as elements of 
cost-price for the individual capitalist, appear conversely therefore 
as creators of surplus-value; creators of a portion of the price of com- 
modities, just as wages create the other. The secret wherefore these 
products of the splitting of commodity-value constantly appear as 
prerequisites for the formation ol value itself is simply this, that the 
capitalist mode of production, like any other, does not merely con- 

850 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

stantly reproduce the material product, but also the social and eco- 
nomic relations, the characteristic economic forms of its. creation. 
Its result, therefore, appears just as constantly presupposed by it, 
as its presuppositions appear as its results. And it is this continual 
reproduction of the same relations which the individual capitalist 
anticipates as self-evident, as an indubitable fact. So long as the cap- 
italist mode of production persists as such, a portion of the newly 
added labour continually resolves itself into wages, another into 
profit (interest and profit of enterprise), and a third into rent. In 
contracts between the owners of various agencies of production this 
is always assumed, and this assumption is correct, however much the 
relative proportions may fluctuate in individual cases. The definite 
form in which the parts of value confront each other is presupposed 
because it is continually reproduced, and it is continually repro- 
duced because it is continually presupposed. 

To be sure, experience and appearance now also demonstrate 
ihat market-prices, in whose influence the capitalist ectually sees 
the only determination of value, are by no means dependent upon 
such anticipation, so far as their magnitude is concerned; that they 
donot correspond to whether the interest or rent were set high or 
low. But the market-prices areconstant only in their variation, and 
their average over longer periods results precisely in the respective 
averages of wages, profit and rent as the constant magnitudes, and 
therefore, in the last analysis, those dominating the market-prices. 

On the other hand, it seems plain on reflection that if wages, profit 
and rent are creators of value since they seer to be presupposed in 
{he production of value, and are assumed by the individual! capital- 
ist in his cost-price and price of production, then the constant por- 
tion, whose value enters as given into the production of every 
commodity, is also a creator of value. But the constant portion 
of capital is no more than a sum of commodities and, therefore, of 
commodity-values. Thus we should arrive at the absurd tautol- 
oy that commodity-value is the creator and cause of commodity- 
value, 

However, if the capitalist were at all interested in reflecting about 
this—and his reflections as capitalist are dictated exclusively by his 
interests and self-interested motives—experience would show him that 
the product which he himself produces enters into ot her spheres of pro- 
duction as a constant portion of capital, and that products of these 
other production spheres enter into his own product as constant 
portions of capital. Since the additional value, so far as his 
new production is concerned, seems to be formed, from his 
paint of view, by the magnitudes of wages, profit and rent, then 

ILLUSIONS CREATED BY COMPETITION 851 

this also holds good for the constant portion consisting of the products 
of other capitalists. And thus, the price of the constant Portion of 
capital, and thereby the total value of the commodities, reduces 
itself in the final analysis, although in a manner which is somewhat 
unaccountable, to a sum of values resulting from the addition of 
independent creators of value—wages, profit and rent—which are 
regulated according to different laws and arise from different sources. 

Fourthly: Whether the commodities are sold at their values or not, 
and hence the determination of value itself, is quite immaterial 
for the individual capitalist. It is, from the very outset, a process 
that takes place behind his back and is controlled by the force of 
circumstances independent of himself, because it is not the values, 
but the divergent prices of production, which form the regulating 
average prices in every sphere of production. The determination 
of value as such interests and has a determining effect on the indi- 
vidual capitalist and the capital in each particular sphere of pro- 
duction only in so far as the reduced or increased quantity of la- 
bour required to produce commodities, as a consequence of a rise or 
fall in productiveness of labour, enables him in one instance to make 
an extra profit, at the prevailing market-prices, and compels him 
in another to raise the price of his commodities, because more wages, 
more constant capital, and thus more interest, fall upon each por- 
tion of the product, or individual commodity. It interests him only 
in so far as it raises or Jowers the cost of production of commodities 
for himself, thus only in so far as it makes his position excep- 
tional. 

On the other hand, wages, interest and rent appear to him as 
regulating limits not only of the price at which he can realize the 
profit of enterprise, the portion of profit falling to hisshare as func- 
tioning capitalist, but also at which he must generally be able to 
sell his commodities, if continued reproduction is to take place. It 
is quite immaterial to him whether or not he realizes, through 
sale, the value and surplus-value incorporated in his commodities, 
provided only that he makes the customary, or larger, profit of 
enterprise at given prices, over and above his individual cost-price 
determined by wages, interest and rent. Apart from the constant 
portion of capital—wages, interest and rent appear to him, there- 
fore, as the limiting and thereby productive determining elements 
of the commodity-price. Should he succeed, e.g., in depressing 
wages below the value of labour-power, i.e., below its normal 
level, in obtaining capital at a lower interest rate, and in paying 
less lease money than the normal amount for rent, then it is com- 
pletely irrelevant to him whether he sells his product below its val- 

852 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURVES 

ue, or even below the general price of production, thereby giving 
away gratis a portion of the surplus-labour contained in the commod- 
ities. This also applies to the constant portion of capital. Ef an in- 
dustrialist, e.g., can buy his raw material below its price of pro- 
duction, then this buflers him against loss, even should he sell it 
in the finished product under its price of production. His profit 
of enterprise may remain the same, or even increase, if only the 
excess of the commodity-price over its elements, which must be 
paid, replaced by an equivalent, remains the same or increases. 
But aside from the value of the means of production which enter 
into the production of his commodities as a given price magnitude, it 
is precisely wages, interest and rent which enter into this produc- 
tion as limiting and regulating price magnitudes. Consequently 
they appear to him as the elements determining the price of the com- 
modities. Profit of enterprise, from this standpoint, seems to beeither 
determined by the excess of market-prices, depetident upon acciden- 
tal conditions of competition, over the immanent value of commod- 
ities determined by the above-mentioned elements of price; or, 
to the extent that this profit itself exerts a determining influence 
upon market-prices, it seerns itself, in turn, dependent upon the 
competition between buyers and sellers. : 

In the competition of individual capitalists among themselves 
as well as in the competition on the world-market, it is the given 
and assumed magnitudes of wages, interest and rent which enter 
into the calculation as constant and regulating magnitudes; con- 
stant not in the sense of being unalterable magnitudes, but in the 
sense that they are given in each individual case and constitute 
the constant limit for the continually fluctuating market-prices. 
For instance, in competition on the world-market it is solely a ques- 
tion of whether commodities can be sold advantageously with exist- 
ing wages, interest and rent at, or below, existing genera] market- 
prices, i.e., realizing a corresponding profit of enterprise. If wages 
and the price of land are low in one country, while interest on capi- 
tal is high, because the capitalist mode of production has not been 
developed generally, whereas in another country wages and the 
price of Jand are nominally high, while interest on capital is 
low, then the capitalist employs more labour and land in the one 
country, and in the other relatively more capital. These fac- 
tors enter into calculation as determining elements in so far as compe- 
tition between these two capitalists is possible. Here, then, experi- 
ence shows theoretically, and the self-interested calculation of 
the capitalist shows practically, that the prices of commodities are 
determined by wages, interest and rent, by the price of labour, cap- 

ILLUSION S CREATED BY COMPETITION 853 

ital and land, and that these elements of price are indeed the regu- 
lating constituent factors of price. 

Of course, there always remains an element here which is not 
assumed, but which results from the market-price of commodities 
namely, the excess above the cost-price formed by the addition of 
the aforementioned elements: wages, interest and rent. This fourth 
element seems to be determined by competition in each individual 
case, and in the average case by the average profit, which in its 
turn is regulated by this same competition, only over longer peri- 
ods. 

Fifthly. On the basis of the capitalist mode of production, it 
becomes so much a matter of course to split up the value, in which 
newly added labour is represented, into the forms of revenue, of 
wages, profit and ground-rent, that this method is applied (leaving 
aside earlier stages of history, from which we gave illustrations 
in our study of ground-rent) even where the preconditions for 
these forms of revenue are missing. That is, all is subsumed by 
analogy under these forms of revenue. 

When an independent labourer—let us take a small farmer, 
since all three forms of revenue may here be applied—works for 
himself and sells his own product, he is first considered as his own 
employer (capitalist), who makes use of himself as a labourer, and 
second as his own landlord, who makes use of himself as his own 
tenant. To himself as wage-worker he pays wages, to himself as 
capitalist he gives the profit, and to himself as landlord he pays 
rent. Assuming the capitalist mode of production and the relations 
corresponding to it to be the general basis of society, this subsump- 
tion is correct, in so far as it is not thanks to his labour, but to his 
ownership of means of production—which have assumed here the 
general form of capital—that he is in a position to appropriate his 
own surplus-labour. And furthermore, to the extent that he pro- 
duces his product as commodities, and thus depends upon its price 
(and even if not, this price is calculable), the quantity of surplus- 
labour which he can realize depends not on its own magnitude, but 
on the general rate ol profit; and likewise any eventual excess above 
the amount of surplus-value determined by the general rate of prof- 
it is, in turn, not determined by the quantity of labour performed 
by him, but can be appropriated by him only because he is own- 
er of the land. Since such a form of production not corresponding 
to the capitalist mode of production may thus be subsumed under 
its forms of revenue—and to a certain extent not incorrectly—the 
illusion is all the more strengthened that capitalist relations are 
the natural relations of every mode of production. 

854 REVENUFS AND THEIR SOURCES 

Of course, if wages are reduced to their general basis, namely, 
to that portion of the product of the producer’s own labour which 
passes over into the individual consumption of the labourer; if we 
relieve this portion of its capitalist limitations and extend it to 
that volume of consumption which is permitted, on the one hand, 
by the existing productivity of society (thai is, the social produc- 
tivity of his own individual labour as actually social), and which, 
on the other hand, the [ull development of the individuality requires; 
if, furthermore, we reduce the surplus-labour and surplus-prod- 
uct to that measure which is required under prevailing conditions 
of production of society, on the one side to create an insurance and 
reserve fund, and on the other to constantly expand reproduction 
to the extent dictated by social needs; finally, if we include in No. | 
the necessary labour, and in No. 2 the surplus-labour, the quantity 
of labour which must always be performed by the able-bodied in 
behalf of the immature or incapacitated members of society, i.e., 
if we strip both wages and surplus-value, both necessary and sur- 
plus labour, of their specifically capitalist character, then certain- 
lv there remain not these forms, but merely their rudiments, which 
are common to all socia! modes of production. 

Moreover, this method of subsumption was also characteristic of 
previous dominant modes of production, e. g., feudalism. Production 
relations which nowise corresponded to it, standing entirely beyond 
it, were subsumed under feudal relations, e.g., in England, the 
tenures in common socage (as distinct from tenures on knight’s serv- 
ice), which comprised merely monetary obligations and were [eu- 
dal in name only. 

CHAPTER LI 

DISTRIBUTION RELATIONS 
AND PRODUCTION RELATIONS 

The new value added by the annual newly added labour—and 
thus also that portion of the annual product in which this value 
is represented and which may be drawn out of the total output and 
separated from it—is thus split into three parts, which assume three 
different forms of revenue, into forms which express one portion of 
this value as belonging or falling to the share of the owner of la- 
bour-power, another portion to the owner of capital, and a third 
portion to the owner of landed property. These, then, are relations, 
or forms of distribution, for they express the relations under which 
the newly produced total value is distributed among the owners of 
the various production factors. 

From the common viewpoint these distribution relations appear 
as natural relations, as relations arising directly from the nature of 
all social production, from the laws of human production in gener- 
al. Itcannot, indeed, be denied that pre-capitalist societies disclose 
other modes of distribution, but the latter are interpreted as un- 
developed, unperfected and disguised, not reduced to their purest 
expression and their highest form and differently shaded modes 
of the natural distribution relations. 

The only correct aspect of this conception is: Assuming some 
form of social production to exist (e. g., primitive Indian communi- 
ties, or the more ingeniously developed communism of the Peruvi- 
ans), a distinction can always be made between that portion of labour 
whose product is directly consumed individually by the producers 
and their families and—aside from the part which is productively 
consumed—that portion of labour which is invariably surplus-la- 
bour, whose product serves constantly to satisfy the general social 
needs, no matter how this surplus-product may be divided, and no 
matter who may function as representative of these social needs. 
Thus, the identity of the various modes of distribution amounts 

856 REVENUES AND TIIFIR SOURCES 

merely to this: they are identical if we abstract from their differ- 
ences and specific forms and keep in mind only their unity as dis- 
tinct from their dissimilarity. 

A more advanced, more critical mind, however, admits the his- 
torically developed character of distribution relations,*** but never- 
theless clings all the more tenaciously to the unchanging character 
of production relations themselves, arising from human nature and 
thus independent of all historical development. 

On the other hand, scientific analysis of the capitalist mode of 
production demonstrates the contrary, that it is a mode of produc- 
tion of a special kind, with specific historical features; that, like 
any other specific mode of production, it presupposes a given level 
of the social productive forces and their forms of development as its 
historical precondition: a precondition which is itself the historical 
result and product of a preceding process, and from which the new 
mode of production proceeds as its given basis; that the production 
relations corresponding to this specific, historically determined mode 
of production—relations which human beings enter into during the 
process of social life, in the creation of their social life—possess 
a specific, historical and transitory character; and, finally, that the 
distribution relations essentially coincident with these production 
relations are their opposite side, so that both share thesame his- 
torically transitory character. 

Inthe study of distribution relations, the initial point of depar- 
ture is the alleged fact that the annual product is apportioned among 
wages, profit and rent. But if so expressed, it is a mis-sltatement. 
The product is apportioned on one side to capital, on the other to 
revenue. One of these revenues, wages, never itself assumes the form 
of revenue, revenue ol the labourer, until after it has first confront- 
ed this Jabourer in the form of capital. The confrontation of produced 
conditions of labour and of the products of labour generally, as 
capital, with the direct producers implies from the outset a definite 
social character of the material conditions of labour in relation to 
ihe !abourers, and thereby a definite relationship into which they 
enter with the owners of the means of production and among them- 
selves during production itself. The transformation of these condi- 
tions of labour into capital implies in turn the expropriation of 
the direct producers from the land, and thus a definite forrn of land- 
ed property. 

ri J. Stuart Mill, Some Unsettled Questions in Political Economy, London, 

DISTRIBUTION RELATIONS AND PRODUCTION RELATIONS 857 

If one portion of the product were not transformed into capital 
the other would not assume the forms of wages, profit and rent , 

On the other hand, if the capitalist mode of production presup- 
poses this definite social form of the conditions of production, so does 
it Teproduce it continually. It produces not merely the material 
products, but reproduces continually the production relations in 
which the former are produced, and thereby also the corresponding 
distribution relations 

It may be said, of course, that capital itself (and landed proper- 
ty which it includes as its antithesis) already presupposes a distri- 
bution: the expropriation of the labourer from the conditions of 
labour, the concentration of these conditions in the hands of a 
minority of individuals, the exclusive ownership of land by other 
individuals, in short, all the relations which have been described 
in the part dealing with primitive accumulation (Buch I, Kap. 
XXIV).* But this distribution differs altogether from what is under- 
stood by distribution relations when the latter are endowed with 
a historical character in contradistinction to production relations. 
What is meant thereby are the various titles to that portion of the 
product which goes into individual consumption. The aforemen- 
tioned distribution relations, on the contrary, are the basis of spe- 
cial social functions performed within the production relations by 
certain ol their agents, as opposed to the direct producers. They 
imbue the conditions of production themselves and their represent- 
atives with a specific social quality. They determine the entire 
character and the entire movement of production. 

Capitalist production is distinguished from the outset by two 
characteristic features. 

First. It produces its products as commodities. The fact that 
it produces commodities does not differentiate it from other modes 
of production; but rather the fact that being a commodity is the 
dominant and determining characteristic of its products. This im- 
plies, first and foremost, that the labourer himself comes forward 
merely as a seller of commodities, and thus as a free wage-labourer, 
so that labour appears in general as wage-labour. In view of what 
has already been said, it is superfluous to demonstrate anew that the 
relation between capital and wage-labour determines the entire char- 
acter of the mode of production. The principal agents of this mode 
of production itself, the capitalist and the wage-labourer, are as 
such merely embodiments, personifications of capital and wage- 
labour; definite social characteristics stamped upon individuals 

* English edition: Part Vill.—fd. 

B58 REVENUES AND ‘THEIR SOURCES 

by the process of social production; the products of these definite 
social production relations. 

The characteristic 1) of the product as a commodity, and 2) of 
the commodity as a product of capital, already implies all circula- 
tion relations, i.e., a definite social process through which the prod- 
ucts must pass and in which they assume definite social character- 
istics; it likewise implies definite relations of the production agents, 
by which the value-expansion of their product and its reconver- 
sion, either into means of subsistence or into means of production, 
are determined. Buteven apart from this, the entire determination 
ol value and the regulation of the total production by value results 
from the above two characteristics of the product as a commodity, 
or of the commodity as a capitalistically produced commodity. In 
this entirely specific form of value, Jabour prevails on the one hand 
solely as social labour; on the other hand, the distribution of this 
social labour and the mutual supplementing and interchanging 
of its products, the subordination under, and introduction into, 
the social mechanism, are le[t to the accidental and mutually nul- 
lifying motives of individual capitalists. Since these latter con- 
front one another only as commodity-owners, and every one seeks 
to sell his commodity as dearly as possible (apparently even guided 
in the regulation of production itself solely by his own free will), 
the inner law enforces itself only through their competition, their 
mutual pressure upon each other, whereby the deviations are mutu- 
ally cancelled. Only as an inner law, vis-a-vis the individual agents, 
as a blind law of Nature, does the law of value exert its influence 
here and maintain the social equilibrium of production amidst its 
accidental fluctuations. 

Furthermore, already implicit in the commodity, and even more 
so in the commodity as a product of capital, is the materialization 
of the social features of production and the personification of the 
material foundations of production, which characterize the entire 
capitalist mode of production. 

The second distinctive feature of the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion is the production of surplus-value as the direct aim and de- 
termining motive of production. Capital produces essentially capi- 
tal, and does so only to the extent that it produces surplus-value. 
We have seen in our discussion of relative surplus-value, and fur- 
ther in ccnsidering the transformation of surplus-value into profit, 
how a mode of production peculiar to the capitalist period is founded 
-hereon—a special form of development of the social productive 
powers of labour, but confronting the Jabourer as powers of capi- 
tal rendered independent, and standing in direct opposition there- 

DISTRIBUTION RELATIONS AND PRODUCTION RELATIONS 859 

fore to the labourer's own development. Production for value and: 
surplus-value implies, as has been shown in the course of our anal- 
ysis, the constantly operating tendency to reduce the labour-time 
necessary for the production of a commodity, i.e., its value, below 
the actually prevailing social average. The pressure to reduce cost- 
price to its minimum becomes the strongest lever for raising the 
social productiveness of labour, which, however, appears here only: 
as a continual increase in the productiveness of capital. 

The authority assumed by the capitalist as the personification of 
capital in the direct process of production, the social function per- 
formed by him in his capacity as manager and ruler of production, 
is essentially different from the authority exercised on the besis 
of production by means of slaves, serfs, etc. 

Whereas, on the basis of capitalist production, the mass of direct 
producers is confronted by the social character of their production 
in the form of strictly regulating authority and a social mechanism 
of the labour-process organized as a complete hierarchy—this au- 
thority reaching its bearers, however, only as the personification 
of the conditions of labour in contrast to labour, and not’as politi- 
cal or theocratic rulers as under earlier modes of production—among 
the bearers of this authority, the capitalists themselves, who con- 
front one another only as commodity-owners, there reigns complete 
anarchy within which the social interrelations of production assert 
thernselves only as an overwhelming natural law in relation to indi- 
vidual free will. 

Only because labour pre-exists in the form of wage-labour, and 
the means of production in the form of capital—i.e., solely because 
of this specific social form of these essential production factors— 
does a part of the value (product) appear as surplus-value and this 
surplus-value as profit (rent), as the gain of the capitalist, as addi- 
tional available wealth belonging to him. But only because this 
surplus-value thus appears as Ais profit do the additional means 
of production, which are intended for the expansion of reprocuc- 
tion, and which constitute a part of this profit, present themselves 
as new additional capital, and the expansion of the process of re- 
production in general as a process of capitalist accumulation. 

Although the form of labour as wage-labour is decisive for the 
form of the entire process and the specific mode of production it- 
sell, it is not wage-labour which determines value. In the determi- 
nation ol value, it is a question of social labour-time in general, the 
quantity of labour which society generally has at its disposal, and 
whose relative absorption by the various products determines, as 
it were, their respective social importance. The definite form in 

860 REVENUES AND THEIR SOURCES 

which the social labour-time prevails as decisive in the determina- 
tion of the value of commodities is of course connected with the form 
of labour as wage-labour and with the corresponding form of the 
means of production as capital, insofar as solely on this basis does 
commodity-production become the general form of production. 

Let us moreover consider the so-called distribution relations them- 
selves. The wage presupposes wage-labour, and profit—capital. These 
definite forms of distribution thus presuppose definite social char- 
acteristics of production conditions, and definite social relations 
of production agents. The specific distribution relations are thus 
merely the expression of the specific historical production rela- 
tions. 

And now let usconsider profit. This specific form of surplus-val- 
ue is the precondition for the fact that the new creation of means 
of production takes place in the form ol capitalist production; 
thus, a relation dominating reproduction, although it seers to the 
individual capitalist as if he could in reality consume his entire 
profit as revenue. However, he thereby meets barriers even in the 
form of insurance and reserve funds, laws of competition, etc., 
which hamper him and prove to him in practice that profit is not a 
mere distribution category of the individually consumable product. 
The entire process of capitalist production is furthermore regulated 
by the pricesof the products. But the regulating prices of produc- 
tion are themselves in turn regulated by the equalization of the 
tate of profit and its corresponding distribution of capital among 
the various social spheres of production. Profit, then, appears here 
as the main factor, not of the distribution of products, but of their 
production itself, as a factor in the distribution of capitals and la- 
bour itself among the various spheres of production. The division 
of profit into profit of enterprise and interest appears as the distri- 
bution of the same revenue. But it arises, to begin with, from the 
development of capital as a self-expanding value, a creator of sur- 
plus-value, i.e., from this specific social formof the prevailing proc- 
ess of production. ]t evolves credit and credit institutions out of 
itself, and thereby the form of production. As interest, etc., the 
ostensible distribution forms enter into the price as determining 
production factors. 

Ground-rent might seem to be a mere form of distribution, be- 
cause Janded property as such does not perform any, or at least any 
normal, function in the process of production itself. But the cir- 
cumstance {hat 1) rent is limited to the excess above the average 
profit, and that 2) the landlord is reduced from the manager and mas- 
ter of the process of production and of {he entire process of social 

DISTRIBUTION RELATIONS AND PRODUCTION RELATIONS 861 

life to the position of mere lessor of land, usurer in Jand and mere 
collector of rent, is a specific historical result of the capitalist mode 
of production. The fact that the earth received the form of landed 
property is a historical precondition for this. The fact that landed 
property assumes forms which permit thecapitalist mode of oper- 
ation in agriculture is a product of the specific character of this 
mode of production. The income of the landlord may be called rent, 
even under other forms of society. But it differs essentially from rent 
as it appears in this mode of production. 

The so-called distribution relations, then, correspond to and arise 
from historically determined specific social forms of the process 
of production and mutual relations entered into by men in the 
reproduction process of human life. The historical character of these 
distribution relations is the historical character of production rela- 
tions, of which they express merely one aspect. Capitalist distribu- 
tion differs from those forms of distribution which arise from other 
modes of production, and every form of distribution disappears 
with the specific form of production from which it is descended and 
to which it corresponds. 

The view which regards only distribution relations as historical, 
but not production relations, is, on the one hand, solely the view 
of the initial, but still handicapped, criticism of bourgeois econo- 
my. On the other hand, it rests on the confusion and identification 
of the process of social production with the simple labour-process, 
such as might even be performed by an abnormally isolated human 
being without any social assistance. To the extent that the labour- 
process is solely a process between man and Nature, its simple ele- 
ments remain common to all social forms of development. But each 
specific historical forin of this process further develops its material 
foundations and social forms. Whenever a certain stage of maturi- 
ty has been reached, the specific historical form is discarded and 
makes way for a higher one. The moment of arrival of such a cri- 
sis is disclosed by the depth and breadth attained by the contradic- 
tions and antagonisms between the distribution relations, and thus 
the specific historical form of their corresponding production rela- 
tions, on the one hand, and the productive forces, the production pow- 
ers and the development of their agencies, on the other hand. A 
conflict then ensues between the material development of produc- 
tion and its social form. * 

57 See the work on Competition and Co-Operation (1832?). 

CHAPTER Lil 
CLASSES 

The owners merely of labour-power, owners of capital, and land- 
owners, whose respective sources of income are wages, profit and 
ground-rent, in other words, wage-labourers, capitalists and land- 
owners, constitute then three big classes of modern society based 
upon the capitalist mode of production. 

In England, modern society is indisputably most highly and 
classically developed in economic structure. Nevertheless, even here 
the stratification of classes does not appear in its pure form. Mid- 
dle and intermediate strata even here obliterate lines of demarca- 
tion everywhere (although incomparably less in rural districts 
than in the cities). However, this is immaterial for our analysis. 
We have seen that the continual tendency and law of development 
of the capitalist mode of production is more and more to divorce 
the means of production from labour, and more and more to concen- 
trate the scattered means of production into large groups, thereby 
transforming labour into wage-labour and the means of production 
into capital. And to this tendency, on the other hand, corresponds 
the independent separation of landed property from capital and 
labour, ** or the transformation of all landed property into the 
form of landed property corresponding to the capitalist mode of 
production. 

The first question to be answered is this: What constitutes a 
class?—and the reply to this follows naturally from the reply to 
another question, namely: What makes wage-labourers, capitalists 
and landlords constitute the three great social classes? 

*° F. List remarks correctly: “The prevalence of a self-sufficient economy on 
large estates demonstrates solely the lack of civilization, means of communica- 
tion, domestic trades and wealthy cities. It is to be encountered, therefore, through- 
out Russia, Poland, Hungary and Mecklenburg. Formerly, it was also prev- 
alent in England; with the advance of trades and commerce, however, this was 
replaced by the breaking up into middle eslales and the leasing of land.” (Die 
Ackerverfassung, die Zwergwirtschaft und die Auswanderung, 1842, p. 10.) 

CLASSES 863 

At first glance—the identity of revenues and sources of revenue. 
There are three great social groups whose members, the individuals 
forming them, live on wages, profit and ground-rent respectively, 
on the realization of their labour-power, their capital, and their 
landed property. 

However, from this standpoint, physicians and officials, e.g., 
would also constitute two classes, for they belong to two distinct 
social groups, the members of each of these groups receiving 
their revenue from one and the same source. The same would also 
be true of the infinite fragmentation of interest and rank into which 
the division of social labour splits labourers as well as capitalists 
and landlords—the latter, e.g., into owners of vineyards, farm own- 
ers, owners of forests, mine owners and owners of fisheries. 

[Here the manuscript breaks off.] 

PF. ENGELS 
SUPPLEMENT 
TO CAPITAL, 

VOLUME THREE 

The third book of Capital is receiving many and various interpre- 
tations ever since it has been subject to public judgement. It was 
not to be otherwise expected. In publishing i1, what I was chief- 
ly concerned with was to produce as authentic a text as possible, 
to demonstrate the new results obtained by Marx in Marx’s own 
words as far as possible, to intervene myself only where absolutely 
unavoidable, and even then to leave the reader in no doubt as to 
who was talking to him. This has been deprecated. [t has been said 
that I should have converted the material available 1o me into a 
systematically written book, en faire un livre, as the French say; 
in other words, sacrifice the authenticity of the text to the reader’s 
convenience. But this was not how I conceived my task. I lacked 
all justification for such a revision; a man like Marx has the right 
to be heard himself, to pass on his scientific discoveries to posterity 
in the full genuineness of his own presentation. Moreover, I had no 
desire thus to infringe—as it must seem to me—upon the legacy of 
so pre-eminent a man; it would have meant to me a breach of faith. 
And third, it would have been quite useless. For the people who can- 
not or do not want to read, who, even in Volume I, took more trou- 
ble to understand it wrongly than was necessary to understand it 
correctly—for such people it is altogether useless to put oneself out 
in any way. But for those who are interested in a real understanding, 
the original text itself was precisely the most important thing; 
for them my recasting would have had at most the value of a com- 
mentary, and, what is more, a commentary on something tunpub- 
lished and inaccessible. The original text would have had to be re- 
ferred to at the first controversy, and at the second and third its 
publication in extenso would have become quite unavoidable. 

Such controversies are a matter of course in a work that contains 
somuch that is new, and ina hastily sketched and partly incomplete 
first draft to boot. And here my intervention,of course, can be of use: 
to eliminate difficulties in understanding, to bring more to the fore 
important aspects whose significance is not strikingly enough evident 
in the text, and to make some important additions to the text writ- 
ten in 1865 to fit the state of affairs in 1895. Indeed, there are al- 
ready {wo points which seem to ine to require a brief discussion. 

&GR SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME TIRE 

1 
LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 

It was to be expected that the solution of the apparent contradic- 
tion between these two factors would lead to debates just as much 
alter the publication of Marx's text as before it. Some were prepared 
for a complete miracle and find themselves disappointed because 
they see a simple, rational, prosaically-sober solution of the contra- 
diction instead of the hocus-pocus ihey had expected. Most joy- 
fully disappointed of course is the well-known, illustrious Loria. 
He has at last found the Archimedian fulcrum from which even a 
gnome of his calibre can lift the solidly built gigantic Marxian 
structure into the air and explode it. What! He declaims indignant- 
ly. Is that supposed to be a solution? That is pure mystification! 
When the economists speak of valve, they mean value that is actu- 
ally established in exchange. “No economist with any trace of sense 
has ever concerned himself or will ever want to concern himself with 
a value which commodities do not sell for and never can sell for 
(né possono vendersi mai)....In asserting that the value for which com- 
modities never sell is proportional to the labour they contain, what 
does Marx do except repeat inan inverted form the thesis of the or- 
thodox economists, that the value for which commodities sell is 
not proportional to the labour expended on them?.,. Matters are 
not helped by Marx’s saying that despite the divergency of individ- 
ual prices from individual values the total price of all commad- 
ities always coincides with their total value, or the amount of 
labour contained in the totality of the commodities. For inasmuch 
as value is nothing more than the exchange ratio between one com- 
modity and another, the very concept of a total value is an absurd- 
ily, nonsense ... a contradictio in adjecto....” At the very beginning 
oi the book, he argues, Marx says that exchange can equate two com- 
modities only by virtue of a similar and equally large element con- 
tained in them, namely, the equal amount of labour. And now he 
most solemnly repudiates himself by asserting that commodities 
exchange with one another in a totally different ratio than that of 
the amount of labour contained in them. “Was there ever such 
an utter reductioadabsurdum, such complete theoretical bankruptcy? 
Was ever scientific suicide committed with greater pomp and more 
solemnity!” (Nuova Anfologia, Feb. 1, 1895, pp. 478-79.) 

_ We see our Loria is more than happy. Wasn’t he right in treat- 
ing Marx as one of his own, as an ordinary charlatan? There you 
see it—Marx sneers at his public just like Loria; he lives on mystifica- 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 869 

tions just like the most insignificant Italian professor of economics. 
But, whereas Dulcamara* can afford that because he knows his 
trade, the clumsy Northerner, Marx, commits nothing but inepti- 
tudes, writes nonsense and absurdities, so that there is finally 
nothing left for him but solemn suicide. 

Let us save for later the statement that commodities have never 
been sold, nor can ever. be sold, at the values determined by labour. 
Let us deal here merely with Mr. Loria’s assurance that “value is 
nothing more than the exchange ratio between one commodity and 
another,” and that therefore “the very concept of a total value of 
commodities is an absurdity, nonsense... a contradictio in ad jecto.” 
The ratio in which two commodities are exchanged for each other, 
their value, is therefore something purely accidental, stuck on 
to the commodities from the outside, which can be one thing today 
and something else tomorrow. Whether a metric hundredweight 
of wheat is exchanged for a gramme or a kilogramme of gold does 
not in the least depend upon conditions inherent in that wheat or 
gold, but upon circumstances totally foreign to both. For other- 
wise these conditions would also have to assert themselves in the ex- 
change, dominate the latter on the whole, and also have an independ- 
ent existence apart [rom exchange, so that one could speak of a to- 
tal value of commodities. That is nonsense, says the illustrious Lo- 
tia. No matter in what ratio two commodities may be exchanged 
for each other, that is their value—and that’s all there is to it. Hence 
value is identical with price, and every commodity has as many 
values as the prices it can get. And price is determined by supply 
and demand; and any one asking any more questions is a fool to 
expect an answer. 

But there is a little hitch to the matter. In the normal state, sup- 
ply and demand balance. Therefore, let us divide all the commodi- 
ties in the world into two halves, the supply group and the equally 
large demand group. Let us assume that each represents a price of 
1,000,000 million marks, francs, pounds sterling, or what you will. 
According to elementary arithmetic that makes a price or value of 
2,000,000 millions. Nonsense, absurd, says Mr. Loria. The two groups 
together may represent a price of 2,000,000 millions. But it is other- 
wise with value. If we say price: 1,000-+-1,000=2,000. But if we say 
value: 1,000-+1,000=0. At least in this case, where the totality of 
commodities is involved. For here the commodities of each of the 
two groups are worth 1,000, 000 million only because each of the two 
can and will give this sum for the commodities of the other. But if 

* Charlatan in L’Elisir d’ Amore, comic opera by Donizetti. —Ed. 

29 — mi 2757 

870 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

we unite the totality of the commodities of both groups in the 
hands of a third person, the first has no value in his hand any 
longer, nor the second, and the third certainly not—in the end no 
one has anything. And again we marvel at the superiority with 
which our southern Cagliostro has manhandled the concept of val- 
ue in such a fashion that not the slightest trace of it has been 
left. This is the acre of vulgar economics! ! 

‘ Somewhat later, the same gentleman “well-known through his fame” (to 
use Heine's phrase) also felt himself compelled to reply to my preface to Vol- 
ume Ill—after it was published in Italian in the first number of Rassegna in 
1895. The reply is printed in the Riforma Sociale of February 25, 1895. After hav- 
ing lavished upon me the inevitable (and therefore doubly repulsive) adulation, 
he states that he never thought of filching for himself Marx's credit for the mate- 
trialist conception of history. He acknowledged it as early as 1885—to wit, 
quite incidentally in a magazine article. But in return he passes over it in silence 
all the more stubbornly precisely where it is due, that is, in his book on the sub- 
ject, where Marx is mentioned for the first time on page 129, and then merely in 
connection with small landed property in France. And now he bravely declares 
that Marx is not at all the originator of this theory; if Aristotle had not already 
suggested it, Harrington undoubtedly proclaimed it as early as 1656, and it had 
been developed by a Pleiad of historians, politicians, jurists and economists 
long before Marx. All of whicli is to be read in the French edition of Loria‘s book. 
In short, the perfect plagiarist. After ] have made it impossib!e for him to brag 
any more with plagiarisms [rom Marx, he boldly maintains that Marx adorns 
himself with borrowed plumes just as he himself does. From my other attacks, 
Loria takes up the one that, according to him, Marx never planned to write a sec- 
ond or indeed a third volume of Capital. “And now Engels replies triumphantly 
by throwing the second and third volumes at me ... excellent! And | am so pleased 
with these volumes, to which 1 owe so much intellectual enjoyment, that nev- 
er was a victory so dear to me as today this defeat is—il it really is a defeat. 
But isit actually? Is it really true that Marx wrote, with the intention of pub- 
lication, this mixture of disconnected notes that Engels, with pious friendship, 
has compiled? Is it really permissible to assume that Marx ... confided the coro- 
nation of his work and his system to these pages? Is it indeed certain that Marx 
would have published that chapter on the average rate of profit, in which the 
solution, promised for so many years, is reduced to the most dismal mystifica- 
tion, to the most vulgar playing with phrases? It is at least permissible to doubt 
it.... That proves, it seems to me, that Marx, after publishing his magnificent 
(splendido) book, did not intend to provide it with a successor, or else wanted to 
errr completion of the gigantic work to his heirs, outside his own respon- 
sibility.” 

So it is written on p. 267. Heine could not speak any more contemptuously 
of his philistine German public than in the words: “The author finally gets used 
to his public as if it were a reasonable being.” What must the illustrious Loria 
think his public is? 

in conclusion, another load of praise comes pouring down on my unlucky selt. 
In this our Sganarelle puts himself on a par with Balaam, who came to curse but 
whose lips bubbled forth “words of blessing and love” against his will. For the 
good Balaam was distinguished by the fact that he rode upon an ass that was 
more intelligent than its master. This time Balaam evidently left his ass at home. 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 871 

In Braun's Archiv ftir soziale Gesetegebung, Vol. VU, No. 4, 
Werner Sombart gives an outline of the Marxian system which, tak- 
en all in all, is excellent. It is the first time that a German uni- 
versity professor succeeds on the whole in seeing in Marx's writings 
what Marx really says, stating that the criticism of the Marxian sys- 
tem cannot consist of a refutation—‘let the political careerist deal 
with that"—but merely in a further development. Sombart, too, 
deals with our subject, as is to be expected. He investigates the 
importance of value in the Marxian system, and arrives at the fol- 
lowing results: Value is not manifest in the exchange relation of 
capitalistically produced commodities; it does not live in the con- 
sciousness of the agents of capitalist production; it is not an empiri- 
cal, but a mental, a logical fact; the concept of value in its material 
definiteness in Marx is nothing but the economic expression for the 
fact of the social productive power of labour as the basis of econom- 
ic existence; in the final analysis the law of value dominates eco- 
nomic processes in a capitalist economic system, and for this eco- 
nomic system quite generally has the following content: the value 
of commodities is the specific and historical form in which the pro- 
ductive power of labour, in the last analysis dominating all eco- 
nomic processes, asserts itself as a determining factor. So says Som- 
bart; it cannot be said that this conception of the significance of 
the law of value [or the capitalist form of production is wrong. But 
it does seem to me to be too broad, and susceptible of a narrower, 
more precise formulation; in my opinion it by no means exhausts 
the entire significance of the law of value for the economic stages of 
society’s development dominated by this law. - 

There is a likewise excellent article by Conrad Schmidt on the 
third volume of Capital in Braun’s Sozialpolitisches Zentral- 
blatt, February 25, 1895, No. 22. Especially to be emphasized here 
is the proof of how the Marxian derivation of average profit from sur- 
plus-value for the first time gives an answer to the question not even 
posed by economics up to now: how the magnitude of this average 
rate of profit is determined, and how it comes about that it is, say, 
10 or 15 per cent and not 50 or 100 per cent. Since we know that the 
surplus-value first appropriated by the industrial capitalist is the 
sole and exclusive source from which profit and rent flow, this ques- 
tion solves itself. This passage of Schmidt's article might be di- 
rectly written for economists @ /a Loria, if it were not labour in 
vain to open the eyes of those who do not want to see. 

Schmidt, too, has his formal misgivings regarding the law of 
value. He calls it a scientific hypothesis, set up to explain the actu- 
al exchange process, which proves to be the necessary theoretical 

29* 

872 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

starting-point, illuminating and indispensable, even in respect of 
the phenomena of competitive prices which seem in absolute con- 
tradiction te it. According to him, without the law of value all theo- 
retical insight into the economic machinery of capitalist reality 
ceases, And in a private letter that he permits me to quote, Schmidt 
declares the law of value within the capitalist form of production 
to be a pure, although theoretically necessary, fiction. This view, 
however, is quite incorrect in my opinion. The law of value has a 
{ar greater and more definite significance for capitalist production 
than that of a mere hypothesis, not to mention a fiction, even 
though a necessary one. 

Sombart, as well as Schmidt—I mention the illustrious Loria 
merely as an amusing vulgar-economic foil—does not make suffi- 
cient allowance for the fact that we are dealing here not only with 
a purely logical process, but with a historical process and its explan- 
atory reflection in thought, the logical pursuance of its inner 
connections. 

The decisive passage is to be found in Marx, Buch III, I, S. 154*: 

“The whole difficulty arises from the fact that commodities are 
not exchanged simply as commodities, but as products of capi- 
tals. which claim participation in the total amount of surplus-val- 
ue, proportional to their magnitude, or equal if they are of equal 
magnitude.” 

To illustrate this difference, it is supposed that the workers are 
in possession of their means of production, that they work on the 
average for equally long periods of time and with equal intensity, 
and exchange their commodities with one another directly. Then, 
in one day, two workers would have added by their labour an equal 
amount of new value to their products, but the product of each 
would have diflerent value, depending on the labour already embod- 
ied in the means of production. This latter part of the value would 
Tepresent the constant capital of capitalist economy, while that 
part of the newly added value employed for the worker’s means of 
subsistence would represent the variable capital, and the portion 
of the new value still remaining would represent the surplus-value, 
which in this case would belong to the worker. Thus, after deduct- 
ing the amount to replace the “constant” part of value only ad- 
vanced by them, both workers would get equal values; but the ra- 
tio of the part representing surplus-value to the value of the means 
of production—which would correspond to the capitalist rale of 
prolit—would be different ineach case. But since each of thern gets 

* Present edition: p. 172.— Ed. 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 873 

the value of the means of production replaced through the ex- 
change, this would be a wholly immaterial circumstance. 

“The exchange of commodities at their values, or approximately 
at their values, thus requires a much lower sfage than their exchange 
at their prices of production, which requires a definite level of cap- 
italist development.... Apart from the domination of prices and 
price movernent by the law of value, it is quite appropriate tore- 
gard the values of commodities as not only theoretically but also 
historically prius to the prices of production. This applies to con- 
ditions in which the labourer owns his means of production, and this 
is the condition of the landowning farmer living off his own 
labour and the craftsman, in the ancient as well as in the modern 
world. This agrees also with the view we expressed previously, that 
the evolution of oroducts into commodities arises through exchange 
between different communities, not between the members of the 
same community. It holds not only for this primitive condition, 
but also for subsequent conditions, based on slavery and serfdom, 
and for the guild organization of handicrafts, so long as the means 
of production involved in each branch of production can be 
transferred [rom one sphere to another only with difficulty and 
therefore the various spheres of production are relaied to one 
another, within certain limits, as foreign countries or communist 
communities.” (Marx, Buch III, J, S. 156 ff.)* 

Had Marx had an opportunity to go over the third volume once 
more, he would doubtless have extended this passage considerably. 
As it stands it gives only a sketchy outline of what is to be said on 
the point in question. Let us therefore examine it somewhat closer. 

We all know that at the beginnings of society products are con- 
sumed by the producers themselves, and that these producers are 
spontaneously organized in more or less communistic communi- 
ties; that the exchange of the surplus of these products with stran- 
gers, which ushers in the conversion of preducts into commodi- 
ties, is of a later date; that it takes place at first only between indi- 
vidual communities of different tribes, but later also prevails with- 
in the community, and contributes considerably to the latter’s 
dissolution into bigger or smaller family groups. But even after 
this dissolution, the exchanging family heads remain working peas- 
ants, who produce almost all they require with the aid of their 
families on their own farmsteads, and get only a slight portion of 
the required necessities [rom the outside in exchange for surplus 
products of their own. The family is engaged not only in agri: 

* Present edilion: p. 174.—Ed. 
29* — 2757 

874 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

culture and livestock-raising; it also works their products 
up into finished articles of consumption; now and then it even does 
its own milling with the hand-mill; it bakes bread, spins, dyes, 
weaves flax and wool, tans leather; builds and repaires wooden 
buildings, makes tools and utensils, and not infrequently does 
joinery and blacksmithing; so that the family or family group is 
in the main self-sufficient. 

The little that such a family had to obtain by barter or buy from 
outsiders, even up to the beginning of the 19th century in Germany, 
consisted principally of the objects of handicraft production, that 
is, such things the nature of whose manufacture was by no means 
unknown to the peasant, and which he did not produce himself only 
because he lacked the raw material or because the purchased article 
was much better or very much cheaper. Hence the peasant of the Mid- 
dle Ages knew fairly accurately the labour-time required for the 
manufacture of the articles obtained by him in barter. The smith 
and the cart-wright of the village worked under his eyes; likewise 
the tailor and shoemaker, who in my youth still paid their visits 
to our Rhine peasants, one alter another, turning the home-made ma- 
terials into shoes and clothing. The peasants, as well as the people 
from whom they bought, were themselves workers; the exchanged 
articles were each one’s own products. What had they expended in 
making these products? Labour and labour alone: to replace tools, 
to produce the raw material, and to process it they spent nothing 
but their own labour-power; how then could they exchange these 
products of theirs for those of other labouring producers otherwise 
than in the ratio of the labour expended on them? Not only was the 
labour-time spent on these products the only suitable measure for 
the quantitative determination of the values to be exchanged: 
no other was at all possible. Or is it believed that the peasant and 
the artisan were so stupid as to give up the product of ten hours’ 
jabour of one person for that of a single hour’s labour of another? 
No other exchange is possible in the whole period of peasant natural 
economy than that in which the exchanged quantities of commodi- 
ties tend to be measured more and more according to the amounts 
of labour embodied in them. From the moment money penetrates 
into this mode of economy, the tendency towards adaptation to the 
law of value (in the Marxian formulation, nofa bene!) grows more 
pronounced on the one hand, while on the other it is already inler- 
rupted by the interference of usurers’ capital and fleecing by taxa- 
tion; the periods for which prices, on the average, approach to with- 
in a negligible margin of values begin to grow longer. 

The same holds good for exchange between peasant products and 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF pROFIT 875 

those of the urban artisans. At the beginning this barter takes place 
directly, without the medium of the merchant—on the cities’ 
market days, when the peasant sells and makes his purchases. Here 
too, not only does the peasant know the artisan’s working condi- 
tions, but the latter knows those of {he peasant as well. For the arti- 
san is himself still a bit of a peasant; he nol only has a vegetable and 
fruit garden, but very often also has a small piece of land, one or 
two cows, pigs, poultry, etc. People in the Middle Ages were thus 
able to check up with considerable accuracy on each other's pro- 
duction costs for raw material, auxiliary material, and labour- 
lime—at least in respect of articles of daily general use. 

But how, in this barter on the basis of quantity of labour, 
was the latter to be calculated, even if only indirectly and rela- 
tively, for products requiring longer labour, interrupted at irregu- 
Jar intervals, and uncertain in yield—e.g., grain or cattle? 
And among people, to boot, who could not calculate? Obviously 
only by means of a lengthy process of zigzag approximation, often 
feeling the way here and there in the dark, and, as is usual, learning 
only through mistakes. Bul each one’s necessity lor covering his 
outlay on the whole always helped to return to the right direction; 
and the small number of kinds of articles in circulation, as well 
as the often century-long stable nature of their production, facil- 
itated the attaining of this goal. And that it by no means took so 
long for the relative amount of value of these products to be fixed 
fairly closely is already proved by the fact that cattle, the commod- 
ity for which this appears to be most difficult because of the long 
time of production of the individual head, became the first rather 
generally accepted money-commodity. To accomplish this, the val- 
ue of cattle, its exchange ratio toa large number of other commodi- 
lies, must already have attained a relatively unusual stabilizaticn, 
acknowledged without contradiction in the territories of many 
tribes. And the people of thal time were certainly clever enough— 
both the cattle-breeders and their customers—not to give away the 
labour-time expended by them without an equivalent in barter. 
On the contrary, the closer people are to the primitive state of 
commodity-production—the Russians and Orientals for example— 
the more time do they still waste today, in order to squeeze out, 
through long tenacious bargaining, ihe full compensation for their 
labour-time expended on a product. 

Starting with this determination of value by labour-time, the 
whole of commodity-production developed, and with it the multi- 
farious relations in which the various aspects of the law of value 
assert themselves, as described in the first part of Volume 1 of Capé- 

876 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

tal that is, in particular, the conditions under which Jabour alone 
is value-crealing. These are conditions which assert themselves 
without enlering the consciousness of the participants and can them- 
selves be abstracied from daily practice only through laborious 
theoretical investigation; which act, therefore, like natural laws, 
as Marx proved to lollow necessarily from the nature of commodity- 
production. The most important and most incisive advance was the 
transition lo metallic inoney, the consequence of which, however, 
was that the determination of value by labour-lime was no longer 
visible upon the surface of commodity exchange. From the practi- 
cal point of view, money became the decisive measure of value, all 
the more as the commodities entering trade became more varied, 
the more they came from distant countries, and the less, therefore, 
the labour-time necessary for their production could be checked. 
Money itself usually came first from foreign parts; even when pre- 
cious metals were obtained within the country, the peasant and 
arlisan were partly unable to estimate approximately the labour 
employed therein, and partly their own consciousness of the value- 
measuring property of labour had been fairly well dimmed by the 
habit of reckoning with money; in the popular mind money began 
to represent absolute value. 

In a word: the Marxian law of value holds generally, as far as 
economic laws are valid at all, for the whole period of simple com- 
modity-production, that is, up to the time when the latter suffers 
a modification through the appearance of the capitalisl! form of 
Production. Up to that time prices gravitate towards the values 
fixed according to the Marxian law and oscillate around those val- 
ties, so that the more fully simple commodily-production devel- 
ops, the more the average prices over long periods uninterrupted 
by external violent disturbances coincide with values within a 
negligible margin. Thus the Marxian law of value has general eco- 
nomic validity for a period lasting from the beginning of exchange, 
which transforms products into commodities, down to the 15th 
eenlury of the present era. But the exchange of commodities dates 
from a time before all written history, which in Egypt goes back to 
at least 2,500 B. C., and perhaps 5,000 B. C., and in Babylon to 
4,000 B. C., perhaps 6,000 B.C.; thus the law of value has prevailed 
during a period of from five to seven thousand years. And now let 
us, admire the thoroughness of Mr. Loria, whocalls the value gener- 
ally and directly valid during this period, a value at which com- 
modities are never sold nor can ever be sold, and with which no 
poaneymist having a spark of common sense would ever occupy him- 

e 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 877 

We have not spoken of the merchant up to now. We could save 
the consideration of his intervention for now, when we pass to the 
transformation of simple into capitalist commodity-production. 
The merchant was the revolutionary element in this society where 
everything else was stable—stable, as it were, through inheritance; 
where the peasant obtained not only his hide of land but his status 
as a freehold proprietor, as a free or enthralled quit-rent peasant 
or serf, and the urban artisan his trade and his guild privileges by 
inheritance and almost inalienably, and each of them, in addition, 
his customers, his market, as well as his skill, trained from child- 
hood for the inherited craft. Into this world then entered the mer- 
chant with whom its revolution was to start. But not as a conscious 
revolutionary; on {he contrary, as flesh of its flesh, bone of its bone. 
The merchant of the Middle Ages was by no means an individualist: 
he was essentially an associate like all his contemporaries. The 
mark association, grown out of primitive communism, prevailed 
in the country-side. Each peasant originally had an equal hide, 
with equal pieces of land of each quality, and a corresponding, equal 
share inthe rights of the mark. After the mark had become a closed 
association and no new hides were allocated any longer, sub-division 
of the hides occurred through inheritance, etc., with corresponding 
sub-divisions of the common rights in the mark; but the full hide 
remained the unit, so that there were half, quarter and eiglith- 
hides with half, quarter and eighth-rights in the mark. All later pro- 
ductive associations, particularly the guilds in the cities, whose 
statutes were nothing but the application of the mark constitution 
to a craft privilege instead of to a restricted area of land, followed 
the pattern of the mark association. The central point of the whole 
organization was the equal participation of every member in the 
privileges and produce assured to the guild, as is strikingly ex- 
pressed in the 1527 license of the Elberfeld and Barmen yarn trade. 
(Thun: /adustrie am Niederrhein, Vol. 11, p. 164 ff.) The same holds 
true of the mine guilds, where each share participated equally and 
was also divisible, together with its rights and obligations. like 
the hide of the mark member. And the same holds good in no less 
degree of {he merchant companies, which initiated overseas trade. 
The Venetians and the Genoese in the harbour of Alexandria or Con- 
stantinople, each “nation” in its own fondaco—dwelling, inn. ware- 
house, exhibition and salesrooms, together with central offices— 
formed complete trade associations; they were closed to competitors 
and customers; they sold at prices fixed arnong thernselves; their 
commodities had a definite quality guaranteed by public inspection 
and olten by a stamp; they deliberated in common on the prices to 

878 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

be paid by the natives for their products, etc. Nor did the Hanseat- 
ic merchants act otherwise on the German Bridge (Tydske Bryg- 
gen) in Bergen, Norway; the same held true of their Dutch and Eng- 
lish competitors. Woe to the man who sold under the price or bought 
above the price! The boycott that struck him meant at that time 
inevitable ruin, not counting the direct penalties imposed by the as- 
sociation upon the guilty. And even closer associations were found- 
ed jor definite purposes, such as the Maona of Genoa in the 14th 
and 15th centuries, for years ihe ruler of the alum mines of Phocaea 
in Asia Minor, as well as of the Island of Chios; furthermore the great 
Ravensberg Trading Company, which dealt with Italy and Spain 
since the end of the 14th century, founding branches in those coun- 
tries; the German company of the Augsburgers: Fugger, W elser, 
Vohlin, Héchstetter, etc.; that of the Ntirnbergers: Hirsch vogel 
and others, which participated with a capital of 66,000 ducats and 
three ships in the 1505-06 Portuguese expedition to India, mak- 
ing a net profit of 150 per cent, according to others, 175 per cent 
(Heyd: Levantehandel, Vol. 11], p. 524); and a large number of other 
companies, “Monopolia,” over which Luther waxes so indignant. 

Here for the first time we meet with a profit and a rate of profit. 
The merchant's efforts are deliberately and consciously aimed at 
making this rate of profit equal for all participants. The Venetians in 
the Levant, and the Hanseatics in the North, each paid the same 
prices for his commodities as his neighbour; his transport charges 
were the same, he got the same prices for his goods and bought re- 
turn cargo for thesame prices as every other merchant of his “nation.” 
Thus the rate of profit was equal for all. In the big trading com- 
panies the allocation of profit pro rata ol the paid-in capital share is 
as much a matter of course as the participation in mark rights 
pro rata of the entitled hide share, or as the mining profit pro 
rataof the mining share. The equal rate of profit, which in its fully 
developed form is one of the final results of capitalist production, 
{hus manifests itself here in itssimplest form as one of the points 
from which capital started historically, as a direct offshoot in fact 
of the mark association, which in turn is a direct offshoot of primi- 
tive communism. 

This original rate of profit was necessarily very high. The business 
was very risky, not only because of wide-spread piracy; the competing 
nations also permitted themselves all sorts of acts of violence when 
the opportunity arose; finally, sales and marketing conditions were 
based upon licenses granted by foreign princes, which were broken 
or revoked often enough. Hence, the profit had to include a high 
insurance premium. Then turnover was slow, the handling of trans- 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF pRorit 879 

aclions protracted, and in the best periods, which, admittedly, 
were seldom of long duration, the business was a monopoly trade 
with Monopoly profit. The very high interest rates prevailing at 
the time, which always had to be lower on the whole than the per- 
centage of usual commercial profit, also prove that the rate of prof- 
it was on the average very high. 

But this high rate of profit, equal for all participants and ob- 
tained through joint labour of the community, held only locally with- 
in the associations, that is, in this case the “nation.” Venetians, 
Genoese, Hanseatics, and Dutchmen each had a special rate of prof- 
it, and at the beginning more or less for each individual market 
area as well. Equalization of these different company profit rates 
took place in the opposite way through competition, First, the prof- 
it rales of the different markets for one and the same nation. If 
Alexandria offered more profit for Venetian goods than Cyprus, 
Constantinople or Trebizond, the Venetians would start more 
capital moving towards Alexandria, withdrawing it from trade 
with the other markets. Then the gradual equalization of profit 
rates among the diflerent nations, exporting the same or similar 
goods to the same markets, had to follow, and some of these nations 
were very often squeezed to the wall and disappeared from the scene. 
But this process was being continually interrupted by political 
events, just as all Levantine trade collapsed owing to the Mongo- 
lian and Turkish invasions; the great geographic-commercial dis- 
coveries after 1492 only accelerated this decline and then made it 
final. ; 

The sudden expansion of the market area that followed and the 
revolution in communications connected with it, introduced no 
essential change at first in the nature of trade operations. At the 
beginning, co-operative companies also dominated trade with India 
and America. But in the first place, bigger nations stood behind 
these companies. In trade with America, the whole of great united 
Spain took the place of the Catalonians trading with the Levant; 
alongside it two great countries like England and France; and even 
Holland and Portugal, the smallest, were still at least as large and 
strong as Venice, the greatest and strongest trading nation of the 
preceding period. This gave the travelling merchant, the merchant 
adventurer of the 16th and 17th centuries, a backing that made the 
company, which protected its companions with arms also, more and 
more superfluous, and its expenses an outright burden. Moreover, 
the wealth in a single hand grew considerably faster, so that single 
merchants soon could invest as large sums in an enterprise as for- 
merly an entire company. The trading companies, wherever still 

&80 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME TUREE 

existent, were usually converled into armed corporations, which 
conquered and monopolistically exploited whole newly discovered 
countries under the protection and the sovereignty of the mother 
country. But the more colonies were founded in the new areas, large- 
ly by the state, the more did company trade recede before that of 
the individual merchant, and the equalization of the profit rate be- 
came therewith more and more a matter of competition exclusively, 

Up to now we have become acquainted with a rate of profit only 
for merchant capital. For only merchant and usurers’ capital had 
existed up to that time; industrial capital was yet to be developed. 
Production was still predominantly in the hands of workers owning 
their own means of production, whose work therefore yielded no 
surplus-value to any capital. If they had to surrender a part of 
the product to third parties without compensation, it was in the form 
of tribute to feudal lords. Merchant capital, therefore, could only 
make its profit, al least at the beginning, out of the foreign buyers 
of domestic products, or the domestic buyers of foreign products; 
only toward the end of this period—for Italy, that is, with the de- 
cline of Levantine trade—were foreign competition and the diffi- 
cully of marketing able to compel the handicrait producers o! ex- 
port commodities to sell the commodity under its value to the ex- 
porting merchant. And thus we find here that commodities are sold 
at their values, on the average, in the domestic retail trade of indi- 
vidual producers with one another, but, for the reasons given. not 
in international trade as a rule. Quite the opposite of the presenl-day 
world, where the production prices hold good in international and 
wholesale trade, while the formation of prices in urban retail trade 
is governed by quite other rates of profit. So that the meat of anox, 
for example, experiences today a greater rise in price on its way 
from the London wholesaler to the individual London consumer than 
from the wholesaler in Chicago, including transport, to the London 
wholesaler. 

The instrument that gradually brought about this revolution in. 
price formation was industrial capital. Rudiments of the latter 
had been formed as early as the Middle Ages, in three fields—ship- 
ping, mining and textiles. Shipping on the scale practised by the 
Italian and Hanseatic maritime republics was impossible without 
sailors, i.e., wage-labourers (whose wage relationship may have been 
concealed under association forms with profit-sharing), or without 
oarsmen—wage-labourers or slaves—for the galleysof that day. The 
guilds in the ore mines, originally associated workers, had already 
been converted in almost every case into stock companies for ex- 
ploiting the deposits by means of wage-labourers. And in the textile 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 88T 

industry the ‘merchant had begun to place the little master-weaver 
directly in his service, by supplying him with yarn and having it 
made into cloth for his account in return for a fixed wage, in shart, 
by himself changing {rom a mere buyer into a so-called contractor. 

Here we have the first beginning of the formation of capitalist 
surplus-value. We can ignore the mining guilds as closed monopoly 
corporations, With regard to the shipowners it is obvious that their 
profit had to be at least as high as the customary one in the country, 
plus an extra increment for insurance, depreciation of ships, ete. 
But how were matters with the textile contractors, who first brought 
commodities, directly manufactured for capitalist account, into 
the market and into competition with the commodities of the same 
sort made for handicraft account? 

Merchant capital’s rate of profit was at hand to start with. Like- 
wise, it had already been equalized to an approximate average rate, 
at least for the Iccality in question. Now what could induce the mer- 
chant to take on the extra business of a contractor? Only one thing: 
the prospect of greater profit at the same selling price asthe others. 
And he had this prospect. By taking the little master into his serv- 
ice, he broke through the traditional bonds of production within 
which the producer sold his finished product and nothing else. The 
merchant capitalist bought the labour-power, which still owned 
its production instruments but no longer the raw material. By thus 
guaranteeing the weaver regular employment, he could depress the 
weaver’s wage to such a degree that a part of the labour-time fur- 
nished remained unpaid for. The contractor thus became an appropria- 
tor of surplus-value over and abovehis commercial profit. Admittedly, 
he had to employ additional capital to buy yarn, etc., and leave 
it in the weaver's hands until the article for which he formerly had 
to pay the full price only upon purchasing it was finished. But, in 
the first place, he had already used extra capital in most cases 
for advances to the weaver, who as a rule submitted to the new pro- 
duction conditions only under the pressure of debt. And secondly, 
apart from that, the calculation took the following form: 

‘Assume that our merchant operates his export business with a 
capital of 30,000 ducats, sequins, pounds sterling or whatever the case 
may be. Of that, say 10,000 are engaged in the purcliase of domestic 
goods, whereas 20,000 are used in the overseas market. Say the cap- 
ital is turned over once in two years. Annual turnover = 15,000. Now 
our merchant wants to become a contractor, to have cloth woven for 
his own account. How much additional capital must he invest? 
Let us assume that the production time of the piece of cloth, such 
as he sells, averages two months, which is certainly very high. 

a82 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

Let us further assume that he has to pay for everything in cash. 
Hence he must advance enough capital to supply his weavers with 
varn for two months. Since his turnover is 15,000 a year he buys 
cloth for 2,500 in two months. Let us say that 2,000 of that repre- 
sents the value of varn, and 500 weavers’ wages; then our merchant 
requires an additional capital of 2,000. We assume that the surplus- 
value he appropriates from the weaver by the new method totals 
only 5 per cent of the value of the cloth, which constitutes the cer- 
tainly very modest surplus-value rate of 25 per cent. (2,000c-+-500 v + 
: a , BOs. yf 125 
125s; s’= sg 250; p 5500 
extra profit of 750 on his annual turnover of 15,000, and has thus 
got his additional capital back in 2°/, years. 

But in order to accelerate his sales and hence his turnover, thus 
making the same profit with the same capital ina shorter period of 
time, and hence a greater profit in the same time, ne wil! donate a 
smal! portion of his surplus-value to the buyer—he will sell cheaper 
than his competitors. The latter wil] also gradually be converted into 
contractors, and then the extra profit for all of them will be reduced 
io the ordinary profit, or even to a lower profit on the capital that 
has been increased for all of them. The equality of the profit rate 
is re-established, although possibly on another level, by a part of 
the surplus-value made at home being turned over to the foreign 
buyers. 

The next step inthe subjugation of industry by capital takes place 
through the introduction of manufacture. This, too, enables the 
manufacturer, who is tnost often his own export trader in the 17th 
and 18th centuries—generally in Germany down to 1850, and still 
today here and there—to produce cheaper than his old-fashioned 
competitor, the handicraftsman. The same process is repeated; the 
surplus-value appropriated by the manufacturing capitalist ena- 
bles him (or the export merchant who shares with him) to sell cheap- 
er than his competitors, until the general introduction of the new 
mode of production, when equalization again takes place. The al- 
ready existing mercantile rate of profit, even if it is levelled out 
onty locally, remains the Procrustean bed in which the excessive 
industrial surplus-value is lopped off without mercy. 

If manulacture sprung ahead by cheapening its products, this is 
even more true of modern industry, which forces the production 
costs of commodities lower and lower through its repeated revolu- 
tions in production, relentlessly eliminating all former modes of 
production. It is large-scale industry, too, that thus finally conquers 
ihe domestic market for capital, puts an end to the small-scale 

5%.) Our man then makes an 

LAW OF VALUE AND RATE OF PROFIT 883 

production and natural economy of the self-sufficient peasant fam- 
ily, eliminates direct exchange between small producers, and places 
the entire nation in the service of capital. Likewise, it equalizes 
the profit rate of the different commercial and industrial branches 
of business into one general rate of profit, and finally ensures indus- 
try the positionof power due to it in this equalization by eliminat- 
ing most of the obstacles formerly hindering the transfer of capital 
from one branch to another. Thereby the conversion of values into 
production prices is accomplished for all exchange as a whole. This 
conversion therefore proceeds according to objective laws, without 
the consciousness or the intent of the participants. Theoretically 
there is no difficulty at all in the fact that competition reduces to 
the general level profits which exceed the general rate, thus again 
depriving the first industrial appropriator of the surplus-value ex- 
ceeding the average. All the more so in practice, however, for the 
spheres of production with excessive surplus-value, with high 
variable and lew constant capital, i.e., with low capital composi- 
tion, are by their very nature the ones that are last and least com- 
pletely subjected to capitalist production, especially agriculture. 
On the other hand, the rise of production prices above commodity- 
values, which is required to raise the below-average surplus-value, 
contained in the products of the spheres of high capital composi- 
tion, to the level of the average rate of profit, appears to be extremely 
difficult theoretically, but is soonest and most easily effected in 
practice, as we have seen. For when commodities of this class are 
first: produced capitalistically and enter capitalist commerce, they 
compete with commodities of the same nature produced by pre-capi- 
talist methods and hence dearer. Thus, even if the capitalist pro- 
ducer renounces a part of the surplus-value, he can still obtain 
the rate of profit prevailing in his locality, which originally had 
no direct connection with surplus-value because it had arisen from 
merchant capital iong before there was any capitalist production at 
all, and therefore before an industrial rate of profit was possible. 

884 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

II 
THE STOCK EXCHANGE * 

lt. The position of the stock exchange in capitalist production in 
general is clear from Vol. III, Part 5, especially Chapter .** But 
since 1865, when the book was written, a change has taken place 
which todav assigns a considerably increased and constantly grow- 
ing role to the stock exchange, and which, as it develops, tends 
to concentrate all production, industrial as well as agricultural, 
and all commerce, the means of communication as well as the func- 
tions of exchange, in the hands of stock exchange operators, so 
that the stock exchange becomes the most prominent representa- 
tive of capitalist production itself. 

2. In 1865 the stock exchange was still a secondary element in 
the capitalist system. Government bonds represented the bulk of 
exchange securities, and even their sum-total was still relatively 
small. Besides, there were joint-stock banks, predominant on the 
continent and in America, and just beginning to absorb the aristo- 
cratic private banks in England, but still relatively insignificant 
en masse. Railway shares were still comparatively weak compared 
to the present time. There were still only few directly productive 
establishments in stock company form—and, like the banks, 
most of all in the poorer countries: Germany, Austria, America, 
etc. The “minister's eye” was still an unconquered superstition. 

At that time, the stock exchange was still a place where the capi- 
talists took away each other’s accumulated capital, and which di- 
rectly concerned the workers only as new proof of the demoralizing 
general effect of capitalist economy and as confirmation of the 
Calvinist doctrine that predestination (alias chance) decides, even 
in this life, blessedness and damnation, wealth, i.e., enjoyment and 
power, and poverty, i.e., privation and servitude. 

3. Now it is otherwise. Since the crisis of 1866 accumulation has 
proceeded with ever-increasing rapidity, so that in no industrial 
country, least of all in England, could the expansion of production 
keep up with that of accumulation, or the accumulation of the indi- 
vidual capitalist be completely utilized in the enlargement of his 
own business; English cotton industry as early as 1845; the railway 

* The MS. is entitled by Engels “The Stock Exchange, Supplementary 
Notes to Capital, Volume Three.”"—£ad. 

** In the MS., Engels left a blank for the chapter number to be entered. 
Chapter XXVII, “The Role of Credit in Capitalist Production,” apparently 
was intended.—Ed. 

STOCK EXCHANGE 885 

swindles. But with this accumulation the number of rentiers, 
people who were fed up with the regular tension in business and there- 
fore wanted merely lo amuse themselves or to follow a mild pur- 
suit as directors or governors of companies, also rose. And third, 
in order to facilitate the investment of this mass floating around as 
money-capital, new legal forms of limited liability companies were 
established wherever that had not yet been done, and the liability 
of the shareholder, formerly unlimited, was also reduced-++- [more 
or less} (joint-stock companies in Germany, 1890. Subscription 40 
per cent!). 

4, Thereafter, gradual conversion of industry into stock com- 
panies. One branch after another suffers this fate. First iron, where 
giant plants are now necessary (before that, mines, where not already 
organized on shares). Then the chemical industry, likewise machin- 
ery plants. On the continent, the textile industry; in England, only 
in a few areas in Lancashire (Oldham Spinning Mill, Burnley Weav- 
ing Mill, etc., tailor co-operatives, but this is only a preliminary 
stage which will again fal] into the masters’ hands at the next cri- 
sis), breweries (the American ones sold a few years ago to English 
capital, then Guinness, Bass, Allsopp). Then the trusts, which create 
gigantic enterprises under common management (such as United 
Alkali). The ordinary individual firm is more and more only a pre- 
liminary stage to bring the business to the point where it is big 
enough to be “founded.” 

Likewise in trade: Leafs, Parsons, Morleys, Morrison, Dillon— 
all founded. Thesame inretail stores by now, and not merely under 
the cloak of co-operation & /a “stores.” 

Likewise banks and other credit establishments even in England. 
A tremendous number of new banks, all shares delimited. Even old 
banks like*..., e(c., are converted, with seven private shareholders, 
into limiled companies. 

5. The same in the field of agriculture. The enormously expanded 
banks, especially in Germany under all sorts of bureaucratic names, 
more and more the holders of mortgages; with their shares the actual 
higher ownership of landed properly is transferred to the stock ex- 
change, and this is even more true when the farms fall into the 
creditors’ hands, Here the agricultural revolution of prairie culti- 
vation is very impressive; if it continues, the time can be foreseen 
when England’s and France’s land will also be in the hands of the 
stock exchange. 

* Illegible. It would seem to be “Glyn & Co."—the name of a bank.— 
Ed. 

886 SUPPLEMENT TO CAPITAL, VOLUME THREE 

6. Now all foreign investments in the form of shares. To mention 
England alone: American railways, North and South (consult the 
stock exchange list), Goldberger, etc. 

7. Then colonization. Today this is purely a subsidiary of the 
stock exchange, in whose interests the European powers divided 
Africa a few years ago, and the French conquered Tunis and Ton- 
kin. Africa leased directly to companies (Niger, South Africa, 
German South-West and German East Africa), and Mashonaland and 
Natal seized by Rhodes for the stock exchange. 

NAME INDEX 

A 
Anderson, Adam (1699-1765)—327 
Anderson, James (1739-1 808)— 
605, 606 
Anne (1665-1714), Queen since 
1702—596 5 
Arbuthnot, George (1802-1865) — 
537 

Ace uee (384-322 B. C.)—377, 378, 

87 

Arnd, Karl (1788-1877)—356, 770 

Arndt, Karl—see Arnd, Karl 

Ashley, Antony Cooper, Earl ol 
Schaltesbury (1801-1885)—613 

Attwood, Matthias (1779-1851)—526, 

Atiseod, Thomas (1783-1856)—526, 
ages Marie —580, 598 
B 
Babbage, Charles (1792-1871)—103, 
Be Honoré, de (1799-1850)— 
Baiechie banking house in 
Engl and—523 

Bastiat, Frédéric (1801-1850)—149, 
Boer: John (1654-1725)—28] 

Bentinck, George—407 

eariat Osborne, Ralph (1808-1882)— 
13) 

Bessemer, Henry (1813-1898)—71 

Bosanquet, James Whatman (1804- 
1877)—364, 393 
Bright, John (1811-1889)—616 

Briscoe, John (end of 18th century)— 
588 

Buret, Eugéne (1811-1842)—783 
ee Johann Georg (1728-1800)— 

c 
ne John Elfiot (1823-1875)— 
Cantilton, Philipp Richard (1680- 
1734)—764 
Carey, Henry Charles (1793-1879)— 
i 149, 390, 582, 605, 607, 
7 

Cato, Marcus Porcius Uticensis (234- 
149 B. C.)—326, 377, 768 
ead Thomas (1780 1847)—241, 
Chamberleyne ot Chamberlain, Hugh 
(near 1630-[720)—588 
Charles (1630-1685), 

1660—588, 596 
Charlemagne (Charles the Great) (742- 
814), King since 768, Emperor 
since 800—584, 586, 767 
(1797- 

Cherbuliez, Antoine Elisée 
Child, Josiah (1630-1699)—388, 589, 
590 

since 

King 

1869)—157 

Clay, William (1791-1869)—537 
Comte, Francois Charles Louis (1782- 

1837)—603 
Coquelin, Charles (1803- 1852)— 
394 
Corbet, Thomas —164, 168, 180, 
206, 301 
Cotton, William (1785-1866)—407 

D 

Daire, Louis Francois Eugéne (1798 
1847)—767 
Dante Alighieri (1265-1321)—19 

888 

NAME INDEX 

Davenant, Charles (1656-1714)— 

644 

Disraeli, Benjamin (1804-1881)— 
407 

Dombaste, Christophe Joseph Alex- 
andre Muthiew de (1777-1843)— 
742, 791 

Doe, Patrick Edward (1815-1873)— 
617, 623 

Dureau de la Malle, Adolphe Jules 
César Auguste (1777-1857)—103 

E 
Engels, Friedrich {1820-1895)—16, 
21, 69, 76, 108, 118, 120, 123, 

136, 144, 150, 174, 224, 257, 295, 
329, 330, 380, 381, 400, 401, 407, 
420, 429, 430, 445, 446, 447, 460, 
463, 478, 490, 505, 512, 516, 521, 
530, 537. 543, 544, 551, 557, 560, 
562, 572, 592, 655, 685, 698, 710, 
723, 754, 794, 865 

Epicurus (341-271 B. 
585 

C.)—325, 

F 

Fawcett, Henry (1833-1884)—614 

Feller, Friedrich Ernest (1800- 
1859)—308 

Fireman, Peter (born in 1863)—13, 14, 
15, 21 

Forcade, Eugene (1820-1869)—822 

Fourier, Charles (1772-1837)—591, 
736 
Francis John (1811-1882) —588, 
590 

Friedrich (1 (1194-1250), 
since 1212—584 

Fugger—the richest German mer- 
chants and banking house of 6th cen- 

* tury—878 

Fullarton, John (1780-1849)—396, 
493, 439, 440, 441, 442, 443, 444, 
445, 448, 449, 453, 537 

Emperor 

G 
Garibaldi, Giuseppe (1807-1882)—19 
George Ii! (1738-1820), King since 
1760—388 

Gilbart, James William (1794-1863) — 
a 353, 396, 398, 527, 531, 

Greg, Rotert Hyde (1795-1875)— 
106 
Gurney, Sumuel (1786-1856)—402, 404, 
407, 411, 509, 514, 516, 526, 531, 
561 
H 

Hamilion, Robert (1743-1829)—387 

Hardcastle, Daniel—532, 598 

Harrington, James (1611-1677)— 
870 

Hegel, Georg Friedrich Withelm (1770- 
1831)—47, 601, 602, 760 

Nene Heinrich (1797-1856)—527, 
70 

Henry Vill (1491-1547), King since 
1509-—596 

Herrenschwand, Jean (1728-1811)— 
767 

Heyd, Wilhelm (1823-1906)—878 

Hodgskin, Thomas (1787-1869)—382 

Horner, Leonard (1785-1864)—88, 89, 
96, 122, 125 

Hubbard, John Gellibrand (1805- 
1889)—406-518, 531, 537, 562, 
575 
Hialimann, Karl Dietrich (1765- 
1846)—312, 314, 584 
Hume, David {1711-1776)—369, 
535 

J 
James { (1566-1625), King since 
1603—596 

gia William Stantey (1835-1882) 

—l 

Johnston, Jantes 

_ — 654 

sh Richard (1790-1855)—260, 742, 
61 

(1796-1855)—603, 

K 

Kincaid, John (1787-1862)—89 
Kiesselbach, W ithelm—3a22 . 
Kinnear, J. G.—433, 513 

L 

Laing, Samuel (1780-1888)—754 

Lavergne, Louis Gabriel Léonce (1809: 
1880)—616 

Law, John (1671-1729)—432, 590 

seal, William Henry (1815-1889) 

NAME INDEX 

sei Wilhelm — (1837-1914)—8, 9, 
Liebig, Justus von (1803-1873)—727, 

751, 760, 793 

Linguet, Simon Nicolas Henri (1736- 
1794)—84, 77) 

List, Friedrich (1789-1846)—862 

ro John (1632-1704)—346, 

Loria, Achille (born in 1857)—16, 
17, 18, 19, 868, 869, 870, 871, 872, 
876 

Luther, Martin _(1483-1546)—396, 

340, 385, 386, 586, 597, 878 

Louis XIV (1638-1715), King since 
1643—102 

Loyd, Samuel Jones, first Baron Over- 
stone (1796-1883)—396, 410, 411, 
412, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 
418, 420, 421, 423, 424, 425, 473, 
497, 501, 502, 503, 504, 505, 507, 
522, 526, 535, 537, 539, 540, 541, 
542, 544, 548, 550, 551, 559 

Luzac, Eli (1728-1796)—314 

M 

Macaulay, Thomas Babington (1800- 
1859)—590 

MacCulloch, John 
1864)—64, 219, 233 

Mago (V1 B. C.)—377 

Malthus, Thomas Robert (1766-1834)— 
36, 39, 44, 47, 187, 188, 194, 387, 
630, 644, 655 

Manley, Thomas (1628-1690)—589 

Maron, H.—788 

Marx, Karl (1818-1883)—1, 2, 3, 
4, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 13, 14, 15, 16, 
17, 19, 21, 136, 174, 175, 178, 420, 
428, 534, 591, 594, 867, 868, 869, 
870, 871, 872 

Massie, Joseph (died in 1784)—~- 
327, 346, 352, 355, 358, 369, 791 

Maurer, Georg Ludwig von (1790- 
1872)—174 

Menger, Karl (1840-1921)—10 

Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873)— 
382, 390, 507, 543, 562, 856 

Mirabeau, Victor, marquis de (1715- 

Ramsey (1789- 

1789)—738 
Mommsen, Thecdor (1817-1903)— 
322, 377, 768 

Moore, Samuel (1830-1912)—3 

889 

Le Fa Lewis Henry (1818-1881)— 
Morton, John Chalmers (1821-1888)— 
614, 615 
Morton, John 

659 
Moser, Justus {1720-1794)—77] 
Mounter, L.—788, 79| 
Miller, Adam Heinrich (1779-1829)— 
350, 389 

Lockart—614, 615, 

N 

Nasmyth, James (1808-1890)—96 
Newman, Francis Wiltiam (1805. 
Philipps 

1897)—58\ 

Newman, Samuel (1797- 
1842)—274, 641, 754, 791 

Newmarch, William (1820-1882)— 
511, 514, 527, 529, 544, 553, 554, 
557, 558, 559, 565, 566, 567, 568, 
569, 570, 571 

Norman, George Warde (1793-1882)— 
408, 409, 410, 418, 537, 539 

North, Dudley (1641 -1691)—598, 
608 
Oo 
O’Connor, Charles (1804-1884)— 
378 

Odermann (1815-1904)—308 
Opdyke, George (1805-1880)—356, 
653 

Overstone—see Loyd 
Owen, Robert (1771-1858)—591, 592 

P 

Palmer, John Hersley (1779-1858)— 
545, 546, 556 

Palmerston, Henry John Temple, Lord 
(1784-1865)—89, 615 

Parmentier, Antoine Augustin (1737- 
1813)—102 

Passy, Hippolyte Philibert (1793- 
1880)—751, 761, 764, 767, 
770 

Paterson, William (1658-1719)— 
590 

Patten—see Wilson Patten 

Pecqueur, Charles—see Pecqueur, 
Constantin 

Pecqueur, Constantin (1801-1887)— 
594, 595 

NAME INDEX 

890 

Peel, Robert (1788-1850)—535, 
537 

Pereire. Jakob Emile (1800-1875)— 
592 

Pereire, /saac (1806-1880)}—432 

Petty, William (1623 -1687)—346, 
455, 644, 764 

Pindar (522-443 B. C.)—379 

Pitt, William. junior (1759-1806)— 
386, 388 

Pliny the Elder, Gaius Plinius Secun- 
dus (23-79)—102 
Poppe, Johann Heinrich Moritz (1776- 

1854)—330 
Price, Richard —(1723-1791}—386, 
387, 388 

Proudhon, Pierre Joseph (1809-1865) 
39, 339, 340, 348, 594, 609, 822 

Q 
Quetélet, Zamber: Adolphe Jacques 
(1796-1874)}—839 

R 
Ramsay, George _ (1800-1871)—38, 

44, 274, 354, 355, 37), 372, 749 
Reden, Friedrich Wilhelm Otto Ludwig 
(1804-1857)—455 
Rhodes, Cecil John (1853-1902}— 
(1772-1823)—8, 16, 

886 

Ricardo, David 
38, 45, 64, 106, 112, 176, 180, 
194, 198, 199, 200, 219, 232, 233, 
236, 237, 238, 243. 254, 319, 420, 
534, 535, 536, 634, 635, 644, 656, 
663, 665, 729, 739. 753, 795, 819, 
820, 832 

Redbertus, Johann Kart (1805-1875)— 
8, 137, 759, 781, 832 

Roscher, Withelm (1817-1894) — 
220, 319, 390, 805 
Rothschild, James (1792-1868)—458 
Rubichon, Maurice (1766-1849)— 
614, 788, 791 
Russell, John, Lord (1792-1878)—406 
s 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henrr (1760. 

1825)—591, 592 
Say, Jean Baptist. (1767-1832)—274, 
819, 820, 825 

Schmidt, Conrad (1863-1932)— 
10, 12, 13, 16, 18, 21, 871, 872 

Senior, Nassau William (1790-1864)— 
34, 44 

Shaftesbury—see Ashley 

Shaw, George Bernard (1856-1950)— 
10 

Siemens, August 
1908)—71 
Siemens, Karl Withelm (1829-1883)— 

Friedrich (1826- 

71 

Simon, John (1816-1904)—90, 91, 
93, 95 

Sismondi, Jean Charles Léonard Si- 
monde de (1773-1842)—466, 783 

Smith, Adam (1723-1790)—140, 187, 
188, 194, 209, 220, 233, 319, 323, 
325, 376, 388, 433, 460, 462, 601, 
730, 746, 749, 750, 751, 752, 753, 
768, 806, 815, 819, 820, 821, 823 

Sombart, Werner (1863-1941)— 
871, 872 

Steuart, James (1712-1780)—357, 
766 

Storch, Heinrich friedrich (1766- 
1835)—180, 643, 806, 825, 829 

T 

Thiers, Louts Adolphe (1797-1877)— 

607 

Thomas, Sidney Gilchrist (1850-1885) 
—7i 
Thun, Alphonse (1853-1885)—877 

Tocqueville, Alexis 
(1805- 1859)—783 
Tooke, Thomas (1774-1858)— 348, 353, 
363, 364, 393, 396, 408, 429. 433, 
434, 435, 437, 440, 442, 443, 448, 
473, 512, 527, 537. 544, 556, 559, 
787, 821 

Torrens, Robert (1780-1864)—38, 39, 
44, 106, 347, 348, 537 

ete John Debell (died in 1864)— 
58 

Turgot, Anne Robert Jacques (1727- 
1781}—608 

Charlcs Henri 

U 
Ure, Andrew (1778-1857)—80, 103, 
379 

NAME 

Vv 

Verri, Pietro (1728-1797)—274 
Vingard, Pierre (1820-1882)—767 
Vissering. S. (1818-1888)—313, 314 

Ww 

Wakefield, Edward Gibbon 

(1796- 
1862)— 738, 751 

INDEX 891 
Walton, Alfred (1816-1883) — 606 
West, 

Edward (1782-1828)—237, 644 

Wilson, James (1805-1860)—433, 
440, 520, 521, 528, 529, 537, 550, 
563, 564, 565, 566, 568, 570, 571 

Wilson Patten, John (1802-1892) — 90 

Wolf, Julius (born in 1862)—15, L6, 
i} 

Wood, Charles 

(1800-1885)—541, 
569, 570, 571 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES 
QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME IIL 

I, AUTHORS 

A 

ANDERSON, Adam. An Historical 
and Chronological Deduction of the 
Origin of Commerce, from the earli- 
est accounts to the present time, 
Vol. 2, London 1764,—327. 

ANDERSON, James. A Calm {nves- 
tigation of the Circumstances that 
have led to the present scarcity of 
grain in Britain, London 1801.— 
605. 

ARISTOTLE. De Republica Libri 
Vill et Oeconomica. Ex recensione 
Immanuelis Bekkery, Oxonii 1837.— 
377. 

ARND, Karl. Die naturgemdsse Volks- 
wirtschaft, gegentiber den Mono- 
poliengeiste und dem Kommunismus, 
mit einem Riickblicke auf die ein- 
schlagende Literatur, Hanau 1845.— 
356, 768. 

AUGIER, Marie. Du crédit public et 
de son histoire depuis les temps 
anciens jusqu’d nos jours, Paris 
1842.—580, 598. 

B 

BALZAC, Honoré de. Les paysans, 
1845.—39. 

BASTIAT, Fr. Gratuité du crédit. 
Discussion entre M. Fr. Bastiat 
et M. P. J. Proudhon, Paris 1850.— 
339, 340. 

BELL, G.M. The Philosophy of Joint- 
Stock Banking, London 1840.—533. 

BOSANQUET, J. W. Metallic, Paper, 
and Credit Currency, and the meuns 

of regulating their quantity and 
value, London 1842 —364, 393. 

BRISCOE, John. To the Knights, 
Citizens and Burgesses in Parlia- 
ment assembled, 1695.—588. 

BURET, Eugéne. De ia miisére des 
classes laborieuses en Angleterre et 
en France etc., Paris 1840.—733. 

BUSCH, Johann Georg. Theoretisch- 
praktische Darstellung der Handlung 
in ihren mannigfaltigen Geschaften 
(1792). Third extended and im- 
proved edition with insertions and 
supplements by G.P.H. Normann, 
Hamburg 1808.—598. 

Cc 

CAIRNES, J. E. The Stave Power: 
its character, carcer and probuble 
designs etc., London 1862.—376. 

CANTILLON, Richard. Essaé sur la 
nature du commerce en général. 
Traduit de t’ Anglais, London 1753.— 
764. 

CAREY, H.C. Principles of Soctat 
Science, Vol. IIl, Philadelphia 
1860.—390. 

CHALMERS, Thomas. On Political 
Economy in Connection with the 
Moral State and Moral Prospects of 
Society,2nded, Glasgow 1832.—432. 

CHAMBERLAIN (Chamberleyne}, Dr. 
Hugh. A few Proposals humbly 
recommending etc. establishing a 
Lund Credit tn this Kingdom, 
Edinburgh 1700.—588. 

CHERBULIEZ, A. Riche ou pauvre. 
Exposition succincte des causes et 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME II 

893 

des effets de la distribution actuelle 
des richesses sociales, Paris et Ge- 

- néve 1840.—157. : 

CHILD, Josiah. Traétés sur te com- 
merce et sur les avantages qui résul- 
tent de-la réduction de Uintérét de 
Uargent- (1694), Amsterdam et 
Berlin 1754.—388, 589. . 

COMTE, Charles. Traité de la propri- 
été, T. I, Paris 1834.—603. 

COQUELIN, Charles. Du. crédit et des 
banques. In Revue des Deux Mondes, 
Paris 1842.—394. 

CORBET, Thomas. An Inquiry into the 
Causes and Modes of the Wealth of 
Individuals; or the principles of 
trade and speculation explained, 
London 1841.—164, 168, 180, 301. 

D 

‘DUREAU DE LA MALLE, A. J. 
’ Economie politique des romains, 
Paris 1840.—102, 103. 

E 

‘ENGELS, Friedrich. Die Lage der 
arbeitenden Klasse in England. Nach 
eigner Anschauung und authentischen 
Quellen, Leipzig 1845.—754. 

— The Stock Exchange, Supplemen- 
tary Notes to Capitat, Volume Three 
(1895).—884. 

F 

FELLER, Dr. F.E. und ODERMANN, 
Dr. C. G. Das Ganze der kauftnan- 
nischen Arithmetik, Fiir Handels-, 
Real- und Gewerbeschulen, so wie zum 
Selbstunterricht fiir Geschaftsmén- 
ner iiberhaupt (1842), 7. Autflage, 
Leipzig, 1859.—308. 

FIREMAN, Peter. Kritik der Marx- 
schen Werttheorie. In Jahrbiicher fiir 
Nationalékonomie und Stutistik, 
Dritte Folge, Bd. II, Jena 1892.— 
13, 14. 

FORCADE, Eugéne. La guerre du 
socialisme, 11, L’économie politique 
révolutionnaire et sociale. In Revue 
des Deux Mondes, T. 4, Bruxelles 
1848.—822. 

80 — u757 

-FRANCIS, John. History of the Bank 
af pneland, “ ae and Tradi- 
tons, 3rd ed., London. 1848.—: 
589, 590. eats 

‘“FULLARTON, John. On the Regula- 
tion of Currencies; being an exami- 
nation of the principles, on which 
it is proposed to restrict, within cer- 
fain fixed limits, the future issues on 
credit of .the Bank of England and 
of the other banking establishments 
throughout the country, London 
1845.—396, 439, 440, 441, 443, 444, 
445, 448, 449.. 

G 

GILBART, William James. The Hise 
tory and Principles of Banking, Lon» 

don 1834.—333, 396, 397, 398, 
596, 597. i 
— An Inquiry into the Causes of 

the Pressure on the Money Market 
during the Year 1839, London 1840.— 
527, 531. 

— A Practical Treatise on Banking 
(1827), 5th ed,. London 1849.—353. 

GREG, R.H. The Factory Question, 
Considered in Relation to its Effects 
on the Health and Morals of those 
Employed in Factories. And the 
Ten Hours’ Bill, etc., London 1837.— 
106. 

H 

HAMILTON, Robert. An Inguéry Con- 
cerning the Rise and Progress, the 
Redemption ard Present State and 
the Management of the National 
Debt of Great Britain, 2nd ed., 
Edinburgh 1814.—387. 

HARDCASTLE, Daniel, Jr. Banks and 
Bankers, 2nd ed., London 1843.— 
532, 598. 

HEGEL, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich. 
Grundlinien der Philosophie des 
Rechts, oder Naturrecht und Staats- 
wissenschaft im Grundrisse. In 
Werke, published by Dr. Eduard 
Gans, 7th ed., Berlin 1840.—601, 602. 

HEINE, Heinrich. Disputation. In 
*Gedichte, Dritter Band, Roman- 
zero, 3. Buch, Hebraische Melo- 
dien.” —527. . 

“894 

INDEX OF ALTIIORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME IIT 

HEYD, Dr. Wilhelm. Geschichte des 
Levantehandels im Mittelalter, Stutt- 
gart 1879.—878. 

HODGSKIN. Labour Defended Against 
the Claims of Capital, or the 
Unproducticeness of Capital Proved. 
By a Labourer, London 1825.— 
382, 390. 

HUBBARD, John Gellibrand. The 
Currency and the Country, London 
1843.—406, 518. 

HULLMANN, Karl Dietrich. Stddte- 

. wesen des Mittelalters, Bonn 1826- 
29.—312, 314, 584. 

J 

JOHNSTON, Jamies F. W. Notes on 
“North America Agricultural, Eco- 
nomical and Social, Edinburgh and 
London 1851.—603, 654, 656. 

JONES, Richard. An Introductory 

_ Lecture on Political Economy, Lon- 
don 1833,—260. 

— An Essay on the Distribution of 
Wealth, London 1831.—742, 

K 

KIESSELBACH, Wilhelm. Der Gang 
des Welthandels und die Entwicklung 
des europiischen Ydlkerlebens im 
Mittelalter, Stuttgart 1860.—322. 

KINNEAR, J.G. The Crisis and the 
Currency, London 1847,—433, 513. 

L 
LAING, Samuel. National Distress; 
its Causes and Remedies, London 
1844.—754. 

LAVERGNE, Léonce de. The Rural 

- Economy of England, Scotland and 
fretand (translated from Economie 
Rurale de t’ Angleterre, Paris 1854). 
London 1855.—615. 

-LEATHAM, William. Leffers on the 
Currency. Addressed to Charles Wood, 
London 1840.—393. 

LEXIS, W. Die Marxsche Kapital- 
theorie.. In Conrads Jahrbticher fiir 
Nationalokonomie und Statistik, 
psu oles Bd. XI, Jena 1885.— 

LINGUET, N. Théorie des tois civites 
ou principes fondamentaux de. la 
société, T. I, London 1767.—771L. 

LIST, Dr. Friedrich. Die Ackerver fas- 
sung, die Zwergwirtschaft und die 
Auswandering. From the Deutsche 
Vierteljahrsschrift, 1842, Heft IV. 
Nr. XX, specially printed, Stuttgart 
und Tiibingen 184 

LORIA, Achille. Karl Marx. In Nuova 
Antologia, April 1883.—16. 

— La Teoria Economica della Co- 
stituzione Politica, Roma, Torino, 
Firenze 1886.—16. : 

+ Die Durchschniltsprofitrate auf 
Grundlage des Marxschen Werlge- 
setzes. Von Dr. Conrad Schmidt. 
Stutigart 1889. Review in Conrads 
Jahrbucher fiir Nationaldkonomieund 
Statistik, Neue Folge, Bd. XX, Jena 
1890.—18. 

+ L'Opera postuma di-Carlo- Marx. 
In Nuova Antologia, Vol. LV, Feb- 
ruary 1895.—868, 869. 

LUTHER, Martin. An die Pfarherrn 
wider den Wucher zu predigen, Wit- 
temberg 1540, Luther's Werke, Wit- 
temberg 1589, 6. Teil.—340, 386, 
597. 

—.Von Kaufshandiun, 
Wittemberg 1524, Luther’s Werke, 
Wittemberg 1589, 6. Teil.— 326. 

LUZAC, E. Hollands Rijkdom, Behel- 
zende den Oorsprong van den Koop- 
handel, en van de Magt van dezen 
Staat etc., Leyden 1782. —3l4. 

und Wucher, 

M 

MACAULAY, Th. B. The History of 
England. From the accession of 
James the Second, Vol. 4, London 
1857.—590. 

MALTHUS, T. R. Definitions in Po- 
litical Economy, London 1827.~ 
36. London 1853.—39. 

— Principtes of Political Economy, 
considered with a view to their prac- 
tical application, 2nd ed., London 
1836.—36, 167. 

MANLEY, Thomas. Interest of 
Money Mistaken, or a_ treatise, 
proving that the abatement of in« 

INDEX. OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, ‘VOLUME IT1 

of the riches of @ nation and: that six 
per-cent.is a. proportionable interest 
to the present conditions of this 
Kingdom, London 1668.—589. 

- terest is the i and not the cause 

MARON, Dr. H. Extensiv oder inten-. 

siv? Ein Kapitel aus der landwirt- 
schajttichen Betriebslehre, Oppelrt 

1859.—788. 

MARX, “Karl. Das Kapital, Kritik 
der Politischen Oe&onomie, Buch 1.— 
1, 3, 7, 17, 25, 28, 30, 34, 37, 39, 
50, 51, 75, 83, 90, 92, 94, 140, 144, 

. 158, 178, 226, 241, 257, 302, 313, 
392, 436, 449, 510, 511, 602, 613, 
616, 738, 775, 814, 857, 867, 875. 

— Buch Il.—1, 2,3, 8, 17, 25, 43, 
50, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 115, 262, 
276, 283, 295, 299, 335, 435, 438, 
469, 518, 549, 755, 807, 815, 817, 
820. 

— Das Kapital’ etc. Erster Band, 
Buch I: Der Produktionsprozess 
des Kapitals, 2. Auflage, Hamburg 

1872.--7. 3. Auflage, Hamburg 
1883.—7, 144. 
— Das Kapital etc. Zweiter Band, 

Buch Il: Der Zirkulationsprozess des 
Kapitals, Hamburg 1!885.—I, 2. 
— Misére de !a philosophie. Réponse 
a fa philosophie de la misére de M. 
Proudhon, Paris 1847.—594, 604. 
— Zur Kritik der politischen Oceko- 
nomie, Erstes Heft, Berlin 1859. — 
178, 179, 312, 438, 534, 535, 536, 

_ 537, 547, 594. 

MASSIE, Joseph. An Essay on the 
Governing Causes of the Natural 
Rate of interest etc.. London 1750.— 
346, 352, 355, 358. 

MILL, John Stuart. Essays on Some 
Unsettled Questions of Polttical 
Economy, London 1844.—856. 

— Principles of Political Economy, 
with some of their Applications to 
Social Philosophy, 2nd ed., 
London 1849.—382, 390. 

MOMMSEN, Theodor, Rémische Ge- 

: schichte, 2. Auflage, Berlin 1856 

* bis 1857.—322, 377, 768. 

MORTON, J C. On the Forces used 

..in. Agriculture. Report made at 
“the ‘Society of Arts. In Journal of 

30* 

895. 

- the’ Society of Arts. December. 9, 
1859,—614.. : 
MORTON, -John .‘Locktiart. The 
Resources of Estates: being a-treatise 
on the agricultural improvement and- 
general management of landed prop- 
erty, London 1858.—615, 659. 
MOUNIER, L. M. De Wagriculture en 
France, d’aprés les documents ‘offi- 
clels avec des remarques par M. Rubi- 
. chon, Paris 1846.—788. 5 
MULLER, Adam H. Die. Elemente.der. 
S fcotseanes. Berlin 1809.— 35u, 

N 

NEWMAN, Francis Willtam. ‘Lectures 
on Political Economy, London 

_ 1851.—581, 641, 754. ° 

NEWMAN, S. P. Elements of Polit- 
ical Economy, Andover ‘and New 
York 1835.—2747 

NORTH, Sir Dudley. Déscourses 
upon Trade; principally directed to 
the cases of the interest, coinage, clip- 
ping, increase of money, London 
169] .—598. 

co) 

O’CONNOR, Charles. Speech on 
December 19, 1859 In New York 
cake Tribune, December 20, 1859.— 
378. 

ODERMANN, Dr. C. G. See FELLER. 

OPDYKE, George. A Treatise on 
Political Economy, New York 1851.— 
356. 

Pp 

PASSY, Hippolyte. Des systémes de 
culture et de feur influence sur 
l'économie sociate. 2nd ed., Paris 
1853.—751, 761, -764, 767, 770. 

PECQUEUR, Ch. Théorie nouvelle d'é- 
conomie sociale ef -politique, ow 
études sur l’organisation des sociéfés” 

_ Paris 1842.—595. i : 

PLINIUS, Gajus Securidus, der 
Aeltere. HHistoriae naturalis’ Libri 
XXXVI, Parisiis 1829.— 102... * 

896 

PRICE, Richard. An Appeal to the 
Public, on the Subject of the Na- 
tional Debt (1772), 2nded., London 
1774:—387. 

— Observations on Reversionary 
Payments, on schemes for providing 
annuities for widows, and for persons 
in old age, on the method of calculat- 
ing the vuiues of assurances on 
lives, and on the national debt etc. 
(1771) 2nd ed., London 1772.—387. 

PROUDHON, P. J. See BASTIAT. 

R 

RAMSAY, George. An Essay on the 
Distribution of Wealth, Edinburgh 
1836.—274, 354, 355, 372. 

REDEN, Dr. Freiherr von. Verglei- 
chende Kulturstatistik der Gebiets- 
und Bevolkerungsverhalinisse der 
Gro Sstaaten Europas, Berlin 
1848.—455. 

RICARDO, David. On the Principles of 
Political Economy and Taxation, 
ed. by MacCulloch, London 1852.— 
64, 112, 176, 180, 199, 219, 233, 634, 
635, 753, 795, 819, 832. 

RODBERTUS-JAGETZOW, Karl. 
Soziale Briefe an von Kirchmann.— 
Dritter Brief: Widerlegung der 
Ricardoschen Lehre yon der Grund- 
Tente und Begrindung einer neuen 
Rententheorie, Berlin 1851.—759. 

ROSCHER, Wilhelm. Die Grundlagen 
der Nationaldkonomie. Ein Hand- 
und Lesebuch fiir Geschaftsmdnner 
und Studierende (2. Aulfl., Stuttgart 
und Augsburg 1857.)—220, 302, 
319, 390. 

RUBICHON, Maurice. Du mécanisme 
de la société en France et en Angleterre 
a New edition, Paris 1837,— 

s 

SAINT-SIMON. Nouveau Christia- 
nisme, dialogues entre un conserva- 
feur et un novateur, Paris 1825.— 
591, 592. 

SAY, Jean-Baptiste. Traité d’économie 
politique, ou simple exposition de la 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME IIT 

maniére dont se forment, se distri- 
buent et se consomiment les richesses 
(1803}, 3rd ed., Paris 1817,—274, 
819, 820. 

SCHMIDT, Conrad. Die Durchschnitts- 

profitrate auf Grundlage des Marxschen- 
Wertgesetzes, Stuttgart 1889.—10. 

— Die Durchschnittsprofitrate und 
das Marxsche Wertgesetz. In Die 
Neue Zeit, XI Jahrg., Bd. I., Stutt- 
gart 1893.—13. 

SISMONDI, J. Ch. L. Simonde de. 
Nouveaux principes d’économie po- 
litique ou de la richesse dans ses 
rapports avec la population, Paris 
1819.—465, 466. 

SMITH, Adam. An Inquiry into the 
Nature and Causes of the Wealth 
of Nations (1776), published by 
Wakefield, London 1835 to 1839.— 
140, 323, 460, 461, 749, 750, 753, 
754, 755, 756, 806, 821. 

SOMBART, Werner. Zur Kritik des 
Okonomischen Systems von Karl 
Marx. In Archiv fiir soziale Gesetz- 
gebuing und Statistik, Bd. VIII, 

eflin 1894.—871. 

STEUART, Jacques (James). Recher- 
che des principes de l'économie 
politique ou essai sur la science de la 
politique intérieure des nations 
libres. (Translated Irom An Inquiry 
into the Principles of Political 
Economy etc., London 1767.) Paris 
1789.—357. 

STIEBELING, George C. Das Wertge- 
setz und die Profitrate, New York 
1890.—L9, 20, 21. . 

STORCH, Henri. Cours d'économie 
politique, ou exposition des principes 
qui déterminent la prospérité des 
nations, St. Petersburg 1815.—180; 
806, 825. 

— Considérations sur la nature du 
revenu: national, Paris 1824,—825, 
829. 

T 

THIERS, Adolphe. De fa propriété, 
Paris 1848.—609. 

THUN, Alphons. Die Industrie ant 
Niederrhein und ihre Arbeiter, Leip- 
zig 1879.—877. ‘ 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME Ut: 

TOOKE, Thomas. A History of 
Prices, and of the State of the Cir- 
culation, from 1793 to 1837; preced- 

ed by a brief sketch of the state 
of the corn trade in the last 
two centuries, London 1838.—363. 

— An Inquiry into the Currency 
Principle; the connection of the 
currency with prices and the expe- 
diency of a separation of issue from 
banking, 2nd ed., London 1844.— 
348, 364, 393, 394, 396, 429, 433. 

— A History of Prices and of the 
State of the Circulation from 1839 
to 1847 inclusive; with a general 
review of the currency question 
efc., London 1848.—353. 

— and NEWMARCH, William. A 
History of Prices and of the State of 
the Circulation during the nine 
years 1848-1856, London 1857.—787. 

TORRENS, Robert. An Essay on the 
Production of Wealth with an Appen- 
dix, inwhich the Principles of Politi- 
cal Economy are applied to the actual 
circumstances of this country, London 
1821.—38 

—On the Operation of the Bank 
Charter Act of 1844 etc., 2nd ed., 
London 1847.—347. 

TUCKETT, J. D. A History of the Past 
and Present State of the Labouring 
Population, including the progress of 
agriculture, manufactures and com- 
merce, Shewing the extremes of opu- 
lence and destitution among the oper- 
ative classes with practical means 
for their employment and_ future 
prosperity, London 1846.—588. 

U 

URE, Andrew. Phélosophie des manu- 
factures ou économie industrielle de 
la fabrication du coton, de la laine, 
du lin et de la soie, avec la description 

897 

Ges diverses machines employées dans 
les ateliers anglais. (Translation of 
Philosophy of Manufactures etc. 
London 1835.) Paris 1836.—379, 

v 

VERRI, Pietro. Meditazioni 
Economia Politica. In Serittori 
Classici Italiani di Economia 
Politica, Parte Mederna, Vol. 15, 
Milano 1804.—274. 

VINCARD, Jr. Histoire du travail et 
des travailleurs en France, Paris 
1845.—767. 

VISSERING, S. Handboek van Prak- 
tische Staathuishoudkunde, Amster- 
dam 1860 bis 1865.—313, 314. 

sulla 

Ww 

WAKEFIELD, Edward Gibbon. Eng- 
land and Americu. A comparison of 
the social and political state of both 
nations, London 1833.—738. 

WALTON, Alfred A. History of the 
Landed Tenures of Great Britain 
and Ireland, from the Norman con- 
quest to the present time, London 
1865.—606, 607. i 

WEST, Edward. Essay on the Appli- 
cation of Capital to Land ete. By a 
Fellow of University College Oxford, 
London 1815.—237. ; 

WOLF, Julius. Das Ratsel der Durch- 
schnittsprofitrate bei Marx. In 
Conrads Jahrbdcher fir National- 
okonomie und Statistik, Dritte Folge, 
Bd. II, Jena 1891.—15, 16. 

— Sezialismus und kapitalistische 
Gesellschaftsordnung. Kritische War- 
di ung beider als Grundlegung 
einer Sozialpolitik, System der 
Sozialpolitik, Bd.l, Stuttgart 1892. 

—19. 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED JN CAPITAL, VOLUME JIT 
in = 

II]. ANONYMOUS 

The City of the Physiology of London 
Business. With sketches on change, 
and at the coffee houses. (David 
Morier Evans.) London 1845.—382. 

Competition and Co-Operation, 1832.— 
86). 

The Currency Theory Reviewed in a 
letter to the Scottish People on the 
menaced interference by Government 
with the existing system of banking in 
Scotland. By a Banker in England. 
Edinburgh 1845.—398, 405, 426, 
427, 508. 

Doctrine de Saint-Simon. Exposition. 
Fremié#re année. 1828-1829. (En- 
fantin.) 3rd ed. Paris 183!.—592. 

An Inquiry into those Principles Re= 
specting the Nature of Demand and 
the Necessity of Consumption, lately 
advocated by Mr. Malthus. London 
1821.—190, 630. 

Observations on Certain Verbal Disputes 
in Political Economy, particularly 
relating to value, and to demand and 
supply. London 1821.—180, 188. 

Religion Saint-Simonienne. Economie 
politique et Politique. Articles 
extraits du Globe. (Enfantin.) Paris 
1831.—591, 594. 

Some Thoughts of the Interest of Eng- 
land. By a Lover of Commerce. 
London 1697.—593. 

The Theory of the Exchanges. The Bunk 
Charter Act of 1844 etc, (G. Henry 
Roy.). London 1864.—354, 356. 

The Three Prize Essays on Agriculture 
and the Corn Law. Published by the 
National Anti-Corn-Law League. 
(George Hope, W. R. Grey, Arthur 
Morse.) Manchester, London 1842.— 
612. 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, YOLUME SII 

Ill. NEWSPAPERS AND PERIODICALS 

Archiv fiir sozicle Gesetzgebung und 
Statistik, published by Dr. Hein- 
rich Braun, Bd. VII, Berlin 1894. 
(Essay by Sombart.)—871. 

Daily News, December 10, 1889.—358. 
— December 15, 1892.—462, 463. 
— January 18, 1894:--530. 

Die Neue Zeit, X1. Jahrg., Bd. 1, 
ee (Essay by Conrad Schimidt.)— 
13. 

Economist, March 18, 1845.—427. 
— May 22, 1847.—528, 572, 573, 
574, 575. 

— August 21, 1847.—576. 

— October 23, 1847.—550. 

— November 20, 1847.—430, 486, 
487. 

— December 11, 1847.—560. 

— November 30, 1850.—578. 

— January Il, 185!.—578. 

— January 22, 1853.—351. 

— July 19, 1859.—388, 

Jahrbticher fiir Nationaldkonomie und 
Statistik, published by J. Conrad. 
— 1885, Neue Folge, Bd. XI. 
(Essay by W. Lexis.)—8. 

— 1890, Neue Folge. Bd. XX. 
(Essay by Achille Loria.)—18. 

— 1891, III. Folge, Bd. II. (Essay 
by Julius Wolf.)—15. 

— 1892, III. Folge, Bd. IIl. (Essay 
by Peter Fireman.)—13. 

Journal of the Society of Arts, Vol. 
VII, No. 368, London, December 9, 
1859. (Report by J. C. Morten.)— 
614. ; 

Manchester Guardian, 
1847.—400. 

Morning Star, December 14, 1865. 
(Speech by John Bright.)—616. 

New York Daily Tribune, December 20, 
1859. (Speech by O'Connor.)—378. 

Nuova Antologia, April 1883. (Essay 
by Achille Loria.)—16. 

— February 1895. (Essay by Achille 
Loria.)—868. 

Revue des Deux Mondes, 1842. (Essay 
by Coquelin.)—394. 

— 1848, (Essay by Forcade.)—822. 

Times, London, December 3, 5, 7, 
1857.—429. 

Westminster Review.—76l. 

November 24, 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME II1 

IV PARLIAMENTARY REPORTS AND OTHER OFFICIAL PUBLICATIONS 

Anno Vicesimo Sexto Georgii’ IIl. 
Regis. Caput XXXI1. An Act for 
vesting certain Sums in Commission- 
ers, at the End of every Quarter of 
a year, to be by them applied to the 
Reduction of the National Debt 

_ (1786).—388. 

First Report on Children’s Employ- 
ment in Mines and Collieries, April 
21, 1829.—87. 

Coat Mine Accidents. Abstract of 
Return to an Address of the Honour- 
able The House of Commons, dated 
3 May 1861, etc.—Ordered, by 
the H. of C., to be Printed, 6 Feb- 
tuary .1862.—87. 

First Report from the Select Committee 
of the House of Lords on the Sweating 
System, together with the Proceed- 
ings of the Committee, Minutes of 
Evidence. Ordered, by the H. of 
cou be Printed, 1] August 1888 
—330. 

Public Health. Sixth Report of the 
Medical Officer of the Privy Coun- 
cil. With Appendix. 1863, London 
1864.—90, 91, 92, 93, 94, 95. 

Report from the Select Committee on 
Bank Acts, together with the Proceed- 
ings of the Committee, Minutes of 
Evidence, Appendix and Index. Or- 
dered, by the House of Commons, to 
be Printed, 30 July 1857. Part I. 
Reportand Evidence.—404, 408, 409, 
410, 411, 413, 414, 415, 416, 417, 
418, 420, 421, 422, 423, 424, 425, 
440, 48], 484, 485, 489, 490, 497, 
498, 499, 506, 507, 509, 511, 512, 
513, 514, 515, 516, 517, 518. 519, 
520, 521, 522, 523, 524, 525, 526, 
527, 529, 530, 531, 535, 536, 537, 
538, 539, 540, 541, 542, 543, 544, 

545, 546, 547, 548, 549, 550,. 551, 
552, 553, 554, 556, 557, 558, 559, 
561, 562, 563, 566, 567, 568, 569, 

570, 57], 755. 

— Part Il, Appendix and Index.— 
509, 538. 

Report from the Select Committee on 
the Bunk Acts, together with the 
Proceedings of the Committee, Min- 
utes of Evidence, Appendix and 

- Index. Ordered, ae the House of 
Commons, to be Printed, 1 July 
1858.—8, 464, 473, 485, 486, 488, 
511, 512. 

First Report from the Secret Committee 
on Commercial Distress; with the 
Minutes of Evitlence. Ordered, by 
the House of Commons, to be Printed, 
8June 1848.—8, 396, 401, 402, 403, 
406, 407, 458, 462, 474, 475, 476, 
499, 527. 

Report from the Secret Committee of 
the House of Lords, Appointed to 
Inquire into the Causes of the Dis- 
tress which has for some time pre- 
vailed among the commercial 
classes, and how far it has been 
affected by the laws for regulating 
the issue of bank-notes payable 
on demand. Together with the 
Minutes of Evidence and an Appen- 
dix. Ordered, by the House of Com- 
mons, to be Printed, 28 July 1848. 

— Reprinted 1857.—8, 403, 410, 
411, 512, 513, 514, 515, 540, 544, 
545, 546, 549, 555, 556. 

Reports of the Inspectors of Factories, 
efe.—611. 

— for the half-year ending lst 
October 1845, London 1846.—122. 

— for 31st October 1846, London 
1847.—122, 123. 

INDEX OF AUTHORITIES QUOTED IN CAPITAL, VOLUME III gal 

— for 3Stst October 1847, 
1848.—123, 124. 

— for 3!st October 1848, 
1849.—78, 106. 

— for 380th April 1849, 
1849.—124. 

— for 81st October 1849, 
1850.—124. 

— for 30th April 1850, 
1850.— 108, 125. 

— for 31st October 1850, 
1851.—120, 125. 

— for 30th April 1851, 
1851.—120. 

— for 3ist October 1852, 
1853.—96, 97, 98, 99. 

— for 30th Aprit 1853, 
1853.— 125. 

— for 3st October 1853, 
1854.— 125. 

— for 30th April 1854, 
1854.—125. 

— for dist October 1855, 
1856.—88. 

London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 
London 

London 

—-for 31st October 1858, London 
1859.—77, 119, 120, 121, 122. 

— for 30th April 1859, London 
1859.—125, 126. ¥ 

— for 3ist October 1859, London 
1860.— 126. 

— for 30th Aprit 1860, London 
1860.—126. 

— for 3tst October 1860, London 
1861.—126. 

— for 30th April 1861, London 
1861.—90, 126, 128. 

— for 3ist October 1861, London 
1862.—127. 

— for 30th Aprit 1862, London 
1862.—90, 128. 

— for 38tst October 1862, London 
1863.—78, 101, 127, 129. 

— for 30th April 1863, London 
1863.— 130. 

— for ist October 1663, London 
1864.—88, 100, 101, 108, 128, 130, 
131, 132, 134. 

— for 30th Aprit 1864, London 
1864,—128, 133. 

SUBJECT INDEX 

A 

Absolute ground-rent 

its definition—742, 744 

its formation—743-750 

its essence—753 

in the extracting industry—753 

Accumulation of capital 

definition—213, 214, 239, 258, 
260, 201 

and rise of the productive power 
of labour—214, 243,. 244, 245, 
389, 390, 391 

and relative over-po Pe 
214, 218, 219, 240, 245, 
246, 249, 250, 951, 38, 959 

and concentration and central- 
ization of capital—24) 

and primitive accumulation— 
241 

and a drop in the rate of profit— 
245, 251, 253, 257, 260 

factors stimulating accumula- 
tion—260 

Accumulation of loan capital 

is accumulation of claims of 
ownership upon labour—465 
signifies the expansion of the 
real process of reproduction— 
466, 467, 473, 476, 477 

and bankers—467 

is inversely proportional to the 
accumulation of industrial cap- 
ital—477, 478. 483, 484 
discovery of Australian and 
Californian gold mines—490, 491 
as a form distinct from actual 
accumulation—490, 491, 492 
and the crisis—491 

its source—492, 493, 494 
special forms of—494, 495 

Advance 

its forms—334, 338, 343 
its character—339 

its moverment—341, 342 
kinds of advance—445 

Advanced capital— —30, 32, 33, 35, 36, 

494 

Africa and its division by the Euro- 

pean powers—886 

Agriculture 

change ‘of the value of capital in 
the case of agriculture—112 
capitalist system works against 
a rational agriculture—119, 792 
and manufacture—328, 329 
and the process of reproduction — 
440 

features of small-peasant agri- 
culture—600 

capitalist nature of—-600, 601, 
603, 604 

and private property in land— 
603, 604 

and classes—604 

rent works against a 
agriculture—605, 606 
in England—615, 616 
in Europe—655 

telative over-production 
656 

natural laws of—660 
pre-capitalist—660 

rational 

in— 

— slow and uneven development 

of capitalism in—661, 781, 782 
organic composition of capital 
in—741, 742, 744, 745, 746, 
747, 748 

drawbacks of smal] agriculture— 
787, 788 

America 

as a centre of the crises of 

1825-57—71, 480 

SUBJECT INDEX 

American census—76 2 
Civil War in A.—108, 126, 127 
development of production in 

lI 

A.—117, 118 ste 
— ownership in A.—378, 605, 783, 
784 

stock companies in A.—429 
trade of America with Asia— 
552, 553 
-— tate of exchange of 
with England—570 
— rate of exchange of 
with A.—569, 570, 471 
— land speculation in A.—653 
— quality of land in A—751 
Argentina—709 
Asia 
— high rate of profit in A.—149 
— pre-capitalistic modes of . pro- 
duction in A.—328, 583 
— combination of small-scale agri- 
culture and home industry in 

It 

Anierica 

England 

A.—328 
— capitalist nations as debtors of 
A.—5N5 

export of silver to A.—539, 552 
rate of exchange with A.—546, 
563, 564, 565, 566, 567, .568, 
569, 570, 571 
— private ownership of land has 
been imported by Europeans 
to A.—602 
Also see: /ndia, China 
Australia—490, 552, 565, 577 
Average profit—140, 151, 154, 155, 
, 156, 157, 165, 167, 169, 170, 
171, 176, 177, 191, 193, 194, 205 

1 

Balance of payments and the trade 
balance—442, 479, 480, 504, 505, 
577 
Bank 
— and loaning capital—419 
— and loaning money—419, 420 
— gold reserve and the banking 
Teserve—424, 425, 453, 458, 459 
— and issue of notes—424 
— bank capital—453, 454, 
456, 457, 458 
— bank deposits, their double role— 

455, 

903 
459, 460, 461 
— formation of bank assets—529, 
530, 592 

the Bank of Amsterdam—589 
the Bank of Hamburg—589 

English Bank of Credit—590 
Crédit mobilier—592 

Also see: Bank of England 

Bank Act of 1844-422, 541, 542, 
543, 546, 547, 549 

Bank depasits—459, 460 cad 

Banking system and_ its 
significance—593, 594 

1Ptt 

historical 

" Banker—398, 494, 528, 529 

Bank-note = 
— its definition—395, 396, 435 
— circulation of bank-notes- and 
the industrial cycle—449, 514. 
515, 516, 517 i 

— law of the circulation of—510 

— circulation of notes of the Bank 
ol England—510, 511, 512, 513, 
514, 515 G 

— number of circulating bank-notes 
and the turnover—510, 511, 512, 
513, 514 

— issue of bank-notes and metal 
teserve—Hl3, 514 

— and reserve fund—516, 517 

— and advance of capital—526, 
527 

— and circulation. of bills—526, 
527, 528 

Bank of England 
— its securities—441, 442, 445, 447, 

448 

— circulation of its notes—442, 
- 445, 447 

— and demand for gold—442, 443, 
444, 447, 450 

~ gold reserve in the Bank of 

England—443, 444, 447 

— accommodations by—447, 448, 
449 

— reserve fund ol—462, 463, 464, 
507, 525 : 

— ils rate of interest in 1844-45— 
505, 506 Da 

— inflow and outflow of notes in- 
517 

— the largest capital power it-Lon- 
don—528, 529, 530, 531 

C4 

SUBJECT INDEX 

its profits for the period from 
1797 to 1817—531, 532 

and the Bank Act of 1844—541, 
542 

power of the Bank of England 
over commerce and industry— 
593 

Big landowner 

Buying and selling—178, 

and the farmer—604, 605, 606, 
607, 611, 612, 613 

enrichment of the landlord in 
the course of economic develop- 
ment—605, 606 

and the Corn Laws in England— 
612, 613 
appropriates part 
value—623 
vitality of the class of big land- 
lords—709 

role of big landlords in capitalist 
mode of production—800, 801 
of exchange 

its definition—392 
discounting bills—416, 
473, 474 

discounting bills and borrowing 
capital—417, 418 

speculative bill—420 

and swindling—473, 475, 478, 
479 

of surplus- 

418, 

191, 276, 
284, 289, 336, 337, 339, 340, 
341, 362, 419, 420 

Cc 

Capital 

lt 

movement of—25, 48 

general formula of—41 
magnitude of the total capital- 
value and the magnitude of 
surplus-value—45, 46, 47 
technical composition of—45, 46 
organic composition of capital 
in industry—75, 76 

= tie-up of—109, 110, 112, 113, 114, 

rare of value of capital—109, 
release of capital—109, 119 

influence of the change in the 
magnitude of capital on the rate 
of profit—137, 138, 150, 151 
at social power—191, 258, 

depreciation of—231, 244, 247, 
249, 250 

definition of—240, 241 

absolute over-production of— 
246, 247, 249, 250, 251 

plethora oi—246, 251 

increasing minimum of capital 
required for the operation of an 
industrial establishment with the 
development of capitalist pro- 
duction—245, 257 

circuit of —249, 250 

exports of capital in productive 
and money-form—251, 563, 564, 
566, 567, 568 

merchant's capital invested in 
the purchase and payment of 
the means of circulation—282 
criticism of theory of the origin 
of capital from savings and ab- 
stention of the capitalist—430 
social character of capital is pro- 
moted through the development 
of the credit and banking sys- 
tem—593 

as the production relation—794, 
795 

as the historically determined 
social form—795, 796 
fetishism of—803, 804, 805, £06 

- Capitalist 

—trustee of bourgeois societ 

his illusion regarding the origin 
of surplus-value and profit— 
38, 41, 42, 44, 47, 196, 187, 206 
and production of a commodity— 
41, 857, 858 

and the working class—41, 193, 
194, 373 

and advanced capital—41, 42 
who 
pockets the fruits of social pro- 
duction—261 

industrial—363, 364 
money-capitalist—363, 364, 365, 
366, 367, 368, 498, 499 

is not needed for the production 
process—379, 380 

personified capital—804 

Capitalist mode oj production 

as a synthesis of the processes 
of production and circulation— 
26, 41, 806, 807 

its distinction from the mode 

SUBJECT INDEX 905 

of production based’ on slavery— 

mystilication of—39, 41, 42, 45, 

48, 806, 807, 808, 809, 810, 841, 
844, 845, 846, 847 

production relations under—45, 

383, 645, 797, 798, 799, 803, 
804, 805, 806, 807, 808, 809, 810, 
849, 850, 857 

and economy of constant capital— 

84, 85 

and development of the produc- 
tive power of labour—85, 252, 
253, 254, 261 

internal contradictions of—s6, 
118, 240, 244, 245, 251, 252, 
253, 258, 259, 261, 280, 281, 

£82, 560, 561 

squanderer of physical and spir- 
itual powers of human beings— 

86, 87, 88 

and social character of produc- 
tion—88, 89, 189, 190, 261, 560, 
56] 

as immediately preceding the 

socialist mode of production— 
88, 428 

and the world-market—109, 261 

social control and regulation of 
production are irreconcilable 
with—I17, 118 

and mass production of commod- 
ities—177, 178, t79 

classes under capitalist mode of 
roduction—191, 862, 863 
istorical premises of—192, 581, 
582, 601, 602, 603 

and the process of accumulation— 
213, 214, 215, 260, 261 

and relative over-population— 
214, 218, 219, 231 

production of surplus-value and 
profit as purpose of—236, 237, 
238, 239, 240, 246, 251, 252, 
855 

hislorica! character of —237, 252, 
253, 254, 258, 606, 607, 794, 
795, 858 

productive forces of the capital- 
ist mode of production—237, 
244, 252, 258, 431, 861 

barriers of production under— 
245, 252, 253, 258, 495 
disproportion of the individual 

cere of production under— 
—relatively limited market under— 
428 
— and agriculture—602, 603, 635, 
660, 661, 781, 782, 790, 791, 
792 
— and impoverishment of the di- 
tect producers—604 
— and the reduction of the agri- 
cultural population as compared 
with the non-agricultural—622 
— leads to the separation of small 
industry and manufacture from 
agriculture—799, 800 
— and the price of land—790, 
791, 792, 793 
— and large landed property—791, 
792, 793, 800 
— and pre-capitalist 
relations—810 
—- and reproduction of production 
- relations—849, 850, 857 
Capitalist reproduction 
— replacement of constant 
tal—814, 815 
— its conditions—184 
— two departments of the social 
capital—815, 816 
— exchange between two depart- 
ments—816, 817 
— scheme of simple reproduction— 
817 
— reproduction of capitalist pro- 
duction relations—818 
— and advanced capital—817, 818 
— and revenues—818 
Cartels—118, 428, 429 

production 

capi- 

Centralization of capital—see Con- 
centration 
China 
— pre-capitalist mode of production 
in C.—328 

— imports of European and Ameri- 

can goods to C.—328, 329, 
399, 557 
— English opium trade inC.—398, 
539, 565 
Circulation 

— seeming derivation of surplus- 
value [rom circulation—39, 43, 
136, 807 : 

— time of circulation—43, 71, 80, 
274, 275, 297, 807 

906 

SUBJECT INDEX 

as a phase of the process of 
reproduction—274, 284, 806, 807 
and the value of commodities— 
274 

Circulating capital 

and the cost-price—32, 33, 34 
money-form of the circulating 
capital—74, 75 * 
and value of the commodity- 
product—l07 : 
and development of the produc- 
tive forces of labour—254 

loan ‘of—337, 338 

Classical bourgeois political economy 

rldd 

Ricardo on the correlation of the 
prices of production and values 
of commodities—176, 177 
Ricardo on the ground-rent— 180, 
634, 635, 663, 665, 739, 753 
Ricardo on the influence ol for- 
eign trade on the general rate 
of profit—232, 233 : 
Ricardo on the rate of profit— 
236, 237, 238- 

Newman’ on the correlation of 
commerce .and industry—274 
Ricardo and Smith on industrial 
capital—319 

Ricardo and Smith on merchant’s 
capital—319, 320 

Tooke on interest, credit and 
money—363, 364, 393. 394, 433, 
434, 435, 436, 437 

Smith on manager's salary—376 
Smith on the role of capital in 
money-lending—460 : 
Ricardo’s theory on the value of 
money—534, 535, 536 

Smith on ground-rent—601, 749, 
750, 753, 754, 755, 756. 768 
treats the capitalist mode of 
production as an eternal cate- 
gory—60! 

Petty on ground-rent—764, 765 
its merits—809, 810 

its limitations—810, 815 
criticism of Smith's dogma— 
819, 820, 82) 

Ricardo and Smith’s dogma— 
819, 820 

Coin—435 * 

Colonial. system—324, 327, 328, 577, 
578, 777, 885, 886 

Cotontes : ” 

739 

high rate of profit in—148, (49, 
232, 233, 234 -° 
tole of the commercial capital 
in—325, 3264 

profit on capital invested in— 
569, 577 

lack. of private ownership of 
land in colonies—602, .737, 738, 

differentia) 
661 : i 
exports of grain from colonies at 
low prices—654, 655 

difference of the modern colo- 
nies from those of ancient times— 
654, 655 . 

agricultural—737, 738 . 

seizure and exploitation of col- 
onies by the European powers 
at the end of the 19th century— 
B86 ee 

rent in—635, 660, 

Also see: india 
Commerce 

foreign—232, 233 - 

its size—320 - 

and the development of produc- 
tion—321, 325, 326, 327, 328, 
330, 33] 

carrying trade—323 

role ol the revolutionof 16th and 
I7th centuries in—327 

Commercial capital 

— as a portion of industrial 

as a special Junction of capital— 
262, 263, 264, 265, 267, 283, 453 
two-forms of—262 ~ 
its movement—264, 
267, 268, 269 

as a form of the social division 
of labour—267 

265, 266, 

la- 
bour—269 

and the process of reproduction— 
269, 279 

produces neither value nor sur- 
plus-value—276, 277 

as the oldest state ol existence 
of capital—320, 321, 331 

its development stands in inverse 
praportion to the general econom- 
ic development of society— 
322, 323 : 
and commercial profit—324, 325 
and a system of robbery —326, 327 

SUB) ECT INDEX: 

— its role in-the transition from 
feudalism to capitalism—329, 
330 ' 
-Also see: Merchant’s capital 
Commercial credit 

— foundation of credit system— 
468 
its tools—468 
its circuit—468, 469 
its limits—469, 470 
leads to an extension of indus- 
trial and commercial operations— 
470 ; 
grows with increasing volume of 
industrial capital—470 
and the reproduction process— 
» 470, 471, 476, 477 

— promotes the metamorphosis of 
commodities—47) 

— and actual money ‘credit—473 

— and interest—505 ~ © 

-= ‘and circulation bills—509, 510 

Conumnercial labour—292-295 
Commercial prices—301-303 
Commercial profit 

— source of—276-280 

— definition of—281, 282, 306 

— and the industrial profit—28l, 

. 282 

— source of merchant’s income— 

wa 285 2 

— limits determining commercial 

|, profit—301, 302 

Comunod ity 

— its origin—174 

,— and money—178 : = 

— as the use-value—181, 620, 621 

— metamorphosis of—320, 321 

— conversion of agricultural prod- 

- ucts into—62!-623 ae 

— as the unity of use-value and 
exchange-value—63), 632 

Communist mode of production 

— discipline under—83 

-- Social control and regulation of 
production are possible anly 
under—118, 184, 799, 800 

-~ development of agriculture un- 

bla 

der—119 , 7 is = 
— and labour productivity—256, 
799 : 

— development of productive forces 

907 

inevitably leads to the estab- 
lishment of—259, 430, 757. 
Stock capital as a ftransition 
point to—428, 429, 431 

and the co-operative ‘factories 
of the labourers—431 

and abolition of landed proper- 
ty—645, 756, 757 

and surplus-labour—799, 800, 
825, 854 : ‘ 
Ireedom and ‘necessity under— 
799, 800 oe 
and shortening of the working- 
day—800 y 

distribution of the'social product 
under—825, 826, 853, 854 
tegulation of labour-time and 
the distribution of social labour 
under—829, 830 

wages under—854_ 

Community - : 

and evolution of products into 
commodities—-174—- 

in India—328, 709, 767, 771, 
855 

in Russia—709 

in Poland and Rumania—783 
communal society—810 
characteristic of—873 

the mark—877, 878 

Competition 

11] 

14 

main law ofl—37 

in the world-market—I18 

and the monopoly—1!!8, 190, 
428, 429 23 
and the capitalist class—190, 
I91, 247, 248 

role of competition in the distri- 
bution of-social capital among 
the various spheres of produc- 
tion—170, 192 _ 

among labourers—]72 | hes 
competition within branch of 
production. and between differ- 
ent branches of production—170 
determining market-value—181, 
190 2 
brings out. the social character 
of production—190 | 
mechanics of—190, 220, 226, 
248, 249, 250, 251, 259, 260 __ 
tole of competition in the forma- 
tion of the’ average’ profit and 

SUBJECT INDEX 

908 
price of production—191, 192, — between productive forces and 
204, 205, 206, 308 production relations—244, 245, 
— fall of the rate of profit—220, 252, 258, 259, 861 
221, 250, 251 — between the social character of 
— and over-production of capital— production and the private form 
247, 248 o! appropriation—259, 261; 431, 
— in European grain markets—709, 559, 560 
710 Co-operative factory—380, 381, 431 
Concentration , Corn Laws in England—106, 322, 
—of means of production—79, 612, 641, 664, 709 
a vie te 82 5 Cost-price 
—of 1 ers—82, 21 aI : 
ot capital-87, 215, 236, 241, — of the commodity—26, 28, 29, 30, 
242, 245, 246, 258, 427, 580 320 
— and the centralization of capi- — capitalist—26 
— actual—26 

tal—236, 241, 430 
— of commerce—290 
— of money-capital—355 
— of the credit system—359 
— ol the national reserve fund—444 
— of payments—508 
Constant capital—29, 52, 80, 84, 109, 
115, 116, 117, 150, 151, 230, 231, 
831 
Also see: Economy of the constant 
capital 
Consumer-power 
— of society—239 
— of tabourers—472 
— of non-productive classes—479 
Consumption 
— contradiction between production 
and consumption—183, 184, 239, 
240, 251, 252 
— productive consumption—185 
— and competition—190 
— is not the purpose of capitalist 
production—239, 251 
— and production—252 
— and the turnover of merchant’s 
capital—298 
— its limits—471 
— and cheapening of 
of life—642 
— volume of labourer’s consumption 
under capitalism and under soci- 
alism—854 
Contradiction 
— between private landownership 
and rational agriculture—119, 
792 
— between production and consump- 
ae » 184, 239, 240, 251, 

necessities 

— and changes in the value of the 
constant and variable capital— 
29, 30 . 

— and distinction between fixed 
and circulating capital—32, 33, 
34, 47 

— and value of commodity—36, 37, 

161, 162, 163, 166, 168, 169 

and price of commodity—37 

Proudhon's theory of—39, 40 

component parts of—44, 45 

and the distinction between vari- 

able and constant capital—151 
— and intensification of labour— 
227, 228 
Costs of circulation—277, 283, 284, 
289, 290, 293, 296, 311, 426 

Credit-banking system—532, 559, 579 

Creditor 
— and the debtor-state—454, 455 
— division of profit between lender 

and borrower—506 

Credit system 7 
— and money as a means of pay- 

ment—362, 392 

functions of —394 

forms of commercial credit—395 

forms of banker’s credit—395, 

396 

— and industrial cycle in England— 
398, 399, 400, 401, 402, 405, 422, 
423 

— swindling through credit—415 

— role of credit in the equalization 
of the rate of profit—426 

— and economy in costs of circu- 
lation—426, 427, 508 

Pitt 

SUBJECT INDEX on 

— and the formation of stock com- 
panies—427, 428, 429, 430, 431 

— places social property at disposal 
al individual capitalist—429, 430 

— and wholesale commerce—430 

— and centralization of capitals— 
430 

— and sharpening of contradictions 
in capitalist society—431, 432 

— dual character of—432, 591, 592, 
593 

— and the period of prosperity— 
437 

— and the crisis—449, 478 

— as the social form of wealth— 
559, 560 

Currency principle—408, 409, 443, 

534, 536, 539, 540, 541, 546 

D 

Demand and supply 
— and the market-value—175, 176, 
177, 178, 182-188 
— demand for means of production 
on the part of capitalists—184, 
185 
— and production—184, 190, 191 
— demand for means of subsistence 
on Lhe part of labourers—184, 185 
— productive demand—185 
— social need for commodities— 
185 
their inconsistency—185-187 
and market-prices—187 
their proportion recapitulates the 
relation of use-value to exchange- 
value— 189 
— and the division of the 
revenue o: society—191 
— and the commodity-capital— 
502-503 
Differential ground-rent 
— its formation—625-633, 728, 
729, 734, 735 
— and natural forces—629-63) 
— Ricardo on—634, 635, 663 
—on the worst cultivated soil— 
721-727 
— and rent as interest on capital 
incorporated in the soil—728, 
729 
— its source—728, 729 
— its definition—802 
Dif} rential rent 1 

11 

{otal 

— and natural fertility of soil—635, 
636-655, 657, 802 
— and the location of land sites— 
635, 636 
— its change depends on the change 
in prices—638-652 : 
— and the market-value—645, 646 
ae aud the rate of rent—646, 649- 
- and the rental—649 651 
— and the surplus-product—663 
Differential rent {1 
— and intensive cultivation—659, 
660, 664 
— and differential 
661, 662 
— and the difference in distribution 
of capital among tenants—661 
— and the formatian of surplus- 
profit—66l -666 
— its distinction from differential 
rent I—666-668 
— when price of production is can- 
stant—669-676, 699, 700 
— when price of production is de- 
clining—677-693, 699, 700, 704 
— when price of production is ris- 
ing—694-698, 700, 703-705 
— its growth with the development 
of capitalist agriculture—708, 709 
Discounting —458 ‘ 
Division of labour—183, 261, 270, 289, 
290, 291, 294, 311, 312, 620, 
621, 622 

rent I—660, 

E 

Economic law 
— distortion of the economic law 
in the canceptions of the manu- 
facturer, merchant, and banker— 
45, 118-136, 137, 220, 307, 308, 
373, 375, 376, 382 
— under capitalist production, the 
genera! law acts as the prevailing 
tendency only—159, 172, 185, 
229. 230, 233, 858 
Economic crisis 
— money panic in 1847—123 
— as momentary and forcible solu- 
tion of contradictions of the 
capitalist mode of production— 
243, 244 
— and the redundant 
population—258 

labouring 

910 

SUBJECT INDEX 

main cause of economic crises is 
the contradiction between the 
development of productive 
forces and limited consumption 
of working people under capital- 
ism—261, 472 

breaks out in the sphere of 
wholesale trade and banking— 
299, 300 

of 1847 in England—399, 400, 
401, 402, 403, 404, 405, 406, 407, 
408, 409, 475, 481 

and superabundance of productive 
capital—472, 479 

and flooding of the market with 
commodities—475, 479 

and sudden stoppage of credit— 
478. 

and. money crisis—478, 481, 504 
of 1857 in the U.S.A.—480 
development of crisis into a 
genera! crisis—480, 481 

exports of precious metal in time 
of—480 

Also see: Industrial cycle, o 
Over-production of capital 

Economy 

of constant capital and the rate 
of profit—60, 61, 366 : 

of constant capital and the in- 
crease of labour productivity— 
78, 80, 81 

of prodtction cénditions—78, 79 
of constant capital and the social 
character of labour—79, 80 

as the result of continuous im- 

provements of machinery—80 
in’ the use of constant capital— 
B2-87 

in means of production—83: 

in the generation and’ transmis- 
sion of power, and in’ buildings— 
96-100. 

in the utilization of waste prod- 
ucts—100-103 

in the application of constant 

capital through inventions—103° 

of payments—496 ’ 
— of means of etculalion—p0e 

England 

Corn Laws in 5. “47, 612, 613, 
664, 665, 709..° 
protective tarilt : system, “406 

1 itd 

I 1 

—_——_—_——— re 

cotton industiy in E.—106; 120, 

121, 125, 126, 127 

woollen industry in E.— 119, 
120,12] 

cotton crisis of 186]-65—122, 
123, 124, 125, 126 

position of cotton operatives in 
E.—128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 
134, 135 

settlement Jaws in England—172 
working-day in England—210 
commercial estate—322, 323 
foreign trade of E.—328, 569, 
570 

accumulation capital in 
1792-1815—414, 415 

monopoly of E. in industry—478 
industrial cycle of England—489 

of 

— English exports to Ireland since 

Europe 

-of production—66l, 

1824 until 1863—489, 490 
England’s balance of trade—577, 
578, 579 

usage of land in E.—604, 605, 
606, 610 749 
farm-labourers’ wages 
612, 613, 614, 615 
grain prices in E.—642 . 
classic land of capitalism in agri- 
culture—66] 

classic land ofthe capitalist mode 
862 

in E.— 

Enclosure Bitls—751 
classes in E.—862 

Sate of profit in European coun- 
tries is. lower. than in .Asian 
countries—148, 149 
movement of. gold reserve. in 
Europe in the 19th century — 
552-554, 557 2. - 

influence of grain imports from 

Russia, India and America on 
West European agriculture — 
709, 710 ~ 

Exchange of commodities: 

474, 

at their values—17], 172, 173, 
184, 873, 874, 875, 876, 
878, 879 

as products of 

capitals—172, 
173, 174: 

— between communities—174, 873 
Exploitation of labour 

in different spheres of produce 
tion—140, 14] , 

SUBJECT INDEX 

orl 

— national differences in the degree 
of—}41, .233 
--— of the working class by the sum 
total of capital—193 
“— is the appropriation of unpaid 
labour—193, 378 : 
-— the degree of—193, 227-280, 
238, 242, 243, 250 
— and the intensification of labour-— 
227, 228 ‘ - 
:..— and the prolongation ol the work- 
ing-day—228 . 
— in colonies—233 
— conditions of—239-246 
— means of—253 : - 
-- Also see: Rate of surplus-labour 
Exports of capital—250, 251, 467, 561, 
-- 562, 563, 567,568,577 --- 
Expropriation i vat 
— as the starting-point and purpose 
ol the capitalist mode of produc- 
tion—215, 245, 430, 602, 779, 

801, 856, 857 
— and the formation’ of stock 
companies—430 
F 

Farmer, farming 

— and flax manufacture—101 

— and capitalist farming—600, 603, 
732, 778; 779, 780 - 

— capital incorporated in the 
land of —605, 606, 607 

— contract period—605, 607 

— and the rent—606, 607, 609, 610 

— and the landowner—606, 607, 
609, G10, 730-732, 779, 781 

— in lreland—61] 

— in England—611-613 

— and the larm-labourers’ wages— 
613 : 

— and the farmer's surplus-profit— 
658, 659, 660, 661, 690, 734, 737 

— in Sicily —768 

— and agricultural labourers—776 

— price of agricultural products— 
781 

Fetishism : 

— ol interest-bearing capital—381- 
390 fx 

— of interest—384 -. 

— of profit—384 - 

— commercial! —504 

— of capital 803-806 

Feudalism : 
— characteristic of the feudal mode 
of production—320-32!, 325, 327, 
329 

— and the feudal lord—321, 325, 
583, 770 : 

— transition from the feudal mode 
of production to the capitalist 
mode of production—327, 329-331 
and usury—582, 583 
-and. fanded property—601-602 
and non-economic compulsion— 
768 4 

—.relations .betieen country-side 

- and town under feudalism—780, 
78\ ‘ 
Financial aristocracy—322, 429, 498, 

- 499, 532 : : 

Fixed capital 
— andthe cost-price—32, 33, 34, 35, 

36 
— wearof—33, 81, 107, Ill, 112, 
222, 260, 762 

— only distinction which impresses 
itself. upon the capitalist is 
that of fixed and circulating 
capital—74 

— portion of constant capital—77, 
80; 117, 208 

— reproduction of—78 

— and value of the commodily- 
product—8l, 107 

— changes in its value with the de- 
velopment of the productivily 
of labour-—254, 255 

— advance of —337,. 338 

— in agriculture—604 

Foreign trade and capitalist mode of 

production—232, 233, 319 

France 

— silk industry in F.—329 

—and the Panama swindle—430 

— increase of the rental in F.— 
614 

— improvement of land fertility in 
F.—751 

— peasant proprietorship of land 

"parcels in F.—786 - 

G 
General ‘law of capitalist accumula- 
tion—217 ~ ae 
Generul or average rate of profit - 
— its formation —$52-166, 171 

912 

SUBJECT INDEX 

a 

its definition—155, 156, 170, 
360 
factors determining the general 

rate of profit—160, 
167. 
its amount and the value of the 
commodities—164 
and the degree of labour exploi- 
tation—164, 194 
is revealed as a tendency—359 

164, 166, 

Also see: Law of the tendency of the 
rate of profit to fall 

Gold 

as universal money—312, 313 
demand for—422, 423, 424, 
447, 449, 450 

sources. of production—552 
as the expression of the social 
character of wealth—560 

Also see: Precious metal 
Gross profit 

breaks up into interest and profit 

of enterprise—365, 366, 367, 
368, 369, 370 
and the national income—529 

and interest—574, 575 

Ground-rent 

rate ol—237, 757 

as the surplus over the average 
profit—238, 764, 779, 780. 781, 
782 

characteristics of ground-rent— 
604, 610, 611, 618, 619 

its distinction from interest on 
capital incorporated in the land 
—604-610 

as the obstacle to a rational de- 
velopment of agriculture—606 
and the rate of interest—609 
and farm-labourers’ wages—612- 
615 

confusion of surplus-product with 
ground-rent—617 

and rent in kind—619 

its amount is the result of devel- 

opment of social labour—622, 
624 

and _money-rent—622, 777- 
778, 782 

is a part of surplus-value—623 
cause of the increase in the price 
of producis—743, 744 
monopoly ground-rent— 744, 
BL, 812 

building site rent—754-756 
mining rent—754, 756 

and the amortization of capital— 
755 

and production relations—757 
and the price of land—757-761 
and the price of the agricul- 
ante product—757, 758 , 768-770, 
7 

growth o! its mass—758 

its seeming origin from the 
soil—768 

rent in kind—768-770, 774 
777 

labour rent—770-774 
and the state as landowner— 

771 

and ownership of land parcels— 
784, 785, 786 

Income 

| i) 

Kdeileat 

of a capitalist—75, 76, 800, 
801, 802, 803, 804, 805, 806, 
807, 808, 809 

of a labourer—75, 76, 800-810 
as a fund Jor accumulation and 
as a fund Jor consumption— 193, 
194 

result of actual accumulation— 
492 

of a landowner—800-810 
gross—8}8, 819 

net—819, 820 

Say onthe net and gross income— 
819, 820 

Independent peasant — 221, 330, 635, 

660, 779, 
873, 877, 881 

784, 786, 853, 

Also see: Small landowner 

India 

as the centre olf the crises of 
1825-57—71 

pre-capitalist mode of produc- 
tion in I— 211, 327, 328, 329, 
710, 767, 77), 855 

peasant in I.—2]!, 710 

English rule in 1.—327, 328, 
329, 568, 578, 776, 777 
swindling in Anglo-Indian 

trade—400, 401, 403, 411 
export of capital from England 
to 1.539, 563, 564, 565, 566 

SUBJECT INDBX 913 

England does not pay any equiv- 
alent for imports from I.—569 

Industrial cycle 

in Britain—398, 489, 490 

in times of prosperity—437, 
438, 476, 477 

and the crisis—439, 477, 478 
and the depression—473, 474, 
475, 477, 478, 483, 484 
change in the time of cycle with 
the development of industry— 
477, 478 

Also see: Economie crises, Quver- 
production of capital 
interest 

its definition—339-344, 346, 
347 

as the price of capital—347, 
348 

and competition—349, 350, 355, 
356, 363 

and profit—351, 352, 353 

and the average rate of profit— 
353, 499, 500 

as the fruit of owning capital— 
367, 368 

— its nature—369, 370 

and wage-labourers—375 

and the relationship between 
two capitalists—375 

its movement—575 

usurers’ interest—582, 583, 584 

~— in the Middle Ages—584. 596, 

597, 598 

Also see: Rate of interest 
Interest-bearing cupital 

its movement—334, 335, 336 
its distinction from the commod- 
ity-capital—336, 338, 339, 340, 
341, 342, 343, 344 

its specific character—337, 338, 
339, 340, 341, 454 

as a Specific form of money- 
dealing capital—338, 347, 
595 

and the process of production— 
357 

and the functioning capital—365 
historically precedes the capi- 
talist mode of production— 
369 

as property and as a function— 
368, 371, 372, 373 

its general formula—383, 384 

$$ 

— and the development of labour 
productivity—390, 39] 

— its fetishism—390, 808 

— and usury—586, 587, 588, 

589, 590 
— and capitalist mode .of produc- 
tion—593,. 594 
Also see: Loan capital, Usurer’s 
capital 
fretand—101, 118, 124, 125, 513, 
6ll, 613 
- Htlaly—19, 330, 768,778, 781, 877, 
878, 879, 880 
J 
Japan— 00 
L 
Labour 

~— purposive nature of labour—28 

— an combination of—79, 80, 

universal— 103 

co-operative—103 

intensity of—193 

tendency for the rate of labour 

exploitation to rise under capi- 

tallsm—234 

agricultural and industrial— 

617, 618 

— necessary and surplus labour of 
all society—617, 618, 419, 
620, 621 

— natural productivity of agricul- 
tural labour—617, 748 

— appears as the productiveness 

of capital—626 

— and the monopolizable force of 
Nature—630 

— Nature's productive power of 
labour—728 

— enforced labour—773 

— forced character of labour under 
capitalism—798 

— as the general agent in produc- 
tion—803 

— labour-process as process between 
man and Nature—805 

Also see: Productive force of social 

labour, Exploitation of labour. 

Labourer 

— and the socia) character o! his 

labour—84 

914 

SUBJECT INDEX 

and economy in his labour. con- 
ditions—86, 87, 88 

labour conditions of the labourer 
in the factory—88-95 
exploitation of—140, 

141, 192, 

193, 227, 228, 230, 233, 238, 
239, 242, 243, 250, 251, 252, 
378 

and the rate of profit—t74, 
176, 177 

living conditions of—184 

and the capitalist—192, 193, 
194, 373 

commercial worker—286, 287, 
294, 295 

agricultural labourer—604, 779 
as the seller of his individual 
labour-power—801 

Labour-power 

I 

use-value of—29, 30, 345, 378, 
384 

change of its value—112, 113, 201 
its absolute increase with 
the development of capitalism 
215 

depression of wages below the 
value of—230, 249 

and the development of produc- 
tive force of labour—242 
determination of the value of 
labour-power—287, 456, 723, 
801, 802, 837 . 

as a commodity—345 

is potentially capital—349 

in the slave system—456 - - 

and profit—sdl 

and rate of interest—501 

abour-time—620, 629, 830 

L 
Land 

rt 

and capital incorporated in it— 
604, 605 

use of land for building pur- 
poses—606 

nationalization of land -under 
capitalism—607, 608, 645 
value and price of—608,- 609, 
610, 618, 632, 653, 760, 761 
sale and purchase of—609 - 
monopoly of—630 

Natural fertility of—635, 636, 
652, 653, 654, 726, 728, 729, 751, 
761, 762, 792, 793, 795 

extending cultivated land—652, 
653 

its exploitation under capitalist 
mode of production—791, 792 
material element of every process 
of production—796 

— does not create value—796, 
787 
Landlord, flandlordism—see Large 

landed property, Big landowner 
Large landed property 

Law 

Lease 

its pre-capitalist 
601, 602, 619 
under capitalist mode of produc- 
tion—600, 601, 602, 603, 604, 
605, 606, 607, 608, 790, 791, 
792, 795, 800, 801 

cfiticism of Hegel's views. con- 
cerning—601, 602 

is realized economically in- the 
form of ground-rent—604, 605, 
606, 607 

and the surplus- -profit 632. 

forms —600, 

limitations to the investment 
of capital in the land— 
732, 733, 746 

does not create rent—737, -738, 
739 

lays obstacles to a rational. agri- 
culture—792, 793 

its role in the development of 
capitalist mode of production— 
792, 793, 800, 801 

fetishist character of—803, 804 
of value—\0-21, 174, 176, 177, 
620, 621, 629, 858, 868, 869, 
870, 871, 872, 873, 874, 875, 876 

term of —605, 606, 659 

and the interest on capital incor- 
porated in the land—605, 606 
share cropping—655 

and fixation of rent—659 - 

lease money—610, 611, 737 

and wages of the agricultural 
labourers—612, 613, 737, 738 
and rent—737 

+ Loan, its définition—461 

Loan capital 

a 

its function in the process of 
circulation—336, 337 

as a commodity of a_ special 
kind—335, 336, 337, 338, 344, 
347, 348, 349, 359, 360. - 

its use-value—345, 346, 347 
sources “of its. origin—394- 

SUBJECT INDEX O15 

— the mass of the loan capital is 
diferent from the mass of cir- 
culating money—488, 489 

— fictitious character of the Joan 
capital—496, 497 

— and the crisis—500, 501 

— and the period of renewed activ- 
ity—501 

— has a movement different from 
industrial capital—572, 573 

Also see: /nterest-bearing capital 

Machinery 
— reproduction of the value of— 
78, 81, 107, 108, 112, 115, 116, 
259, 260 ; 
— moral depreciation of—112—- 
— introduction of new machines 
under capitalism—112, 267-- 
—-relative. over-production of—117 
— and labour productivity—255 
Market- value—175, 176, 177, 178- 
182, 186, 187, 188 - 
Means of production 
— capitalist .as owner of—4l 
— and surplus-value—45, 46 
— economy in—83 
— -cheapening ol—84 : 
— as means of exploiting labour—85 
— as social property—430 : 
— as capital—794, 795, 804, 859 
Medium of circulation 
— and credit—433 
- — and the industria! cycle—514, 
515 : . 
—~ and the rate of interest—5i7, 
518 
— and foreign. trade—519-521 
Mercantilism—33], 765, 766 
Merchant's capital 
— as the independent part of the 
industrial capital—270, 285, 
286, 303, 305, 319 
— role of merchant's capital in 
capitalist reptoduction—270, 
286, 305, 319, 320, 321 
— criticism of- bourgeois econo- 
mists’ views on the nature of— 
~ 274 
— and the turnover—270, 9382, 297, 
298, 299, 300, 303, 304, 305, “306 
— and. the formation . of average 

eran ed 303, 304 
— and the commercial profit—282, 
291, 304 
— under pre-capitalist modes of 
production—22, 305 
—the pure form of merchant's capi- 
tal in wholesale trade—283, 284 
_ ps of the merchar.t's capital — 
Also. see: Money-dealing capital, 
Commercial capital 
Money 
_.—= as a means of circulation—315, 
316, 332, 333, 518, 519 
ps conversion of money into capi- 

tal—332, 3233 

— money-market-—359,° 360, 361, 
499, 517 

— as a form of capital—410, 434, 
436, 439 

— as.credit-money—426, 503, 504, 
524 

— as revenue—433, 436, 439 
— quantity of circulating money— 
436, 437 
— and reproduction process—437, 
438 
— ina period of crisig-—439 
— as absolute form of value—449, 
503, 504, 841 
— as the universal equivalent—503 
— and exchange among various 
- component parts of the social 
capital—518, 519 . 
~ = as the expression of the social 
character of wealth—-560 
- = as the expression of the social 
character of labour-—-593 
Money-capital 
— and the. industrial capitalist’s 
commodity-capital—282, 453 
-~ and development of industry— 
361 
— its concentration with: the devel- 
opment of capitalist mode of 
production—380 
— demand lor—41G, 411, 414, 424, 
503 
— and value of commodity- capital 
and productive capital—4l12 . 
Money -deating capital : 
— as .an. individualized part.—of 
industrial capital—310, 311, 
312: Dae eo 

916 SUBJECT INDEX’ 

— its metamorphosis—310, 311 
— its movement—310, 311, 312 
— its origin—312, 313, 314, 315, 
316, 317 
— and formation of a hoard—314, 
315, 316, 324, 325 : 
— and commercial capital—316, 
317 
— profit of—317 
Also see: Merchant’s capital 
Money-murket—359, 360, 499 
Monopoly 
— in industry—190, 192, 195, 
220, 233, 301, 308, 428, 429 
— of landed property—601, 602, 
603, 610, 619, 623, 733, 735, 739, 
744, 745, 754, 765, 839 

N 
Natural ecsonomy—767, 775, 776 

ce) 

Organic structure of capital 

— technical structure is the basis 
of—45, 46, 143, 747 

— tts definition—143, 144, 152, 
735, 744, 745 

— and the rate of profit—153 

— capital of higher composition— 
161, 741 

— capital of lower composition— 
161, 741 

— capital of average composition— 
161, 74] 

~— and the development of the pro- 
oe of labour—208, 209, 

— in the extractive industry—741 

— in the mining industry—74) 

— in agriculture—742, 746, 747, 
748, 749 

— in industry—747, 748 

Over-production of capital 

— relative—182, 251, 252 

— is aan of commadi- 
ties—246, 251, 252 

— absolute—246, 247, 250 

- Le overieccumulstion of capital— 

— depreciation of capital—247, 
249, 250 
— and the function of money as a 

medium of payment—249 

— and relative over-population — 
214, 249, 250, 251 

— is over-production of the means 
of production—250, 262 

— credit system as the main lever of 
—43] 2 

Also see: Economic crisis, Industrial 

cycle Fi 

P 

runama swindle—430 
Peasant proprietorship of tand par- 
cels—783, 784, 785, 787, 788, 
789, 790, 791, 792, 793 
Also see: Smal landed property 
Petty-bourgeois political economy— 
— Proudhon on loan-capital—339, 
340, 341 
— Proudhon on the perpetuation of 
commodity-production without 
mone y—594 
Physiocrats 
— their teaching—S91, 738, 739, 
765, 766. 767 
— Turgot onground-rent and inter- 

est—608 

Population 

— growthof the working popula- 
tion—214, 244 

— growth of population and pover- 
ty—214 

— excessive population—214, 240, 
244 

— and productive power of labour— 
214, 219, 236, 261 

— reduction of the agricultural pop- 
ulation with the development of 
capitalism —622 

—and means of existence—655 

— and the development of agri- 
culture—751, 752 

Precious metal 

— movement of—315, 316, 551, 
552, 553, 554, 555, 556, 557. 

— determination of its reserve 
fund—553, 554, 555 

— magnitude of a hoard of a coun- 
try—555 

— export and import of—556, 
557, 558, 571 4 

— amount of precious metals under 
the credit system—558, 559, 592 

Alsi 
Price 

Price 

SUBJECT INDEX GI7 

as expression of the social char- 
acter of wealth—5S60 
0 see: Gold, Silver 

and the cost-price—38 

monopoly price—165, 739, 744, 
747, 749, 753, 756, B11, 812, 
829, 839 

average market-price—186, 187 
its definition—347, 348 
market-price—186, 187, 349 
causes effecting the increase in 
prices—573 

and the rate of interest—572, 
573, 574 

of land 

and the monopoly price—756, 
790 

and the price of the agricultural] 
product—758, 760, 790 

its definition—788, 789 

its role in the case of small-scale 
agriculture—787, 788, 789, 792 

— and the rate ofinterest—790, 791 

Price 

Als 
Priva 

and the form of private landown- 
ership—792 

of production 

its definition—155, 156, 163, 
279, 280 

as the converted form of value 
— 157, .158, 161, 162, 170, 171, 
176, 191, 192, 194, 817, 818 
and the cost-price—163 
conditions affecting changes 
of its amount—163, 201, 202. 
203 

and the value of commodities — 
170, 174, 202, 203. 204, 625, 626, 
737, 739 

centre of gravitation of market- 
prices—176 

its definition by bourgeois econ- 
omists— 194 

effects of wage fluctuations on 
prices of production—196, 197. 
198, 199 

and the value of the agricultural 
product—742, 743, 744, 745, 
746, 747 

and the price of agricultural 
products—746, 747 

o see: Low of value 

te fanded property—see Landed 

property 

Private property 
— and the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction—261, 427, 592 
— and communism—756, 757 
Product 
—. and demand—641,: 642 
— value of the annual product— 
B01, 802, 817, 818, 823, 824, 
831, 832, 844, 845 
— gross product—815 
. Also see: Surplus-value 
Productive _forces—237, 244, 245, 
252, 258, 431, 861 
Productive power of social labour 
— as the productive power of capi- 
tal—45, 764 
— and saving of constant capital— 
77, 78, 80, 81, 82 
— and the rate of profit—85, 86, 
257, 258, 259 
— and the introduction of ma- 
chines—107, 255, 256 
— and, the increase of the organic 
composition of capital—160, 
208, 209, 212,244, 740,741 
— degree of its development—161 
— and value of the commodity— 
168, 169, 186, 187, 255, 256, 
259, 260, 626, 627 
— its significance for capitalist 
society—193, 194 
— and profit—193, 194, 195, 225. 
226, 232, 233 : 
— law of the tendency of the rate 
of profit to fall—209, 210, 211, 
212 
— and accumulation—213, 214, 215 
— and wages—215, 835 
— and population—218, 219, 243, 
244, 245, 261 
— price of the individual com- 
nodity—221, 222, 225, 226, 
259 : 
— and expansion of production— 
242 
— and employment of !abour-pow- 
er—242 
— andthe mass of use-values—243, 
260 
— and capital—243, 244 
— growth of the productive power 
of social labour and the capital- 
ist mode of production—254, 
255, 256, 257, 258, 259 

918 SUBJECT INDEX 

and the disproportion in its 
develapment—254 
— and circulating capital—255 
— and fixed capital—255 
— its increase—255 
— and the communist mode of 
production—256, 799, 800 
— and the relative decrease of the 
number of wage-workers—258 
— and competition—259, 260 
— and the wear and tear of fixed 
capital—260 
— and the material 
capital—260 
— Nature’s productive power of 
labour—728 
— and the wealth of society—799 
Production relations 
— capitalist—45, 84, 85, 383, 645- 
646, 794, 795, 797, 798, 853 
— contradiction between the pro- 
ductive forces and—244, 245, 
252, 253, 258, 431, 861 
— in the slave system—757, 810, 
859 
-— in communist society—757 
— correspondence of the production 
relations to the character of 
productive forces—772 
— under the exploiting modes of 
production—772, 773 
— reproduction oaf—773 
Profit 

elements of 

its definition—35, 36, 37, 42, 

43 44, 45, 46, 47, 48 

Torrens’ theory of—38, 39 

Ramsay’s theory of—39 

Malthus' theory of—39 

and surplus-value—47, 49, 164, 

165, 166, 170, 171, 176 

— and the prolongation of the work- 
ing-day—77 

— average profit—l40, 151, 154, 
155, 156, 157, 165, 167, 169, 170, 
171, 176, 177, 191, 193, 194, 205, 
206 

— and capital—150, 151, 167 

— source of—I65, 166, 167, 206 

— capitalists' conception of the ori- 
gin of—165, 167, 206, 225, 296 

— bourgeois political economy on — 
166, 209 

— industrial profit—278, 291 

— money-dealers’ prolit—317 

—e 

—in the stock company—427 
— as the appropriation of national 
labour—529 
— average profit as the regulator 
of capitalist production—764 
— limits of profit—838, 839 
Also see: Surplus-value 
Profit of enterprise 
— and the rate of interest—365, 
366, 368 
— and interest —368, 371, 372, 373, 
374 
— as the capitalist conceives it— 
373, 374, 375, 376, 381 
— and the wages of management— 
380, 381, 382 
Protective tariffs—428 

R 

Rate of exchange 
— barometer for the international 
movement of money metals— 
315, 561, 562, 563 
— and crisis—555, 556 

—of England with Asia—563, 
564, 571 
— and export of capital—563, 

564, 567, 568, 569, 570, 571 
— and the interest rate—567, 568, 
575, 576, 577 
— and conditions which determine 
its changes—578, 579 
of interest 
and the average rate of profit— 
352, 353, 355, 357, 358 
— and the industrial cycle—353- 
364 
= its tendency to [all-—354 
— average 

rate of interest—356- 
358 
— its volume—357-361 
— market rate of interest—359 
— in 1847—412 
— in 1856—413 
_- ae the rate of profit—413,-414, 

Rate of profit 
— definition of—42, 43, 45, -46, 
47, 48, 111 
— and the rate of surplus-value— 
43, 47, 48, 50, 51, 68, 69, 136, 
137, 138, 139, 164, 207.. 

Rate 

SUBJECT INDEX 

aes 919 

and the rate of interest—350, 
351, 355 

its measurement—46 

and differences between fixed and 
circulating capital—47, 149, 150 
value of money—50 

and the turnover of variable cap- 
ital—50 

and labour productivity—50, 
51, 81 

and variable capital—52, 53, 
55, 145, 146 

and the turnover—70, 71, 72, 73, 
74, 75, 76 

and the time of production— 
70, 71 

and the time of circulation—71 
and the constant working-day— 
77, 78 

and the prolongation of the work- 
ing-day—77 

and the value of constant capi- 
tal—80 

and quality of raw materials—82 
and the adulteration of elements 
of production—83 

and economy in labourer's liy- 
ing conditions—86 

and fluctuations in the price of 
raw materials—104, 105, 106, 107, 
110, {1 

and foreign trade—106 

and the organic structure of 
capital—140, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 
151 

comparison of national rates of 
profit—141, 148, 210, 211 

and the value of advanced capi- 
tal—193 

its calculation by the elements 
of the price of and individual 
commodity—-222, 223, 224 
stimulus of capitalist produc: 
tion—236, 237, 253, 25: 

and its reduction—241 

and formation of new capitalist 
enterprises—253 . 
Ricardo on—254 

as the starting-point of the his- 
torical development of capital— 
878, 879, 880 

of surplus-value 

definition of—42, 49, 229 

Relative 

Stavery, slave economy 

— and surplus-value—43 

— and the rate of profit—43, 47, 
48, 49-50, 68, 69, 136, 137, 138, 
207 > 

Also see: Exploitation of labour 

Raw materials 

— quality of raw materials and the 
tate of profit—8z 

— component part of the constant 
capital—105, 110 

— influence of the price of raw ma- 
terials on the rate of profit— 
105, 107, 110, 111, 136 : 

— and the value of the 
107, 110 

— and the productive rower of so- 
cial labour—107 

— component part of the circulating 
capital—107, 108 

-— influence of changes in prices 
of raw materials on the process- 
of reproduction—108, 115-119 

— available supplies of—IlI 

over-population—2\4, 217, 

219, 240, 244, 245, 246, 250, 251, 

258, 260, 614 

product — 

Reserve fund—459 
Russia 

— foreign trade of R.—125, 329, 
710 : 
— development of the capitalist 

mode of production in R.—329: 

~ — circulation of bank-notes in R.— 

512 
— peasantry in R.—710 

s 

Securities 

title of ownership—466 

component parts of—453, 454 

in the period of crisis—457 

depreciation of—457 

title to future production—458. 

their quotation on the stock 

exchange—466 

— and the development al capital- 
ist production—-466, 467 

Also see: Stock 

Pit 

Sitver—312, 315, 539, 540, 546, 552, 

553, 554, 565, 578 
Also see: Precious metal 

— and the capitalist mode ‘of pro- 

920 SUBJECT 

INDEX 

duction—30, 334 

and the conversion of products 
into commodities—174, 320 
role of commerce in the develop- 
ment of the slave economy—326 
work of supervision—377, 378 
and the usurer’s capital—580, 
581, 582 

spoliation of the soil by the 
slave-owners in the United 

States—605 

— and landed property—619 

— production relations in—757, 
810, 859 

— and the slave's labour condi- 
tions—771 

systems of—784 
price of slaves—788 
antagonistic form of surplus- 
labour in the slave system—799 
Small landed property 

— form of landed property for small- 
scale operation—600, 787 
causes of decay of small-scale 
landed property—787 
and the development of produc- 
tive power of labour—787 
and price of land—788, 790, 
791, 792 
illusions created by—789, 790 
expropriation of the smal] land- 
ed property as the basis of the 
capitalist made of production— 
792 
and exploitation of land—792, 
793 

Also see: Peasant proprietorship of 

fand parcels 
Small landowner—779, 782 783, 784, 

785, 786 

Small producer, small production— 
173, 174, 211, 328, 329, 330, 600, 
674, 770, 771, 772, 773, 774, 
775, 776, 779, 787, 790, 872, 873 

Socialism—see Communist mode of 
production 

Socialist revolution—259, 431, 757 
Society 

— its wealth—349, 431, 560, 799 

— its economic and political struc- 
ture—772, 798 
State 
— and import and export of pre- 
cious metal—315 

as owner of the surplus-product 
in pre-capitalist societies—325 

— national debt—387, 388, 454, 
455, 514 
— government bonds—395, 400, 

447, 448, 457, 465, 466, 491, 789 
and differential rent—646 

— as a landowner—771 
Stock 

— and gambling on the stock ex- 
change—430 
and contradiction between the 
social character of production 
and individual appropriation— 
430 
as a title of ownership, a ficti- 
tious capital—456, 457 . 
circulation and market-value of— 

457, 458 
— preferred and deferred stocks— 
460 

Stock capital 
and the general rate of profit— 
235 : 
as capital of associated individ- 
uals—427 
contradiction of—427, 428, 429 
as a mere phase of transition to 
a new form of production— 
428, 429, 431 
Stock company 

— and falling of the general rate 
of profit—257, 428 
and the separation of the capi- 
{al function from the capital 

ownership in the process of 
ap oenction 31 380, 427, 
42 

the separation of wages of man- 
agement from profits of enterprise 

—380, 381, 427 . 
— profit in stock companies—381, 
427, 428 

and competition—428, 429 | 
as the next high stage in develop- 
ment of capitalist production— 
428, 885 

parasitic nature of—429 
organization of—429 c 
United Alkali Trust—429, 885 
development of stock company 
during the second half of the 
19th century—885 

Stock exchange—430, 498, 885 

Ltt 

SUBJECT (NDEX 921 

Surplus-labour 

and the cast-price—44 

growth of the mass of surplus- 
labour with the development of 
production—214 
its natural basis—617 
ground-rent as the product of 
unpaid surplus-labour—619, 770, 
771, 772, 773 

forms of surplus-labour—770, 
771, 772-773 

source of profit—674 
limits of —772-773 e 
category— 

as_a non-historica) 

799 

compulsory character of sur- 
plus-labour under capitalism 
—799 

and necessary labour—801, 812, 
813 
and the general rate of profit— 
853 

Surplus-profit 

— its 

formation—194, 195, 626- 
633, 634, 710-716 

for waterlalls—626-633 
transformation of surplus-prof- 
it into rent—631-633, 710- 
720, 745-746 

in industry—743 

Surplus-value 
— formation of—34, 35 

its source—34, 147 

as the transmuted form of prof- 
it—35, 36, 37 

its seeming origin [rom sale—37- 
38, 39, 44, 136, 807 

Proudhon on the origin ol—39 
and the time of circulation—43, 
274, 275, 807 

and the profit—49 

and the wages—5l, 52, 

and the length of the working- 
day—51, 52 : 
and the turnover of capital— 
70 

its seeming origin from total 
capital—164, 165 

- relative surplus-value—214 

limitol surplus-value is the phiye- 
ical maximum of the working- 
day—238, 838, 840 

factors determining surplus-val- 
ue—242 

— conditions for its existence— 

619-620 . 
— its division in capitalist society— 
800 
— its forms—811, 812, 813, 819 
826-827, 831-832 7 
- bistarital development of—8g0- 
Also see: Profit 

T 

Tendency of rate of profit to fall, 

law of 

— as the result of the develop. 
ment of the productivity of la- 
bour—208, 209, 211, 212, 215, 
253 

— and the rising of the organic com- 
position of the capital—208- 
213, 234 

— and bourgeois political economy— 
209, 219, 220 

— as thelaw of capitalist produc- 
tion—209 

— and growth of absolute magni- 
tude of the surplus-value—213, 
214-216, 218-220, 243 

— and relative over-population— 
214, 217, 219, 231 

— and the increasing intensity of 

exploitation—227, 228, 234 
— and technical progress—228, 
229 

— factors due to which the law acts 
as a tendency—229, 230, 233 

— and depression of wages below 

the value of !abour-power—230 

and counteracting agencies— 

227-235, 244 

— and cheapening of elements -of 

constant capital—230-231 

and foreign trade—232-234 

and the productive labour—234 

and stock capital—235 

and. the capitalist mode of pro- 

duction—237 

— and the competitive struggle— 
248-249, 250-251 

{tbl 

Time of production—70, 297 
Town 

— role of commerce in the develop- 
ment of towns—327 7 
— and country-side—779-780, 781 

922 SUBJECT INDEX 
Turnover — and the average rate of profit-= 

— andthe rate of profit—S0, 70- 151 
76, 149, 223, 224 . —and the price of production—I74, 

— and surplus-value—70 839, 871-883 _ 

— of merchant's capital and mer- — conditions determining the sale 
cantile prices—270-273, 297, of commodities ai their yalue— 
306, 307, 309 174, 175, 176, 177, 178, 184 

— of industrial capital—271, 297, — and market-value—175, 176, 
298, 303, 304, 307 645-646 

— rate of turnover and the amount — individual value—175, 179, 
of merchant's capital—273 180, 181 

— and the commercial profit—308, — average value—181 
309 — and the commodity-price—189, 

Use-calue 848, 849 - 

of machinery—80 

and the capitalist mode of pro- 
duction—191, 561 

of commodity—274 

of money serving as capital— 
333, 337, 344, 345, 348, 384 
as the bearer of exchange-yalue— 
631 

Usurer’s capital 

historical form precedlng the 
capitalist mode of production— 
580-581 

its development is bound up 

with the development of mer- 
chant’s capital—580 

developed to its highest point 
in ancient Rome—580 - 
in pre-capitalist formations— 
581, 582-583 

and capitalist mode of produc: 
tion—582, 583, 584, 596 
exploits a given mode of produc- 
tion without altering it—582, 
583, 584, 596 

its influence on pre-capitalist 
modes of production—583, 584 
and the generating of capital— 
584 

and the Iunction of money as a 
means of payment—586 
opposition to—587-590 

and preconditions for the devel- 
Dal of industrial capital— 
596 

Also see: Interest- -bearing capital 
Usury—see Usurer's capital 
Value of the commodity 
- — and the cost-price—26 

— its 

definition—42, 86, 

138, 
148, 841-843, 859-860 

139, 

its socia] character—646 

and the monopoly price—839 
regulates the production—858 
Loria on—868-869 

Sombart on—871 

Schmidt on—871-872 

Variable capital—30, 32, 52, 53, 112, 

113, 114, 115, 143, 144. 145, 
168, 518, 519, 831 Fi 
Vulgar bourgeois political economy 

Malthus on the regulation of the 
cost of production by demand and 
supply—187, 188 

criticism of the methodology of 

vulgar economists—226, 767, 
797-798, 807 
vulgar economists confuse trad 

ing capital and industrial capi- 
tal—262 

Say on the correlation of com- 
Merce and production—274 
vulgar economists on mercantile 
profit, commodity-capital and 
money-capital—318, 319 
Roscher on commodity-capital— 
319 

Bosanquet on interest—364 - 
vulgar economists on profit— 
8-10, 381 

vulgar economists on capital— 
385 

“Currency Principle” school— 
408, 409, 410. 442, 535, 537-540, 
542, 550-551 

Overstone’s confusion over capi- 
tal—410, 411, 412, 420-425 ... 
Fullarton on cap ital—439, 440, 
ek 442, 443, 44d. 448, 449, 450, 
45 

criticism of the theory. of absli- 

SUBJECT INDEX 923 

nence—496 
— vulgar economists on the crises 
of aver-praduction—54! 

— John Stuart Mill on the Bank Act 
of 1844—543-544 
— John Stuart Mill's 

money—543-544 

little-shilling school—S47 

— Carey on the capitalist mode of 
roduction—607 

— Rodbertus on rent—759 

— criticism of Malthus’ theory of 
diminishing returns—644, 655 

theory of 

t 

WwW 
Wages 
— as the converted form of value 
and the price of labour-power— 
30, 44, 113, 455, 456, 797, 798, 
799, 837-838, 848-849 
— and the rate of profit—5l, 52, 

56, 57, 64, 65, 104, 176, 177, 
196, 501, 833 
— and introduction of the ten- 

hour working day—106 
— and prices of production—196, 

197, 198, 199, 200 

— and labour productivity—215, 
835 

— depression of wages below the 
value of labour-power—230, 
249 

— and the requirements of the la- 
bourers—24! 

— of commercial labourer—292, 
293 

— and the supply and demand of 
labour-power—349, 842.843 

— for skilled labour—379 

— and ground-rent —610-611 

—of farm- labourers—612, 613, 
614, 615, 616, 617 
— and labour—794, 795, 802, 803 
— as the basis of the limitation of 
revenues—837 
— limits of—837 
—- and competition—842 
— basis of wages common to all 
Modes of production—859 
Wars and usury—585 
Waste, its usage—79, 80, 
Wealth of society 
— its antagonistic character under 
capitalism —349, 431 
— its social nature—431, 560 
— and labour productivity—799 
World-market 
— basis of capitalist production— 
109 
— competition in—118 
— creation of—261, 328 
— struggle for supremacy in—331, 
478 
Working-day 
— its length and the rate of prof- 
it—51, 64, 65, 723-724 
— its prolongation—112, 228 
— and the exploitation of labour— 

100, 102 

193, 2t1 

— necessity of shortening the work- 
ing-day—800 

- sragile eaver the limits of —806 

— division of the working-day into 

necessary labour and surplus- 
labour—812-813 
— physical maximum of—~838 

Work of management and supervision 
— its necessity—376-378 
— Mommsen on—377 
— Aristotle on—377, 378 
— its origin—378, 37) 
— and wages—378, 379 

K. MAPKC 
KANHTAA 
tom II! 

Ha akeauticxom n3eine 

Tlomnacatio b negate 4/VITI 69 r, opmat 60% 92"\4. Bym. n. 287/578, med. J. 
y4. waa, a. 57,59 Ban. 2757. Tupam 21.000 Llena 28 pyd. 

Tleppan OSpa3zuopan Tanorpapua umenn A. A. Kaanoga 
MockoncHoro Fopogcxora Connapxosa 
Mockga K-54. Banopan 28. 

Printed in the Union of Sovtet Soctalist Republics