The Poverty of Philosophy
Karl Marx (Harry Quelch, trans.) (1913)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): Karl Marx's Misere de la philosophie (1847) in Harry Quelch's English translation, from the 1913 Charles H. Kerr & Company edition (Chicago). Scan via Internet Archive (Claremont School of Theology library). Library stamps, bookseller matter and scan artifacts trimmed from beginning and end; the full text — Introduction, Author's Introductory Note, both chapters in all sections, and three appendices — is complete per the edition's table of contents. This 1913 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


BEING A TRANSLATION OF
MISÈRE
DE LA PHILOSOPHIE


(A REPLY TO “LA PHILOSOPHIE DE LA MISERE” OF
M, PROUDHON)


BY


KARL MARX, (0/7-/8"3


WITH A PR


FRIEDRICH ENGELS


Translated by H. Queich.


CHICAGO
CHARLES H. KERR & COMPANY
1913


CONTENTS


Introduction rp Macphee) Be eon Net MRR OPM e eM Pee el LBP PIV 5
TENANCY ep i a 8 atc Seep a EE te SR PLD 9
PNAECIN OES oT CLACE 2 oes ca ors co een a oe ones aad ast aden te Noalntes 29
Author's Introductory Note  .........:.:ccccsccscninesvessnsiscescnsssescssses 31
CHAPTER I.—A Scientific Discovery.
Section 1I.—Opposition of Utility Value to Exchange
SUE We cis * Bate eer a Sl ath re Mb UREA 33
He II.—Constituted or Synthetic Value.................. 46
2 III.—Application of the Law of the Proportion
of Value—(a) Money.........-......cscsecsccecseeee 85
ee de (De Surplas slab Or icccscccssescxee 97
CHAPTER II.—The Metaphysics of Political Economy.
Section), (l.—#0he Method 125... taco ise cece tescbeecrcsectee nabestitoechn 112
4 II.—The Division of Labor and Machinery.... 138
a III.—Competition and Monopoly..........2.......0+ 158
H DV-—Property and: Rent 1.10.5, tess onataesed-eessasseens 168
4 V.—Strikes and the Combination of Workmen 181
Appendix I—Proudhon Judged by Marx...............-ccce 193
zi II.—John Gray and his Theory of Labor Notes 203


” NAW Pie ean Tt Ore soacectsocsake cca saceacvceuccssentenconorscnechacesces 208


$i ad : >t a Mg
ERS Be Sak RAC Es be
Ths ob Sg We kg ea hy a
a he ; Sa tae 5 Meee physi ae


Pe mo? cans kee eas a ue ate
? Les om eee Rn ER st Pooe oa


ee 4 7 z ‘
ey x Age Fa med §


INTRODUCTION.


_No apology, I imagine, is necessary for the appear-
ance of this translation of Marx’s “Misére de la
Philosophie.” On the contrary it is strange that it
should not have been published in England before, ana
that the translation of his monumental work, the
“Capital,” tardy as that was, should have yet been made
before that of a work which was originally published
some twenty years before “Capital’’ first appeared.

It may be that the translators and editors of the latter
work were of opinion that in view of the comprehensive-
ness of “Capital,” a publication of an English edition
of the “Misére de la Philosophie’? would be a work of
supererogation. Or it may be that they thought a book so
distinctly French—as the “Capital” may be said to be
._ distinctly English—and which was, further, exclusively
a criticism of a work of Proudhon’s little known ia
England—would have slight interest for English readers.
On the other hand, the groundwork of the theories so
fully elaborated in “Capital,” apart from its ex-
haustive analysis of the capitalist system of production
and distribution, will be found in “Misére.” In ad-
dition, there are several subjects—notably that of rent—

5


8 INTRODUCTION


dealt with in this volume which are barely touched upon
in the single book of “Capital” which has been translated
into English.

Marx’s criticism of Proudhon’s theory that “the time
which is necessary to create a commodity indicates
exactly its degree of utility,” so that “the things of which
the production costs the least time are the things which
are the most immediately useful,’ has been matched by

_H. M. Hyndman’s crushing refutation of the theory of
Final Utility. The subject of rent, too, has been fully
dealt with by the latter in the same book, “The
Economics of Socialism,” published, as the author says,
in the hope of furnishing “the rapidly-increasing number
of students of sociology with a concise and readable
statement of the main theories of the scientific school of
political economy founded by Karl Marx and Friedrich
Engels.” Neither of these facts, however, necessarily
detracts from the value of this older work of Marx’s.
On the question of rent, after reviewing the Ricardian
theory and the many objections which present themselves
to that theory, Hyndman says: “It seems, threfore, that
a wider definition of the rent of land under capitalism
is needed than that given by Ricardo, and the following
is suggested :—Rent of land is that portion of the total
net revenue which is paid to the landlord for the use of
plots of land after the average profit on the capital em-
barked in developing such land has been deducted.” On
the question of confiscating rent he says it “would not
affect the position of the working portion of the com-
munity unless the money so obtained were devoted to
giving them more amusement, to providing them with
better surroundings and the like.... In fact, the attack
upon competitive rents is merely a capitalist attack. That
class sees a considerable income going off to a set of


INTRODUCTION 9


people who take no part in the direct exploitation of
labor; and its representatives are naturally anxious to
stop this leakage, as they consider it, and to reduce their
own taxation for public purposes by appropriating rent
to the service of the State. That is all very well for
them.”

On this point Marx says: “We can understand such
economists as Mill, Cherbulliez, Hilditch and others,
demanding that rent should be handed over to the State
to be used for the remission of taxation. That is only
the frank expression of the hate which the industrial
capitalist feels for the landed proprietor, who appears to
him as a useless incumbrance, a superfluity in the other-
wise harmonious whole of bourgeois production.”

“Rent,” says Marx, “results from the social relations
in which exploitation is carried on. It cannot result from
the nature, more or less fixed, more or less durable, of
land. Rent proceeds from society and not from the soil.”

The criticism of Proudhon’s appreciation of gold and
silver as the first manifestation of this theory of “con-
stituted value” should be interesting reading to those
admirers of the French Anarchist who yet profess their
profound detestation of money and its function. So,
too, should his declaration against strikes and combina-
tions of workmen. In this we see once more how ex-
tremes meet. This declaration of Proudhon’s would not
be out of place in the organ of the Liberty and Property
Defence League.

In this matter of trade union combination, Marx was
scarcely accurate in his perception of its development.
He clearly did not foresee that the great English trade
unions would become fossilised, as it were; and that
instead of being a revolutionary force they would become
a reactionary mass, opposing the progress of the mere


8 INTRODUCTION


proletarian outside their ranks, as they have done. With
the spread of Socialist ideas among them, however, their
exclusive character is being modified, and they may even
yet take that place in the revolutionary working-class
movement which Marx anticipated they would occupy.
Given this change of attitude, the development must
inevitably be along the lines he predicted. We are
seeing “in face of constantly united capital, the mainte-
nance of the association [becoming] more important
and necessary for them than the maintenance of wages,”
and, further, that the combinations of capital are forcing
the trade unions to that point where “association takes a
political character.”

It is scarcely necessary to point out that in this work,
written in 1847, some words have a meaning quite other
than that which they bear to-day. Thus, for instance,
the words “Socialists” and “Socialism,” where they
occur, refer to the utopians—who formulated theories of
a social system independent of the industrial evolution—
and to these theories themselves.

In most cases the numerous quotations have been
verified and reproduced in the original. In some in-
stances, however, they are summaries rather than quota-
tions, and appear as translated.

A translation in necessarily an imperfect presentation
of the thoughts, ideas, and conclusions of the author.
In this work I have endeavored to adhere as closely as
possible to the form and letter, as well as the spirit of
the original, and to this the indulgent reader is asked to
ascribe such faults of language as would otherwise merit
his censure.


H. QUELCH.


PREFACE.


THE present work was written in the winter of
1846-7, at a time when Marx had just elucidated the
principles of his new historical and economic theory.*
The “Systéme des Contradictions Economique ou
Philosophie de la 'Misére,” of Proudhon, which had just
appeared, gave him the opportunity of developing his
principles in opposing them to the ideas of the man who
from then was to take a preponderating place among the
French Socialists of his epoch. From the moment when
both of them at Paris had lengthily discussed economic
questions together, often for whole nights at a stretch,
their tendency had been to drift further and further
apart: Proudhon’s book showed that there was already


* “Ta Misére de la Philosophie,” written in French, was
published in 1847 in Paris, by A, Franck, 69, Rue Richelieu,
and in Brussels by C. G. Vogler, 2, Petite Rue de la Madeline;
it was translated into German by E. Bernstein_and Karl
Kautsky, and published in 1892 by the Social-Democratic
Party, together with this preface by Engels. :

Marx’s own copy of the work, which, as well as his other
books were given by his two daughters, Laura and Eleanor,
to the German Social-Democratic Party, to form the basis of
a library for the party, bears some corrections from the hand
of the author, They have been reproduced in this edition.—
Note by Editor,

9


10 PREFACE


an impassable gulf between them; to keep silence was no
longer possible. Marx demonstrates in this reply the
irreparable rupture which had taken place.

The summary of Marx’s judgment of Proudhon is
expressed in the article reproduced as an appendix to
this work, which first appeared in the Sozialdemokrat of
Berlin, Nos. 16, 17 and 18. It was the only article Marx
ever wrote for that journal. The efforts of Herr von
Schweitzer to drag the paper into governmental and
feudal waters constrained us ‘to publicly withdraw from
it after a few weeks.

The present work has for Germany a special import-
ance which Marx did not foresee. How could he have
known that in attacking Proudhon he at the same time
struck a blow at the idol of the Strebars (arrivistes) of
to-day, Rodbertus, whose name even he did not know?

This is not the place to deal at length with the rela-
tions existing between Marx and Rodbertus; I may soon
have the opportunity to do it. Suffice it here to say
that when Rodbertus accuses Marx of having “pillaged”
him, and of having in his “Capital” profited much by
his work, “Zur Erkenntniss,” &c., without making aay
acknowledgment, he allows himself to be guilty of a
calumny which is only to be explained by the natural
ill-humor of a misunderstood genius, and his remarkable
ignorance of everything occurring outside of Prussia,
and notably of Socialist and economic literature. These
accusations never, any more than the work we have
cited, came under the notice of Marx; of Rodbertus’s
work he knew nothing, except the three “Sozialen
Briefe” (“Social Letters”), and even these certainly not
before 1858 or 1859.

There is much more foundation for Rodbertus’s claim
to have in these letters discovered “the constituted value


PREFACE i


of Proudhon” long before Proudhon. But he is wrong
in flattering himself with the belief that he was the first
to discover it. In any case, the present work criticises
him with Proudhon, and this forces me to dilate some-
what upon his fundamental brochure, “Zur Erkenntniss
unserer Staatswirthschaftlichen Zustande” [On the Ex-
planation of our Economical Position], 1842, at least in
so far as this work of his, besides the communism of
Weitling, which it also contains, however unconsciously
anticipates Proudhon.


In so far as modern Socialism, of no matter what
tendency otherwise ‘it may be, proceeds from bourgeois
political economy, it almost exclusively attaches itself
to the theory of value of Ricardo. The two propositions
which Ricardo in 1817 put at the head of his “Principles” ;
First, that the value of each commodity is only and
solely determined by the quantity of labor exacted by its
production; and, second, that the product of the totality
of social labor is shared between the three classes of
landlords (rent), capitalists (profit), and laborers
(wages )—these two propositions had already in England

afforded’ material for Socialist conclusions. They had
been deduced with so much clearness and profundity that
this literature, which has now almost disappeared and
which Marx had in great part discovered, could not be
surpassed until the appearance of “Capital.” We shall
return to this another time. When Rodbertus, in 1842,
on his side drew certain Socialist conclusions from the
principles above stated, that was then certainly an im-
portant step for a German to take, but it was only a
discovery for Germany. Marx shows how little there is
of novelty in a similar application of the theory of
Ricardo by Proudhon, who suffered from an equal
imagination.


12 , PREFACE


“Whoever is, no matter how little, acquainted, with
the movement of political economy in England, cannot
but know that nearly all the Socialists of that country
have, at different times, proposed the equalitarian (that
is to say, Socialist) application of the Ricardian theory.”
We might cite to M. Proudhon the “Political Economy”
of Hopkins, 1822; William Thompson, “An Inquiry into
the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth most Con-
ducive to Human Happiness,” 1827; T. R. Edmonds,
“Practical Moral and Political Economy,” 1828, &c., &c.,
and we might add pages of “&c.” We will content our-
selves with hearing an English Communist, Bray, in his -
remarkable work, “Labor’s Wrongs and Labor’s
Remedy,” Leeds, 1839, and these quotations from Bray
alone settle, for the most part, the claim to priority set
up by Rodbertus.

At this time Marx had not entered the reading-room
of the British Museum. Beyond the libraries, besides
my books and my extracts, which he read during a
journey of six weeks which we made together in England
in the summer of 1845, he had perused only the books
which one could procure at Manchester. The literature
of which we have spoken was then not as inaccessible
as it may be at the present time. If, in spite of that, it
was unknown to Rodbertus, that is entirely due to the
fact that he was an exclusive Prussian. He is the
veritable founder of specifically Prussian Socialism, and
he is at last recognized as such.

However, even in his beloved Prussia, Rodbertus
could not remain in absolute ignorance of the work of
others. In 1859 there appeared at Berlin the first book
of the “Critique de Economie Politique,” by Marx.
There we find, among the objections raised by the
economists against Ricardo, as second objection, p. 40:


\


PREFACE 13


“Tf the value in exchange of a product is equal to the
labor time which it contains, the value in exchange of
a day of labor is equal to its product. Or, indeed, wages
must be equal to the product of labor. But it is the
contrary which is true.” In a note: “This objection
raised against Ricardo from the side of the economists,
has been raised again later. by the Socialists. The theo-
retical exactitude of the formula being admitted, the
practice is accused of being in contradiction to the theory,
and bourgeois society was invited to draw practically
the conclusions implied by the theory. Some English
Socialists have, at least in this sense, turned the formula
of the exchange-value of Ricardo against political
economy.” We are referred in this note to the “Misere
de la Philosophie” of Marx, which was then in all the
libraries.

It was, then, sufficiently easy for Rodbertus to convince
himself of the real novelty of his discoveries of 1842.
Instead of that he has not ceased to proclaim them, and
to believe them to be so incomparable that he has never
once been able to suppose that Marx all alone could
have drawn from Ricardo the same conclusions as
Rodbertus himself had done. That was impossible.
Marx had “pillaged” him—him to whom the same Marx
had offered every facility for convincing himself that
long before either of them these conclusions, at least in
the gross form that they still possess with Rodbertus,
had already been expressed in England.

The most simple Socialist application of the theory
of Ricardo is that which we have given above. In many
cases it has led to perceptions on the origin and the
nature of surplus-value which have gone far beyond
Ricardo. The same may be said with regard to
Rodhertus. Not only does he in this order of ideas never


14 PREFACE


present anything which has not already been at least as
well said before, but his expositions also possess all the
defects of those of his predecessors. He accepts the
economic categories of labor, capital, value, in the crude
form in which they had been transmitted to him by the
economists, under their assumed form, without seeking
their content. He thus not only closes to himself all
means of developing himself more completely—contrary
to Marx who, for the first time, has made something
of these propositions so often reproduced during the past
sixty-four years—but he takes the road which leads
straight to utopia, as we will show.

The above application of the theory of Ricardo, which
shows to the workers that the totality of social pro-
duction, which is their product, belongs to them because
they are the only real producers, leads direct to Commun-
ism. But it is also, as Marx shows, false in form,
economically speaking, because it is simply an application
of morality to economy. According to the laws of
bourgeois economy, the greater part of the product does
not belong to the workers who have created it. If, then,
we say, “That is unjust, it ought not to be’; that has
nothing whatever to do with economy, we are oualy
stating that this economic fact is in contradiction to our
moral sentiment. That is why Marx has never based
upon this his Communist conclusions, but rather upon
the necessary overthrow, which is developing itself
under our eyes every day, of the capitalist system of
production. He contents himself with saying that
surplus-value consists of unpaid labor; it is a fact, pure
and simple. But that which may be false in form from
the economic point of view may yet be exact from the
point of view of universal history. If the moral senti-
ment of the mass regards an economic fact—as, formerly,


_ PREFACE 16


slavery and serfdom—as unjust, that proves that this
fact itself is a survival; that other economic facts are
established thanks to which the first has become in-


supportable, intolerable. Behind the formal economic


inexactitude may, therefore, be hidden a very real
economic content. It would, however, be out of place
here to dwell at length on the importance and the history
of surplus-value.

We can draw other conclusions from Ricardo’s theory
of value, and that has been done. The value of com-


- modities is determined by the labor exacted by their


production. But it is found that in this wicked world
commodities are bought sometimes above, sometimes be-
low, their value, and besides, there is the relation to the
variations of competition. As the rate of profit has a
tendency to maintain itself at the same level for all
capitalists, the price of commodities tends also to sink
to the value of labor, through the intermediary of supply
and demand. But the rate of profit is calculated upon
the total capital employed in an industrial enterprise ;
on the other hand, in two different branches of industry
the annual production may incorporate equal masses of
labor, that is to say, present equal values, while, if the
wages are at an equal level in these two branches, the
capital advanced can be, and often is, doubled or trebled
in one or the other branch. Ricardo’s law of value, as
Ricardo himself has already discovered, is in contra-
diction to the law of the equality of the rate of profit.
If the products of the two branches are sold at their
value, the aggregates of profits cannot be equal; but if
the rates of profit are equal, the products of the two
branches are not sold at their value everywhere and
always. We have then, here, a contradiction, an anta-
gonism between two economic laws. The practical solu-


16 PREFACE


‘tion operates, according to Ricardo (chap. i., sections
4 and 5) regularly in favor of the rate of profit at the
expense of the value.

But Ricardo’s definition of value, in spite of its evil
characteristics, has a phase which renders it dear to our
good bourgeoisie. That is the side on which it’ appeals
with irresistible force to their, sense of justice. Justice
and equality of rights, those are the twin pillars upon
which the bourgeoisie of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries would raise their social edifice above the ruins
of injustice, of feudal inequalities and privileges. The
determination of the value of commodities by labor and
the free exchange which arises according to this measure
of value between the possessors of equal rights, such are,
as Marx has already shown, the real foundation upon
which all the political, juridical and philosophicat
ideology of the modern bourgeoisie is erected. When
one knows that labor is the measure of commodities, the
good sentiments of the worthy bourgeoisie must feel
deeply wounded by the wickedness of the world, which,
indeed, nominally recognises this principle of justice,
but which every momeat without compunction actually
appears to set it on one side. Above all, the “little man,”
whose honest labor—even when it is only that of his
workmen or of his apprentices—loses every day more
and more of its value through the competition of the
great industry and of machinery; above all, the small
producer must ardently desire a society in which the
exchange of products according to their labor-value
would be a complete and invariable reality. In other
terms, he must ardently desire a society in which a
single law of production of commodities reigns fully and
exclusively, but in which the conditions which alone
render this law effective, that is to say, the other laws of


PREFACE 1°


the production of commodities, or better, of capialist
production, were entirely suppressed.

This utopia has struck its roots deep and wide in the
thought of the modern middle class—real or ideal. This
is demonstrated by the fact that already in 1831 it had
been systematically developed by John Gray ; that at this
period it had been practically tried, theoretically ex-
pounded, in England, proclaimed as the most recent
truth in 1842 by Rodbertus in Germany, in 1846 by
Proudhon in France, and again published by Rodbertus
as the solution of the social question, and, so to speak,
his social testament in 1871; and in 1884 it receives the
adhesion of the sequel evolved under the name of Rod-
bertus to exploit Prussian State Socialism.


The criticism of this utopia has been made so com-
pletely by Marx, as well against Proudhon as against
Gray (Cf. appendix 2 of this work), that I need only
devote myself here to some remarks on the special form
that Rodbertus has adapted to formulate and express it.

As we have said: Rodbertus accepts the traditional
economic concepts under the exact form in which they
have been transmitted to him by the economists. He
does not make the slightest attempt to verify them.
Value is for him “the quantitative valuation of one thing
relatively to others, this valuation being taken for
measure.” This none too rigorous definition gives us at
the most an idea of what value appears almost to be, but
does not say absolutely what it is. But as it is all that
Rodbertus is able to tell us about value, it is com-
prehensible that he seeks for a measure of value outside
of value. After having at random, and without method,
twisted use-value and exchange-value about under a
hundred aspects with that power of abstraction so in-
finitely admired by M. Adolphe Wagner, he arrives at


18 - PREFACE


this result—that there is no real measure of value, and
that it is necessary to be content with a supererogatory
measure. Labor may be such measure, but only in the
case of .an exchange between products of equal quantities
of labor; if the case is otherwise in other instances, it is
not so unless one has taken means to assure it. Value
and labor thus remain without the least real relation to
each other, although all the first chapter has been de-
voted ‘to an endeavor to explain to us how and why the
cost of commodities is determined by labor and by
nothing but labor.

Labor is yet again taken in the form in which one
meets it with the economists. And not even that. Be-
cause although there may be something said as_to the
difference in intensity of labor, it is very generally repre-
sented as something which “costs,” that is to say which
is a measure of value, whether it be expended or not
under the normal conditions of society. Whether the
producers employ ten days in the manufacture of pro-
ducts which could be manufactured in one day, or if they
employ only one; whether they use the best or the worst
implements ; whether they apply their labor time to the
manufacture of articles socially necessary or in the
quantity socially required; whether they make articles
for which there is no demand at all.or articles for which
there is more or less demand—of all that there is no
question ; labor is labor, the product of equal labor must
be exchanged with the product of equal labor. Rod-
bertus, who in all other cases is always ready, whether
it be relevant or not, to place himself at the nationa!
point of view and to consider the relations of isolated
producers from the height of the observatory of general
society, timidly avoids all that here. Simply because
from the first line of his book he goes straight to the


PREFACE 19


utopia of the labor-note, and that all analysis of labor
as the producer of value only strews his route with
difficulties. His instinct was here considerably stronger
than his power of abstraction—that cannot be discovered
in Rodbertus, it may be said in passing, only by means
of the most concrete poverty of ideas.

The journey to utopia is quickly made. “The dis-
positions” which fix the exchange of commodities ac-
cording to the value of labor as following an absolute
law present no difficulty. All the other utopians of this
tendency, from Gray to Proudhon, are at great pains to
elaborate social measures. In order to realize this object
they at least endeavor to resolve the economic question
by economic means, due to the action of the owner of
commodities who exchanges them. For Rodbertus itis
much more simple. As a good Prussian he calls in the
State. A decree of the public power establishes the
reform.

Value is thus then happily “constituted,” but not the
priority of this constitution which is claimed by Rod-
bertus. On the contrary, Gray as well as Bray—among
many others—have often expressed the same idea; they
piously desire measures by which the products will
exchange, in spite of all obstacles, always and only at
their value in labor. After the State has thus consti-
tuted value—at least of a part of the products, as Rod-
bertus is modest—it issues its labor-notes; in effect, as
advances to the industrial capitalists with which the
workers are paid; the workers then buy the products
with the labor-notes they have received and thus permit
the return of the paper money to its original source. It
is necessary to learn from Rodbertus himself how
admirably that develops.

“For this second condition we must secure the dis-


20 PREFACE


.


position which exacts that the value attested should be
really in circulation by giving only to him who actually
delivers a product, a note on which should be marked
exactly the quantity of labor necessary for the manufac-
ture of the product. He who delivers a product of two
days’ labor would receive a note marked ‘two days.’
The second condition would be necessarily fulfilled by |
the strict observance of this regulation in the issue of
the notes. According to our hypothesis, the true value
of goods coincides with the quantity of labor expended
in their manufacture, and this quantity of labor is
measured by the division of time expressed. He who
delivers a product to which two days’ labor have been
devoted, if he receives a certificate of two days’ labor,
has then secured that there should be assigned or certified
to him neither more nor less value than he has in fact
delivered—and further, as he only who has really put a
product in circulation, alone secures such an attestation,
it is equally certain that the value inscribed on the note
is capable of paying society. Enlarge as much as we
will the sphere of the division of labor, if the regulation
is properly followed the sum of value disposable must
be exactly equal to the sum of value certified, and, as the
sum of value certified is exactly the sum assigned, this
must necessarily coincide with the value disposable. All
the exigencies are satisfied and the liquidation is perfect.”
(Pages 166, 167.)

If Rodbertus has up to the present had the misfortune
of arriving too late with his discoveries, this time, at
least, he has obtained a kind of originality; none of his
rivals had dared to give to the foolish utopia of the
labor-note this form so naively infantile, I might even
say so truly Pomeranian. Because that for each note an
object of ‘corresponding value is delivered, as no object


PREFACE 21


of value is delivered except against a corresponding note,
necessarily the sum of notes is covered by the sum of the
objects of value. The calculation is perfectly equal, it
is exact to a second of labor time, and there is not a
superior employee in the Office of the Public Debt who,
however appalled by his own duties, could in this calcula-
tion make the slightest error. What more could be de-
_ sired?

Ia modern capitalist society each industrial capitalist
produces on his own account what he likes, how he likes,
and as much as he likes. The quantity socially demanded
is for him an unknown magnitude, and he does not know
the quality of the objects demanded any more than their
quantity. That which to-day cannot be supplied quickly
enough may to-morrow be in excess of the demand.
Ultimately demand is satisfied in some fashion, ill or
well, and generally production is definitely regulated by
the objects demanded. How is the reconciliation of this
contradiction effected? By competition. And how does
that arrive at this solution? Simply by depreciating
below their labor value the commodities which are by
reason of their quality or quantity useless or unnecessary,
in the present state of the demand of society, and in
making the producers feel, in this explicit fashion, that
they have manufactured articles absolutely useless or
unnecessary, or that they have manufactured a super-
fluity of otherwise useful articles. From that two things
follow :

First, the continual deviation of the price of com-
modities in relation to the value of commodities is the
necessary condition by which alone the value of com-
modities can exist. It is only by the fluctuations of
competition, and following that, of the price of com-
modities, that the law of: value realizes itself in the


92 PREFACE


production of commodities and that the determination of
value by the labor time socially necessary becomes a
reality. That the form of representation of value, price,
has, in general, a quite other aspect than the value which
it manifests, is a lot which it shares with the greater
part of social relations. The king often bears but slight
resemblance to the monarchy which he represents. In
a society of producers of exchangeable commodities, to
wish to determine value by labor time by interdicting
competition from establishing this determination of value
in the single form by which it can do this—in influencing
its price, is to show, at least in this connection, the
habitual utopian misunderstanding of economic laws.

In the second place competition, in realizing the law
of value of the production of commodities in a society
of producers for exchange, establishes by that means
and by assured conditions the single order and the single
organisation possible for social production. It is only
by the depreciation or appreciation of the price of
products that the isolated producers of commodities
learn to their cost what kind of things society requires,
and the quantity it requires of them. But it is precisely
this single regulator which the utopianism shared by
Rodbertus would suppress. And if we ask what
guarantee we have that only the necessary quantity of
each commoditiy would be produced, that we should not
be. wanting corn and meat while there was an abundance
of beet sugar and we were inundated with a too plentiful
supply of potato spirit, that we should not be lacking
breeches to cover our nakedness while breeches buttons
were multiplied by the million—Rodbertus triumphantly
shows us his famous account, in which there 1s set forth
an exact certificate for each superfluous pound of sugar,
for each cask of spirit not purchased, for each useless


j PREFACE 23


breeches button, an account which is “just,” which
“satisfies all the conditions and in which the liquidation
is exact.” Apd anyone who does not believe this has
only to address himself to “M. X.,” the superior employee
of the Office of the Public Debt in Pomerania, who has
revised the calculation and has found it just, and who
_may be regarded as never havirig been capable of a
mistake in his accounts.

And now let us briefly notice the naiveté wtih which
Rodbertus would suppress industrial and commercial
crises by means of his utopia. When the production of
commodities has reached the limits of the world market
it is by a cataclysm of this market, by a commercial
crisis, that equilibrium is established between the isolated
producers, producing each according to his individual
calculation, and the market for which they produce, and
of the demand of which, both as to quantity and quality,
they are ignorant. If competition is to be prevented from
making known to the isolated producers the state of the
market by the rise or fall of prices, they would be blinded
indeed. To direct the production of commodities in
such fashion that the producers could not know the state
of the market for which they produce—it is to provide
for crises in such a fashion as to raise the envy’ of
Doctor Eisenbart for Rodbertus.

We can understand now why Rodbertus determined
the value of commodities by labor, and further admitted
different degrees of intensity of labor. If he had enquired
why and how labor created value and, in consequence,
determined and measured it, he would have arrived at
socially necessary labor, necessary for the isolated pro-
duct, as well in relation to other products of the same
kind, as well as in relation to the total quantity socially
required. He would have been met with the question:


24 PREFACE


How is the production of isolated producers accom-
modated to the total social demand? and all his utopia
would have become impossible. This time, indeed, he
has preferred to abstract, he has made an abstraction of
the problem to be solved.

‘At last we come to the point where Rodbertus offers
us something new: the point which distinguishes him
from all his numerous comrades of the organisation
of exchange by labor-notes. They all acclaim this
method of exchange with the object of destroying the
exploitation of wage-labor by capital. Each producer
must obtain the total labor-value of his product. They
are unanimous about this from Gray to Proudhon. Not
at all, says Rodbertus, on the contrary. Wage-labor and
its exploitation will still exist.


In the first place there is no social state possible in
which the laborer could receive for his own consumption
the total value of his product. The funds produced must
support a number of functions economically unproductive
but necessary ; and they must consequently maintain the
people concerned with these functions. That is true
only as regards the present division of labor. In regard
to a society where productive labor would be obligatory,
a society which is certainly possible, the statement falls
to the ground. There still remains the necessity for an
accumulated social reserve fund, and then the laborers,
that is to say all, would remain in possession and in
enjoyment of the total product, but each isolated worker
would not enjoy the integral product of his own labor.
The support of functions, economically unproductive, by
the product of labor has not been neglected by the other
labor-note utopians. But they leave the workers to im-
pose this obligation upon themselves, following in this
respect the customary democratic method, while Rod-


PREFACE 25


bertus, whose whole theory of social reform in 1842 is
fashioned according to the Prussian State pattern of that
time, refers everything to the judgment of the bureau-
cracy, which authoritatively determines the share of the
worker in the product of his own labor, and graciously
abandons that part to him. Then rent and profit must
also continue to exist. In fact, the landed proprietors
and the industrial capitalists do fulfil certain functions,
socially useful, or even necessary, although economically
unproductive, and receive in exchange a kind of re-
muneration, rent and profit—which is a conception
scarcely new, even in 1842. Truth to tell, they receive
very much too much for the little that they do, and which
they do sufficiently ill; but Rodbertus has need of a
privileged class, at least for 500 years to come, also the
rate of surplus-value, to express myself correctly, that
must also exist, but without being capable of being
augumented. Rodbertus accepts as the actual aggregate
of surplus value, 200 per cent., that is to say, that for a
daily labor of twelve hours the worker will not receive
a certificate of twelve hours, but one of four hours only,
and the value produced in the remaining eight hours
must be shared between landlord and capitalist. The
labor-notes of Rodbertus lie then, absolutely, but it is
necessary to be a Pomeranian feudal proprietor to
imagine that there is a working class to whom it would
be advantageous to work twelve hours to obtain a labor-
note of four hours. If the juggleries of capitalist pro-
duction were translated in this simple manner, in which
it appears as a manifest theft, it would be rendered im-
possible. Each labor-note given to the worker would be
a direct provocation to rebellion, and would fall within
the scope of section 110 of the penal code of the
German Empire. It is necessary never to have seen any


,


26 PREFACE


other proletariat than that of a Pomeranian feudal
estate, a proletariat of day laborers, almost serfs, in fact,
where the baton and the whip reign supreme, and where
all the pretty girls of the village belong to the harem
of their gracious seigneur, to be able to offer such
impertinences to the workers. But our conservatives are
our greatest revolutionists.

But if the workers were sufficiently simple to allow
themselves to be persuaded that having labored for
twelve full hours, they have in reality only labored four
hours, they would at least be recompensed by being
gtiaranteed that their proportion of the product of their
own labor would never fall below a third. That is, in
reality, to play the air of the society of the future on a
child’s trumpet. That is really not worth spending
another word upon. Consequently all that Rodbertus
offers that is new in his utopia of labor-notes is childish
and far inferior to the labor of his numerous rivals,
whether they have preceded or followed him.

For the epoch in which it appeared Rodbertus’s “Zur
Erkennttiiss, &c.,”’ was certainly an important book. To
pursue the theory of Ricardo in this direction was a
promising beginning. If for him and for Germany alone
it was a novelty, his work might in its completion have
attained the same height as that of the best among his
English predecessors. But it was only a commencement
of which the theory could only achieve a real result by
ulterior, fundamental, critical work. This development
was arrested because from the outset the development
of the theory of Ricardo was carried in the other
direction, in the direction of utopia. From’ then it lost
the essential of all criticism—independence. Rodbertus
worked then with a preconceived end; he became an
economist with a settled tendency. Once seized by his


PREFACE 91


utopianism, he is precluded from all possibility of
scientific progress. From 1842 until his death he turned
in the same circle, reproduced the same ideas, already
expressed or indicated in his preceding works, found
himself misunderstood, found himself pillaged, when he
had nothing of which to be robbed, and at last refused to
accept the evidence that at bottom he had discovered
nothing which had not already been established long
before him.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that in this work the
language is not identical with that of “Capital.” In this
work Marx still speaks of labor as a commodity, and of
its purchase and sale, instead of labor power.

As appendices we have added to this work: Ist, a
passage from Marx’s work, “Critique de 1’Economie
Politique,” Berlin, 1859, with reference to the first labor-
notes utopia of John Gray; and 2nd, the discourse of
Marx on “Free Trade” delivered in French at Brussels
in 1847, which belongs to the same period of the author's
development as the ‘“‘Misére.”


| FRIEDRICH ENGELS.
London, October 23, 1884.


AUTHOR’S PREFACE.


M. Proudhon has the misfortune of being singularly
misunderstood in Europe. In France he has the right
to be a bad economist, because he passes for a good
German philosopher. In Germany he has the right to
be a bad philosopher, because he passes for one of the
greatest of the French economists. We, as both German
and economist at the same time, wish to protest against
this double error.

The reader will understand that in this ungrateful task
it has been often necessary for us to leave the criticism
of M. Proudhon, in ordér to turn to that of German
philosophy. and to set forth from time to time some
views on political economy.


Brussels, June 15, 1847.


The work of M. Proudhon is not simply a treatise
on political economy, an ordinary book, it is a Bible:
“Mysteries,” “Secrets dragged from the bosom of God,”
“Revelations,” nothing is wanting. But as, in our days,
the prophets are discussed more conscientiously than the
profane authors, the reader must resign himself to pass
with us by the arid and gloomy erudition of “Genesis”
in order to rise later with M. Proudhon into the
ethereal and fruitful regions of supra-Socialism. (See
Proudhon’s “Philosophie de la Misére,” Prologue, page
i113, line 20.)


THE
POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


CHAPTER I.
A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY.


Section I—Opposition or Utitiry-VALUE TO
ExCHANGE-V ALUE.


“The capacity possessed by all products, natural or
industrial, to serve the subsistence of man is specially
described as wtility-value ; the capacity they have of being
given in exchange for each other as exchange-value....
How does utility-value become exchange-value?......
The generation of the idea of value (ia exchange) has
not been noted by the economists with sufficient care; it
is important for us to halt here. Since among the objects
of which I have need many are found in nature only in
very small quantities, or, in some cases, not at all, I am
forced to aid in the production of what I want; and, as
I cannot turn my hand to so many things, I propose to
other men, my collaborators in different functions, to
cede to me a portion of their products in exchange for
mine.” (Proudhon, vol. I., chap. 11.)

M. Proudhon proposes to himself to, before all, explain


to us the double nature of value, “the distinction in value,”
33


34 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


the process which makes exchange-value of utility-value.
It is important for us to halt with M. Proudhon at this
act of transubstantiation. This is how this act is accom-
plished according to our author:

A large number of products are not found in nature,
they are found at the end of industry. Suppose his needs
exceed the spontaneous production of nature, man is
forced to have recourse to industrial production. What
is this production, in the supposition of M. Proudhon?
What is its origin? A single man experiencing the want
of a large number of things “cannot turn his hand to so
many things.” To have so many wants to satisfy sup-
poses so many things to produce—there are no products
without production—to have so many things to produce
pre-supposes more than the hand of a single man already
assisting in production. But from the moment that you
suppose more than one hand assisting in production you
have already supposed a whole system of production
based on the sub-division of labor. Thus the need, such
as M. Proudhon supposes it, itself pre-supposes the
whole sub-division of labor. In supposing the sub-
division of labor you have exchange, and consequently
exchange-value. It would have been just as well to have
supposed exchange-value in the first place.

But M. Proudhon prefers to make the circuit. Let us
follow him in all his detours, to always return to the
point of departure.


To leave the state of things in which each produces
solitarily, and to arrive at exchange, “I address myself,”
says M. Proudhon, “to my collaborators in various
functions.” Then, it seems, I have some collaborators
who all have various functions, without I and all the
others, in order to arrive at such a state of things—
always according to the supposition of M. Proudhon—


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 85


having abandoned the solitary and unsocial position of
Robinson Crusoe. The collaborators, and the diverse
functions, the division of labor and the exchange which
it indicates are all existing already.

To summarise: I have wants based upon the division
of labor and on the exchange of commodities. In sup
posing these wants M. Proudhon finds that he has sup-
posed exchange, exchange-value, of which he precisely
proposes to “note the generation with more care than the
other economists.”


M. Proudhon could just as well have inverted the
order of things without by so doing inverting the just-
ness of his conclusions. To explain exchange-value there
must be exchange. To explain exchange there must be
division of labor. To explain the division of labor there
must be wants which necessitate the division of labor.
To explain these wants it is necessary to “suppose”
them, which is not to deny them, contrary to the first
axiom of M. Proudhon’s prologue: “To suppose God is
to deny him.” (Prologue, p. 1).

How does M. Proudhon, for whom. the division of
labor is swpposed known, take this to explain exchange-
value, which for him is always the unknown?

“A man’ sets out “to propose to other men, his
collaborators in various functions,” to establish exchange
and to make a distinction between use-value and
exchangeable value. In accepting this proposed distinc-
tion the collaborators have left to M. Proudhon no
other “care” than to take account of the fact, to mark,
to “note” in his treatise of political economy “the
generation of the idea of value.” But he owes it to us,
always, to explain “the generation” of this proposition,
to tell us, finally, how this single solitary man, this
Robinson Crusoe, has had suddenly the idea of making


36 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


“to his collaborators” a proposition of this kind, and how
his collaborators have been led to accept it without any
protest whatever.

M. Proudhon does not enter into these genealogical
details. He simply gives to the fact of exchange a kind
of historical cachet in presenting it under the form of a
motion, which a third party has made, tending to
establish exchange.

That is a sample of “the historical and descriptive
method” of M. Proudhon, who professes a superb
disdain for the “historical and descriptive method” of
Adam Smith and Ricardo.

Exchange has its own history. It has passed through
different phases. )

There was a time, as in the Middle Ages, when only
the superfluity, the excess of production over consump-
tion, was exchanged.

There was, again, a time when not only the superfluity
but all the products, the whole of industrial existence,
entered into commerce, in which the whole production
depended entirely upon exchange. How are we to ex-.
plain this second phase of exchange—saleable value at
its second power?

M. Proudhon would be prepared with an answer:
Admit that a man has “proposed to other men, his
collaborators in various functions,’ to raise saleable
value to its second power.


Lastly, there comes a time when all that men have
regarded as inalienable become objects of exchange, of
traffic, and can be disposed of. It is the time in which
even the things which until then had been communicated,
but never exchanged; given, but never sold; acquired,
but never bought—virtue, love, opinion, science, con-
science, &c.—where all at last enter into commerce. It


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 6°87


is the pericdé of general corruption; of universal venality,
or, to speak in the terms of political economy, the time
when everything moral or physical having become a
saleable commodity, is conveyed to the market to be
appraised at its proper value.

_ How can we explain this new and last phase of ex-
change—saleable value at its third power?

M. Proudhon would have an answer all ready: Put
it that a person has “proposed to some other persons,
his collaborators in various functions,” to make of virtue,
love, &c., a saleable value, to raise exchange-value to its
third and last power. We thus see that the “historical
and descriptive method” of M. Proudhon suffices for
everything, it answers to everything, it explains every-
thing. If it is above all a question of explaining
histcrically “the generation of an economic idea,” he
supposes a man who proposes to other men,’ his col-
laborators in various functions, that they should ac-
complish this act of generation, and all is said.

Henceforth we accept the “generation” of exchange-
value as an accomplished fact; it only remains now to
explain the relation of exchange-value to utility-value.
Listen to M. Proudhon.

“The economists have very well explained the double
character of value; but what they have not set out with
equal clearness is its contradictory nature; it is here that
our criticism begins..... It is a small matter to have
signalised in utility-value and exchange-value this aston-
ishing contrast, in. which the economists are accustomed
to see nothing but the most simple matter: it is neces-
sary to show that this pretended simplicity hides a
profound mystery which it is our duty to penetrate.....
In technical terms use-value and exchange-value are in
inverse ratio the one to the other.”


88 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


If we have grasped M. Proudhon’s idea, here are the
four points he proposes to establish:

(1) Utility-value and exchange-value form an “aston-
ishing contrast,” they are in opposition to each other.

(2) Utiltity-value and exchange-value are in inverse
ratio the one to the other, in contradiction.

(3) The economists have neither seen nor known,
either the opposition or the contradiction.

(4) The criticism of M. Proudhon begins at the end.

‘We also, we will commence at the end, and in order
to clear the economists from the accusations of M.
Proudhon we will hear what two economists of some
importance have to say.

Sismondi: “It is the opposition between value in
use and exchangeable value to which commerce has re-
duced all things, &c.” (“Etudes,”,’ vol. IL, p. 162.
Brussels edition.)


Lauderdale: “In general national wealth (utility-
value) diminishes in proportion as individual fortunes
increase by the augmentation of saleable value; and to
the extent that these are reduced by the diminution of
this value, the first generally increases.” (“Enquiries
into the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth.’’)

Upon the opposition between use-value and exchange-
value Sismondi has based his principal theory that the
diminution of the revenue is in proportion to the increase
of production.

Lauderdale has based his system on the theory of the
inverse raito of the two kinds of value, and his doctrine
was so popular at the time of Ricardo that the latter
could speak of it as of a thing generally known :-—

“It is through confounding the ideas of value and
wealth, or riches, that it has been asserted that by
diminishing the quantity of commodities, that is to say,


eit


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 89


of the necessaries, conveniences and enjoyments of
human life, riches may be increased.” (Ricardo, “Prin-
ciples of Political Economy.’’)

We have just seen that the economists before M.
Proudhon have “signalised’” the profound mystery of
oppositon and contradiction. Let us now see how in
his turn M. Proudhon explains this mystery after the
economists.


The exchange-value of a product falls in proportion as
the supply increases; in other terms, the greater the
abundance of a product relatively to the demand, the
lower its exchange-value or its price falls. And vice versa,
the smaller the supply relatively to the demand, the
higher the exchange-value or the price of the product
rises; in other terms, the geater the scarcity of the pro-
ducts offered relatively to the demand the dearer they
are. The exchange-value of a product depends upon its
abundance or its scarcity, but always in relation to the
demand. Suppose a most rare product, one unique of
its kind, if you will: this unique product would be more
than abundant if it were not wanted at all. On the other
hand, suppose a product multiplied by millions, it will be
always scarce so long as it does not meet the tlemand ;
that is to say, if it is in too great demand.

These are mere truisms, but it is necessary to repro-
duce them here in order to make M. Proudhon’s
mysteries clearly understood. ,

“Therefore in following the principle to its ultimate
consequences. we come to this conclusion, the most
logical in the’ world, that the things which are most
necessary as articles of use, and whose quantity is
infinite can be had for nothing, and those of which the
utility is nil and which are extremely scarce will have an
inestimable price. To increase the difficulty, actual


40 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


practice does not admit these extremes; on the one side,
no human product ever attains the infinite in magnitude ;
on the other the most scarce things have need of some
degree of utility in order to be possessed of any value.
Use-value and exchange-value are thus fatally chained
to each other, although by their nature they continually
tend to exclude each other.” (Vol. I., p. 39.)

What is it which adds to the difficulty of M.
Proudhon? It is simply that he has forgotten the
demand, and that a thing can only be scarce or abundant
according as it is in demand. Demand once set aside
he assimilates exchange-value to scarcity and use-value
to abundance. Practically in saying that the things “of
whih the utility is mil, and which are extremely scarce,
will have an imestimable price,’ he simply says that ex-
change-value is nothing but scarcity. “Extreme scarcity
and utility nil,’ is pure scarcity. “Inestimable price” is
the maximum of exchange-value, it is pure exchange-
value. He puts these two terms in equation. Then,
exchange-value and scarcity are equivalent terms. In
arriving at these pretended “extreme consequences,”
M. Proudhon finds in effect that he has pushed to
extremes, not the things, but the terms which express
them, and in that he demonstrates his rhetoric rather
than his logic. He finds once more his first hypotheses
tn all their nakedness when he believes that he has dis-
covered new consequences. Thanks to the same process
he succeeds in identifying use-value with pure abundance.

After having put in equation exchange-value and
scarcity, utility-value and abundance, M. Proudhon is
astonished not to find utility-value in scarcity and
exchange-value, nor exchange-value in abundance and
utility-value; and in seeing that actual practice does not
admit of these extremes he can do no other than believe


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 41


in the mystery. There is for him inestimable price,
because there are no buyers, and he will never find them
while he continues to exclude demand.

From another side, the abundance of M. Proudhon
seems to be something spontaneous. He all at once
forgets that there are people who produce, and that it is
to their interest never to lose sight of the demand. If
not, how can M. Proudhon have been able to say that
the things which are very useful must be very cheap, or
even cost nothing? He ought to have concluded, on the
contrary, that it is necessary to restrict abundance, the
production of very useful things, if one wished to raise
their price, their value in exchange.

The old vine growers of France, in asking for a law
prohibiting the planting of fresh vines; the Dutch, in
burning the spices of Asia, in uprooting the clove-trees
in the Malays, wished simply to reduce abundance in
order to raise the exchange-value. So the society of the
Middle Ages, in limiting by law the number of associates
whom a single master could employ, and in limiting the
number of instruments he could use, acted on the same
principle. (See Anderson, “History of Commerce.”’)

After having represented abundance as use-value and
scarcity as exchange-value—nothing more easy than to
demonstrate that abundance and scarcity are in inverse
ratio--M.Pfoudhon identifies use-value with supply and
exchange-value with demand. To make the antithesis
still more clear, he substitutes other terms by putting
value of choice instead of exchange-value. Here then
the struggle has changed its ground and we have on one
side utility (use-value, supply), on the other choice
(exchange-value, demand.)

These two powers opposed the one to the other, who
will reconcile them? What can be done to bring them


42 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


into accord? Is it possible for us only to establish be-
tween them a point of comparison?

“Certainly,” cries M. Proudhon, “there is one, it is
choice!’ The price which will result from this struggle
between supply and demand, between utility and choice,
will not be the expression of eternal justice.”

M. Proudhon proceeds to develop this antithesis:

“In my character of free purchaser, 1 am the judge of
what I want, judge of the convenience of the article,
judge of the price I am willing to put upon it. On the
other hand, in your quality of free producer, you are
master of the means of production, and in consequence
you have the power to reduce your cost of production.”
(Molo Igp..42:)

And as demand, or exchange-value, is identical with
opinion, M. Proudhon is led to say:

“Tt is proved that it is the free will of man which
gives rise to the opposition between use-value and
exchange-value. How can we solve this opposition
whilst maintaining free will? And how can we sacrifice
this, without at least sacrificing man?” (Vol. I., p. 51.)

Thus then there is no result possible. There is a
struggle between two incommensurable powers, so to
speak, between utility and choice, between the free
purchaser and the free producer.

Let us examine these things a little more closely.

Supply does not represent. utility exclusively ; demand
does not represent choice exclusively. He who demands,
does he not also offer a product of some kind, or the
representative sign of all products, money; and in
supplying this does he not, according to M. Proudhon,
represent utility, or use-value?

On the other hand, he who offers, does he not also
demand a product of /some kind, or the representative


SF a yA


3 eee


t
A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 43


sign of all products? And does he not thus become the
representative of choice, of the value of choice, or
exchange-value ?

A demand is at the same time an offer, an offer is at
the same time a demand. Thus the antithesis of M.
Proudhon in simply identifying supply and demand, the
one to utility, the other to choice, rests merely on a futile
abstraction.

What M. Proudhon calls value of utility other
economists, with as much reason, call value of choice.
We will only cite Storch. (“Cours d’Economie Po-
litique,” Paris, 1823, pp. 88 and 99.)

According to him, those things are called wants, of
which we feel the want; those things are called’ values
to which we attribute value. Most things only have
value because they satisfy wants engendered by choice.
Opinion as to our wants may change, then the utility of
things, which expresses only the relation of those things
to our wants, may change also. Natural wants them-
selves change continually. What variety there is, for
instance, in the objects which serve as the staple food
among different peoples!

The struggle is not really between utility and choice;
it is between the saleable value demanded by him who
wishes to sell, and the saleable value offered by him who
makes the demand, who wishes to buy. The exchange-
able value of the product is each time the result of these
contradictory appreciations.

In a final analysis, supply and demand bring together
production and consumption, but production and con-
sumption based upon individual exchanges. The pro-
duct offered is not utility in itself. It is the consumer
who verifies its utility. And even when its quality of
utility is recognised, it is not exclusively utility. In the


44 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


course of production it has been exchanged against all
the expenses of production, such as raw material, work-
people’s wages, &c., all things which are saleable values.
Thus the product represents, in the eyes of the producer,
a sum of saleable values. What he offers is not merely
an object of utility, but, above all, a saleable value.

As to demand, it can only be effective on condition
that it has at its disposal some means of exchange.
These means themselves are products, saleable values.

In supply and demand then, we find, on one side a
product which has cost some saleable values, and the
desire to sell; on the other, some means which have
cost some saleable values and the desire to purchase.

M. Proudhon opposes the free purchaser to the free
producer. He has given to the one and to the other some
purely metaphysical qualities. This it is which makes
him say: “It is proved that it is the free will of man
which gives rise to the opposition between use-value and
exchange-value.”’

The producer, from the moment that he has produced
in a society based on the division of labor and the
exchange of commodities—and that is the hypothesis of
‘M. Proudhon—is forced to sell. M. Proudhon makes
the producer master of the means of ‘production; but he
will agree with us that it is not upon his free will that
his means of production depend. Further, these means
of production consist largely of products which come to
him from without, and in modern production he is not
even free to produce whatever quantity he likes. The
actual degree of development of productive forces obliges
him to produce on such and such a scale.

The consumer is not more free than the producer.
His choice depends upon his means and his wants. The
one and the other are determined by his social position,


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 45


which itself depends upon the entire social organisation.
Thus the worker who buys potatoes, and the kept woman
who buys lace, follow the one and the other their re-
spective choice. But the diversity of their choice is
explained by the difference in the positions which they
occupy in the world, a difference which is the product
of the social organisation.

Is the entire range of wants based upon choice or
upon the whole organisation of production? In most
cases wants spring directly from production or from a
state of things based upon production, The commerce
of the world almost entirely turns upon wants arising
not from individual consumption but from production.
Thus, to take another example, does not the need for
notaries presuppose a given civil right, which is only an
expression of a certain development of property; that
is to say, production?

For M. Proudhon it is not sufficient to have eliminated
from the relation of supply and demand the elements of
which we have just spoken. He pushes abstraction to
the farthest limits, in confounding all producers in a
single producer, all consumers in a single consumer, and
in establishing the struggle between these two chimerical
personages. But in the real world matters go other-
wise. The competition between those who offer, ana
the competition between those who demand, forms a
necessary element of the struggle between buyers and
sellers, from which saleable value arises.

After having eliminated the cost of production and
competition, M. Proudhon can at his ease reduce to
absurdity the formula of supply and demand.

“Supply and demand,” he says, “are nothing but two
ceremonial forms serving to set before each other use-
value and exchange-value, and to effect their reconcilia-


46 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


tion. They are the two electric poles which, when put
into relation with each other, produce the phenomenon of
affinity called exchange.” (Vol. I., pp. 49 and 50.)

This amounts to as much as saying that exchange is
only a “ceremonial form” to bring face to face the
consumer and the object of consumption. As well say
that all economic relations are “ceremonial forms’’ serv-
ing as intermediaries to immediate consumption. Supply
and demand are relations of a given production, neither
more nor less than are individual exchanges.

Of what, after all, then, does M. Proudhon’s dialectic
consist? In substituting for use-value and exchange-
value, for supply and demand, some abstract and contra-
dictory notions, such as scarcity and abundance, utility
and choice, a producer and a consumer, both of them
chevaliers of free will.

And to what, as the resujt of all this, does he come?

To arrange the means of introducing later one of the
elements which he had excluded, the cost of production,
as the synthesis between use-value and exchange-value.
It is thus that in his eyes the cost of production con-
stitutes synthetic value, or constituted value.


Section II.—Constirutep or SynTHETIC VALuz.


“Value (saleable) is the corner-stone of the economic
edifice.” “Constituted’”’ value is the corner-stone of the
system of economic contradictions.

What then, is this “constituted value’ which con-
stitutes all M. Proudhon’s discovery in political
economy ?

Utility being admitted, labor is the source of value.
The measure of labor is time. The relative value of
products is determined by the labor time it is necessary


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 47


to employ in order to produce them. Price is the
monetary expression of the relative value of a product.
Finally the constituted value of a product is simply the
value which is constituted by the labor time embodied
in it.

Just as Adam Smith discovered the division of labor,
in the same way M. Proudhon claims to have discovered
“constituted value.” This is not precisely “something
unheard of,” but then it must also be admitted that there
is nothing unheard of in any discovery in economic
science. M. Proudhon, who feels all the importance
of his discovery, nevertheless seeks to attenuate its merit,
“in order to reassure the reader with regard to his pre-
tensions to originality and to conciliate those whose
timidity rendes them but little favorable to new ideas.”
But, while admitting that each of his predecessors has
done something for the appreciation of value, he is com-
pelled to loudly proclaim that it is to him that the greater —
part, the lion’s share, belongs.

“The synthetical idea of value was vaguely perceived
by Adam Smith.... But this idea of value was entirely
intuitive with Adam Smith; nevertheless, society does
not change its habits on the faith of intuitions, it decides
only on the authority of facts. It is necessary that the
contradiction should be expressed in a clearer and more
‘sensible manner. J. B. Say was its principal exponent.”

There is the whole history of the discovery of syn-
thetical value--to Adam Smith vague intuition, to J. B.
Say contradiction, to M. Proudhon the constituent and
“constituted” truth. And let there be no mistake; all
the other economists, from Say to Proudhon, have done
nothing but wander in the beaten path of contradiction.

“Tt is incredible that so many men of sense should for
forty years have struggled against such a simple idea.


48 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


But no, the comparison of values is effected without there
being any point of comparison between them and without
unity of measure :—that is what the economists of the
nineteenth century, rather than embrace the revolutionary
theory of equality, have resolved to maintain towards
and against all. What will posterity say about it?”
(Vol. I., p. 68.)

Posterity, so brusquely apostrophised, will commence
by being puzzled about this chronology. It must neces-
sarily ask: But were not Ricardo and his school
economists of the nineteenth century? The system of
Ricardo, which set forth the principle “that the relative
value of commodities depends exclusively on the quantity
of labor required for their production,” appeared in
1817. Ricardo is the chief of a whole school which
reigned in England since the Restoration. The Ricardian
theory sums up, rigorously, pitilessly, all the doctrine of
the English middle class, itself the type of the modern
bourgeoisie.

“What will posterity say about it?’ It will not say
that M. Proudhon did not know Ricardo, because he
speaks of him, deals with his theory at considerable
length, returns to it constantly, and ends by saying that
it is rubbish. If ever posterity concerns itself with the
subject, it will say, perhaps, that M. Proudhon, fearing
to shock the anglophobia of his readers, has preferred
to make himself the editor responsible for the ideas of
Ricardo. However that may be, it will find it very
curious that M. Proudhon gave as a “revolutionary
theory of the future” that which Ricardo had scientifically
explained as the theory of existing society, of bourgeois
society, and that he thus took for the solution of the
contradiction between utility and exchange-value what
Ricardo and his school had, a long time before him, pre-


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY, 49


sented as the scientific formula of a single side of that
contradiction of exchange-value. But let us put posterity ©
altogether on one side and confront M. Proudhon with
his predecessor Ricardo. Here are some passages from
that author which sum up his theory of value.

“Tt is not utility which is the measure of exchange-
value although that quality is \absolutely necessary.”
(Vol. I., p. 3, “Principles of Political Economy.’’)

“Things, once they are recognised as useful in them-
selves, draw their exchange-value from two sources:
from their scarcity and from the quantity of labor
necessary to acquire them. There are some things the
value of which depends only on their scarcity. No
amount of labor being capable of increasing their
quantity, their value cannot fall through their too great
abundance. Such are rare statues, pictures, &c. This
value depends solely on the faculties, the tastes and the
caprice of those desirous of possessing such objects.”
(Vol. I, pp. 4 and 5.) “These, however, form but a
very small part of the commodities which are constantly
exchanged. The greater number of desirable objects
being the fruit of industry, they can be multiplied, not
only in one country, but in many, to an extent to which
it is almost impossible to fix any limits, every time that
one is willing to employ the industry necessary to create
them.” (Vol. I., p. 5.) “When, then, we speak of com-
modities, of their exchange-value, and of the principles
which regulate their relative price, we have in view only
those commodities the quantity of which can be increased
by the industry of man, the production of which is
encouraged by competition, and is not prevented by any
obstacle.” (Vol. I, p. 5)

Ricardo quotes Adam Smith, who, according to him,
“has defined with great precision the primitive source


50 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


f


of all exchange-value” (Vol. I, ch. 5 of Smith), and
he adds: “That such must in reality be the basis of
exchange-value of all things (namely, labor time) ex-
cept those which the industry of man cannot multiply
at will, is a doctrinal point of the highest importance in
' political economy; for there is no source from which
have flowed so many errors, and out of which have
sprung so many diverse opinions in this science as from
the vague and indefinite sense attached to the word
value.” (Vol. I., p. 8.)

“If it is the quantity of labor embodied in an article
which regulates its exchange-value, it follows that every
increase in the quantity of labor must necessarily in-
crease the value of the object upon which it has been
employed, in the same way every reduction in the
amount of labor must bring about a reduction in price.”
(Voll. p79.)

Ricardo afterwards reproaches Smith:

(1) “With having given to value a measure other than
labor, sometimes the value of wheat, sometimes the
quantity of labor which an article would purchase, &c.”
(Vol. I., pp. 9 and Io.)

(2) “With having admitted the principle without
reserve, and to have, nevertheless, restricted its appli-
cation to the rude and primitive state of society which
preceded the accumulation of capital and the ownership
of land.” (Vol. I, p. 21.)

Ricardo devotes himself to demonstrating that the
ownership of land, that is to say rent, cannot change
the relative value of commodities, and that the accumu-
lation of capital exercises only a passing and oscillating
influence on the relative values determined by the com-
parative quantity of labor employed in their production.
In support of this proposition he formulates his famous


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 51


theory of rent, decomposes capital and comes, in the
final analysis, to find that there is nothing but accumu-
lated labor. He afterwards develops a whole theory of
wages and profit, and demonstrates that wages and
profit rise and fall in inverse ratio the one to the other,
without influencing the relative value of the product.
He does not ignore the influence which the accumulation
of capitals and the difference in their nature (fixed
capital and circulating capital), as well as the rate of
wages, may exercise on the proportional value of the
products. There are, indeed, the principal problems
which occupy Ricardo.

“Every economy of labor,” says he, “never fails to
reduce the relative value of a commodity, whether this
economy be effected in the labor necessary to the
manufacture of the article itself or in the labor necessary
to the formation of the capital employed in that manu-
facure.” (Vol. I, p. 48.) “In consequence, while a
day’s labor continues to give to one the same quantity
of fish and to the other the same of game, the natural
rate of the respective prices of exchange will remain the
same, whatever may, otherwise, be the variation in wages
and in profit, and in spite of all the effects of the
accumulation of capital.” (Vol. I., p. 32.) “We have
regarded labor as the foundation of the value of thitgs,
and the quantity of labor necessary to their production
as the law which determines the respective quantities of
commodities which must be given in exchange for
others; but we have not pretended to deny that there may
be in the current prices of commodities some accidental
and passing deviation from this primitive and natural
price.” (Vol. I, p. 105). “It is the cost of production
which regulates, in the last analysis, the price of things


59 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


and not, as has often been advanced, the proportion
between supply and demand.” (Vol. IL, p. 253.)

Lord Lauderdale had developed the variations of
exchange-value according to the law of supply and
demand, or of scarcity and abundance relatively to
demand. According to him the value of a thing would
increase when its quantity diminished or demand in-
_ creased; it would diminish in proportion to the increase
of its quantity or to the reduction of demand. Thus the
value of anything might change by the operation of
eight different causes, namely, four causes appertaining
to the thing itself, and four causes appertaining to money
or any other commodity which served as measure of its
value. Here is Ricardo’s refutation:

“The products of which an individual or a company
has the monopoly vary in value according to the law
which Lord Lauderdale has postulated: they fall in pro-
portion as they are supplied in greater quantity, and they
rise with the desire of purchasers to acquire them; their
price has no necessary relation to their natural value.
But as to the things which are subject to competition
between the sellers, and of which the quantity can be
increased within reasonable limits, their price depends
definitely not upon the state of demand and of supply,
but upon the actual cost of production.” (Vol. IL.,
Pp. 159.) |

We will leave the reader to compare the precise, clear,
and simple language of Ricardo with the rhetorical
efforts made by M. Proudhon in order to arrive at the
determination of relative value by labor time.

Ricardo shows us the real movement of bourgeois
production which constitutes value. M. Proudhon,
making abstraction of this movement, “struggles” to
invent new processes in order to regulate the world


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY ; 53


according to a professedly new formula which is only
the theoretical expression of the real existing movement
so well expounded by Ricardo. Ricardo takes for his
point of departure existing society to demonstrate to us
how it constitutes value. M. Proudhon takes for his
point of departure constituted value, in order to con-
stitute a new social world by means of this value. For
him, M. Proudhon, constituted value must make a
circuit and become the constituent for a world already
fully constituted according to this mode of valuation.
The determination of value by labor time is for Ricardo
the law of exchange-value; for M. Proudhon it is the
synthesis of use-value and exchange-value. The theory
of value of Ricardo is the scientific interpretation of
actual economic life; the theory of value of M. Proudhon
is the utopian interpretation of the theory of Riacrdo.
Ricardo proves the truth of his formula by drawing his.
conclusions from all the economic relations and in explain-
ing by this means all the phenomena, even those which
at first sight appear to contradict it, such as rent, the
accumulation of capitals, and the connection between
wages and profits; that is precisely what makes of his
theory a scientific system. M. Proudhon, who has re-
discovered this formula of Ricardo’s by means of
entirely arbitrary hypotheses, is compelled afterwards to
seek for isolated economic facts which he tortures aad
falsifies, in order to make them serve as examples,
applications already existing, of the beginnings of the’
realisation of his regenerating idea. (See our Section 3,
“Application of Constituted Value.”)

Let us now pass on to the conclusions which M.
Proudhon draws from value constituted (by labor time).
' _ A given quantity of labor equals the product
created by the same quantity of. labor.


54 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


— Every day’s labor is worth another day’s labor;
that is to say, in equal quantity the labor of one is worth
the labor of another: there is no qualitative difference.
Given an equal quantity of labor, the product of one will
exchange for the product of another. All men are
wage-workers, and equal wages pay for an equal time
of labor. Perfect equality presides over the exchange.

Are these conclusions the natural, rigorous conse-
quences of value “constituted,” or determined, by labor
time?

If the relative value of a commodity is determined by
the quantity of labor required to produce it, it naturally
follows that the relative value of labor, or wages, must
be equally determined by the quantity of labor which is
necessary to produce the wages. The wage, that is to
say the relative value, or price, of labor, is then
determined by the labor-time which is necessary to pro-
duce all that is required for the subsistence of the
worker. “Reduce the cost of manufacturing hats and
eventually their price will fall to their new natural price,
although the demand may be doubled, trebled, or quad-
rupled. Reduce the cost of subsistence of men by reducing
the natural price of the necessary food and clothing and
you will see wages eventually fall, although the demand
for hands may have considerably increased.” (Ricardo,
vol, 11.5.p.253.)

Certainly the language of Ricardo is most cynical. To ©
put in the same category the cost of manufacturing hats
and the cost of subsistence of man, is to transform man
into a hat. The cynicism is in the things themselves,
and not in the words which express these things. Some
French writers, such as MM. Droz, Blanqui, Rossi and
others, give themselves the innocent satisfaction of
Proving their superiority to the English economists by


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 55


seeking to observe the etiquette of “humanitarian”
language; if they reproach Ricardo and his school with
their cynical language, it is because they are annoyed at
seeing economic conditions exposed in all their crudity,
at seeing the mysteries of the bourgeoisie betrayed.
. Let us sum up: Labor being itself a commodity,
measures itself as such by the labor-time necessary to
produce this labor-commodity. And what is necessary
to produce the labor-commodity? Exactly that amount
of labor time which is necessary to produce the objects
indispensable to the constant subsistence of labor; that
is to say, to enable the workers to live and to propagate
his race. The natural price of labor is nothing but the
minimum wage. If the current price of wages rises
above the natural price it is precisely because the law of
value, postulated in principle by M. Proudhon, finds
itself counterbalanced by the consequences of the varia-
tions in the relation between supply and demand. But
the minimum wage is, nevertheless, the centre towards
which the current price of wages constantly gravitates.

Thus relative value, measured by labor-time, is fatally
the formula of the modera slavery of the worker,
instead of being, as M. Proudhon would have it, the
“revolutionary theory” of the emancipation of the pro-
letariat. |

Let us now see in how many cases the application of
labor time as the measure of value is incompatible with
the existing antagonism of classes and the unequal dis-
tribution of the product between the immediate worker
and the possessor of accumulated labor.

Let us suppose a certaia product: for instance, linen.

This product, as such, embodies a definite quantity of
labor. This quantity of labor will be the same no


56 , THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


matter what may be the reciprocal positions of those
whose labor has combined to create this product.

Let us take another product (cloth) which has exacted
the same quantity of labor as the linen.

If there is an exchange of these products there is an
exchange of equal quantities of labor. In exchanging
these equal quantities of labor, we do not change the
reciprocal position of the producers any more than we
change something in the situation of the workers and
manufacturers among them. To say that this exchange
of products measured by time has, for its consequence,
the equal remuneration of all the producers, is to suppose
that equality of participation has existed anterior to the
exchange. When the exchange of the cloth for the linen
has been accomplished, the producers of the cloth will
share in the linen in precisely the same proportions as
they before shared in the cloth.

The illusion of M. Proudhon proceeds from his taking
as a necessary consequence what at the most can be
nothing but a gratuitous assumption.

Let us go further.

Does labor time, as the measure of value, suppose at
least that the days are equivalent, and that the day of one
is worth the day of another? No.

Assuming, for a moment, that the day of a jeweler
is worth three days of a weaver, all changes in the
value of jewels relatively to the value of woven stuffs
must always, apart from the passing effects of the
oscillation of supply and demand, have for cause
_a reduction or an increase on one side or the other of
the time employed in production. Let three days of
labor of different workers be in the proportion of 1, i333
and all change in the relative value of their products
will be a change in this proportion of 1, 2, 3. Thus


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 57


value may be measured by labor time in spite of the
inequality of value of different days of labor; but, to
apply a similar measure it is necessary for us to have a
comparative scale of the different days of labor; it is
competition which establishes this scale.

Is your hour of labor equal to mine? That is a
question debated and settled by competition.

Competition, according to an American economist,
determines how many days of simple labor are containea
in a day of complex labor. Does not this reduction of
days of complex labor to days of simple labor suppose
that simple labor is itself taken as the measure of value?
The single quantity of labor serving as the measure of
value supposes in its turn that simple labor has become
the pivot of industry. It supposes that labors are
equalised by the subordination of man to the machine, or
by the extreme division of labor; that men are effaced
before labor; that the balance of the pendulum has be-
come the exact measure of the relative activity of two
workers as it is of the speed of two locomotives. Then it
is not necessary to say that the hour of one man is worth
the hour of another man, but rather that a man of one
hour is worth another man of an hour. Time is every-
thing, man is nothing; he is no more than the carcase ot
time. There is no more question of quality. Quantity
alone decides everything, hour for hour, day for day:
but this equalisation of labor is not the work of M.
Proudhon’s “eternal justice”; it is solely the accomplish-
ment of modern industry.

In the automatic workshop the labor of one worker
is scarcely distinguished in anything from the labor of
another worker: the workers cannot distinguish between
themselves except by the quantity of time they work.
Nevertheless, this quantitative difference becomes, at a


58 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


certain point of view, qualitative, inasmuch as the time
given to work depends, in part, on purely material causes,
such as physical constitution, age, and sex; in part on
purely negative moral qualities, such as patience, im-
passability, assiduity. Lastly, if there is a difference of
quality im the labor of the workers it is at most a degree
of the last quality, which is far from being a distinctive
speciality. Such is, in the final analysis, the state of
things in modern industry. It is on this already realised
equality of automatic labor that M. Proudhon bases his
plane of “equalisation” which he proposes to realise
universally in “the time to come.” é

All the “equalitarian” consequences which M. Proud-
hon draws from the doctrine of Ricardo rest upon a
fundamental error. That is, that he confounds the value
of commodities measured by the quantity of labor em-
bodied in them with the value of commodities measured
by “the value of labor.’ If these two methods of
measuring the value of commodities were confounded in
one, we might say indifferently, the relative value of any
commodity is measured by the quantity of value embodied
in it; or, it is measured by the quantity of labor which
it is able to purchase; or, again, it is measured by the
quantity of labor which will purchase it. It is necessary,
indeed, that it should be thus. The value of labor could
no more serve as a measure of value than the value of
any other commodity. Some examples will serve to
more fully explain the above point.

If a quarter of wheat cost two days’ labor instead of
one, it would have double its primitive value; but it
would not put in motion a double quantity of labor, be-
cause it would contain no more nutritive matter than
before. Thus the value of the wheat, measured by the
quantity of labor employed to produce it, would have


eo


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 69


doubled; but measured either by the quantity of labor
that it could buy, or by the quantity of labor by which
it could be bought, it would be far from having doubled.
On the other hand, if the same labor produced double
the amount of clothing as before, the relative value
would fall to one half; but nevertheless this double
quantity of clothing will not thereby be reduced to
command only half the quantity of labor, nor could the
same quantity of labor command double the quantity of
clothing, as the half of the clothing would continue to


render to the workers the same service as before.


Thus, to determine the relative value of commodities
by the value of labor is contrary to economic facts. It
is to move in a vicious circle, to determine relative value
by a relative value which, in its turn, needs to be
determined.

It is beyond doubt that M. Proudhon confounds the
two measures, the measure by the labor-time necessary
to the production of a commodity, and the measure by
the value of the labor. “The labor of every man,” says
he, “will purchase the labor which it embodies.” Thus,
according to him, a certain quantity of labor embodied in
a product equals in value the remuneration of the worker,
that is to say, the value of labor. It is, once more, the
same reason which leads him to confound the cost of
production with wages.

“What are wages? They are the price of the amount


of wheat, &c., .... the integral price of all things.”
Let us go further still: “Wages are the proportionality
of the elements which compose wealth!” What are


wages? They are the value of labor.

Adam Smith takes as measures of value, sometimes
the labor time necessary to the production of a com-
modity, sometimes the value of labor. Ricardo exposed


60 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


this error by showing clearly the disparity between these
two methods of measuring. M. Proudhon enhances the
error of Adam Smith by identifying the two things which
the latter had only placed in juxtaposition.

It is in order to find the just proportion in which the
workers should share in the products, or in other terms,
to determine the relative value of labor, that M. Proud-
hon seeks for a measure of the relative valueeof com-
modities. To determine the measure of the relative value
of commodities he can think of nothing better than of
giving as the equivalent of a certain quantity of labor
the sum of the products that it has created, which
amounts to supposing that the whole of society consists
solely of direct workers receiving for wages their own
produce. In the second place, he sets forth as a fact the
equality of the days of different workers. To sum up,
he seeks the measure of the relative value of commodities
in order to discover the equal remuneration of the
workers, and he assumes, as an already established fact,
equality of wages in order to discover the relative value
of commodities. What admirable dialectic!

“Say and the economists who have followed him have
observed that labor being itself subject to valuation, a
commodity like any other, in fact, to take it for a
principle and the. efficient cause of value would be to.
move in a vicious circle. These economists, if they will
permit me to say so, have shown by that a prodigious
inattention. Labor is called value, not as being a com-
modity itself, but in view of the values supposed to be
potentially embodied in it. The value of labor is a
figurative expression, an anticipation of the cause and
the effect. It is a fiction of the same kind as the pro-
ductivity of capital. Labor produces, capital denotes
value..... Labor, like liberty, is a vague and indefinite


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 61


thing by nature, but it becomes qualitatively defined by
its object; that is to say, it becomes a reality by its
product.

“But what need to insist? When the economist (read

M. Proudhon) changes the name of things, vera rerum
vocabula, he implicitly avows his impotence and puts
himself out of court.” (Proudhon I., 188.)
_ We have seen that M. Proudhon makes of the value
of labor “the efficient cause” of the value of products
to the extent that for him wages, the official name of the
“value of labor,’ form the integral price of everything.
That is why the objection of Say troubles him. In labor
commodity, which is a frightful reality, he sees nothing
but a grammatical ellipsis. The whole of existing society,
then, based upon labor commodity, is henceforth based
upon a poetic licence, on a figurative expression.

Does society desire to “eliminate all the inconveniences”
which trouble it, it has only to eliminate all the ill-
sounding terms. Let it change the language, and for
that it has only to address itself to the Academy and ask
it for a new edition of its dictionary. After all that we
have seen, it is easy to understand why M. Proudhon, in
a work on political economy, has had to enter into long
dissertations on etymology and other parts of grammar.
Thus, he has still to gravely discuss servus a servare.
These philological dissertations have a profound meaning,
an esoteric meaning; they form an essential part of the
argument of M. Proudhon.

Labor, labor force, inasmuch as it is bought and sold,
is a commodity the same as any other commodity, and
has consequently an exchange-value. But the value of
labor, or labor, as a commodity, does not produce, any
more than the value of wheat, or wheat, as a commuotity,
serves for nourishment.


62 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Labor “is worth” more or less, according as alimen-
tary commodities are more or less dear, according as the
supply and demand of “hands” exists in such or such a
degree, &c., &c.

Labor is not a “vague thing’; it is always definitely
determined labor, never labor in general, which is bought
and sold. It is not only the labor which is qualitatively
defined by the object, but it is also the object which is
determined by the specific quality of the labor.

Labor, in so far as it is bought and sold, is itself a
commodity. Why is it purchased? “In view of the
values supposed to be potentially embodied in it.” But
if we say that a certain thing is a commodity there is no_
question of the object for which we buy it, it is simply
for the service we intend to derive from it; the applica-
tion which we shall make of it. It is a commodity as
object of traffic. All the reasonings of M. Proudhon con-
fine themselves to this: We do not purchase labor as an
object of immediate consumption. No, we buy it as an
instrument of production, as we would buy a machine.
Merely as a commodity labor is worth nothing and
produces nothing. M. Proudhon might just as well have
said that there are no commodities in existence at all,
seeing that every commodity is only acquired for some
use and never merely as a commodity.

In measuring the value of commodities by labor M.
Proudhon vaguely perceives the impossibility of express-
ing labor by this same measure, in so far as it has a
value, labor commodity. He has a misgiving that it is
to make of the minimum wage the natural and normal
price of direct labor, that it is to accept the existing
state of society. So, to escape from this fatal consequence
he performs a volte-face and pretends that labor is not a
commodity, that it could not have a value. He forgets


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 63


oy


that he has himself taken labor value for a measure.
He forgets that his whole system rests on the labor
commodity, on labor which is trafficked, bought and
sold, exchanged for products, &c.; on the labor, in fine,
which is an immediate source of revenue for the worker.
He forgets all.

In order to save his system he consents to sacrifice
its basis.

Et propter vitam vivendi perdere causas!

We now arrive at a new definition of “constituted
value.”

“Value is the relation of the proportion of the products
which compose wealth.”

First of all let ws remark that the simple expression
“relative or exchangeable value” implies the idea of
some sort of relation, in which the products exchange
reciprocally. By giving to this relation the name of
“relation of proportion” we change nothing of the
relative value, except the expression. Neither the de-
preciation nor the enhancement of the value of a product
destroys the quality which it possesses of finding itself
in a “relation of proportion” of some kind with the other
products which form wealth.

Why, then, this new term, which conveys no new
idea?

The “relation of proportion” makes one think of
many other economic relations, suth as the proportion of
production, the just proportion between supply and
demand, &c.; and M. Proudhon has thought of all that
in formulating this didactic paraphrase of saleable
values.

Ia the first place, the relative value of products being
determined by the comparative quantity of labor
employed in the production of each of them, the relation


64 THE POVERTY OF FHILOSOPHY


of the proportion, applied to this special use, signifies the
respective quota of products which can be manufactured
in a given time, and which, consequently, would be given
in exchange.

Let us see what advantage M. Proudhon draws from
this relation of proportion. Everybody knows that when
supply and demand are equal the relative value of any
product whatever is exactly determined by the quantity
of labor embodied in it—that is to say, that this relative
value expresses the relation of the proportion precisely
in the sense in which we have just given it. M. Proud-
hon reverses the order of things. Begin, says he, by
measuring the relative value of a product by the quantity
of labor embodied in it, and then supply and demand
will infallibly equalise themselves. Production will cor-
respond with consumption; the product will be always
exchangeable. Its current price will express precisely its
exact value. Instead of saying, with everybody else,
that when the weather is fine one sees many people out
walking, M..Proudhon makes his people walk out in order
to ensure fine weather.

What M. Proudhon gives as the consequence of sale-
able value determined @ priori by labor time could only
be justified by a law formulated in almost these terms:

Products will henceforth be exchanged in exact ratio
to the labor time they have cost. Whatever may be thc
proportion between supply and demand, the exchange of
commodities will be always as if they had been produced
proportionately to the demand.

Let M. Proudhon take it on himself to formulate and
to make such a law, and we will pass the proofs to him.
If he intends on the contrary to justify his theory, not as
legislator, but as economist, he will have to prove that
the time which is necessary to create a commodity in-


> en


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 65


dicates exactly its degree of utility, and marks its relation
of proportion to the demand and, by consequence, to the
total mass of wealth. In this case, if a product is sold
at a price equal to its cost of production, supply and de-
mand always equalise themselves; since the cost of pro-
duction is deemed to express the true relation of supply
and demand.

Practically M. Proudhon sets himself to prove that
the labor-time necessary to create a product marks its
exact proportion to existing wants, in such sort that the
things of which the production costs the least time are
those things which are the most immediately useful, and
so on, gradually. The production of an article of luxury
in itself proves, according to this doctrine, that society
has sufficient leisure to permit it to satisfy a desire for
luxury.

The very proof of his thesis M. Proudhon finds in the
observation that the things the most useful cost the least
time to produce, that society commences always by the
most simple industries, and that it successively
“attacks the production of objects which cost more
labor time, and which correspond to wants of a higher
order.”

M. Proudhon borrows from M. Dunoyer the example
of extractive industry—gathering wild fruit, pasturage,
the chase, fishing, &c.—which represents the most simple
form of industry, the least costly, and by which man
commenced “the first day of his second creation.” The
first day of his first creation is enshrined in Genesis,
which shows us God as the first industrial of the
world.

Things go quite otherwise than as M. Proudhon thinks.
From the very moment in which civilisation begins pro-
duction commences to be based on the antagonism of


66 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


orders, of States, of classes, and finally on the antagonism
between accumulated labor and present labor. No
antagonism, no progress. That is the law which civilisa-
tion has followed down to our day. Up to the present
the productive forces have been developed thanks to this
régime of the antagonism of classes. To say now that,
because all the wants of all the workers were satisfied,
men could give themselves up to the creation of products
of a superior order, more complicated industries, would
be to make abstraction of the antagonism of classes, and
to overthrow the whole development of history. It is as
if one should say that because, under the Roman
emperors, murenas were nourished. in artificial §fish-
ponds, there was food in abundance for all the population
of Rome. But, on the contrary, the Roman people
wanted the necessary means to buy bread while the
Roman aristocrats had no lack of slaves with which to
feed their fishes.

The price of food has almost continually risen, while
the price of manufactured articles and luxuries has
almost continually fallen. Take the agricultural industry
itself: the most indispensable objects, such as wheat,
meat, &c., increase in price while cotton, sugar, coffee,
&c., fall continually in a surprising fashion. Even
among food-stuffs, properly so-called, luxuries, such as
artichokes, asparagus, &c., are relatively cheaper to-day
than the objects of prime necessity. In our epoch the
superfluity is more easily produced than the necessaries
of life. Finally, at different historical epochs, the
reciprocal relations of price are not only different but
opposed. Alf through the Middle Ages agricultural
products were, relatively cheaper than manufactured
products: in modern times the relations are reversed.


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 67


Has the utility of agricultural products therefore
diminished since the Middle Ages? |

The use of products is determined by the social con-
ditions in which the consumers are placed, and these
conditions themselves rest on the antagonism of classes.

Cotton, potatoes and spirits are the objects of com-
monest use. Potatoes have engendered scrofula; cotton
has largely driven linen and wool out of the market,
although wool and liaen are in many cases of much
greater utility, if only from considerations of hygiene;
spirits, again, have largely replaced beer and wine,
although spirits, used as food, are generally recognised
to be poison, For a whole century Governments vainly
struggled against European opinion ; economics prevailed,
they dictated orders to consumption.

Why, then, are cotton, potatoes and spirits the pivots
of bourgeois society? Because the least amount of labor
is necessary for their production, and they are in conse-
quence at the lowest price. Why does the minimum of
price decide the maximum of consumption? Can it by
any chance be because of the absolute utility of these
objects, of their intrinsic utility, of their utility in so far
as they correspond in the most useful manner to the
needs of the worker, as man, and not of the man as
worker? No, it is because, in a society based upon
poverty, the poorest products have the fatal prerogative of
serving the use of the greatest number.

To say now that, because the least costly things are
most generally used therefore they must be of the greatest
utility, is to say that the extensive use of spirits because
of their low cost of production is the most conclusive
proof of their utility; it is to tell the proletariat that the
potato is the most salutary meat; it is to accept the
existing state of things; it is, in fine, to make, with M,


68 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Proudhon, the apology for a society without compre-
hending it.

In a future society, where the antagonism of classes
will have ceased, where there will no longer be classes,
use will no longer be determined by the minimum time
of production; but the time of social production which
will be devoted to the various objects will be determined
by their degree of social utility.

To return to the thesis of M. Proudhon: From the
moment that the labor time necessary to the production
of an object is not the expression of its degree of utility,
the exchange-value of this object, determined beforehand
by the labor time embodied in it, can never regulate the
just relation of supply and demand, that is to say, the
relation of the proportion in the sense which M. Proud-
hon for the moment attaches to it.


It is not the sale of any product whatever at the price
of its cost of production which constitutes “the relation
of proportion” of supply and demand, or the propor-
tional quota of this product relatively to the whole of
production ; it is the variations of demand and of supply
which fix for the producer the quantity in which it is
necessary to produce a given product in order to get in
exchange at least the cost of production. And as these
variations are continued, there is also a continual move-
ment of withdrawal and of application of capitals with
regard to the different branches of industry.


“It is only by reason of similar variations that capitals
are devoted precisely in the required proportion, and not
beyond, to the production of the different commodities
for which there is a demand. By the rise or fall of
prices profits rise above or fall below their mean level,
and by that capital is attracted to or repelled from the


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 69


particular employment which experiences the one or the
other of these variations.”


“If we cast our eyes over the markets of large towns
_ we shall see with what regularity they are provided with
all kinds of commodities, native and foreign, in the
required quantity; and whatever difference there may
be in demand as the effect of caprice, of taste, or by the
variation of population; without there often being a glut
by too abundant a supply, or excessive dearness through
the poorness of supply compared to demand; we must
admit that the principle which distributes capital it: each
branch of industry in the exact proportions required, is
more powerful than is generally supposed.” (Ricardo,
vol. I., pp. 105 and 108.)

If M. Proudhon accepts the value of products as deter-
mined by labor time, he must equally accept the
oscillatory movement which alone makes labor time the
measure of value. There is no “relation of proportion”
completely constituted, there is only a constituting move-
ment.

We have seen in what sense it is correct to speak of
the “proportion” as of a consequence of value deter-
mined by labor time. We will see now how this measure
by time, called by M. Proudhon “law of proportion,”
transforms itself into a law of disproportion.

Every new invention which permits of the productioa
in one hour of that which hitherto took two hours to
produce depreciates all the homogeneous products already
on the market. Competition compels the producer to sell
the product of two hours as cheaply as the product of
one hour. Competition realises the law according io
which the relative value of a product is determined by
the labor time necessary to produce it. Labor time,


70 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY.


serving as measure of saleable value, thus becomes the
law of a continual depreciation of labor. We will say
more. There will be depreciation, not only of the com-
modities put on the market, but also the instruments
of production and of the whole manufacture. This fact
Ricardo has already noted in saying: “In constantly
increasing the facility of production we constantly reduce
the value of the things previously produced.”

Sismondi goes further. He sees in this “value consti-
tuted” by labor time the source of all the contradictions
of modern commerce and industry. “Mercantile value,”
he says, “is always fixed, in the last analysis, by the
quantity of labor necessary to procure the thing valued:
it is not what it has actually cost, but what it will cost
henceforth with perhaps perfect means; and this quantity,
however difficult it may be to appreciate, is always
established with fidelity by competition..... It is on
this basis that is calculated the demand of the seller and
the offer of the purchaser. The first will perhaps affirm
that the thing has cost him ten days’ labor; but if the
other recognises that he may henceforth accomplish it
with eight days’ labor, if competition carries the
demonstration to the two contracting parties, it will.be to
eight days only that the value will be reduced, and that
the market price will be established. The two contracting ©
parties have indeed, it is true, the notion that the thing
is useful, that it is desired, that without desire there
would be no sale; but the fixation of price has no con-
nection with utility.” (“Etudes,” &c., Vol. IT’, Dp. 267,
Brussels edition.)


It is important to insist upon this point, that what
determines value is not the time in which a thing has been
produced, but the minimum time in which it is susceptible


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY "1


of being produced, and this minimum is demonstrated by
competition. Suppose for a moment that there is no
longer any competition, and therefore, no means of
demonstrating the minimum of labor necessary for the
production of a commodity, what would be the result?
It would suffice to put six hours’ labor into the production
of a commodity in order to have the right, according to
M. Proudhon, to exact in exchange six times as much
as he who has devoted only one hour to the production
of the same article.

In place of a “relation of proportion” we have a
relation of disproportion, if we are at all times willing to
remain in these relations, good or evil.

The continual depreciation of labor is only a single
side, only a single consequence of the valuation of com-
modities by labor time. The inflation of prices, over-
production, and many other of the phenomena of in-
dustrial anarchy find their interpretation in this mode of
valuation.

But labor time serving as means of value, does it at
least give rise to the proportional variety in commodities
which so charms M. Proudhon?

On the contrary, monopoly in all its dreary monotony,
follows in its train and invades the world of commodities,
as, in the sight and to the knowledge of everybody,
monopoly invades the world of the instruments of
production. It appertains only to certain branches of
industry to make very rapid progress, as, for instance,
the cotton industry. The natural consequence of this
_ progress is that the products manufactured from cotton
fall rapidly in price; but in proportion as the prices of
cotton falls the price of linen must rise in comparison.
What is the result? Linen is replaced by cotton. ~ It is
in this way that linen has been nearly driven out of the


12 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


whole of North America. And we have obtained instead
of the proportional variety of product, the reign of cotton.

What now remains of this “relation of proportion.”
Nothing but the vow of am honest man, who would that
the commodities should: be produced in such proportions
that they can be sold at an honest price. In all times the
good bourgeois and the philanthropist. economists have
been pleased to make this innocent vow.

Let us hear old Bois-Guillebert: “The price of com-
modities,” says he, “must always be proportioned, there
being only this intelligence which can make them live
together to constantly give and receive reciprocally (see
the continual exchangeability of M. Proudhon), birth to
one another..... As wealth, then, is only this constant
intercourse between: man and man, between metier and
metier, it is a fearful blindness to seek for the cause of
poverty elsewhere than in the cessation of such commerce
brought about by the derangement in the proportion of
Prices.” (“Dissertations sur la Nature des Richesses,”)

Listen also to a modern economist.

“A great law which must be applied to, production, is
the law of proportion, which can alone preserve the
continuity of value..... The equivalent must be guaran-
teed.... All the nations have essayed at different epochs.
by means of numerous commercial regulations and
restrictions, to realise up to a certain point this law of
proportion; but egoism, inherent in the nature of man,
has forced him to overthrow all this regulation régime.
A proportional production is the realisation of the entire
truth of the science of social economy.” (W. Atkinson,
“Principles of Political Economy,” London, 1840, pp.
170-195.)

Fuit Troja. This true proportion between supply and
demand which again begins to become the object of so


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY "13


many vows, has long ceased to exist. It has died of oid
age. It was only possible in the epoch in which the
means of production were limited, and in which exchange
only took place within very narrow limits. With the
birth of the great industry this just proportion dis-
appeared, and production was fatally constrained to pass
in a perpetual succession, through the vicissitudes of
prosperity, depression, crisis, stagnation, new prosperity,
and so on in succession.

Those who, like Sismondi, would return to the just
proportion of production, while conserving the existing
bases of society, are reactionary, since, to be consistent,
they must also desire to re-establish all the other con-
ditions of past times.

What was it which maintained production in just
proportion, or nearly so? It was the demand which
governed the supply which preceded it. Production
followed consumption step by step. The great industry,
forced by the very instruments of which it disposed to
produce on an ever-increasing scale, could not wait for
the demand. Production preceded consumption, the
supply forced the demand.

In existing society, in the industry based on individual
exchanges, the anarchy of production, which is the
source of so much misery, is at the same time the source
of all progress.

Thus of two things, one:

Either you would have the just proportions of past
centuries, with the means of production of our epoch, in
which case you are at once a reactionary and a utopian ;

Or, you would have progress without anarchy: In
which case, in order to conserve productive forces, you
must abandon individual exchanges.

Individual exchanges accord only with the small


14 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


industry of past centuries and its corollary of “just pro-
portion,” or with the great industry and all its train. of
misery and anarchy.

After all, the determination of value by labor time,
that is to say the formula which M. Proudhon has given
us as the regenerating formula of the future, is then only
the scientific expression of the economic relations of
existing society, as Ricardo has clearly and definitely
demonstrated it long before M. Proudhon.

But at least the “equalitarian’” application of this
formula belongs to M. Proudhon. Is it he who has first
thought of reforming society by transforming all men
into immediate workers, exchanging quantities of equal
labor? Is it indeed for him to make to the Communists’
—these people innocent of all knowledge of political
economy, these “obstinately stupid men,” these “para-
disical dreamers”—the reproach of not having found
before him, this “solution of the problem of the prole-
tariat”’? .

Whoever is, no matter how little, acquainted with the
movement of political economy in England, knows that
nearly all the Socialists of that country have, at different
times, proposed the equalitarian application of the Ricar-
dian theory. We may cite to M. Proudhon the “Political
Economy” of Hopkins; William Thompson: “An
Inquiry into the Principles of the Distribution of Wealth
most Conducive to Human Happiness,” 1827; T. R.
Edmonds: “Practical, Moral, and Political Economy,”
1828, &c., &c., and we might add pages of &. We will
content ourselves with quoting an English Communist.
We will reproduce the decisive passage of his remark-
able work, ‘“Labor’s Wrongs and Labor’s Remedy,”
Leeds, 1839, and we will dwell upon it at sufficient
length; in the first place, because J. F, Bray is yet but


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY "5


little known in France; and, further, because we believe
we have there found the key of the past, present and
guture works of M. Proudhon.

“The only way to arrive at truth is to go at once to
first principles..... Let us go at once to the source from
whence governments themselves have arisen..... By
thus going to the origin of the thing we shall find that
every form of government, and every social and govern-
mental wrong, owes its rise to the existing social system
—to the institution of property as it at present exists—
and that, therefore, if we would end our wrongs and our
miseries at once and for ever, the present arrangements
of society must be totally subverted, and supplanted by
those more in accordance with the principles of justice
and the rationality of man.

“By thus fighting them upon their own ground, and
with their own weapons, we shall avoid that senseless
clatter respecting ‘visionaries’ and ‘theorists’ with which
they are so ready to assail all who dare move one step
from that beaten track which ‘by authority’ has been
pronounced to be the only right one. Before the con-
clusions arrived at by such:a course of proceeding can be
overthrown the economists must unsay or disprove those
established truths and principles on which their own
arguments are founded.” (J. F. Bray, pp. 17 and 41.)

“It is labor alone which bestows value..... Every
man has an undoubted right to all that his honest labor
can procure him. When he thus appropriates the fruits |
of his labor he commits no injustice upon any other
human being, for he interferes with no other man’s right
of doing the same with the produce of his labor.....
All these ideas of superior and inferior—of master and
man—may be traced to the neglect of first principles,
and to the consequent rise of inequality of possessions ;


16 “THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


and such ideas will never be eradicated, nor the institu-
tions founded upon them be subverted, so long as this
inequality is maintained. Men have hitherto blindly
hoped to remedy the present unnatural state of things,
and to institute equality of rights and laws by removing
one rich tyrant and setting up another—by destroying
existing inequality and leaving untouched the cause of
the inequality; but it will shortly be seen that it is not
in the nature of any mere governmental change to
afford permanent reliei—that misgovernment is not a
cause but a consequence—that it is not the creator, but
the created—that it is the offspring of inequality of
possessions; and that inequality of possessions is in-
separably connected with our present social system.”
(J. F. Bray, pp. 33, 36 and 37.)

“Not only are the greatest advantages, but strict justice
also, on the side of a system of equality..... Every man
is a link, and an indispensable link, in the chain of
effects—the beginning of which is but an idea, and the
end, perhaps, the production of a piece of cloth. Thus,
although we may entertain different feelings towards the
several parties, it does not follow that one should be
better paid for his labor than another. The inventor will
ever receive, in addition to his just pecuniary reward,
that which genius only can obtain from us—the tribute
of our admiration.”

“From the very nature of labor and exchange, strict
justice not only requires that all exchangers should be
mutually, but that they should likewise be equally
benefited. Men have only two things which they can
exchange with each other, namely, labor, and the
produce of labor; therefore, let them exchange as they
will, they merely give, as it were, labor for labor. If
a just system of exchanges were acted upon, the value


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY “tY


\


of all articles would be determined by the entire cost of
production, and equal values should always exchange for
equal values. If, for instance, it takes a hatter one day to
make ‘a hat, and .a shoemaker the same time to make a
pair of shoes—supposing the material used by each to be
of the same value—and they exchange these articles with
each other, they are ‘not only mutually but equally
benefited : the advantage derived by either party cannot
be a disadvantage to the other, as each has given the
same amount of labor, and the materials made use of
by each were of equal value. But if the hatter should
obtain two pair of shoes for one hat—time and value of
material being as before—the exchange would clearly be
an unjust one. The hatter would defraud the shoemaker
of one day’s labor; and were the former to act thus in
all -his'exchanges he would receive for the labor of half
a year, the product of some other person’s whole year;
therefore the gain of the first would necessarily be a
loss to the last. We have heretofore acted upon no
other than this most unjust system of exchanges—the
workmen have given the capitalist the labor of a whole
year in exchange for the value of only ‘half .a year—and
from this, and not from the assumed inequality of bodily
and mental powers, in individuals, has arisen the in-
equality of wealth and power which at present exists
around us. It is an inevitable condition of inequality of
exchanges—of buying at one price and selling at another
—that capitalists shall continue to be capitalists and
working men be working men, the one.a class of tyrants
and the other a class of slaves,..... The whole trans-
action, therefore, plainly shows that the capitalists and
proprietors do no more than give the working man, for
his labor of one week, a part of the wealth which they
obtained from him the week before !—which just amounts


"8 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


to giving him nothing for something..... The whole
transaction, therefore, between the producer and the
capitalist is a palpable deception, a mere farce; it is, in
fact, in thousands of instances, no more than a barefaced
though a legalised robbery.” (J. F. Bray, pp. 45, 48,
49 and 50.)

“The gain of the employer will never cease to be the
loss of the employed, until the exchanges between the
parties are equal; and exchanges never can be equal
while society is divided into capitalists and producers—
the last living upon their labor, and the first bloating
upon the profit of that labor.”

“Tt is plain,” continues Bray, “that you may establish
whatever form of government you will .... that you
may talk of morality and brotherly love .... no such
reciprocity can exist where there are unequal exchanges,
and inequality of rewards for equal services.....  In-
equality of exchanges, as being the cause of inequality of
possessions, is the secret enemy that devours us.”

“Tt has been deduced, also, from a consideration of
the intention and end of society, not only that all men
should labor, and thereby become exchangers, but that
equal values should always exchange for equal values—
and that as the gain of one man ought never to be the
loss of another, value should ever be determined by cost
of production. But we have seen that, under the
present arrangements of society, all men do not labor. .
that the gain of the capitalist and the rich man is always
the loss of the workman—that this result will invariably
take place, and the poor man be left entirely at the mercy
of the rich man, so long as there is inequality of
exchanges—and that equality of exchanges can be insured
only under social arrangements in which labor is
universal..... If exchanges were equal, the wealth of


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 19


the present capitalists would gradually go from them to
the working classes.” (Bray, pp. 51, 52, 53 and 55.)

“So long as the system of unequal exchanges is
tolerated, the producers will be almost as poor and as
ignorant and as hardworked as they are at present, even
if every Governmental burden be swept away and ail
taxes be abolished..... Nothing but a total change of
system—an equalising of labor and exchanges—can alter
this state of things for the better, and ensure men a true
equality of rights..... The producers have but to make
an effort—and by them must every effort for their own
redemption be made—and their chains will be snapped
asunder for ever..... As an end political equality is a
failure. As a means, also, it is a failure.... Where
things are of equal value, and they are exchanged un-
equally, the gain of one exchanger must ever be the loss
of another....for every exchange is then simply a
transfer, and not a sacrifice of labor and wealth. Thus,
although under a social system based on equal exchanges,
a parsimonious man may become rich, his wealth will be
no more than the accumulated produce of his own labor.
He may exchange his wealth or he may give it to others
who will exchange it for an equal value of the wealth of
other persons; but a rich man cannot continue wealthy
for any length of time after he has ceased to labor. Under
equality of exchanges, wealth cannot have, as it has now,
a procreative and apparently self-generating power, such
as replenishes all waste from consumption ; for, unless it
be renewed by labor, wealth, when once consumed, is
given up for ever. That which is now called profit and
interest cannot exist, as such, in connectionwith equality
of exchanges, for producer’ and distributor would be
alike remunerated, and the sum total oftheir labor would
determine the value of the article created and brought to


80 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


the hands of the consumer. The principle of equal
exchanges, therefore, must, from its very nature, ensure
universal labor.” (Bray, pp. 67, 88, 89, 94, 109 and IIo.)
After having rebutted the objections of the economists
to communism, Bray continues thus: “If a changed
character be essential to the success of the social system
of community in its most perfect form—and if, likewise,
the present system affords no circumstances and no
facilities for effecting the requisite change of character
and preparing man for the higher and better state de-
sired, it is evident that things must remain as they are...
unless some preparatory steps be discovered and made
use of—some movement partaking partly of the present
and partly of the desired system, some intermediate
resting-place, to which society may go with all its faults
and all its follies, and from which it may move forward,
imbued with those qualities and attributes without which
the system of community and equality cannot as such
have existence.” (Bray, p. 134.)

“The whole movement would require only co-opera-
tion in its simplest form...... Cost of production would
in every instance determine value; and equal values
would always exchange for equal values. If one person
worked a whole week, and another worked only half a
week, the first would receive double the remuneration of
the last; but this extra pay of the one would not be at
the expense of the other, nor would the loss incurred by
the last man fall in any way upon the first. Each person
would exchange the wages he individually received for
commodities of the same value as his respective wages ;
and in no case could the gain of one man or one trade
be a loss to another man or another trade. The labor


of every individual would alone determine his gain and
his losses.”


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 81


“By means of general and local boards of trade, and
the directors attached to each individual company, the
quantities of the various commodities required for con-
sumption (the relative value of each in regard to each
other), the number of hands required in various trades
and descriptions of labor, and all other matters con-
nected with production and distribution, could in a short
time be as easily determined for a nation as for an
individual company under the present arrangements....
As individuals compose families, and families towns,
under the existing system, so likewise would they after
the joint-stock change had been effected. The present
distribution of people in towns and villages, bad as it is,
would not be directly interfered with..... Under this
joint-stock system.... every individual would be at
liberty to accumulate as much as he pleased, and to enjoy
such accumulations when and where he might think
proper..... Society would be, as it were, one great
joint-stock company, composed of an indefinite number
of smaller companies, all laboring, producing and
exchanging with each other on terms of the most
perfect equality.....”

“Our new system of society by shares, which is only a
concession made to existing society, in order to arrive at
communism, established in such a way as to admit of
individual property in productions in connection with a
common property in production powers—making every
individual dependent on his own exertions, and at the
same time allowing him an equal participation in every
advantage afforded by nature and art—is fitted to take
society as it is, and to prepare the way for other and
better changes.” (Bray, pp. 158, 160, 162, 163, 168,
170 and 194.)

We have only a few words to say in reply to Mr.


89 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Bray, who, quite in spite of ourselves, we find to have
supplanted M. Proudhon, inasmuch as Mr. Bray, far
from wishing to have the last word of humanity, only
proposes such measures as he believes good for a period
of transition between existing society and a system of
communism,

An hour of the labor of Peter is exchanged for an
hour of the labor of Paul. That is the fundamental
axiom of Mr. Bray. Suppose Peter has performed
twelve hours’ work and Paul has only done six; then
Peter will only be able to make with Paul an exchange
of six against six. Peter will consequently have six
hours’ labor remaining. What will he do with these
six hours of labor?

Either he will do nothing with them, that is to say he
will have worked six hours for nothing; or maybe he
will idle six hours in order to equalise matters; or,
again, and this is his last resource, he will give to Paul
these six hours, with which he can do nothing else, intu
the bargain.

Thus at the end of the account, what has Peter gained
on Paul? Some hours of labor? No. He will have
gained only some hours of leisure; he will be compelled
to be an idler for six hours. And for this new right of
idleness to be not only accepted but appreciated in the
new society it is necessary that the latter should find its
highest felicity in laziness and that labor should weigh
upon it like a chain from which it must free itself at any
cost. Yet still, if these hours of leisure which Peter
has gained over Paul were only a real gain! But no.
Paul, in beginning by working only six hours, arrives by
steady and regular labor at the same result as Peter
only obtains by commencing with an excess of labor.
Each would desire to be Paul, there would be competition.


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 88


!


to obtain the position of Paul, a competition in idleness.

Ah well! What has the exchange of equal quantities
of labor given us Overproduction, depreciation, over-
work followed by enforced idleness ; in fine, the economic
relations such as we see them in existing society, less
the competition of labor.

But no, we deceive ourselves. There would be still
an expedient by which the new society, the society of —
Peters and Pauls, could be saved. Peter might eat all
alone the product of the six hours of labor which re-
mained to him. But from the moment in which there is
no more exchanging in order to have a product, there is
no longer production in order to exchange, and all the
supposition of a society founded on exchange and the
division of labor falls to the ground. We should have
saved the equality of exchanges, only through the cessa-
tion of exchange: Paul and Peter would have arrived
at the condition of Robinson Crusoe.

Then if we imagine all the members of society to be
workers, the exchange of equal quantities of hours of
labor is only possible on condition that we understand
beforehand the number of hours necessary to employ in
material production. But such an understanding denies
individual exchange.

We shall still arrive at the same result if we take for
a starting point, not the distribution of the products
created, but the act of production. In the great industry
Peter is not free to fix for himself the time of his labor,
because the labor of Peter is nothing without the
co-operation of all the Peters and all the Pauls in the
establishment. It is this which clearly explains the
obstinate resistance of the English manufacturer to the
Ten Hours Bill. They knew very well that a reduction
of two hours’ labor given to the women and children


ry ies THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


would be sure to result in a reduction of the hours of
labor of adult men. It is in the nature of the great
industry that the hours of labor should be equal for all.
That which is to-day the result of capital and the
competition of the workers among themselves, will be
to-morrow, if you cut off the relation between labor and
capital, the effect of an understanding based on the
relation of the sum of the productive forces to the sum
of existing wants.

But such an understanding is the condemnation of
individual exchange, and so we arrive once more at our
first result.

In principle there is no exchange of products, but
exchange of the labors which co-operate in production.
The mode of exchange of the products depends upon
the mode of production of the productive forces.
Generally the form of the exchange of products corre-
sponds to the form of production. Change the latter and
the former finds itself changed as a consequence. We
may also see in the history of society the mode of ©
exchanging products regulated by the method of pro-
ducing them. Individual exchange also corresponds to
a determined method of production, which itself cor-
responds to the antagonism of classes. Thus there
is no individual exchange without the antagonism of
classes.

But the honest consciences refuse to accept this
evidence. So long as one is bourgeois one cannot do
other than see in this relation of antagonism a relation
of harmony and eternal justice, which permits no one to
get value at the expense of another. For the bourgeois
individual exchange can exist without the antagonism
of classes; for him these are two entirely incompatible
things. Individual exchange, as it presents itself to the


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 85


bourgeois, is far from resembling individual exchange as
it is in actual practice.

Mr. Bray makes of the illusion of the honest bourgeois
the ideal which he desires to realise. In_ purifying
individual exchange, in freeing it from all the antagon-
istic elements he finds in it, he believes he has found an
“equalitarian” relation which he desires to see adopted
by society.

Mr. Bray does not see that this equalitarian relation,
this corrective ideal, which he wishes to apply to the
world is itself nothing but the reflection of the existing
world, and that it is in consequence quite impossible to
reconstitute society on a basis which is only an embel-
lished shadow. In proportion as this shadow becomes
substance, it is seen that this substance, far from being
the dreamed-of transfiguration, is nothing but the body
of existing. society.*


Section III.—APppLicaTION OF THE LAW OF THE
PROPORTION OF VALUE.


(A)—Money.


“Gold and silver are the first commodities the value
of which has arrived at its constitution.”

Gold and silver then are the first applications of the
“constituted value’ of M. Proudhon. And as M.
Proudhon constitutes the values of products in deter-


* Like all other theories, this of Mr, Bray has had its
partisans who have been deceived by appearances. In London,
Sheffield, Leeds, and many other towns in England, have
been founded some “equitable-labor-exchange-bazaars.”
These bazaars, after having absorbed considerable capital,
have all failed miserably. People have lost the taste for them
for ever. Let M. Proudhon take note!


86 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


mining them by the comparative quantity of labor they
embody, all that he had to do was to prove that varia-
tions which have taken place in the value of gold and
silver were always to be explained by the variations in
the time of labor necessary to produce them. M.
Proudhon does not dream of that. He does not speak
of gold and silver as commodities, he speaks of them as
money.

All his logic, if logic there be, consists in juggling with
the quality which gold and silver possess, of serving as
money, for the benefit of all the commodities which have
the quality of being valued by labor time. Decidedly
there is more of simplicity than malice in this shuffling. .

A useful product, being valued by the labor time
necessary to produce it, is always acceptable in exchange.
Witness, cries M. Proudhon, gold and silver which find
themselves in my desired conditions of “exchangeability.”
Then gold and silver are value arrived at the state of
constitution—they are the incorporation of the idea of
M. Proudhon. He is most happy in his choice of an
example. Gold and silver, in addition to the quality
which they possess of being commodities, valued like all
other commodities by labor time, have further that of
being the universal agent of exchange, of being money.
In taking now gold and silver as an application of “value
constituted” by labor time, nothing is more easy than to
prove that every commodity the value of which may be
constituted by labor time will be always exchangeable,
will be money.

A very simple question presents itself to the mind of
M. Proudhon. Why have gold and silver the privilege
of being the type of “constituted value”?

_ “The particular function which usage has devolved
upon the precious metals of serving as the agent of com-


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 87


merce is purely conventional, and every other commodity
could, less conveniently perhaps, but in a sufficiently
satisfactory manner, fill this role; the economists recog-
nise and cite more than one example of this. What, then,
is the reason for this preference generally accorded to
the precious metals, of serving as money, and how is
this speciality of functions of money, without analogy in
political economy, to be explained .... Is it possible to
re-establish the series from which money seems to have
been detached, and thereby to bring it back to its true
principle ?”

Already, in putting the question in these terms, M.
Proudhon has supposed the existence of money. The
first question he should have put is, why, in the
exchanges as they are actually constituted, exchange-
value should have had to be individualised, so to speak,
by the creation of a special agent of exchange. Money is
not a thing, it is a social relation. Why is the relation
of money a relation of production, like every other
economic relation, such as the division of labor, &c.?
If M. Proudhon had clearly asecrtained this relation he
would not have seen in money an exception, a member
detached from a series, unknown or to be discovered.

He would, on the contrary, have recognised that this
relation is a link of, and as such, intimately attached to,
the whole chain of the other economic relations, and that
this relation corresponds to a determined mode of pro-
duction, neither more nor less than individual exchange.
What does he do? He begins by detaching money from
the whole of the existing mode of production, in order
later to make it the first member of an imaginary series,
a series to be discovered.

Once the necessity for a special agent of exchange,
that is:‘to say the necessity for money, is recognised, it is


88 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


only necessary to explain why this particular function
has devolved upon gold and silver rather than upon any
other commodity. That is a secondary question which
is not explained by the chain of the relations of produc-
tion, but by the specific qualities inherent in gold anc
silver as material. If, after all, the economists on this
occasion have “gone outside their own science and have
made this a physical, a mechanical, and_ historical
question, &c.,” as M. Proudhon has reproached them with
having done, they have only done what they ought. The
question is no longer within the domain of political
economy.

“What none of the economists,” says M. Proudhon,
“has either seen or comprehended, is the economic reason
which has determined, in favor of the precious metals,
the privilege which they enjoy.”

The economic reason which no one, and with good
cause, has either seen or comprehended, M. Proudhon
has seen, comprehended, and bequeathed to posterity.

“But what no one has remarked is that, of all com-
modities, gold and silver are the first the value of which
has been constituted. In the patriarchal period, gold
and silver were bought and sold and exchanged in ingots,
but even then with an obvious tendency to domination,
and with a marked preference. Little by little monarchs
took possession of them and set their seal upon them;
and from this sovereign consecration sprang money, that
is to say the commodity par excellence, which in spite of
all the shocks of commerce, maintains a fixed pro-
portioned value and makes itself accepted in payment
everywhere..... The distinctive feature of gold and
silver, I repeat, arise from this that, thanks to their
metallic properties, to the difficulties attending their pro-
duction, and, above all, to the intervention of the public


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 89


authority, they have at an early stage, conquered, as
commodities, fixity and authenticity.”

To say that, of all commodities, gold and silver are
the first the value of which has been constituted, is to
say, after all which has preceded it, that gold and silver
are the first commodities which have become money.
That is the great revelation of M. Proudhon, that is the
truth which no one had discovered before him!

If by these words M. Proudhon has wished to say
that gold and silver are commodities the time necessary
to the production of which has been sooner known thar.
in the case of any others, that would still be one of the
suppositions with which he is so ready to gratify his
readers, If we wished to hold to this patriachal erudition,
we should say to M. Proudhon that the time necessary
for the production of the objects of prime necessity,
such as iron, &c., was known in the first place. We
would make him a present of the classic arch of Adam
Smith.

But, after all, how can M. Proudhon speak of the
constitution of a value, since one value is never con-
stituted alone? It is constituted not by the time which
is necessary for its production alone, but relatively to
the quota of all other products which can be created in
the same time. Thus the constitution of the value of
gold and silver presupposes the constitution to be already
established of a mass of other products.

It is then, not the commodity which has arrived, in
gold: and silver, at the state of “constituted value,” it is
the “constituted value’ of M. Proudhon which has
arrived, in gold and silver, at the state of money.

Let us now examine more closely these economic
reasons, which, according to M. Proudhon, have afforded
gold and silver the advantage of being erected into money


90 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


sooner than all other products, of passing to the con-
stitutive state of value. .

These economic reasons are: the “marked preference,”
already in “the patriarchal period,” and other circumlo-
cutions of the same fact, which augment the difficulty,
since they multiply the fact in multiplying the incidents
which M. Proudhon brings forward to explain the fact.
M. Proudhon has not yet exhausted all the pretended
economic reasons. Here is one of supreme force,
irresistible :

“It is from the sovereign consecration that money
springs; the monarchs seize gold and silver and place
their seal upon them.” .

Thus the good pleasure of monarchs is, for M. Proud-
hon, the supreme reason, in political economy!

Truly it is necessary to be entirely innocent of all
historical knowledge not to know that in all times
sovereigns have had to submit to the economic conditions
and have never made laws for these. Legislation,
political as well as civil, could do no more than give ex-
pression to the will of the economic conditions.

Has the monarch seized gold and silver to make them
the universal agents of exchange by impressing his seal
upon them, or have these universal agents of exchange
not rather taken possession of the monarch by forcing
him to impress his seal upon them and thus give them a
political consecration ?

The imprint which has been, and is, given to money
is not that of its value, it is that of its weight. The
fixity and authenticity of which M. Proudhon speaks
applies only to the standard of the money, and this
standard indicates how much of material metal there is
in a coined piece of gold or silver. “The sole intrinsic
value of a silver mark,” said Voltaire, with his usual


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 91


good sense, “is that of a mark of silver—a half pound
of the weight of eight ounces. The weight and the
standard alone make this intrinsic value.” (Voltaire,
“Systeme de Law.”) But the question: What is the
value of an ounce of gold or of silver? still remains. If a
cashmere from the establishment of the great Colbert bore
the trade mark of the manufactory, pure wool, this mark
would still not tell us the value of the cashmere. The
question of how much the wool was worth would still
remain. “Philippe I., King of France,” says M. Proud-
hon, “mixed with the pound (sterling) of Charlemagne
a third of alloy, imagining that as he alone had the
monopoly of the manufacture of money he could do what
any trader having a monopoly can do. What was the
effect of this alteration of the coinage with which
Philippe and his successors have been so strongly re-
proached? A very sound reasoning, from the commercial
point of view, but very unsound in economic science, is
to suppose that, as supply and demand regulate value, it
is possible, either by producing an artificial scarcity or
by monopolising the manufacture, to increase the
estimation and consequently the value of things, and
that this is true of gold and silver as well as of corn,
wine, oil or tobacco. However, the fraud of Philippe
Was no sooner suspected than his money was reduced to
its proper value, and he at once lost all that he imagined
he had gained out of his subjects. The same thing would
happen as the result of any similar attempts.”

To begin with, it has been demonstrated over and
over again that if the monarch debases the coinage it is
he who suffers the loss. What he has gained once by
the first issue he loses as many times as the falsified
money returns to him in the form of duties, taxes, &c.
But Philippe and his successors knew how to more or


92 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


less protect themselves from this loss, as, once the
debased money was put in circulation, they had nothing
to do but to order a general reminting ie money at the
old standard.

And, besides, if Philippe I. had cate reasoned ike
M. Proudhon, Philippe would not have reasoned well
“from the commercial point of view.” Neither
Philippe I. nor M. Proudhon show any evidence of
mercantile genius when they imagine that it is possible
to alter the value of gold as well as that of every other
commodity, simply because that value is determined by
the relation of supply and demand.

If King Philippe had ordered that a quarter of wheat
should be henceforth called two quarters he would have
been a swindler. He would have deceived all the fund-
holders, all the people who had to receive a hundred
quarters of wheat; he would have been the cause of all
these people receiving, instead of a hundred quarters,
only fifty. Suppose the king to owe a hundred quarters
of wheat, he would have only really had to pay fifty.
But in commerce a hundred such quarters would never
be worth more than fifty. In changing the name we do
not change the thing. The quantity of wheat, either in
supply or demand, would not be diminished or increased
by this simple change of name. Thus, the relation of
supply to demand being precisely the same in’ spite of
this change of name, the price of the wheat would
undergo no real alteration. In speaking of the supply
and demand of things we do not speak of the supply and
demand of the aame of things. Philippe I. was not the
maker of gold or silver, as Proudhon says; he was the
maker of the name of moneys. Make your French
cashmeres pass for Asiatic cashmeres, and it is possible
that you may deceive a buyer or two; but once the


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 93


fraud becomes known, and your: pretended Asiatic cash-

meres will fall to the price of the French article. In
giving a false standard to gold and silver, King Philippe
could only make dupes so long as the fraud was not
known. Like any other shopkeeper, he deceived his
customers by a false description of the commodity, but
that could not last long. Sooner or later he must suffer
the rigor of the laws of commerce. Is it that which M.
Proudhon wishes to prove? No. According ‘to him it
is from the monarch, and not from commerce, that
money receives its value. And what is it that he has
effectively proved? That commerce is more sovereign
than the monarch. Let the monarch order that a mark
shall be henceforth two marks, commerce will always
tell you that these two marks are only worth one mark
as before.

But for all that, the question of the determination of
value by the quantity of labor has not been taken a step
further. It still remains to be decided if the value of
these two marks—-again become the original mark—
is determined by the cost of production or by supply and
demand.

M. Proudhon continues: “It may be equally assumed
that if, instead of altering the money it had been in the
power of the King to double its quantity, the exchange-
value of gold and silver would have immediately fallen
to half, always in consequence of this proportion and
equilibrium.”

If this opinion, which M. Proudhon shares with the
economists, is correct, it is a proof in support of their
theory of supply and demand, and not in support of the
“proportion” of M. Proudhon. Because, whatever may
have been the quantity of labor embodied in the double
quantity of gold and silver its value would have fallen by


94 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


half, the demand remaining the same and the supply
having doubled. Or is it indeed, by chance, that “the
law of proportion” confounds itself this time with the
so-despised law of supply and demand? This just pro-
portion of M. Proudhon is in effect so elastic, it lends,
itself to so many variations, combinations and permuta-
tions, that it may possibly for once coincide with the
relation of supply and demand.

To “make every commodity acceptable in exchange,
if not' in fact at least by right,” in basing it on the
function performed by gold and silver, is then to mis-
understand this function. Gold and silver are only
acceptable in exchange by right, because they are so in
fact, and they are so in fact because the existing organisa-
tion of production has need of a universal agent of
exchange. The right is only the official recognition of
the fact.

We have seen this, that the example of money as an
application of value passed to the state of constitution has
been chosen by M. Proudhon only that he might smuggle
in the whole of his theory of exchangeability ; that is to
say, in order to demonstrate that every commodity
valued by its cost of production must arrive at the state
of money. All that would be beautiful and good but for
the difficulty that precisely gold and silver—as money—
are of all commodities the only ones which are not
determined by their cost of production; and that is so far
true that in circulation they may be replaced by paper.
Inasmuch as there will be a certain proportion observed
between the needs of circulation and the quantity of
money issued, whether the money be in paper, in gold,
in platinum, or in copper, there can be no question of
any proportion to the observed between the intrinsic
value (the cost of production) and the nominal value of


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 95


money. Undoubtedly, in international commerce the
value of money, as that of every other commodity, is
determined by labor time. But that is simply because
gold and silver in international commerce are means of
exchange as products and not as money; that is to say,
that in this connection gold and silver lose that very
character of “fixity and authenticity,” of “sovereingn con-
secration,’ which is for M. Proudhon their specific
characteristic. Ricardo has so well understood this truth
that after having based his whole system on value
determined by labor time and after having said, “Gold
and silver, as well as all other commodities, have value
only in proportion to the quantity of labor necessary to
produce them and put them on the market,” he added,
nevertheless, that the value of money is not determined
by the labor time embodied in its substance, but only by
the law of supply and demand. “Although paper money
has no intrinsic value, nevertheless if its quantity be
limited its exchangeable value may equal the value of
metallic money of the same denomination, or of bullion
estimated as specie. It is by the same principle, that
is to say by the limitation of the quantity of money, that
coins of a low standard are able to circulate at the same
value as they would have had if their weight and their
value were those fixed by law, and not at the intrinsic
value of the pure metal which they contain. That is
why in the history of English money we find that out
currency has never been depreciated in the same pro-
portion as it has been changed. The reason is that it
has never been multiplied in proportion to its deprecia-
tion” (Ricardo.)

J. B. Say, on the subject of this passage of Ricardo,
observes :

“This example should suffice, it seems to me, to con-


‘


96 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


vince the author that the basis of all value is not the
quantity of labor necessary to produce a commodity, but
the need which exists for that commodity, balanced by
its scarcity.”

Thus money, which is for Ricardo no longer a value
determined by labor time and which J. B. Say takes
for that rason as an example to convince Ricardo that
other values cannot be any more than money, determined
by labor time, this money, I say, which is taken by J. B.
Say as the example of value determined exclusively by
supply and demand, becomes for M. Proudhon the
example, par excellence, of the application of value con-
stituted.... by labor time.

To conclude, if money is not a “value constituted”
by labor time, still less can it have anything in common
with the “just proportion” of M. Proudhon. Gold and
silver are always exchangeable, because they have the
particular function of serving as the universal agent of
exchange, and not at all because they exist in a pro-
portionate quantity to the mass of wealth; or, to speak
more correctly, they are always in proportion because,
alone of all commodities, they serve as money, as the
universal agent of exchange, whatever may be their
quantity relatively to the whole mass of wealth. “The
money in circulation can never be sufficient to cause a
glut; because if you reduce its value you augment its
quantity in the same proportion, and in increasing its
value you diminish the quantity. ” (Ricardo.)

“What an imbroglio is political economy!” cries M.
Proudhon.

“Accursed gold!” ironically exclaims a Communist
(by the mouth of M. Proudhon). It would be as reason-
able to say: Accursed wheat, accursed vines, accursed
sheep! seeing that “in the same way as gold and silver,


J


es


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY ot


all commercial value must arrive at its exact and rigorous
determination.”

The idea of sheep and vines being brought to the state
of money is not new. In France that idea belongs to
the period of Louis XIV. At that epoch, money having
begun to establish its omnipotence, there was great
complaint of the depreciation of all other commodities,
and the people prayed most ardently for the moment in
which “every commercial value” would arrive at its
exact and rigorous determination, at the state of money. .
Here is what we find in Bois-Guillebert, one of the oldest
economists of France: “Money then, by this growth of
innumerable competitors, which will be the commodities
themselves established in their exact values, will be re-
stricted to its natural limits.”’ (“Economistes Financiers
du Dixhuitiéme Siécle,” p. 422.)

We see that the first illusions of the bourgeoisie are
also their last.


(B.)—Surplus Labor.


“We read in some works on political economy this
absurd hypothesis: If the price of all things were
doubled.... As if the price of all things was not the
proportion of things, and as if one could double a pro-
portion, a relation, a law!” (Proudhon, vol. L., page
81.)

The economists have fallen into this error through
not having known how to apply the “law of proportion”
and of “constituted value”!

Unfortunately we find in the work of M. Proudhon
(Vol. I., p. 110) this absurd hypothesis, that “at
wages were raised generally, the price of everything
would rise.” Furthermore, if the phrase in question is
found in a work of poltical economy, there is also the


98 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


explanation. “If we say that the prices of all com-
modities rise or fall, we always exclude one commodity
or another, the commodity excluded being generally
either money or labor.” (“Encyclopedia Metropoli-
taine, or Universal Dictionary of Knowledge,” vol. IV.,
the article on Political Economy by Senior, London.
1836.) See also, on this expression, John Stuart Mill,
“Essays on some Unsettled Questions of Political
Economy,” London, 1844, and Tooke, “A History of
Prices, &c.,” London, 1838.

Let us now pass to the second application of “con-
stituted value,” and other proportionalities, whose single
failing is that they are so little proportioned, and see if
M. Proudhon is more happy in that than in the monetisa-
tion of sheep.

“An axiom generally admitted by the economists is
that all labor must leave a surplus. This proposition is
for me a universal and absolute truth: it is the corollary
of the law of proportion, which may be regarded as the
summary of the whole science of economy. But, I must
crave the pardon of the economists, the principle that all
labor must leave a surplus has, in their theory, no
meaning, and is not susceptible of demonstration.”
(Proudhon. )

In order to prove that all labor must leave a surplus,
M. Proudhon personifies society; he makes a personal
Society, a society which is not, so much as it is necessary,
the society of persons, since it has its laws apart, having
nothing in common with the people composing society,
and its “own intelligence,” which is not the common
intelligence of men but an intelligence which has no
common sense. M. Proudhon reproaches the economists
with not having understood the personality of this
collective being. We are pleased to oppose to him the


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY “99


following passage from an American economist who
reproaches the other economists with quite the opposite
fault. “The moral entity in the grammatical being called
society has been clothed with attributes which have no
existence except in the imagination of those who make
a thing with a word....that it is which has led to so
many difficulties and to such deplorable mistakes in
political economy.” (Th. Cooper, “Lectures on the
Elements of Political Economy,” Columbia, 1826.)

“This principle of the surplus of labor,” continues M.
Proudhon, “‘is true of individuals only because it emanates
from society, which thus confers upon them the benefit
of its own laws.”

Does M. Proudhon wish by that to say simply that
the production of the social individual exceeds that of
the isolated individual? Is it of this surplus of the pro-
duction of associated individuals over that of non-
associated individuals that M. Proudhon is to be under-
stood to speak? If that is so we can cite a hundred
economists who have expressed this simple truth without
all the mysticism with which M. Proudhon surrounds it.
Here is what Sadler, for instance, says on the subject:

“Combined labor gives results which individual labor
could never produce. In proportion, then, as people in-
crease in number, the products of their united industry
will greatly exceed the sum of a simple addition calculated
on this increase..... In mechanical arts, as in the labors
of science, a man can actually do more in a day than an
isolated individual could do in the whole of his life.
The axiom of the mathematician, that the whole is
equal to the parts, is not true, as applied to this subject.
As to labor, the great pillar of human existence, it may
be said that the product of accumulated efforts greatly
exceeds all that individual and separate efforts could


100 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


ever accomplish.” (T. Sadler, “The Law of Population,”
London, 1830.)

To return to M. Proudhon. The surplus of labor, he
says, explains itself by society personified. The life of
this personal society follows laws opposed to the laws
by which man acts as an individual, as he will prove by
“facts.”

“The discovery of an economic process can never be
worth to the inventor the profit which it yields to
society..... It has been remarked that railway under-
takings have been much less a source of riches to ihe
owners than to the State...... The average price for
the transport of commodities by road is eighteen centimes
per ton per kilometre, goods called for and delivered.
It has been calculated that at this rate, an ordinary
railway undertaking would not clear ten per cent. net
profit, a return nearly equal to that of road cartage.
But, admitting that the speed of railway transport is to
road transport as four to one, as in society time is money,
the railway would show an advantage over the road of
four hundred per cent. This enormous advantage, how-
ever, very real for society, is far from being realised in
the same proportion by the railway proprietor, who,
while he enables society to enjoy an additional value of
four hundred per cent., does not draw, himself, even ten
per cent. Let us suppose, to make the matter clearer,
that the railway increases its tariff to twenty-five
centimes, that of road transport remaining at eighteen,
it would immediately lose all its consignments. Traders
and their consignees, everybody, in fact, would return
to the old road waggons. The locomotive would be
deserted. A social advantage of four hundred per cent.
would be sacrified to a loss of thirty-five per cent. The
reason is easy to comprehend : the advantage arising from


‘A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 101


the speed of the railway is entirely social, and each in-
_ dividual participates in it only in a minimum proportion
(remember we are dealing here only with the transport
of merchandise), while the loss falls directly upon the
consumer personally. A social ‘benefit of four hundred
represents for the individual, if the society only
number a million men, four ten-thousandths; while a
loss of thirty-three per cent. for the consumer would
suppose a social deficit of thirty-three millions.”
(Proudhon.)

M. Proudhan not only expresses a quadrupled speed
by four hundred per cent. of the primitive celerity, but
he sets up a relation between the percentage of speed
and the percentage of profit, and establishes a propor-
tion between two conditions which, although they may
be separately estimated at so much per cent., are never-
theless incommensurable with each other: This is to
establish a proportion between the percentages and to
leave out the denominations. Percentages are always
percentages. Ten ‘per cent. and four hundred per cent.
are commensurable, they are to each other as ten is to
four hundred. Then, concludes M. Proudron, a profit
of ten per cent. is worth forty times less than a
quadrupled speed. In order to save appearances he says
that, for society, time is money. This error arises from
the fact that he confusedly recollects that there is a rela-
tion between value and labor time, and he has nothing
-to do but assimilate labor time with the time of trans-


port; that is to say, he identifies the drivers, guards and
firemen, whose labor time is nothing but the time of


transport, with the whole of society. For this master
stroke, behold speed become capital, and in such case he
is quite right to say: “A benefit of four hundred per
cent. would be sacrificed to a loss of thirty-five per cent.”


102 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


After having set up this strange proposition as a matehe-
matician, he gives us the explanation as an economist.

“A social benefit equal to four hundred represents for
the individual, if the society is only one of a million
of men, four ten-thousandths.” Certainly; but it is not
a question of four hundred, it is a question of four hun-
dred per cent., and a benefit of four hundred per cent.
represents neither more nor less than four hundred per
cent. for the individual. Whatever may be the capital,
the dividends will be always in the proportion of four
hundred per cent. What does M. Proudhon do? He
takes the percentage for the capital, and, as though he ;
feared that his confusion was not sufficiently manifest,
sufficiently “clear,” he continues :—

“A loss of thirty-three per cent. for the consumer
would suppose a social deficit of thirty-three millinns.”
Thirty-three per cent. of loss for the consumer would
remain a loss of thirty-three per cent. for a million con-
sumers. How can M. Proudhon say afterwards,
definitely, that the social deficit, in the case of a loss of
thirty-three per cent., would amount to thirty-three
millions when he does not know either the social capital
or even that of a single one of those interested? Thus,
it is not sufficient for M. Proudhon to have confounded
the capital and the percentage, but he must go further
still, and identify the capital put into an undertaking
with the number of those concerned. “Let us suppose,
to make the matter still clearer,’ a determined capital.
A social profit of four hundred per cent. shared among
a million participants, supposing each to be interested to
the extent of a franc, would mean four francs profit per
head, and not 0.0004, as M. Proudhon pretends. In the
same way a loss of thirty-three per cent. for each of the
participants would represent a social deficit of 330,000


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 103


francs, and not thirty-three millions (100:33=1,000,000:
330,000).

M. Proudhona, preoccupied with his theory of personi-
fied society, forgets to make the division by 100. He
thus obtains 330,000 francs loss; but four francs per
head profit make for the society a profit of four million
francs. There remains for society a net profit of 3,670,000
francs. This account exactly demonstrates the opposite
to that which M. Proudhon wished to demonstrate, that
is, that the profits and losses of society are not in inverse
ratio to the profits and losses of the individual.

After having rectified these simple errors of calcula-
tion, let us glance for a moment at the consequences to
which we should arrive if we were to admit for railways
this relation of speed to capital such as M. Proudhon
gives it, less the errors of calculation. Suppose a
transport four times as rapid cost four times as much,
this transport would not give less profit than the road
transport which is four times as slow and costs only a
quarter as much. Then if the latter charges eighteen
centimes the railway could charge seventy-two centimes.
This would be, according to “mathematical rigor,’ the
consequence of the supposition of M. Proudhon, always
excepting his errors of calculation. But then he suddenly
tells us that if, instead of seventy-two centimes the rail-
way charged twenty-five it would at once lose all its
consignments. Decidedly it would be necessary to return
to the old road waggons. Only if we have any advice
to offer M. Proudhon it is not to forget in his “Pro-
gramme of the Progressive Association” to make the
division by 100. But, alas! it is scarcely to be hoped
that our advice will be listened to, for M. Proudhon is
so enamored of his “progressive” calculation, - corre-
sponding to the “progressive occasion” that he cries with


104 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


much emphasis: “I have already shown in Chapter II., |
by the solution of the contradiction of value, that the
advantage of every useful discovery is incomparably less
for the inventor, whoever he may be, than for society.
I have carried out the demonstration of this point with
matehematical rigor!”

Let us return to the fiction of society personified, a
fiction which has no other object than to prove the
following simple truth: A new invention causing a larger
quantity of commodities to be produced with the same
amount of labor, results in a fall in the saleable value
of the product. Society makes a profit then, not in-ob-
taining more. exchangeable values, but in obtaining more
commodities for the same value. As to the inventor,
competition causes his profit to fall successively to the
general level of profits. Has M. Proudhon proved this
proposition as well as he wished to do? No. That does
_not prevent him from reproaching the economists with
having failed to make this demonstration. To prove to
him the contrary we will only cite Ricardo and Lauder-
dale; Ricardo, the chief of the school which determines
value by labor time, Lauderdale one of the most vigorous
defenders of the determination of value by supply and
demand. Both have developed the same thesis.

“In constantly augmenting the facility of production,
we constantly diminish the value of some of the things
already produced, although by the same means we not
only add to the national wealth, but we increase the
facility of producing for the future..... As soon as,
by means of machines, or by our knowledge of physics,
we force natural agents to do the work which has
previously been done by man, the value of this work falls
in consequence. If it takes ten men to turn a corn-mill,
and it is discovered that by means of wind or water the


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 105


labor of these ten men can be saved, the flour which will
be the product of the action of the mill will, from that
moment, fall in value, in proportion to the amount of
labor saved; and society will find itself enriched by all
the value of the things which the labor of these ten men
can produce, the funds: destined to the support of the
workers not having by that suffered the least diminution.”
(Ricardo.)

Lauderdale, in his turn, says :—

“There is no part of the capital of a country that more
obviously derives its profits from supplanting a portion
of labor that would otherwise be performed by man, or
from performing a portion which is beyond the reach of
his personal exertion, than that which is vested in
machinery..... The small profit which the proprietors
of machinery generally acquire, when compared with the
wages of labor which the machine supplants, may per-
haps create a suspicion of the rectitude of this opinion.
Some fire-engines, for instance, draw more water from
a coalpit in one day than could be conveyed on the
shoulders of three hundred men, even assisted by the
machinery of buckets; and a fire-engine undoubtedly”
performs its labor at a much smaller expense than the
amount of the wages of those whose labor it thus
supplants. This is, in truth, the case with all machinery.
All machines must execute the labor that was antecedently
performed, at a cheaper rate than it could be done by the
hand of man..... If such a privilege is given for the
invention of a machine, which performs, by the labor of
one man a quantity of work that used to take the labor
of four; as the possession of the exclusive privilege
prevents any competition in doing the work, but what
proceeds from the labor of the four workmen, their
wages, as long ‘as the patent continues, must obviously


106 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


form the measure of the patentee’s charge; that is, to

secure employment, he has only to charge a little less

than the wages of the labor which the machine sup-

plants. But when the patent expires, other machines of
the same nature are brought into competition; and then

his charge must be regulated on the same principle as
every other, according to the abundance of machines....

The profit of capital employed in foreign trade, though

it arises from supplanting labor, comes to be regulated,

not by the value of the labor it supplants, but, as in all
other cases, by the competition among the proprietors

of capital, and it will be great or small in proportion to
the quantity of capital that presents itself for perform-
ing the duty, and the demand for it.” (“An Enquiry into
the Nature and Origin of Public Wealth.’”)

Finally, then, in proportion as the profit may be
greater than in other industries, fresh capital will be
thrown into the new industry until the average profits
in it have fallen to the common level.

We have just seen that the illustration of the rail-
way was scarcely appropriate for throwing any light on
the fiction of personified society. Nevertheless, M.
Proudhon hardily continues his discourse: “These points
cleared, nothing is more easy than to explain how labor
must leave to each producer a surplus.”

This which now follows belongs to classic antiquity.
It is a poetic romance told in order to relieve the reade=
from the fatigue he has suffered from the rigor of the
mathematical demonstrations which have preceded it.
M. Proudhon gives to his personified society the name
of Prometheus, whose noble traits he glorifies in these
terms :

“At first, Prometheus, springing from the bosom of
nature, awakes to life in an inertia full of charms, &c.,


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 104


&c. Prometheus sets to work, and from his first day,
the first day of the second creation, the product of
Prometheus, that is to say his wealth, his well-being, is
equal to ten. The second day Prometheus divides his
labor, and his product becomes equal to a hundred.
The third day and every following day, Prometheus
invents machines, discovers new utilities in his body,
new forces in nature. . . . At each step that his industry
takes the amount of his production increases, and denotes
to him an increase of felicity. And finally, since, for
him, to consume is to produce, it is clear that each day’s
consumption, absorbing only the product of yesterday,
leaves a surplus product for the day after.”

This Prometheus of M. Proudhon is a droll sort of
fellow, as feeble in logic as in political economy. In
so far as Prometheus only informs us of the division
of labor, the application of machinery, the exploitation
of natural forces and scientific power, multiplying the
productive forces of men and giving a surplus as com-
pared with the product of isolated labor, this new
Prometheus has only the misfortune of coming too late.
But when Prometheus begins to speak of production
and consumption he becomes really grotesque. To
consume is, for him, to produce; he consumes next day
that which he produced the day before—thus he has
always a day in hand; this day in hand is his “surplus
of labor.” But in consuming the next day that which
he produced the day before, it is necessary that on the
first day, which had no yesterday, he should have worked
two days, in order to afterwards have a day in hand.
How did Prometheus gain this surplus on the first day,
when there was neither division of labor, nor machinery,
nor even any knowledge of physical forces except fire?
Thus the question, in order to have been deferred to


108 _THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


“the first day of the second creation,’ has not advanced
a step. This manner of explaning things derived at the
same time from the Greek and the Hebrew, which is at
once mystic and allegorical, gives to M. Proudhon the
perfect right to say, “I have demonstrated by theory and
by facts the principle that all labor must leave a surplus.”

The facts, they are the famous progressive calcula-
tion ; the theory, it is the myth of Prometheus.

“But,” continues M. Proudhon, “this principle, ac-
curate as an arithmetical proposition, is yet far from
being realised for everybody. While by the progress of
collective industry, each day of individual labor creates
a larger and still larger product, and by a necessary
consequence, while the worker, with the same wages,
must become richer every day, there exist in society
some classes which thrive and others which perish.”

In 1770 the population of the United Kingdom of
Great Britain was fifteen millions and the productive
population three millions. The scientific power of
production would about equal a population of twelve
more millions; thus making a total of fifteen millions of
productive forces. Thus the productive power was to
the population as 1 is to 1, and the scientific power was
to manual power as 4 is to I.

In 1840 the population did not exceed thirty millions:
the productive population was six millions, while the
scientific power amounted to 650 millions, that is to say
that is was to the whole population as 21 to 1, and to
manual power as 108 to I.

In English society, the day of labor had thus acquired
in seventy years a surplus of 2,700 per cent. of produc-
tivity, that is to say that in 1840 it produced twenty-
seven times as much as in 1770, According to M.
Proudhon it is necessary to put the following question:


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 109


Why is the English workmen of 1840 not twenty-seven
times richer than the workman of 1770? In putting
such a question one would naturally suppose that the
English had been able to produce these riches without
the historical conditions in which they were produced—
such as: the private accumulation of capital; the modern
division of labor; the automatic workshop; anarchic
competition ; the wage-system, and, in fine, all that which
is based upon the antagonism of classes—having to exist.
But these were precisely the necessary conditions for the
development of the productive forces and of the surplus
of labor. Thus, it was necessary, in order to obtain this
development of the productive forces, and this surplus
of labor, that there should be some classes which thrive
and others which perish.

What then, in the last place, is this Prometheus re-_
susciated by M. Proudhon? It is society, it is the social
relations based on the antagonism of classes. These
relations are, not the relations of individual to individ-
ual, but of workman to capitalist, of farmer to landlord,
&c. Efface these relations and you have extinguished
the whole of society, and your Prometheus is nothing
-more than a phantom without arms or legs, that is to
say without the automatic workshop, without the division
of labor, wanting, in fine, all that you have originally
endowed him with in order to enable him to obtain this
surplus of labor.

If then, in theory, it suffices to interpret, as M. Proud-
hon does, the formula of the surplus of labor in the
sense of equality without taking account of the actual
conditions of production, it must suffice, in practice, to
make among the workers an equal distribution of wealth
without changing anything in the actual conditions of


110 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


production. This distribution would not assure a great
degree of comfort to each of the participants.

But M. Proudhon is not so pessimistic as one might
believe him to be. As proportion is everything for him,
it is indeed necessary that he should see in his fully
endowed Prometheus, that is to say in actual society, a
commencement of the realisation of his favorite idea.

“But everywhere also the progress of riches, that is to
say the proportion of values, is the dominant law; and
when the economists oppose to the complaints of the
social party the progressive growth of the public wealth
and the amelioration effected in the condition of even
the most unfortunate classes, they proclaim, without
suspecting it, a truth which is the condemnation of
their theories.”

What, in effect, are collective riches, public wealth?
They are the wealth of the bourgeoisie, and not that of
each individual bourgeois. Well! the economist have
simply demonstrated how, in the relations of production
as they exist, the wealth of the bourgeoisie has developed
and must still grow. As to the working classes, it is still
a much debated question whether their condition has
been ameliorated at all as a result of the growth of the
so-called public wealth. If the economists cite to us, in
support of their optimism, the example of the workers
engaged in the English cotton industry, they only notice
their position in the rare moments of commercial pros-
perity. These moments of prosperity are to the epochs
of crisis and stagnation in the “exact proportion” of
three to ten. But perhaps also, in speaking of ameliora-
tion, the economists may have wished to refer to the
millions of workers condemned to perish, in the East
Indies, in order to procure for the million and a half of


A SCIENTIFIC DISCOVERY 111


workpeople employed in England in the same industry,
three years of prosperity out of ten.

As to the temporary participation in the growth of
public wealth, that is different. The fact of the tempor-
ary participation is explained by the theory of the
economists. It is the confirmation of that theory and
not the “condemnation,” as M. Proudhon says. If
there was anything to condemn it would certainly be the
system of M. Proudhon, which, as we have demonstrated,
would reduce the worker to the minimum wage, in spite
of the growth of riches. It is only by reducing the
worker to the minimum wage that he could make an ap-
plication of the “exact proportion” of values, of “value
constituted”—by labor time. It is because wages, in
consequence of competition, oscillate above and below
the price of the necessaries of life essential to the sus-
tentation of the worker that he can not only participate,
to however small a degree, in the development of the
collective wealth, but also that he can perish of want.
There is the whole theory of the economists, which sets
up no illusions.

After his long divagations on the subject of railways,
of Prometheus and of the new society to be reconstituted
on “constituted value,” M. Proudhon reflects ; emotion
overcomes him, and in a paternal tone he cries:

“I adjure the economists to question themselves a
moment, in the silence of their hearts, tar. ftom: the
prejudices which disturb them and without regard to
the employments which occupy, or which await them, to
the interests which they serve so ill, to the approbation
to which they aspire, or to the distinctions which their
vanity craves; that they should say if to this day the
principle that all labor must leave a surplus has been
apparent to them with this chain of preliminaries and
of consequences that we have raised.”


CHAPTER II.
THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.
SEcTION 1.—THE MeEtTHOop.


Now we are quite in Germany! We have now to talk
metaphysics while speaking of political economy. And,
in this again, we only follow the “contradictions” of
M. Proudhon. Just now he compelled us to speak
English, to become even passably English ourselves.
Now the scene changes. M. Proudhon transports us to
our dear native land and compels us in spite of ourselves
to once more assume our quality of German.

If the Englishman transforms men into hats, the
German transforms hats into ideas. The Englishman
is Ricardo, a rich banker and distinguished economist ;!
the German is Hegel, a simple professor of philosophy
at the Berlin University.

Louis XV., the last absolute monarch and who re--
presented the decadence of French royalty, had attached
to his person a physician who was, himself, the first
economist of France. This physician, this economist,
Tepresented the imminent and certain triumph of the
French bourgeoisie. Doctor Quesnay has made of polit-
ical economy a science; he has summarised it in his
famous “Tableau Economique.” Besides the thousand


and one commentaries which have appeared on this
118


Ra


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 413


tableau, we possess one by the doctor himself. It is,
“The Analysis of the Economic Tableau,” followed by
“Seven Important Observations.”

M. Proudhon is another Doctor Quesnay. The
Quesnay of the metaphysics of political economy. But
metaphysics—the whole .of philosophy, in fact—is sum-
med up, according to Hegel, in the method. It will be
necessary, then, for us to endeavor to elucidate the
method of M. Proudhon, which is at least as obscure as
the “Tableau Economique.” For that purpose we will
give seven observations more or less important. If
Doctor Proudhon is not content with our observations,
well, then, he must play Abbé Bauwdeau, and give “the
explanation of the economico-metaphysical method” him-
self.


First Observation.


“We will not make a history according to the order of
time, but according to the succession of ideas. The
economic phases or categories are in their manifestation
sometimes contemporaneous, sometimes in inverse order
. . . . Economic theories have also their logical succes-
sion and their series in the comprehension. It is this
order which we flatter ourselves with having discovered.”
(Proudhon vol. I., p. 146.)

Decidedly M. Proudhon has wished to frighten the
French by throwing in their faces some quasi-Hegelian


phrases. We are then concerned with two men, at first


with M. Proudhon and then with Hegel. How does M.
Proudhon distinguish himself from other economists
And Hegel, what réle does he play in the political
economy of M. Proudhon? .

The economists express the relation of borgeois


114 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


production, the division of labor, credit, money, &c.,
as categories fixed, immutable, eternal. M. Proudhon,
who has before him these already formed categories,
would explain to us the act of formation, the generation
of these categories, principles, laws, ideas, thoughts.

The economists explain to us how production is car-
ried on in the relation given, but what they do aot ex-
plain is how these relations are produced, that is to
say the historical movement which has created them.
M. Proudhon, having taken these relations as abstract
principles, categories, and thoughts, has only to put
order into these thoughts, which may be found ranged
alphabetically at the end of any treatise on political
economy. The material of the economists is the active
and busy life of men; the materials of M. Proudhon are
the dogmas of the economists. But from the moment
that we cease to follow the historical movement of the
relations of production, of which the categories are
nothing but the theoretical expression, from the moment
that we see in these categories only spontaneous thoughts
and ideas, independent of the real relations, we are
forced to assign the movement of pure reason as the
origin of these thoughts and ideas. “How does pure
reason, eternal, impersonal, give birth to these thoughts?
How does it proceed in order to produce them?

If we had the intrepidity of M. Proudhon in this
Hegelianism we should say: Reason is distinguished in
itself from itself. What does this expression mean?
Impersonal reason having outside of itself neither ground
upon which to stand, nor object to which it can be
opposed, nor subject with which it can be composed,
finds itself forced to make a somersault in posing, oppos-
ing and composing itself—position, opposition, composi-
tion. To speak Greek, we have the thesis, the antithesis


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 115


(

and the synthesis. As to those who are not acquainted
with Hegelian language, we would say to them in the
sacramental formula, affirmation, negation, and negation
of the negation. That is what it means to speak in this
way. It is certainly not Hebrew, so as not to displease
IM. Proudhon; but it is the language of this reason so
pure, separated from the individual. Instead of the
ordinary individual, with his ordinary manner of speak-
ing and thinking, we have nothing but this ordinary
manner pure and simple, minus the individual.

Is there occasion to be surprised that everything, in the
final abstraction, because it is abstraction and not
analysis, presents itself in the state of logical category‘
Is there need to be astonished that in casting down
little by little all which constitutes the individuality of a
house, that in making abstraction of the materials of
which it is composed, of the form which distinguishes it,
you would come to have nothing but a body—that in
making abstraction of the limits of this body you would
very soon have nothing but an empty space—that, finally,
in making abstraction of the dimensions of this space
you would finish by having nothing more than quantity
pure and simple, the logical category? In consequence
of thus abstracting all the so-called accidents, animate
or inanimate, men or things, we are right in saying that
in the final abstraction we have as substance the logical
categories. Thus the metaphysicians who imagine that
in making these abstractions they make an analysis, and
who in proportion as they detach more and more from
certain objects imagine that they approach the point of
penetrating them, these metaphysicians have in their turn
the right to say that the things of this earth are em-
broideries of which the logical categories form the
canvas. That is what distinguishes the philosopher from


116 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


the Christian. The Christian has but one incarnation of
the Logos, in spite of logic; the philosopher has never
finished with incarnations. That all which exists, that all
which lives on land and in water, may, by force of ab-
straction, be reduced to a logical category; that in this
fashion the whole of the real world may be drowned in
the world of abstractions, in the world of logical
categories, who can wonder?

All that exists, all that lives on ‘and and in water,
exists, lives, only by some movement. Thus the move-
ment of history produces the social relations, the
industrial movement gives us the products of in-
dustry, &c.

As by the force of abstraction we have transformed
everything into a logical category, so we have only to
make abstraction of all distinctive character of the
different movements in order to arrive at movement in
the abstract, movement purely formal, at the purely
logical formula of movement. If in the logical categories
is found the substance of all things, it might be supposed
that in the logical formula of movement would be found
the absolute method which not only explains everything,
but which further implies the movement of things.

It is of this absolute method that Hegel speaks in
these terms: “Method is absolute force, unique, supreme,
infinite, which no object can resist; it is the tendency of
reason to find itself, to recognise itself, in everything.”
(“Logic,” vol. III.) Everything being reduced to a
logical category, and every movement, every act of pro-
duction, to method, it naturally follows that all masses of
products and of production, of objects and of movement,
are reduced to an applied metaphysic. What Hegel has
done for religion, right, &c., M. Proudhon seeks to do
for political economy.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 117


What, then, is this absolute method? The abstraction
of movement. What is the abstraction of movement?
Movement in the abstract, What is movement in the
abstract? The purely logical formula of movement or
the movement of pure reason. In what does the move-
ment of pure reason consist? To pose, oppose and
compose itself, to be formulated as thesis, antithesis and
synthesis, or, better still, to affirm itself, to deny itself
and to deny its negation.

How does reason act, in order to affirm itself, to place
itself in a given category? That is the affair of reason
itself and of its apologists.

But once it has placed itself in thesis, this thesis, this
thought, opposed to itself, doubles itself into two
contradictory thoughts, the positive and the negative, the
yes and no. The struggle of these two antagonistic
elements, comprised in the antithesis, constitutes the
dialectic movement. The yes becoming no, the no be-


" coming yes, the yes becoming at once yes and no, the


no becoming at once no and yes, the contraries balance
themselves, neutralise themselves, paralyse themselves.
The fusion of these two contradictory thoughts coasti-
tutes a new thought which is the synthesis of the two.
This new thought unfolds itself again in two contradic-
tory thoughts which are confounded in their turn in a
new synthesis. From this travail is born a group of
thoughts. This group of thoughts follows the same
dialectic movement as a simple category, and has for
antithesis a contradictory group. From these two groups
is born a new group of thoughts which is the synthesis
of them.

As from the dialectic movement of simple categories is
born the group, so fromthe dialectic movement of ‘the


118 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY |


groups is born the series, and from the dialectic move-
ment of the series is born the whole system.


Apply this method to the categories of political
economy, and you will have the logic and the meta-
physics of political economy, or, in other words, you will
have the economic categories, known to all the world,
translated into an almost unknown language, which will
give them the appearance of having been freshly hatched
in a head of pure reason, so much do these categories
seem to engender the one the other, to enchain and en-
tangle the one in the other by the sole labor of the
dialectic movement. Let not the reader be alarmed by
these metaphysics with all their scaffolding of categories,
of groups, of series and of systems. M. Proudhon, in
spite of the great trouble he has taken to scale the height
of the system of contradictions, has never been able to
raise himself above the two first steps of simple thesis
and antithesis, and yet he has bestridden them twice -
only, and out of the twice he has once tumbled back-
wards.


Up to the present we have only explained the dialectic
of Hegel. We will see later how M. Proudhon has
succeeded in reducing it to the most paltry proportions.
Thus for Hegel, all which has passed and which still
Passes is exactly that which passes in his own reasoning.
Thus the philosophy of history is only the history of
philosophy, of his own philosophy. There is no longer
“history according to the order of time”; there is only
“the succession of ideas in the understanding.” He
thinks to construct the world by the movement of
thought, while all that he does is to reconstruct
systematically, and range under the absolute method, the
thoughts which are in the heads of everybody.


2


ei.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 119


Second Observation.


The economic categories are only the theoretical ex-
pressions, the abstractions, of the social relations of pro-
duction. M. Proudhon, as a true philosopher, taking the
things inside out, sees in the real relations only the in-
carnations of these principles, of these categories, which
sleep—M. Proudhon the philosopher tells us again—in
the bosom of “the impersonal reason of humanity.” M.
Proudhon: the economist has clearly understood that men
make cloth, linen, silk-stuffs, in certain determined re-
lations of production. But what he has not understood
is that these determined social relations are as much
produced by men as are the cloth, the linen, &c. The
social relations are intimately attached to the productive
forces. In acquiring new productive forces men change
their mode of production, and in changing their mode of
production, their manner of gaining a living, they change
all their social relations. The windmill gives you society
with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the
industrial capitalist.

The same men who establish social relations coa-
formably with their material productivity, produce also
the principles, the ideas, the categories, conformably
with their social relations.

Thus these ideas, these categories, are not more eternal
than the relations which they express. They are historical
and transitory products.

There is a continual movement of growth in the pro-
ductive forces, of destruction in the social relations, of
formation in ideas; there is nothing immutable but the
abstraction of the movement—mors immortalis.


120 - THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Third Observation.


The relations of production of every society form a
whole. M. Proudhon regards the economic relations as
so many phases, engendering the one the other, resulting
the one from the other, as the antithesis from the thesis,
‘and realising in their ee succession the impersonai
reason of humanity.

The sole inconvenience of this method is that in
approaching the examination of a single one of these
phases M. Proudhon cannot explain it without having
recourse to all the other relations of society, relations,
however, which he has not yet caused to be engendered
by his dialectic movement. When afterwards, by means
of pure reason, M. Proudhon passes to the birth of the
other phases, he acts as if these were new-born infants,
he forgets that they are the same age as the first.

Thus, in order to arrive at the constitution of value,
which is for him the basis of all the economic evolutions,
he cannot get away from the division of labor, competi-
tion, &c. Nevertheless, in the series, in the understanding
of M. Proudhon, in the logical succession, these relations
do not yet exist.

In constructing with the categories of political economy
the edifice of an ideological system, the members of the
social system are dislocated. The different members of
society are changed as belonging to separate societies
which arrive one after the other. How, indeed, can the
single logical formula of movement, of succession, of
time, explain the composition of society, in which all the
relations co-exist simultaneously and support each
other?


mers


——


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 121


Fourth Observation.


Let us see now the modifications to which M. Proud-
hon subjects the dialectic of Hegel in applying it to


_ political economy.


For him, M. Proudhon, every economic category has


two sides, the one good, the other bad. He regards the


categories as the lower middle-class regard the great
men of history: Napoleon was a great man; he did very
much good, he also did much evil.

The good side and the bad side, the advantage and the
inconvenience, taken together, form for M. Proudhon the
contradiction in each economic category.

The problem to solve: | To conserve the good side
while eliminating the bad.

Slavery is an economic category as well as any other.
That then has, that also, its two sides. Let us leave the
bad side and speak of the beautiful side of slavery ; being
understood that it is only a question of direct slavery, of
the slavery of the blacks in the East, in Brazil, in the
Southern States of North America.

Direct slavery is the pivot of bourgeois industry as


well as machinery, credit, &c. Without slavery you


have no cotton, without cotton you cannot have modern
industry. It is slavery which has given their value to
the colonies, it is the colonies which have created the
commerce of the world, it is the commerce of the world
which is the essential condition of the great industry.
Thus slavery is an economic category of the highest
importance. ;

Without slavery, North America, the most progressive
country, would have been transformed into a patriarchal
country. Efface North America from the map of the
world and you would have the anarchy, the complete


122 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


decadence, of modern commerce and civilisation. Cause
slavery to disappear, and you will have effaced America
from the map of nations.

Thus slavery, because it is an economic category, has
always existed in the institutions of the nations. Modern
nations have known how to disguise slavery in their own
lands alone, they have imposed it without disguise on the
New World.

What will M. Proudhon do to save slavery? He
puts the problem: Conserve the good side of this
economic category, eliminate the bad.

Hegel has no problems to put. He has only dialectic.
M. Proudhon has of the dialectic of Hegel nothing but
the language. His dialectic movement for him is the
dogmatic distinction of good and evil.

Let us for an instant take M. Proudhon himself as a
category. Let us examine his good and his bad side,
his advantages and his inconveniences.

If he has the advantage over Hegel of putting
problems which he reserves it to himself to solve for the
greater good of humanity, he has the inconvenience of
being stricken with sterility when it is a question of
engendering by dialectical travail a new category. In
order merely to put the problem of eliminating the evil
side, one cuts short the dialectic movement. It is not the
category which poses and opposes itself by its contra-
dictory nature, it is M. Proudhon who disturbs himself,
argues with himself, strives and struggles between the
two sides of the category.

Taken thus in a impasse, from which it is difficult to
escape by legitimate means, M. Proudhon performs a
veritable somersault which carries him at a single bound
into a new category. It is then that the series in the
understanding unveils itself to his astonished eyes.


: ae


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 498


He takes the first category to hand and arbitrarily
attributes to it the quality of becoming a remedy to the
inconveniences of the category which he wishes to purify.
Thus imposts, if we are to believe M. Proudhon, remedy
the inconveniences of monopoly; the balance of com-
merce, the inconveniences of imposts; landlordism, the
inconveniences of credit.

In thus taking successively the economic categories
one by one and making one the antidote of the other,
M. Proudhon makes of this mixture of contradictions and
of antidotes to the contradictions, two volumes of
contradictions which he calls by their proper title: “The
System of Economic Contradictions.”


Fifth Observation.


“In absolute reason all these ideas....are equally
simple and general..... In fact, we attain to the science
only by a kind of scaffolding of our ideas. But truth
in itself is independent of its dialectical figures, and free
from the combinations of our mind.” (Proudhon, vol.
LP p. 07.)

There at a blow, by a kind of quick change of which
we now know the secret, the metaphysic of political
economy becomes an illusion! Never has M. Proudhon
spoken more truly. Certainly from the moment that the
development of the dialectical movement is reduced to the
simple process of opposing the good to the bad, of posing
problems tending to eliminate the bad, and of giving one
category as antidote to the other, the categories have
no more spontaneity; the idea “functions no more,” it
has no longer any life in it. It no longer poses or de-


- composes itself in categories. The succession of


categories has become a kind of scaffolding. The dia-


124 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


lectic is no longer the movement of absolute reason.
There is no longer any dialectic; at the most there is
only pure ethics.

When M. Proudhon spoke of the series in the under-
standing, of the logical succession of categories, he de-
clared positively that he would not give history according
to the order of time, that is to say, according to M.
Proudhon, the historical succession in which the cate-
gories are manifested. All therefore passed for him im
the pure ether of reason. All must be caused to flow
from this ether by means of dialectic. Now that it is a
question of putting this dialectic in practice, reasoa
makes default. The dialectic of M. Proudhon makes a
false leap to the dialectic of Hegel, and here is M. Proud-
hon compelled to say that the order in which he gives
the economic categories is no longer the order in which
they engender éach other. The economic evolutions are
no longer the evolutions of reason itself.

What then is it that M. Proudhon gives us? Real
history, that is to say, according to the understanding of
M. Proudhon, the succession in which the categories are
manifested in the order of time? No. History as it
passes in the idea itself? Still less that. Thus neither
the profane history of categories nor their sacred history.
What history does he give us, in fine? The history of
his own contradictions. We will see how they march
and how they draw M. Proudhon after them. Before
approaching this examination, which gives place to the
sixth important observation, we have still an important
observation to make.

We will admit with M. Proudhon that real history,
history according to the order of time, is the historical


succession in which the ideas, the categories, the
principles are manifested.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 195


Each principle has had its century in which to
manifest itself: The principle of authority, for in-
stance, had the eleventh century, as the principle of in-
dividualism had the eighteenth century. From, conse-
quence to consequence it was the century which apper-
tained to the principle and not the principle to the
century. In other words, it was the principle which made
history, it was not history which made the principle.
When, further, in order to save the principles as well as
history, we enquire why such a principle has been
manifested in the eleventh or in the eighteenth century
rather than in another, we are necessarily compelled to
minutely examine into what were the men of the
eleventh century, what were those of the eighteenth, what
were their respective wants, their productive forces, their
mode of production, the raw material of their production,
in fine, what were the relations between man and man
resulting from all these conditions of existence. To
thoroughly examine all these questions, is it not to make
real profane history of the men in each century, to
represent these men at the same time as the authors and
the actors of their own drama? But from the moment
that you represent men as the actors and the authors of
their own history you have, by a detour, arrived at the
actual point of departure since you have abandoned the
eternal principles from which yon at first set out.

M. Proudhon has not even advanced sufficiently on the
cross-road which the ideologist takes in order to gain the
highway of history.


Sixth Observation.


Let us take with M. Proudhon this cross-road.
Let us grant that the economic relations, regarded as
immutable laws, eternal principles, ideal categories, were


126 _ THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


anterior to active living men; that, further, these laws,
these principles, these categories, had, from the beginning
of time, slept “in the impersonal reason of humanity.”
We have already seen that with these immutable and
immovable eternities, there is no history; at the most
it is only history in the idea, that is to say history which
is reflected in the dialectical movement of pure reason.
M. Proudhon, in saying that in the dialectical movement
the ideas are no longer “differentiated,” has annulled
both the shadow of movement and the movement of the
shadows, by means of which we might at most have
still created a simulacrum of history. In the place of
that he imputes to history his own impotence, he takes
from it all, even to the French language. “It is then
not correct to say,” says M. Proudhon the philosopher,
“that something happens, something is produced: in
civilisation as in the universe everything exists, every-
thing acts from eternity. Jt is thus with all social
economy.” (Vol. II., p. 102.)

Such is the productive force of the contradictions
which function and which make M. Proudhon function,
that in wishing to explain history he is forced to deny it,
that in wishing to explain the successive development of
social relations he denies that anything can happen, and
in wishing to explain production in all its phases, he
denies that anything can be produced.

Thus for M. Proudhon, no more history, no’ more
succession of ideas, and nevertheless his book still exists;
and this book is precisely, according to his own expres-
sion, “history according to the succession of ideas.” How
can we find a formula, as M. Proudhon is the man of
formulas, by the aid of which we can leap at a single
bound beyond all his contradictions ?

For that he has invented a new kind of reason which


\


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 494


is neither absolute reason, pure and virginal, nor the
common reason of men living and active in the different
centuries, but a reason quite apart, the reason of society
personified, of the subject hwmanity, which, under the
pen of M. Proudhon, appears sometimes also as “social
genius,” “general reason,” and in the last place as
“human reason.” This reason dressed up under so many
names, is, however, every instant recognised as the in-
dividual reason of M. Proudhon, with his good and bad
side, his antidotes and his problems.


'“Human reason does not create the truth,” hidden in
the profundity of absolute, eternal reason. It can only
unveil it. But the truths which it has unveiled up to the
‘present are incomplete, insufficient and therefore con-
tradictory. Then, the economic categories, being them-
selves discovered truths, revealed by human reason, by
social genius, are equally incomplete and enclose the
germ of contradiction. Before M. Proudhon social genius
has seen only the antagonistic elements and not the
synthetic formula, both simultaneously hidden in ab-
solute reason. Economic relations causing to be realised
on earth only these insufficient truths, these incomplete
categories, these contradictory notions, are then con-
tradictory in themselves and present the two sides, of
which one is good, the other evil.

To find the complete truth, the notion in all its pleni-
tude, the synthetic formula, which will annihilate the
contradiction—that is the problem of social genius. That
is why still, in the illusion of M. Proudhon, the same
social genius has been driven from one category to the
other without having yet come, with all the battery of
its categories, to drag from God, from absolute reason,
a synthetic formula.


128 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


“At first society (social genius) presents a first fact,
emits a hypothesis....a true contradiction, of which the
antagonistic results unfold themselves in the socia!
economy in the same manner as the consequences would
have been deduced in the mind, in such wise that the
industrial movement, following in all the deductions of
ideas, divides into a double current, the one of useful
effects, the other of subversive results. To constitute
harmoniously this two-faced principle and. solve this
contradiction, society develops a second, which will very
soon be followed by a third; and such will be the progress
of social genius until, having exhausted all its contra-
dictions—I suppose, but that is not proved, that there
is a finality to the contradiction in humanity—it returns,
at a bound, upon all its anterior positions, and in a single
formula solves all its problems.” (Vol. I., p. 135.)

Just as before the antithesis was changed into the
antidote, so now the thesis becomes the hypothesis. This
change of terms on the part of M. Proudhon can no
longer astonish us. Human reason which is nothing less
than pure, having only incomplete views, meets at each
step fresh problems to solve. Each new thesis which it
discovers in absolute reason, and which is the negation
of the first thesis, becomes for it a synthesis, which it
naively accepts as the solution of the problem in question.
It is thus that this reason strives with ever new con-
tradictions, until finding itself as the end of contra-
dictions it perceives that all its theses and syntheses are
only contradictory hypotheses. In its perplexity “human
reason, the social genius, returns at a bound upon all its
anterior positions, and in a single formula solves all its
problems.” This unique formula, we may say in passing,
constitutes the real discovery of M. Proudhon. It is
constituted value.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 499


Hypotheses are only made in view of some end. The
end proposed to itself in the first place by the social
genius which speaks by the mouth of M. Proudhon, was
the elimination of that which was evil in each economic
category, in order to have only the good. For him good,
the supreme good, the true practical end, is equality. And
why does the social genius propose equality rather than
inequality, fraternity, catholicism, or any other principle?
Because “humanity has realised successively so many
particular hypotheses only in view of a superior hypo-
thesis,” which is precisely equality. In other words:
because equality is the ideal of M. Proudhon. He
imagines that the division of labor, credit, the workshop,
that all the economic relations have been invented only
for the benefit of equality, and nevertheless they have
always finished by turning against her. From the fact
that the history and the fiction of M. Proudhon contra-
dict each other at every step, he concludes that there is
a contradiction. If there is a contradiction it exists only
between his fixed idea and the real movement.

Henceforth the good side of an economic relation 1s
that which affirms equality, the bad side is that which
denies it and affirms inequality. Every new category is
a hypothesis of the social genius to eliminate the inequal-
ity engendered by the preceding hypothesis. To sum up,
equality is the primitive intention, the mystic tendency,
the providential end, that the social genius has constantly
before’ its eyes in turning round and round in the circle
of economic contradictions. Providence is also the
locomotive which conveys all the economic baggage of
M. Proudhon better than his pure and heedless reason.
He has devoted to Providence a whole chapter which
follows that on imposts.

Providence, the providential end, that is the fine word


130 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPITY


with which we are presented to-day to explain the pro-
gress of history. In actual fact this word explains
nothing. It is at most a declamatory form, one manner
among others of paraphrasing the facts. It is a fact that
the landed proprietors of Scotland obtained a new value
by the development of English industry. This industry
opened up new markets for wool. In order to produce
wool on a large scale it was necessary to turn arable lands’
into pasture. To effect this transformation it was
necessary to concentrate various properties. To con-
centrate these properties it was necessary to abolish small
holdiags, drive thousands of tenants from their native
land, and put in their place a few herdsmen in charge of
millions of sheep. Thus by successive transformations,
landlordism in Scotland has resulted in the men being
driven away by sheep. Say now that the providential
end of landlordism in Scotland was to cause men to be
driven away by sheep, and you have constructed
providential history.

Certainly, the tendency to equality appertains to our
century for the men and the means of anterior centuries
with wants, means of production, &c., entirely different,
worked providentially for the realisation of equality, is
to begin by substituting the means and the men of one
century for the men and the means of anterior centuries
and to misunderstand the historical movement by which
successive generations transformed the results acquired
from the generations which preceded them. Economists
know very well that the same thing which was for one
the completed work is for the other only the raw material
of further production.

Suppose, as M. Proudhon does, that the social genius
has produced, or rather improvised, the feudal barons,
with the providential end in view of transforming the


\


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 131


peasants into responsible and equal workmen, and you
will have made a substitution of ends and of persons
quite worthy of this Providence, which in Scotland
established landlordism in order to give itself the malign
pleasure of substituting sheep for men.

But since M. Proudhon takes so tender an interest in
Providence we will refer him to “The History of
Political Economy” of M. de Villeneuve-Bargemont, who
also runs after a providential end. This end is no longer
equality but catholicism.


Seventh and. Last Observation.


The economists have a singular manner of proceeding.
There are for them only two kinds of institutions, those
of art and those of nature. Feudal institutions are —
artificial institutions, those of the bourgeoisie are natural
institutions. In this they resemble the theologians, who
also establish two kinds of religion. Every religion but
their own is an invention of men, while their own religion
is an emanation from God. In saying that existing con-
ditions—the conditions of bourgeois production—are
natural, the economists give it to be understood that these
are the relations in which wealth is created and the pro-
ductive forces are developed conformably to the laws of
nature. Thus these relations are themselves natural laws,
independent of the influence of time. They are eternal
laws which must always govern society. Thus there has
been history, but there is no loager any. There has been
history, since there have been feudal institutions, and in
these feudal institutions were found conditions of pro-
duction entirely different to those of bourgeois society,
which the economists wish to have accepted as being
natural and therefore eternal, ,


132 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Feudalism also had its proletariat—serfdom, . which
enclosed all the germs of the bourgeoisie. Feudal pro-
duction also had two antagonistic elements, which were
equally designated by the names of good side and bad
side of feudalism, without regard being had to the fact
that it is always the evil side which finishes by over-
coming the good side. It is the bad side that produces
the movement which makes history, by constituting the
struggle. If at the epoch of the reign of fetidalism the
economists, enthusiastic over the virtues of chivalry, the
delightful harmony between rights and duties, the
patriarchal life of the towns, the prosperous state of
domestic industry in the country, of the development of
industry organised in corporations, guilds and fellow-
ships, in fine of all which constitutes the beautiful side of
feudalism, had proposed to themselves the problem of
eliminating all which cast a shadow upon this lovely
picture—serfdom, privilege, anarchy—what would have
been the result? All the elements which constituted the
struggle would have been annihilated, and the develop-
ment of the bourgeoisie would have been stifled in the
germ. They would have set themselves the absurd
problem of eliminating history.

When the bourgeoisie had overcome it, it was no
longer a question of either the good or the bad side of
feudalism. The productive forces which were developed
by the bourgeoisie under feudalism had now been ac-
quired by the bourgeoisie itself. All the old economic
forms, the civil relations corresponding to them, the
political state which was the official expression of the old
civil society, were all broken down.

Thus, in order to fairly judge feudal production, it is
necessary to consider it as a system of production based
On antagonism. It is necessary to show how wealth was


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 133


produced within this antagonism, how the productive
forces were developed at the same time as the antagonism
of classes, how one of the classes, the bad side, the in-
convenience of society, continued always to grow until!
the material conditions necessary to its emancipation had
arrived at maturity. Is it not sufficient to say that the
mode of production, the relations in which the productive
forces are developed, are nothing less than eternal laws,
but that they correspond to a determined development of
men and of their productive forces, and that any change
arising in the productive forces of men necessarily effects
a change in their conditions of production? As it is
above all important not to be deprived of the fruits of
civilisation, of acquired productive forces, it is necessary
to break the traditional forms in which they have been
produced. From the moment this happens the revolu-
tionary class becomes conservative.

The bourgeoisie commences with a proletariat which
is itself a remnant of feudal times. In the course of its
historical development, the bourgeoisie necessarily de-
velops its antagonistic character, which at its first ap-
pearance was found to be more or less disguised, and
existed only in a latent state. In proportion as the
bourgeoisie develops, it develops in its bosom a new
proletariat, a modern proletariat: it develops a struggle
between the proletarian class and the bourgeois class, a
struggle which, before it is felt, perceived, appreciated,
comprehended, avowed and loudly proclaimed by the two
sides, only manifests itself previously by partial and
momentary conflicts, by subversive acts. On the other
hand, if all the members of the modern bourgeoise have
an identity of interest, inasmuch as they form a class
opposed by another class, they have also conflicting,
antagonistic interests, inasmuch as they find themselves


(


134 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


opposed by each other. This opposition of interests
flows from the economic conditions of their bourgeois
life. From day to day it becomes more clear that the
relations of production in which the bourgeoisie exists
have not a single, a simple character, but a double
character, a character of duplicity; that in the same
relations in which wealth is produced, poverty is produced
also; that in the same relations in which there is a
development of productive forces, there is a productive
force of repression ; that these relations produce bourgeois
wealth, that is to say the wealth of the bourgeois class,
only in continually annihilating the wealth of integral
members of that class and in producing an ever-growing
proletariat.


The more this antagonistic character comes to light
the more the economists, the scientific representatives of
bourgeois production, become excited with their own
theories, and different schools are formed.


We have the fatalist economists, who in their theory
are as indifferent to what they call the inconveniences of
bourgeois production, as the bourgeois themselves are, in
actual practice, to the sufferings of the proletarians who
assist them to acquire riches. In this fatalist school there
are classicists and romanticists. The classicists, like
Adam Smith and Ricardo, represents a bourgeoisie
which, still struggling with the relics of feudal society,
labors only to purify economic relations from the feudal
blemishes, to augment the productive forces, and to
give to industry and to commerce a fresh scope. The
proletariat participating in this struggle, absorbed in
this feverish labor, has only passing accidental suffer-
ings to endure, and _ itself regards them as_ such.
Economists like Adam Smith and Ricardo, who are the


tena


THE MBTAPHYSICS Ol POLITICAL ECONOMY 485


historians of this epoch, have no other mission than to


demonstrate how wealth is acquired in the relations of
bourgeois production, to formulate these relations in
categories, in laws, and to demonstrate how far these
laws, these categories, are, for the production of wealth,
superior to the laws and categories of feudal society.
Poverty in their eyes is only the pain which accompanies
all child-birth, in nature as well as in industry.

The romanticists appertain to our epoch, where the
bourgeoisie is in direct antagonism to the proletariat ;
where poverty is engendered in as great abundance as
wealth. The economists then pose as satisfied fatalists
who, from their lofty position, throw a glance of superb
disdain on the active men who manufacture wealth. They
copy all the developments given by their predecessors,
and the indifference which with those was naiveté be-
comes for these others mere coquetry.

Afterwards comes the humanitarian school, which
takes to heart the evil side of the existing relations of
production. This school seeks, as an acquittel for its
conscience, to palliate, however little, existing contrasts ;
it sincerely deplores the distress of the proletariat, the
unrestricted competition between the bourgeoisie them-
selves; it advises the workers to be sober and industrious,
and to have but few children; it recommends the bour-
geoisie to put thoughtful earnestness into the work of
production. The whole theory of this school rests upon
interminable distinctions between theory and practice,
between principles and results, between the idea and the
application, between the content and the form, between
the essence and the reality, between right and fact, be-
tween the good and the evil side.


The philanthropic school is the humanitarian school


\


136 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


perfected. It denies the necessity of antagonism; it
would make all men bourgeois; it would realise the
theory in so far as it is distinguished from practice and
encloses no antagonism. It goes without saying that, in
theory, it is easy to make abstraction of the contradictions
that are met with each instant in reality. This theory
would become then idealised reality. The philanthropists
thus wish to conserve the categories which express bour-
geois relations, without having the antagonism which
is inseparable from these relations. They fancy they
are seriously combatting the bourgeois system, and they
are more bourgeois than the others.

As the economists are the scientific representatives of
the bourgeois class, so the Socialists and Communists are
the theorists of the proletarian class. So long as the
proletariat is not sufficiently developed to constitute
itself as a class, so long as, in consequence, the struggle
between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie has not ac-
quired a political character, and while the productive
forces are not sufficiently developed in the bosom of the
bourgeoisie itself to allow a perception of the material
conditions necessary to the emancipation of the proletariat
and the. formation of a new society, so long these
theorists are only utopians who, to obviate the distress
of the oppressed classes, improvise systems and run after
a regenerative science. But as history develops and with
it the struggle of the proletariat becomes more clearly
defined, they have no longer any need to seek for such a
science in their own minds, they have only to give an
account of what passes before their eyes and to make of
that their medium. So long as they seek science and
only make systems, so long as they are at the beginning
of the struggle, they see in poverty only poverty, with-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 137


out seeing therein the revolutionary subversive side
which will overturn the old society. From that moment
science, produced by the historical movement and linking
itself thereto in full knowledge of the facts of the case,
has ceased to be doctrinaire and has become revo-
lutionary.


Let us return to M. Proudhon.


Each economic relation has a good and bad side: that
is the single point upon which M. Proudhon does not
contradict himself. The good side, he sees explained
by the economists; the bad side, he sees denounced by
the Socialists. He borrows from the economists the
necessity of eternal relations; he borrows from the So-
cialists the illusion of seeing in poverty only poverty.
He is in agreement with both in wishing to refer it to
the authority of science. Science, for him, is reduced to
the insignificant proportion of a scientific formula. It
is thus that M. Proudhon flatters himself to have made
the criticism of both political economy and of com-
munism: he is below both the one and the other. Below
the economists, since as a philosopher, who has under
his hand a magic formula, he has believed himself able
to do without entering into purely economic details;
below the Socialists, since he has neither sufficient
courage nor sufficient intelligence to raise himself, were
it only speculatively, above the bourgeois horizon.

He wished to be the synthesis, he is a composite
error.

He wished to soar as man of science above the
bourgeoisie and the proletarians; he is only the petty
bourgeois, tossed about constantly between capital and
kabor, between political economy and communism,


¥


138 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Section IJ.—Tue Division or Lapor AND


MACHINERY.


_ The division of labor opens, according to M. Proud-
hon, the series of economic evolutions.


The good side of


the division of labor.


The bad side of


the division of labor.


The problem to solve.


ee aS
a a EO Gtr tts


“Considered in its
essence, the division of
labor is the mode accord-
ing to which is realised
the equality of conditions
and of intelligences.”
(Vol. I., p. 93.)

“The division of labor
has become for us an in-
strument of misery.”
(Vol. I., p. 99.)

VARIANT.

“Labor, in dividing
itself according to the law
which belongs to it, and
which is the first condi-
tion of its fecundity, tends
to the negation of its
ends, and destroys itself.”
(Vol. I., p. 94.)


To find “the recom-
position which will efface
the inconveniences of the
division of labor while
conserving all its useful


effects.” (Vol. I., p. 97.)


The division of labor is, according to M. Proudhon,
an eternal law, a simple and abstract category. It is


Been! tx


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL HCONOMY 189


necessary, then, that the abstraction, the idea, the word,
should suffice him to explain the division of labor in the
different epochs of history. Castes, corporations, the
manufacturing regime, the great industry, must be ex-
plained by the single word division. First study well the
meaning of division, and then you will not need to study
the numerous influences which give to the division of
labor a definite character in each epoch.

Certainly this would be to render things altogether too


simple, by merely reducing them to the categories of M.


Proudhon. History does not proceed so categorically.
Three whole centuries have been necessary in Germany
to establish the first great division of labor—that is, the
separation of the town from the country. As this single
relation, that of town to country, became modified, so
the whole society was modified in consequence. To view
only this single phase of the division of labor you have
the ancient Republics, or Christian feudalism; early
England with its barons, or modern England with its
cotton-lords. In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
when yet there were no colonies, when America did not
yet exist for Europe, when Asia only existed by the inter-
mediary of Constantinople, when the Mediterranean was
the centre of commercial activity, the division of labor
had quite another form, quite another aspect, to that
which it had in the seventeenth century, when the
Spaniards, the Portuguese, the English, and the French
had colonies established in all parts of the world. The
extent of the market, and its physiognomy, give to the
division of labor in the different epochs a physiognomy, a
character, which it would be difficult to deduce from the
single word division, from the idea, or from the category.

“Al the economists,” says M. Proudhon, “since Adam
Smith have designated the advantages and the incon-


140 THE POVERTY Of PHILOSOPHY


veniences of the law of division, but have insisted very
much more on the first than on the second, because that
better served their optimism, and without any one of
them ever asking himself what could be the incon-
veniences of a law..... How could the same principle,
pursued rigorously to its consequences, conduct to
effects diametrically opposed? No single economist,
either before or since Adam Smith, has done more than
perceive that there was a problem to solve. Say only
goes so far as to recognise that in the division of labor
the same cause which produces the good engenders the
evil.”

Adam Smith goes farther than M. Proudhon thinks
he does. He has clearly seen that “in reality the
difference of natural talents between individuals is much
less than is supposed. These dispositions so different,
which seem to distinguish the men of different professions
when they arrive at mature age, are not so much the
cause as the effect of the division of labor.” In principle
a porter differs less from a philosopher than a mastiff
from a greyhound. It is the division of labor which has
placed an abyss between the two. All this does not
prevent M. Proudhon from saying, in another place, that
Adam Smith had no doubt of the inconveniences
produced by the division of labor. It is still this which
makes him say that J. B. Say was the first to recognise
“that in the division of labor the same cause which pro-
duces the good engenders the evil.”

But let us hear Lemontey: swum cuique. “M. J. B.
Say has done me the honor of adopting in his excellent
treatise on political economy the principle which J
brought to light in this fragment on the moral influence
of the division of labor. The somewhat frivolous title
of my book has doubtless precluded him from citing me,


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 44


I can attribute to no other motive than this the silence
of a writer too rich in his own treasures to need to
disavow so modest a loan.” (Lemontey, ‘“(CEuvres
Completes,” Vol. I., p. 245, Paris, 1840.)

Let us render him this justice: Lemontey has in-
tellectually explained the evil consequences of the division
of labor, as it is constituted in our days, and M. Proud-
hon found nothing to add thereto. But since, by the
faults of M. Proudhon, we are now engaged in this
question of priority, we may say in passing that long
before M. Lemontey, and seventeen years before Adam
Smith, the pupil of A. Ferguson, the latter clearly ex-
plained the subject in a chapter treating specially of the
division of labor.

“There will ever be doubts as to whether the general
capacity of a nation grows in proportion to the progress
of the arts. Many mechanical arts.... succeed perfectly
when they are totally destitute of the assistance of reason
or sentiment, and ignorance is the mother of industry as
well as of superstition. Reflection and imagination are
likely to go astray, but the habit of moving the hand or
foot depends upon neither the one or the other. Thus,
we might say that perfection, as regards manufacture,
consists in its being able to be dismissed from the mind,
in such a manner that without an effort of the brain the
workshop may be operated like a machine, of which the
parts are men.... The general officer may be very
accomplished in the art of war while all the merit of the
soldier is limited to executing certain movements of the
foot or hand. The one may have gained what the other
has lost..... In a period where all is separated, the art
of thinking may itself form a separate function.” (A.
Ferguson, “Essai sur Vhistoire de la Socété Civile,”
Paris, 1783.) E


142 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


To terminate the literary view, we formally deny that
“all the economists have insisted very much more on the
advantages than on the inconveniences of the division of
labor.” It is sufficient to name Sismondi.

Thus, as regards the advantages of the division of
labor, M. Proudhon had nothing to do but to paraphrase,
more or less pompously, the general phrases which every-
body knows.

Let us now see how he derives from the division of
labor, taken as a general law, as a category, a thought,
the inconveniences which are attached to it. How is it
that this category, this law, implies an unequal distribu-.
tion of labor to the detriment of the equalitarian system
of M. Proudhon?

“At this solemn hour of the division of labor the wind
of the tempests begins to beat upon humanity. Progress
is not accomplished for all in an equal and uniform
manner ;.... it begins by creating a small number of
privileged persons..... It is this respect of persons on
the part of progress which has created the old-established
belief in the natural and providential inequality of con-
ditions, and has given birth to castes, and has
hierarchically constituted all societies.” (Proudhon, Vol.
L, p. 97.)

The division of labor has made castes. But castes are
the inconveniences of the division of labor ; then it is the
division of labor which has engendered inconveniences.
Quod erat demonstrandum. Would you go further and
ask what causes the division of labor to create castes,
hierarchic constitutions and privileged classes? M.
Proudhon will tell you: Progress. And what has made
this progress? The limit. The limit for M. Proudhon is
the respect of persons on the part of progress.

After philosophy comes history. This is no longer


ees ee eS


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 1438


either descriptive history or dialectic history, it is com-


parative history. M. Proudhon establishes a comparison
between the workman printer of to-day and the workman
printer of the Middle Ages; between the workman of the
Creusot ironworks and the country blacksmith; between
the man of letters of our days and the man of letters of
the Middle Ages; and he makes the balance lean to the
side of those who appertain more or less to the division
of labor such as the Middle Ages have constituted or
transmitted it. He opposes the division of labor of one
historical epoch to the division of labor of another
historical epoch. Was this what M. Proudhon had to
demonstrate? No. He ought to have shown us the in-
conveniences of the division of labor in general, of the
division of labor as category. But of what use is it
further to dwell upon this part of M. Proudhon’s work,
since a little further on we shall see him formally retract
all these pretended developments himself?

“The first effect. of divided labor,” continues M.
Proudhon, “after the degradation of the mind, is the
prolongation of the periods of work, which grow in in-
verse ratio to the amount of intelligence exercised. ....
But, as the duration of these periods cannot exceed six-
teen or eighteen hours a day, from the moment when
compensation cannot be taken by additional time it will
be effected in the price, and wages will fall..... This is
certain—and that is all we are concerned to note—that
the universal conscience does not put at the same rate the
work of an overseer and that of a laborer. There is,
then, a necessity for a reduction in the price of the day’s
work, so that the worker, after having been afflicted in
his mind by a degrading function, should not fail to be
also stricken in the body by the meagreness of the re-
muneration.”


144 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


We will pass over the logical value of these syllogisms,
which Kant would call paralogisms, and consider them
as they are.

Here is their substance:

The division of labor reduces the worker to a degrading
function; to this degrading function corresponds a de-
praved mind; with the depravity of the mind goes a con-
stant reduction of wages. And, in order to prove that
this reduction of wages is adapted to a depraved mind,
M. Proudhon says, to absolve his own conscience, that it
is the universal conscience which wills it thus. Is the
soul of M. Proudhon counted in the universal con-
science ?

Machinery is, for M. Proudhon, “the logical antithesis
of the division of labor,” and, in support of his dialectic
he begins by transforming machinery into a factory.

After having supposed the modern factory in order to
have poverty flow from the division of labor, M. Proud-
hon supposes poverty engendered by the division of labor
in order to arrive at the factory, and to be able to re-
present it as the dialectic negation of this poverty. After
having stricken the worker morally by a degrading
function, and physically by the meagreness of his wages,
after having put the worker in a position of dependence
upon the overseer and reduced his work to the mere

manual task of a laborer, he betakes himself again to the
factory and to the machines in order to degrade the worker
by “giving him a master,’ and he finishes his humiliation
by causing him to be “reduced from the rank of an
artisan to that of a mere laborer.” What beautiful
dialectic! And yet if he would only stick to that! But
no, he must have a new history of the division of labor,
no longer in order to derive contradictions therefrom,
but in order to reconstruct the factory after his own


+


7


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 145


fashion. To arrive at this end he has to forget all that
he has just said about this division.

Labor is organised, and divided, variously, according
to the instruments which it manipulates. The wind-
mill supposes a division of labor quite other than that of
the steam mill. To begin by the division of labor in
general in order to arrive at a specific instrument of pro-
duction, machinery, is therefore to fly in the face of
history.

Machinery is no more an economic category than is the
ox which draws the plough. Machinery is only a pro-
ductive force. The modern workshop, which is based on
the application of machinery, is a social relation of pro-
duction, an economic category.

Let us see now how these things pass in the brilliant
imagination of M. Proudhon.

“In society the incessant apparition of machinery is
the antithesis, the inverse formula, of labor; it is the
protest of industrial genius against fragmentary and
homicidal labor. What, in effect, is a machine? A means
of reuniting different particles of labor, which division
had separated. Every machine might be defined as a
summary of many operations..... Therefore, through
the machine, there would be the restoration of the
worker..... Machinery standing in political economy in
contradiction to the division of labor, represents the
synthesis, opposing, in the human mind, the analysis....
The division only separates the different parts of labor,
leaving each to the speciality most agreeable to him:
The factory groups the workers, according to the relation
of each part to the whole .... it introduces the principle
of authority into labor..... But that is not all: The
machine or the factory, after having degraded the work-
man by giving him a master, finishes his humiliation by


146 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


causing him to be reduced from the rank of an artisan
to that of a mere laborer..... The period through which
we are now passing, that of machinery, is distinguished
by a special character, it is that of the wage-worker. The
wage-worker is posterior to the division of labor and ex-
change.”


A simple observation to M. Proudhon. The separation
of the different parts of labor, leaving to each man the
faculty of devoting himself to the speciality most agree-
able to him, a separation which M. Proudhon dates from
the beginning of the world, exists only in modern in-
dustry, under the régime of competition.

M. Proudhon afterwards gives us a “genealogy,” much
too “interesting,” in order to demonstrate how the work-
shop is born from the division of labor and the wage-
worker from the workshop. 5


1. He imagines a man who “has remarked that by
dividing production into different parts, and causing each
to be executed by a separate workman,” the forces of
production might be multiplied.

2. This man, seizing the thread of this idea, “tells
himself that in forming a permanent group of assorted
workmen for the special object that he has in view, he
will obtain a more regular and more abundant pro-
duction, &c.”’


3. This man makes a proposition to other men to get
them to grasp his idea, and the thread of his idea.

4. This man, at the inception of the industry, acts as
an equal to equals towards the companions who, later, be-
come his workmen.


5. “He is sensible, in fact, that this primitive equality


must rapidly disappear through the advantageous position
of the master and the dependence of the wage-worker,”


\


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 147


That is a further sample of the historical and de-
scriptive method of M. Proudhon.

Let ws now examine, from the historical and economic
point of view, and see if really the workshop or the
machine has introduced the principle of authority into
society subsequent to the division of labor; if it has oa
one hand rehabilitated the worker, while on the other
subjecting him to authority; if the machine is the re-
composition of divided labor, the synthesis of labor op-
posed to its analysis.

Society as a whole has this in common with the interior
of a factory, that it also has its division of labor. If the
division of labor in a modern factory, were taken as a
model to be applied to an entire society, the society the
best organised for the production of wealth would be in-
contestably that which had but one single master di-
stributing the work, according to a regulation arranged
beforehand, to the various members of the community.
But it is not so. While in the interior of the modern
factory the division of labor is minutely regulated by the
authority of the capitalist, modera society has no other
regulation, no other authority, to arrange the distribution
of labor, than free competition.

Under the patriarchal régime, under the régime of
castes, under the feudal and corporative régime, there
was division of labor in the whole of society according
to fixed regulations. Were these regulations established
by a legislator? No. Originally born of the conditions
of material production, it was not till much later that
they were established as laws. It was thus that these
various forms of the division of labor became to such
an extent the bases of social organisation. As to the
division of labor in the factory, it was very little
developed in all these forms of society.


148 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


It might even be set up as a general rule, that the less
authority presides over the division of labor in the interior
of society, the more will the division of labor be
developed inside the factory and the more absolutely will
it there be subject to the authority of a single individual.
Thus the authority in the factory and that in society, in
relation to the division of labor, are in inverse ratio the
one to the other.


It is now important to see what is this factory, in
which the occupations are greatly separated, where the
task of each worker is reduced to a very simple operation,
and where the authority, capital, groups and directs the
laborers. How has this workshop come into existence?
To answer this question we shall have to examine how
manufacturing industry, properly so-called, has been
developed. I refer now to that industry which is not
yet modern industry, with its machinery, but which is,
at the same time, neither the industry of the artisans of
the Middle Ages nor domestic industry. We will not
enter into elaborate details; we will only give some
summarised points in order to show that history cannot
be made with formulas.

One of the most indispensable conditions for the forma-
tion of the manufacturing industry was the accumulation
of capitals facilitated by the discovery of America and
the introduction of its precious metals.

It has been sufficiently proved that the augmentation
of the means of exchange has resulted in, on one side
the depreciation of wages and rent, and on the other the
increase of industrial profits. In other terms, in pro-
portion as the landlord class and the working class, the


feudal lords and the people, fall, so the capitalists class,
the bourgeoisie, rises.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 149


There have been other circumstances which have
operated simultaneously with the development of the
manufacturing industry—the increase of the commodities
put in circulation when commerce penetrated to the East
Indies by way of the Cape of Good Hope, the colonial .
régime, and the development of maritime commerce.

Another point which has not yet been sufficiently ap-
preciated in the history of manufacturing industry was
the disbanding of the numerous retainers of the feudal
lords, the subaltern members of which became vagabonds
before entering the factory. The creation of the factory
was preceded by an almost universal vagabondage in the
fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. The factory found
another powerful support in the numerous peasants, who,
continually driven from the country districts by the trans-
formation of the fields into pasturage, and through the
progress of agriculture rendering a smaller number of
hands necessary for cultivation, steadily flocked into the
towns during whole centuries.

The growth of the market, the accumulation of capitals,
the modification in the social position of classes, a crowd
of people who found themselves deprived of their sources
of income, these were the various historical conditions for
the formation of the manufacturing industry. It was
not, as M. Proudhon says, certain amiable stipulations
between equals which brought men together in the
factory. It was not even in the bosom of the ancient
corporations that manufacture had its birth. It was the
merchant who became the chief of the modern factory,
and not the ancient master of corporations. Almost every-
where there was a furious struggle between the manu-
facturing industry and the handicrafts.

The accumulation and concentration of instruments of
production and of workpeople preceded the development


150: THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


of the division of labor inside the factory. A manu-
factory consists very much more in the union of a large
number of workpeople and many trades in a single place,
in one apartment, under the control of one capital, than
in the analysis of the different operations and the adaption
of each worker td one simple task.


The utility of a factory consists much less in the di-
vision of labor, properly so-called, than in the fact that .
the work is performed on a much larger scale, that much
unproductive expenditure is thereby saved, &c. At the
end of the sixteenth and the beginning of the seventeenth
centuries, there was scarcely any division of labor in
Dutch manufactories.


The development of the division of labor presupposes
the union of workpeople in a factory. There is not even
a single example, either in the sixteenth or seventeenth
centuries, of the different branches of the same trade
being separately exploited to such a point that it would
have sufficed to bring them together in one place to obtain
a complete factory. But once the men and the instru-
ments of production were brought together, the division
of labor, as it existed under the form of co-operation,
was reproduced, was necessarily reflected, inside the
factory.

‘For M. Proudhon, who sees things upside down, if
indeed he always sees them, the division of labor, in the
sense given to it by Adam Smith, preceded the factory
which was a necessary condition of its existence.

Machinery properly so-called dates from the end of the
eighteenth century. Nothing could be more absurd than
to see in machinery the antithesis of the division-of labor,
the synthesis giving unity again to divided labor.

The ‘machine is a union of the instruments of labor,


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 151


and not at all a combination of labors for the workman
himself. ‘When, by the division of labor, each separate
operation has been reduced to the operation of a simple
instrument, the union of all these instruments, put in
operation by a single motor, constitutes—a machine.”
(Babbage, “Traité sur l’Economie des Machines,” &c.,
Paris, 1833.) Simple tools, accumulation of tools, com-
posite tools, the putting in motion of a composite tool by
a single manual motor, by man, the putting in motion of
these instruments by natural forces, the machine, a system
of machines with a single motor, a system of machines
with an automaton for motor—such is the development
of machinery.

The concentration of the instruments of production and
the division of labor are as inseparable the one from the
other as are, in the domain of politics, the concentration
of the public powers and the division of private interests.
England, with the concentration of land, the instrument
of agricultural industry, has, at the same time, division
of agricultural labor and the application of machinery to
the exploitation of the soil. France which has the di-
vision of this instrument, the system of small property
in land, has, generally speaking, neither division of
agricultural labor nor the application of machinery to the
cultivation of the soil.

For M. Proudhon the concentration of the instruments
of labor is the negation of the division of labor. In
reality we find it to be quite the contrary. In proportion
as the concentration of these instruments is developed,
so also this division is developed, and vice versa. To
this is due the fact that every great invention in
mechanics is followed by a greater division of labor, and
each advance in the division of labor brings in its turn
new mechanical inventions.


152 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


We do not need to recall the fact that the great
development of the division of labor began in England
after the invention of machinery. Thus the spinners and
weavers were, for the most part, peasants, such as we
meet them to-day in the more backward countries. The
invention of machines has completely separated the
manufacturing from the agricultural industry. The spin-
ner and the weaver, hitherto united in one family, were
separated by the machine. Thanks to the machine the
spinner can live in England while the weaver dwells in
India. Before the invention of machinery the industry of
a country was exercised principally on the raw material
which was the product of its soil; thus in England wool,
in Germany flax, in France silk and flax, in India and the
Levant cotton, &c. Thanks to the application of
machinery and of steam the division of labor has been
able to assume such dimensions that the great industry,
detached from the national soil, depends only upon the
markets of the world, on international exchanges, and on
an international division of labor. In fine, the machine
exercises such an influence on the division of labor that
when in the manufacture of any given product, means
have been found to partially introduce mechanical ap-
pliances, the manufacture has been immediately divided
into two exploitations entirely independent of each other.

Is it necessary to speak of the providential and philan-
thropic end which M. Proudhon discovers in the original
invention and application of machinery ?

When in England the market had become so fully
developed that manual labor no longer sufficed to supply
it, the need for machinery made itself felt. It was then
that the application of mechanical science, which had been


fully prepared during the eighteenth century, was
thought of,


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 153


The organised factory marked its appearance by acts
which were nothing short of philanthropic. Chrildren
were kept to work by blows of the whip; they were made
objects of traffic, and were contracted for with orphanages
and workhouses. All the laws on the apprenticeship of
workpeople were abolished, because, to make use of the
phrases of M. Proudhon synthesised workers were no
longer needed. In fine, from 1825 all the new inventions
were the result of conflicts between the worker and the
capitalist, who sought at all costs to depreciate the
speciality of the workman. After each strike, however
unimportant, a new machine appeared. The workman
was so far from seeing in the machines a kind of re-
habilitation, of restoration, as M. Proudhon calls it, that,
in the eighteenth century, he for a long time resisted the
nascent empire of the automaton.

“Wyatt,” says Doctor Ure, “inveated the series of
fluted rollers, the spinning fingers usually ascribed to
Arkwright.”.... “The main difficulty did not, to my
apprehension, lie so much in the invention of a proper
self-acting mechanism .... as in training human beings
to renounce their desultory habits of work, and to identify
themselves with the unvarying regularity of the complex
automaton. But to devise and administer a successful
code of factory discipline suited to the necessities of
factory diligence, was the Herculean enterprise. The
whole achievement of Arkwright.”

In short, by the introduction of machinery the division
of labor within society has been developed, the task of
the workman within the factory has been simplified,
capital has been accumulated, and man has been further
dismembered.


If M. Proudhon would be an economist, and leave for


154 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


an instant “the evolution in the series of the under-
standing,” he ‘would draw from Adam Smith his knowl-
edge of the time when the automatic factory had scarcely
come into existence; in fact, learn the difference between
the division of labor as it existed in the time of Adam
Smith and as we see it in the automatic factory. In order
to make this clearly understood it will be sufficient to cite
some passages from the “Philosophy of Manufactures,”
by Doctor Ure :—

“When Adam Smith wrote his immortal elements of
economics, automatic machinery being hardly known, he
was properly led to regard the division of labor as the
grand principle of manufacturing improvement; and he
showed, in the example of pin-making, how each handi-
craftsman, being thereby enabled to perfect himself by
practice in one point, became a quicker and cheaper
workman. In each branch of manufacture he saw that
some parts were, on that principle, of easy execution,
like the cutting of pin wires into uniform lengths, and
some were comparatively difficult, like the formation and
fixation of their heads; and therefore he concluded that to
each a workman of appropriate value and cost was
naturally assigned. This appropriation forms the very
essence of the division of labor..... But what was in
Dr. Smith’s time a topic of useful illustration, cannot
now be used without risk of misleading the public mind
as to the right principle of manufacturing industry. In
fact, the division, or rather adaptation of labor to the
different talents of men, is little thought of in factory
employment. On the contrary, wherever a process re-
quires peculiar dexterity and steadiness of hand it is with-
drawn as soon as possible from the cunning workman,
who is prone to irregularities of many kinds, and it is


\


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 455


placed in charge of a peculiar mechanism so self-regula-
ting that a child may superintendent it..... The principle
of the factory system, then, is to substitute mechanical
science for hand skill, and the partition of a process into
its essential constituents, for the division or gradation of
labor among artisans. On the handicraft plan, labor,
more or less skilled, was usually the most expensive ele-
ment of production—but on the automatic plan skilled


labor gets progressively superseded, and will, eventually,
be replaced by mere overlookers of machines. By the


infirmity of human nature it happens that the more skilful
the workman the more self-willed and intractable he is
apt to become, and, of course, the less fit a component
of a mechanical system, in which, by occasional irregular-
ities, he may do great damage to the whole. The grand
object, therefore, of the modern manufacturer is, through
the union of capital and science, to reduce the task of his
workpeople to the exercise of vigilance and dexterity—
faculties, when concentred to one process, speedily
brought to perfection in the young.....

“On the gradation system, a man must serve an ap-
prenticeship of many years before his hand and eye be-
come skilled enough for certain mechanical feats; but on
the system of decomposing a process into its constituents,
and embodying each part in an automatic machine, a
person of common care and capacity may be entrusted
with any of the said elementary parts after a short pro-
bation, and may be transferred from one to another, on
any emergency, at the discretion of the master. Such
translations are utterly at variance with the old practice
of the division of labor, which fixed one man to shaping
the head of a pin, and another to sharpening its point,
with most irksome and spiritwasting uniformity for a
whole life..... But on the equalisation plan of self-acting


156 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


machines, the operative needs to call his faculties only
into agreeable exercise.....


“As his business consists in tending the work of a
well-regulated mechanism, he can learn it in a short
period; and when he transfers his services from one
machine to another, he varies his task, and enlarges his
views by thinking on those general combinations which
result from his and his companions’ labors. Thus, that
cramping of the faculties, that narrowing of the mind,
that stunting of the frame, which were ascribed, and not
unjustly, by moral writers, to the division of labor,
cannot, in common circumstances, occur under the
equable ‘distribution of industry..... It is, in fact, the
constant aim and tendency of every improvement in
machinery to supersede human labor altogether, or to
diminish its cost, by substituting the industry of women
and children for that of men; or that of ordinary laborers
for trained artisans..... This tendency to employ merely
children with watchful eyes and nimble fingers, instead
of journeymen of long experience, shows how the
scholastic dogma of the division of labor into degrees of
skill has been exploded by our enlightened manu-
facturers.” (Andrew Ure, “Philosophy of Manufactures”
(1835) pp. 15 and 16.)

That which characterises the division of labor within
modern society is that it engenders specialities, species,
and with them the stupefying of handicraft.

“We are struck with admiration,” says Lemontey, “in
seeing among the ancients the same individual being at
once, and in an eminent degree, philosopher, poet, orator,
historian, priest, administrator and general. Our minds
are awe-stricken at the contemplation of so vast a domain.
Each one now plants his hedge and fences himself within


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 157


his own enclosure. I do not kaow if by this cutting up
the field is extended, but I know very well that man is-
lessened thereby.” !

The division of labor in the automatic factory is
characterised by this, that labor there has lost all
specialised character. But from the moment that all
special development ceases, the need of universality, the
tendency towards an integral development of the ia-
dividual begins to make itself felt. The automatic factory
effaces species and the stupefying of handicraft.

M. Proudhon, not having so much as comprehended
this single revolutionary side of the automatic factory,
takes a step backward, and proposes to the workman that
he should not only make the twelfth part of a pin, but the
whole twelve parts in succession. The workman would
thus arrive at the science and conscience of the pin. Such
is the synthetic labor of M. Proudhon. No one can
deny that to make one movement forward and another
backward, is equally to make a synthetic movement.

To sum up, M. Proudhon has not got beyond the ideal
of the petty bourgeois. And in order to realise this ideal
he thinks of nothing better than to bring us back to the
companion, or at most to the master, workman of the
Middle Ages. It suffices, he says somewhere in his book,
to have made a masterpiece once in a lifetime, to have
felt oneself a man for once. Is not that, in its form as
well as in its basis, the masterpiece exacted by the trade
guild of the Middle Ages?


158


THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Section III.—CompeTITION AND MONOPOLY.


The good side of
competition.


The bad side of
competition.


General reflection


|


|


Problem to solve.


“Competition is as
essential to labor as div:-
sion... Iti iS mecessaty
to the advent of equality.”


“This principle is the
negation of itself. Its
most certain effect is to
ruin those whom it draws
into its train.”


“The inconveniences
which follow in its train,
as well as the good which
it procures. ., flow logical-
ly, the one and the other,
from the principle.”


“To find the principie
of reconciliation, which
must be derived from a
law superior to liberty
itself.”

~ VARIANT.


“Tt cannot therefore be
here a question of destroy-
ing competition, a thing as
impossible as to destroy
liberty itself; it is a ques-
tion of finding the equi-
librium, I will frankly say
the police.”


M. Proudhon begins by defending the eternal necessity


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY — 159


of competition against those who would replace it by
emulation. ’

There is no “emulation without an object,” and as
“the object of every passion is necessarily analogous to
the passion, a mistress for the lover, power for the
ambitious, gold for the avaricious, a crown for the poet ;
the object of industrial emulation is necessarily profit.
Emulation is nothing but competition itself.”

Competition is emulation in view of profit. Is industrial
emulation necessarily emulation in view of profit, that is
to say, competition? M. Proudhon proves it in affirming
it. We have already seen that to affirm is, for him, to
prove, the same as to suppose is to deny.

If the immediate object of the lover is a mistress, the
immediate object of industrial emulation is the product
and not the profit.

Competition is not industrial emulation, it is com-
mercial emulation. In our days industrial emulation
only exists in view of commerce. There are some phases
in the economic life of modern peoples in which
everybody is seized with a kind of vertigo for making
profit without producing. This vertigo of speculation,
which reappears periodically, discloses the real character
of competition which seeks to escape the necessity of
industrial emulation.

If you had told an artisan of the fourteenth century
that the privileges and the whole feudal organisation of
‘industry were about to be abrogated, in order to put in-
dustrial emulation, called competition, in their place, he.
would have answered that the privileges of the various
corporations, masters and wardens, were organised
competition. M. Proudhon says no better in affirming
that “emulation is nothing but competition itself.”

“Enact that from January 1, 1847, work and wages


re
160 _ "THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


shall be guaranteed to everybody: immediately an im-
mense relaxation would succeed to the ardent tension of —
industry.”

In the place of a supposition, an affirmation, and a
negation, we have now an ordinance, which M. Proudhon
gives expressly in order to prove the necessity of com-
petition, its eternity as a category, &c.

If people were to suppose that it only requires an
ordinance to escape from competition, they would never
escape from it. And to go so far as to propose the aboli-
tion of competition while retaining the wage system is to
propose to make nonsense by a royal decree. But the
peoples do not proceed by royal decree. Before making
these ordinances they have at least to change, from top
to bottom, their industrial and political conditions of
existence, and, in consequence, all their manner of
being.

M. Proudhon would answer with his imperturbable
assurance that this is the hypothesis “of a transforma-
tion of our nature without historical precedent,” and
that he would have the right to “put us outside the dis-
cussion” in virtue of we know not what ordinance.

M. Proudhon does not know that the whole of history
is nothing but a continual transformation of human

nature.

“Let us keep to facts. The French Revolution was
made for industrial as well as for political liberty ; and,
although France, in 1789, may not have recognised all
the consequences of the principle, the realisation of which
she demanded, we may say frankly she was not deceived
either in her desires or in her attempt. Whoever should
attempt to deny this would in my opinion lose the right
of criticism. I will never dispute with an adversary
who would lay down as a principle that 25,000,000 of


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 161


men had spontaneously been guilty of error... Why,


then, if competition were not a principle of the social


economy, a decree of destiny, a necessity of the human
mind, why, instead of abolishing corporations, com-
panies and wardenships, did not people rather think of re-
establishing the whole of them?”

Thus, since the French people of the eighteenth
century abolished corporations, companies and warden-
ships, instead of modifying them, the French people of
the nineteenth century ought to modify competition in-
stead of abolishing it. Since competition was established
in France, in the eighteenth century, as a consequence
of historical needs, this competition must not be de-
stroyed in the nineteenth century in consequence of other
historical needs. M. Proudhon, not comprehending that
the establishment of competition was bound up with the
actual development of the men of the eighteenth century,
makes of competition a necessity of the human mind,
in partibus infidelium. What would he have made of the
great Colbert for the seventeenth century ?

After the Revolution comes the existing state of things.
M. Proudhon also draws some facts from that in order to
show the eternity of competition, by proving that all
the industries in which this category is not yet
sufficiently developed, as agriculture, are in a state of
inferiority, of decay.

To say that there are some industries which are not


yet at the height of competition, that yet others are below


the level of bourgeois production, is mere quibbling which
by no means proves the eternity of competition.

All the logic of M. Proudhon is summed up in this:
Competition is a social relation in which we really develop
our productive forces. He gives to this truth, not any


162 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


logical! developments, but certain forms, often well
developed, in saying that competition is industrial emula-
tion, the actual mode of being free, responsibility in labor,
the constitution of value, a necessary condition for the
future of equality, a principle of social economy, a decree
‘of destiny, a necessity of the human mind, an inspira-
tion of eternal justice, liberty in division, division in
liberty, an economic category.

“Competition and association support each other. So
far from excluding each other they are not even
divergent. Who speaks of competition already supposes a
common end. Competition therefore is not egoism, and
the most deplorable error of Socialism lay in having re-
garded it as the overthrow of society.”


Who speaks of competition speaks of a common end,
and that proves, on the one hand, that competition is
association ; on the other, that competition is not egoism.
And does not he who speaks of egoism, speak of a
common end? Each egoism operates in society and by
reason of the existence of society. It, therefore, presup-
poses society, that is to say common ends, common
wants, common means of production, &c., &. Can it by
chance be that, therefore, the competition and the asso-
ciation of which the Socialists speak are not even
divergent ?

The Socialists know very well that modern society is
based upon competition. How can they reproach com-
petition with overthrowing the existing society, which
they desire to overthrow themselves? And how can
they reproach competition with the overthrow of the so-
ciety of the future in which, on the contrary, they see
the overthrow of competition ?


M. Proudhon says, further, that competition is the


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 168.


opposite of monopoly, that, in consequence, it cannot be
the opposite of association.

Feudalism was, from its origin, opposed to competition,

which did not yet exist. Did it follow that competition
was not opposed to feudalism?
- In fact, society, association, are denominations which
may be given to all societies, to feudal society as well as
to bourgeois society, which is association based upon
competition. How, then, can there be Socialists who, by
the single word association think to be able to dispose
of competition? And how can M. Proudhon himself
think to defend competition against Socialism, simply by
defining competition by the single word association?

All that we have just considered forms the good side
of competition, as M. Proudhon understands it. We will
now pass on to the evil side, that is to say to the negative
side of competition, to its inconveniences, to those quali-
ties in it which are destructive, subversive, maleficent.

The picture of these which M. Proudhon presents to
us is a somewhat lugubrious one.

Competition engenders poverty, foments civil war; it
“changes the natural zones,” confounds nationalities,
disturbs families, corrupts the public conscience, “over-
turns the notions of equity, of justice,” of morality, and
what is worse, it destroys honest and free commerce and
does not even give in exchange synthetical value, fixed
and honest price. It disenchants everybody, even the
economists. It forces things on even to its own destruc-
tion.

After all the bad that M. Proudhon says of it, can
there be, for the relations of bourgeois society, for its
principles and its illusions, an element more SISIANER tet
ing, more destructive, than competition ?

Let us observe that competition always becomes more


164 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


destructive of bourgeois relations in proportion as it
exites to a feverish creation of new productive forces—
that is to say, of the material conditions of a new society.
In this connection, at least, the evil side of competition
should have its good,

“Competition, as an economic position or phase, con-
sidered in its origin, is the necessary result . . . . of
the theory of the reduction of the general cost.”

‘For M. Proudhon, the circulation of the blood must.
be a consequence of the theory of Harvey.

“Monopoly is the fatal term of competition, which the
latter engenders by an incessant negation of itself. This
generation of monopoly is already the justification of
competition . . . . Monopoly is the natural opposite of
competition . . . . but from the time that competition
is necessary it implies the idea of monopoly, since mon-
opoly is as the seat of each competing individuality.”

We rejoice with M. Proudhon that he can for once, at
least, properly apply his formula of thesis and antithesis.
Everybody knows that modern monopoly is engendered
by competition.

As to the content, M. Proudhon devotes himself to
some poetic images. Competition makes “of each sub-
division of labor a sort of sovereignty in which each
individual reposes in his strength and his independence.”
Monopoly is “the seat of each competing individuality.”
The sovereignty is at least worthy of the seat.

M. Proudhon speaks only of modern monopoly en-
gendered by competition. But we all know that competi-
tion was engendered by feudal monopoly. Thus primar-
ily competition has been the contrary of monopoly, and
not monopoly the contrary of competition. Therefore
modern monopoly is not a simple antithesis ; it is, on the
contrary, the true synthesis,


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 165


,


Thesis: Feudal monopoly anterior to competition.

Antithesis : Competition.

Synthesis: Modern monopoly, which is the negation of
feudal monopoly in so far as it supposes the régime of
competition, and which is the negation of competition
in so far as it is monopoly.

Thus modern monopoly, bourgeois monopoly, is syn-
thetic monopoly, the negation of the negation, the unity
of contraries. It is monopoly in its pure, normal, ra-
tional state. M. Proudhon is in contradiction with his
own philosophy when he makes of bourgeois monopoly,
monopoly in the crude, simple, contradictory, spasmodic
state. M. Rossi, whom M. Proudhon often quotes on
the subject of monopoly, appears to have more clearly
grasped the synthetic character of bourgeois monopoly.
In his “Cours d’Economie Politique,” he distinguishes
between artificial monopolies and natural monopolies.
Feudal monopolies, he says, are artificial, that is to say
arbitrary ; bourgeois monopolies are natural, that is to
say rational.

Monopoly is a good thing, reasons M. Proudhon, since
it is an economic category, an emanation “from the
impersonal reason of humanity.” Competition is another
good thing since it also is an economic category. But
what is not good is the reality of monopoly and the
reality of competition. What is worse still is that com-
petition and monopoly devour each other mutually. What
is to be done? Seek the synthesis of these two eternal
thoughts, drag it from the bosom of God, where it has
been deposited from time immemorial.

In practical life we find not only competition, monop-
oly, and their antagonism, but also their synthesis, which
is not a formula but a movement. Monopoly produces
competition, competition produces monopoly. The


166 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


monopolists are made by competition, the competitors
become monopolists. If the monopolists restrict competi-
tion among themselves by partial association, competition
grows among the workers; and the more the mass of
the workers grows as against the monopolists of one
nation, the more keen becomes the competition between
the monopolists of different nations. The synthesis is
such that monopoly can only maintain itself by contin-
ually passing through the struggle of competition.

In order to dialectically engender the imposts which
follow monopoly, M. Proudhon talks to us of the social
genius who, after having intrepidly pursued his zigzag
route, “after having marched with a firm step, without
regret and without halting, and having arrived at the
angle of monopoly, casts a melancholy glance backward,
and, after profound reflection, fixes imposts on all objects
of production, and creates an entire administrative
organisation, in order that all employment should be
delivered to the proletariat and be paid by the men of
monopoly.”

What is to be said of this genius, who being fasting,
walks zigzag? And what is to be said of this promenade
which has no other end than to demolish the bourgeoisie
by imposts, while these imposts serve precisely to give
the bourgeoisie the means of conserving its position as
the dominant class?

In order to get a glimpse of the manner in which
M. Proudhon treats economic details, it will suffice to
say that, according to him, the impost on articles of
consumption must have been established with a view to
equality. and in order to render assistance to the prole-
tariat.

Imposts on articles of consumption have only had
their true development since the advent of the bour-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 167


geoisie. In the hands of industrial capital, that is to
say the sober and thrifty wealth which maintained, re-
produced, and increased itself by the direct exploitation
of labor, the impost on articles of consumption was a
means of exploiting the frivolous, joyous, prodigal
wealth of the grand lords who did nothing but consume.
Sir James Steuart very weil explains this primitive object
of the impost on articles of consumption in his “Inquiry
into the Principles of Political Economy,” which he
published ten years before Adam Smith.

“Under the pure monarchy,” he says, “the prince
seems jealous as it were, of growing wealth, and there-
fore imposes taxes upon people who are growing richer.
Under the limited Government they are calculated
chiefly to affect those who are growing poorer. Thus
the monarch imposes a tax upon industry, where every-
one is rated in proportion to the gain he is supposed to
make by his profession. The poll-tax and taille, are
likewise proportioned to the supposed opulence of every-
one liable to them. . . . . In limited Governments, im-
positions are generally laid upon consumption.”

As to the logical succession of imposts, of the balance
of commerce, of credit—in the understanding of M.
Proudhon—we will merely observe that the English
bourgeoisie, having, under William of Orange, attained
its political constitution, created at a stroke a new
system of taxation, public credit, and the system of
protective duties, when it was in a position to freely
develop its conditions of existence.

This glimpse will suffice to give the reader a fair idea
of the lucubrations of M. Proudhoa on police and taxa-'
tion, the balance of commerce, communism, and popula-
tion. We defy the most indulgent critic to approach
these chapters seriously.


168 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


Section IV.—Property AND Rent.


In each historical epoch property is differently devel-
oped, and in a series of social relations entirely different.
Thus, to define bourgeois property is nothing other than
to explain all the social relations of bourgeois produc-
tion.

To pretend to give a definition of property as of‘an
independent relation, a separate category, an abstract
and eternal idea, can only. be an illusion of metaphysics
or of jurisprudence.

M. Proudhon, while professing to speak of property
in general, deals only with property in land, the rent of
land.


“The origin of rent, as property, is, so to speak,
extra-economic; it exists in certain psychological and
moral considerations which are only remotely connected
with the production of wealth.” (Vol. IL., p. 266.)

Thus M. Proudhon recognises his inability to com-
prehend the economic origin of rent and of property.
He acknowledges that this incapacity obliges him to
have recourse to psyhcologial and moral considerations,
which are indeed only remotely connected with the
production of wealth, being closely allied to the exigen-
cies of his historical views. M. Proudhon affirms that in
the origin of property there is something mystic and
mysterious. But to see mystery in the origin of property,
that is to say, to transform the relation of production
itself to the distribution of the instruments of production
into a mystery, is that not, to use the language of M.
Proudhon, to renounce all pretension to economic
science P

M. Proudhon is “compelled to recall that at the
seventh epoch of economic evolution—credit—the fiction


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 169


having caused the reality to vanish, human activity
threatening to lose itself in space, it became necessary
to attach it more closely to nature; but rent was the
price of this new contract.”

“The man with forty crowns” represents a Proudhon
to come: “My Lord the creator, if you please: each
is master in his world; but you will never make me
believe that this world where we are is of glass.” In
such a world, where credit was a means for losing one’s
self in space, it is quite possible for property to be
necessary in order to attach man to nature. In the
world of real people, where property in land always
precedes credit, the horror vacui of M. Proudhon could
not exist.

The existence of rent once admitted, whatever may
have been its origin, it is contradictorily debated be-
tween farmer and landlord. What is the last term of
this debate—in other words, what is the mean quota of
rent? Here is what M. Proudhon says:

“The theory of Ricardo answers this question. At the
beginning of society, when man, newly arrived on earth,
had before him only immense forests, when the earth
was vast and industry was in its infancy, rent was nil.
Land, not yet cultivated by labor, was an object of
utility ; it was not a value in exchange. It was common,
not social. Little by little the multiplication of families
and the progress of agriculture caused the price of land
to make itself felt. Labor gave its value to the soil:
from that sprang rent. The more fruitful a field, with
the same quantity of labor, the more it was esteemed;
moreover, the tendency of the proprietors was always to
attribute to themselves the whole of the fruits of the
soil, less the wages of the cultivator, that is to say less
the cost of production, Thus property followed in the


170 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


train of labor to take from it all that which, in the
product, exeeded the actual cost. Property fulfilled a
mystic duty by representing the community face to face
with the cultivator. In the design of Providence the
cultivator is nothing but a responsible laborer, who must
give an account to society of all that he reaps in excess
of his legitimate wages. . . . . By essence and destina-
tion, therefore, rent is an instrument of distributive
justice, one of the thousand means which economic
genius puts into operation in order to arrive at equality.
It is an immense valuation executed contradictorily by
the landlords and farmers, without the possibility of
collision, in a superior interest, and the definite result
of which must be to equalise the possession of the land
between the exploiters of the soil and the industrial com-
munity. . . . . It required nothing less than this magic
of property to drag from the cultivator the excess of
the product which he could not be prevented from re-
garding as his, and of which he believed himself to be
the sole author. Rent, or rather property, broke down
agricultural egoism and created a solidarity to which no
power, no partition of the land, could have given birth.

. . At present, the moral effect of property secured,
it only remains to distribute the rent.”

All this jumble of words may be reduced to this:
Ricardo says that the excess of the price of agricultural
products over their cost of production, including the
ordinary profit and interest of capital, gives the measure
of the rent. M. Proudhon does better, He makes the
proprietor intervene, as a deus ex machina, who drags
from the cultivator all the excess of his production over
the actual cost of production. He makes use of the
intervention of the proprietor, to explain property, of the
landlord, to explain rent. He answers the problem by


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 171


‘


restating the same problem and increasing it by a syl-
lable.

We may further observe that in determining rent by
the difference of fertility of the soil, M. Proudhon as-
signs to it a new origin, since land, before being estimated
according to the different degrees of fertilty, “was not,”
according to him, “a value in exchange, but was com-
mon.” What has it now become, this fiction of rent
which sprang from the necessity of attaching to earth
man who was likely to lose himself in the infinity of
space?

Let us now extricate the doctrine of Ricardo from the
providential, allegorical and mystical phrases in which
M. Proudhon has been careful to envelop it.

Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is property in land in the
bourgeois state—that is to say, feudal property which
has been subjected to the conditions of bourgeois
~ production.

We have seen that, according to Ricardo, the price of
all products is finally determined by the cost of pro-
duction including in that industrial profit — in other
terms, by the time of labor employed. In the manu-
facturing industry the price of the product obtained by
the minimum of labor regulates the price of all other
commodities of the same kind, provided that the least
costly and most productive instruments of production
may be multiplied to infinity, and that, therefore, free
competition necessarily creates a market price—that is to
say, a common price—for all the products of the same
kind.

In agricultural industry, on the contrary, it is the price
of the product obtained by the greatest amount of labor
which regulates the price of all the products of the same
kind. In the first place, we cannot, as in manufacturing


172 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


industry, multiply at will the instruments of production
of the same degree of productivity—that is to say, the
soils of the same degree of fertility. Then, in proportion
as population grows, it is necessary to exploit soils of
inferior quality, or to expend on the same soil additional
capital proportionately less productive than the first. In
either case a larger quantity of labor is expended in
order to obtain a product proportionally smaller. The
needs of the population having rendered this increase of
labor necessary, the product of the soil more costly to
cultivate has its sale forced as well as that of the more
cheaply cultivated soil. Competition levels the market
price, and the product of the better soil will fetch as high
a price as that of the inferior soil. It is the excess of
the price of the products of the superior soil over their
cost of production which constitutes rent. If there were
always at disposal soils of the same degree of fertility, if,
as in manufacturing industry, recourse could always be
had to the less costly and more productive machinery,
or if the second expenditure of capital produced as much
as the first, then the price of agricultural products would
be determined by the price of the commodities produced
by the better instruments of production, as we have
seen in the price of manufactured articles. But also,
from this moment, rent would have disappeared.

For the theory of Ricardo to be generally true, Gt is
further necessary that capital could be freely applied to
the different branches of industry; that a strongly
developed competition between the capitalists should
have reduced profits to an equal rate; that the farmer
should be no more than an industrial capitalist who asks
for the employment of his capital upon the land, a profit
equal to that which he would draw from his capital
applied to any manufacture; that agricultural exploita-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 173


tion should be subject to the régime of the great industry ;
in fine, that the landed proprietor himself should aim at
nothing more than the monetary revenue.

Rent may no longer exist, as is the case in Ireland,
although farming there has been developed to an ad-
vanced degree. Rent being the excess, not only over
wages, but over the industrial profit, it cannot exist
where the revenue of the proprietor is only a previous
deduction from wages.

But, far from making of the exploiter of the soil, of
the farmer, a simple laborer, and “dragging from the
peasant the excess of the product which he cannot be


‘prevented from regarding as his own,” rent sets before


the landed proprietor the industrial capitalist, instead of
the slave, the serf, the tributary, the wage-worker.

Further, a considerable time elapsed before the feudal
farmer was replaced by the industrial capitalist. In
Germany, for example, this transformation did not begin
until the last third of the eighteenth century. It is only
in England that this relation between the industrial
capialist and the landed proprietor has been fully devel-
oped.

So long as there was only the cultivator of M.
Proudhon there was no rent. When there is rent the
peasant is not the farmer, but the workman, the employé
of the farmer. The degradation of the cultivator re-
duced to the position of simple workman, day-laborer
wage-worker, laboring for the industrial capitalist ; the
intervention of the industrial capitalist, exploiting the
land like any other factory; the transformation of the
landed proprietor from a petty sovereign into a vulgar
usurer: those are the different relations expressed by
rent.

Rent, in the Ricardian sense, is patriarchal agricul-


174 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


ture transformed into commercial industry, industrial
capital applied to the land, the bourgeoisie of the towns
transplanted into the country. Rent, instead of “attach-
ing man to nature,” has only attached the exploitation
of the land to competition. Once constituted as rent,
landed property itself is the result of competition, since
thenceforward it depends upon the saleable value of agri-
cultural products. As rent, landed property is mobilised
and becomes an effect of commerce. Rent is possible
only from the moment in which the development of the
industry of the towns and the social organisation result-
ing therefrom force the landlord to have regard only to
venal profit, to the monetary relation of his agricultural
products; to see, in fine, in his landed property, only a
machine for making money. Rent has so perfectly
detached the landed proprietor from the soil, from nature,
that he scarcely needs to know his lands, as we see in
England. As to the farmer, the industrial capitalist and
the agricultural laborer, they are no more attached to
the soil which they cultivate than the capitalist and the
workman in manufacture are attached to the cotton or
the wood they use; they have regard only for the price
of their exploitation, for the monetary product. To that
fact is due the jeremiads of the reactionary parties who
fervently pray for the return of feudalism, for the happy
patriarchal life, for the simple and noble manners of our
ancestors. The subjection of the soil to the laws which
rule every other industry is and will always be the subject
of interested condolences. Thus we might say that rent
is the motive force which has cast idyllism into the
historical movement.

Ricardo, after having supposed bourgeois production
as necessary in order to determine rent, applies it never-
theless to landed property in every epoch in every coun-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 175


¢


try. These are the errors of all economists who regard
the conditions of bourgeois production as eternal cate-
gories. |

From the providential object of rent, which is, for M.
Proudhon, the transformation of the cultivator into a
responsible workman, he goes on to the equalitarian re-
ward of rent.

Rent, as we have just seen, is constituted by the equal
price of the products of lands of wnequal fertility in such
wise that a hectolitre of wheat which has cost to francs


-is sold for 20 francs if the cost of production rises, for an


inferior soil, to 20 francs. So long as necessity compels
the purchase of all the agricultural products put upon
the market, the market price is determined by the highest
cost of production. It is, therefore, this equalisation of
price, resulting from competition and not from the dif-
ferent fertility of soils, which secures for the proprietor
of the superior soil a rent of 10 francs for each hecto-
litre which his farmer sells. .

Let us for a moment suppose that the price of the
wheat is determined by the labor-time necessary to
produce it, and that in consequence the hectolitre of
wheat obtained from the superior soil would be sold at
10 francs, while that obtained from the inferior soil
would cost 20. That admitted, the mean market price
would be 15 francs; while, according to the law of
competition, it is 20 francs. If the mean price was 15
francs there would be nothing for distribution, either
equalitarian or other, as there would be no rent. Rent
exists only in consequence of the fact that the hectolitre
of wheat, which cost the producer 10 francs, is sold for
20 francs. M. Proudhon supposes the equality of the
market price, with unequal cost of production, in order


176 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


to arrive at the equalitarian distribution of the product
of inequality.

We can understand such economists as Mill, Cher-
bulliez, Hilditch, and others, demanding that rent should
be handed over to the State to be used for the remis-
sion of taxation. That is only the frank expression of
the hate which the industrial capitalist feels for the landed
proprietor, who appears to him as a useless incumbrance,
a superfluity in the otherwise harmonious whole of
bourgeois production. :

But to first take twenty francs for the hectolitre of
wheat in order to afterwards make a general distribution
of the ten francs too much charged to the consumers,
—that would indeed be sufficient to make the social
genius pursue its zigzag way in melancholy, ready to
knock its head against any corner.


Rent becomes, under the pen of M. Proudhon, “an
immense land valuation made independently by the land-
‘lords and the farmers in a superior interest, the definite
result of which must be to equalise the possession of
the land between the exploiters of the soil and the man-
ufacturing classes.”


In order for any valuation whatever, determined by
rent, to be of practical utility, it is necessary always to
remain in the conditions of existing society.

But we have demonstrated that the farm rent, paid by
the farmer to the landlord, expresses almost exactly the
rent only in those countries most advanced in industry
and commerce. Yet this farm rent often includes the
interest paid to the landlord for the capital incorpor-
ated in the land. The situation of soils, the neighbor-
hood of towns, and very maf other circumstances, in-
fluence the farm hire and modify the rent. These


~


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 177


arbitrary reasons will suffice to prove the inexatitude
_of a land valuation based on rent.

On the other hand rent cannot be a constant indica-
tion of the degree of fertility of any land, since the
modern application of chemistry constantly changes the
nature of the soil, while it is only in recent years that
geological knowledge has begun to destroy all the old
estimate of relative fertility. It is only about twenty
years ago that vast areas in the eastern countries of
England were brought into cultivation, they had been
left uncultivated for want of appreciating correctly the
relations between the nature of the upper soil and of the
lower stratum.

Thus history, so far from giving, in rent, a valuation
completely formed, simply changes, completely reverses,
the valuations already formed.

In fine, fertility is not so much a natural quality as
might reasonably be supposed, but is intimately related
to existing social conditions. A soil may be very fertile
for the raising of corn, yet, nevertheless, the state of the
market may induce the cultivator to turn it into an
artificial prairie and thus render it barren. M. Proudhon
has improvised his valuation, which is not even worth
the ordinary valuation, simply in order to give a corpo-
real form to the providentially equalitarian object of
rent.

“Rent,” continues M. Proudhon, “is the interest paid
for a capital which never perishes, namely land. And
as this capital is not susceptible of any increase as to
its material but only to an indefinite improvement in
its use, it results that, while the interest or profit on a
loan (mutuum) tends to constantly diminish in conse-
quence of the abundance of capital, rent tends to con-
stantly increase by the perfection of the industry from


\
178 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


which results the improvement in the usages of the
SOil.; <1 «> Such, in’ He “essence, 1s rent CVol. Bie
p. 265.) BE

This time, M. Proudhon sees in rent all the attri-
butes of interest, so far as it arises from a capital of a
specific nature. This capital is land, eternal capital,
“which is not susceptible of any increase as to its
material, but only to an indefinite improvement in its
use.” In the progressive march of civilisation interest
has a constant tendency to fall, while rent constantly
tends to rise. Interest falls on account of the abundance
of capital; rent rises with the improvements made in
industry which have the effect of constantly improving
the use of land.

Such is, in its essence, the opinion of M. Proudhon.

Let us begin by examining at what point it is correct
to say that rent is the interest on capital.

For the landowner himself rent represents interest on
the capital which the land has cost him, or which it
would return to him if he sold it. But in buying or sel-
ling land, he only buys or sells rent. The price which
he has paid in order to acquire the rent is regulated by
the general rate of interest and has nothing to do with
the nature of rent itself. The interest on capital invested
in land is, in general, less than the interest on capital
sunk in manufacture or commerce. Thus for him who
does not distinguish the interest which land represents
to the proprietor from rent itself, the interest on capital
in land diminishes much more than the interest on other
capitals. But it is not here a question of the price of
the sale or purchase of rent, of the saleable value of rent,
of capitalized rent, it is a question of rent itself.

The hire of a farm may imply in addition to the rent
Properly so-called, interest on capital incorporated in the


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 179


land. Then, the proprietor receives this part of the
farm hire not as landlord, but as capitalist; that is, how-
ever, not the rent, properly speaking, with ‘which we
have to deal.

Land, so long as it is not exploited as a means of
production, is not capital. Capital in land can be aug-
mented as well as all other means of production. No-
thing is added to the material, to speak the language of
M. Proudhon, but the soils which serve as instruments
of production are multiplied. By merely applying ad-
ditional capital to land already transformed into means
of production land-capital may be augmented without
adding anything to the material land, that is to say to
the extent of the land. The material land of M. Proudhon
has the bounds of the earth for its limits. As to the
eternity which he attributes to land we readily grant
that, as matter, it has this quality. As capital, land is
not more eternal than any other capital.

Gold and silver, which pay interest, are as durable and
eternal as land. If the price of gold and silver falls
while that of land rises, that is certainly not due to the
more or less eternal nature of land.

Land-capital is a fixed capital, but fixed capital is
used up as well as circulating capital. The improve-
ments effected in the soil need to be reproduced and
maintained ; they only last a certain time, a quality which
they possess in common with all other improvements


‘of which use is made in order to transform matter into


means of production. If land-capital were eternal certain
lands would present an entirely different aspect to that
which they bear to-day, and we should see the Roman
Campagna, Sicily, and Palestine, in all the splendor
of their ancient prosperity.

There are, moreover, cases where land-capital may


180 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


disappear, even while the improvements remain incor-
porated in the land.

In the first place this actually; happens every time that
rent, properly so-called, is extinguished by the competi-
tion of new and more fertile soils; further, the improve-
ments which have a value at a certain period, cease to
have that value from the moment that they become uni-
versal through the development of agricultural science.

The representative of land-capital is not the land-
owner but the farmer. The revenue which land gives
as capital is industrial interest and profit, and not rent.
There are some lands which return this interest and
profit, but which pay no rent.

To sum up, land in so far as it gives interest, is land-
capital, and, as land-capital, it returns no rent, it does not
constitute landed property. Rent results from the social
relations in which exploitation is carried on. It cannot
result from the nature, more or less fixed, more or less
durable, of land. Rent proceeds from society and not
from the soil.

According to M. Proudhon “the improvement in the
use of land”—a result of “the improvement of industry,”
is the cause of the constant rise of rent. This improve-
ment, on the contrary, causes it to periodically fall,

In what, in general, does all improvement consist,
whether it be in agriculture or in manufacture? It is to
produce more with the same amount of labor, it is to
produce as much, or even more, with less labor. Thanks
to these improvements the farmer can dispense with the
employment of a greater quantity of labor for a product
proportionally less. He has no need then to have re-
course to the inferior soils, and the portions of capital
successively applied to the same land are equally produc-
tive. Therefore these improvements, so far from caus-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 181


ing a constant rise of rent, as M. Proudhon says, are,
on the contrary, so many temporary obstacles which
oppose its rise.

The English landowners of the seventeenth century
were so sensible of this truth that they strenuously
opposed all agricultural progress, for fear of seeing their
revenues diminish. (See Petty, an English economist of
the time of Charles II.)


Section V.—STRIKES AND THE COMBINATION OF
WoRKMEN.


“Every upward movement in wages can have no
other effect than that of a rise in wheat, in wine, &c.,
that is to say, the effect produced by a dearth. For
what are wages? They are the cost price of wheat, &c.,
the integral price of everything. Let us go further still,
wages are the proportion of the elements which compose
wealth and which are consumed reproductively each day
by the mass of the workers. But, to double wages . - -
is to bestow upon each of the producers a part greater
than his product, which is contradictory; and if the
rise only affects a small number of industries, the
result is to provoke a general perturbation in exchanges,
in a word, a scarcity . . . . It is impossible, I insist,
for the strikes which result in an increase in wages
not to lead to a general dearness: that is as certain as
that two and two make four.” (Proudhon, Vol. I., pp.
110 and 111.)

We deny all these assertions, except that two and two
make four.

In the first place there is no such thing as general
dearness. If the price of everything is doubled at the


182 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


same time as wages, there is no change in prices, there
is only a change in terms.

Further, a general rise in wages can never produce a
dearness, more or less general, of commodities. In effect,
if all industries employed the same number of workmen
in proportion to the fixed capital or to the instruments
used, a general rise in wages would produce a general
reduction of profits, and the current price of commidities
would undergo no alteration.


But as the relation of manual labor to fixed capital
is not the same in different industries, all the indus-
tries which employ relatively a greater mass of fixed
capital and less workers will be forced sooner or later
to reduce the prices of their commodities. In the con-
trary case, where the price of their commodities is not
reduced, their profit will rise above the common rate of
profit. The machines are not wage-workers. There-
fore, the general rise in wages will affect those indus-
tries less which, compared with the others, employ more
machines than workmen. But as competition always
tends to level the rate of profits, those which rise above
the ordinary rate can only do so temporarily. Thus,
apart from some oscillations, a general rise in wages,
so far from resulting, as M. Proudhon contends, in a
general rise in prices would result in a partial fall, that
is to say, a fall in the current price of the commodities
which are manufactured chiefly by machinery.


The rise and fall of profit or wages merely expresses
the proportion in which the capitalists and the workmen
Participate in the product of a day of labor without, in
most cases, influencing the price of the product. But
that “the strikes which are followed by an increase in
wages lead to a general rise in prices, to a scarcity even,”


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 183


-—these are ideas which could only be hatched in the
brain of an unintelligible poet.

In England strikes have regularly given rise to in-
vention and to the application of new machinery.
Machines were, we might say, the arms which the
capitalists used to defeat revolted labor. The self-acting
mule, the greatest invention in modern industry, put
the revolted hand-spinners out of action. Even when
combination and strikes have no other effect than to
arouse against them the efforts of mechanical genius,
they always exercise an immense influence on the devei-
opment of industry.

“T find,’ continues M. Proudhon, “from an article
published by M. Leon Faucher . . . . September, 1845,
that for some time English workmen have ceased to form
combinations, which is certainly a progress upon which
they are to be congratulated. But this improvement in
the morality of the workers arises above all from their
economic knowledge. ‘It is not upon the manufacturers,’
cried a working spinner at a meeting at Bolton, ‘that
wages depend. In periods of depression the masters are
only, so to speak, the whips with which necessity is
armed, and, whether they will or no, they must strike.
The regulating principle is the relation between supply
and demand; and the masters have not the power.’”’
“Well and good,” cries M. Proudhon, “these are well
developed model workmen, &c., &c. The poverty we
have here does not exist in England; it cannot cross the
Channel.” (Proudhon, Vol. I., pp. 261 and 262.)

Of all the towns in England, Bolton is one in which
Radicalism is as fully developed as anywhere. Than
the workers of Bolton there are none more revolutionary.
During the great agitation in England for the abolition
of the Corn Laws, the English manufacturers felt that


184 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


they would be unable to make head against the land-
owners except by putting the workers in the front of the
fight. But, as the interests of the workers were not less"
opposed to those of the manufacturers than the interests
of the manufacturers were opposed to those of the land-
owners, it was natural to expect that the manufacturers
would get the worst of it in the meetings of the workers.
But what did the manufacturers do? In order to save
appearances they organised meetings composed in great
part of foremen and overseers, of the small number of
workmen who were devoted to them, and some “friends
of commerce,” properly so-called. When afterwards the
real working people attempted, as at Bolton and
Manchester, to take part in such meetings in order to
protest against these factitious demonstrations, they
were told they were “ticket meetings,” to which no one
could be admitted without a ticket, and were refused
admission. Nevertheless, the placards advertising the
meetings had announced them as public demonstrations.
Every time these meetings were held the capitalist
journals gave glowing accounts, with full and detailed
reports of the speeches. It goes without saying that
these speeches were made by foremen and overseers.
The London newspapers gave literal reproductions of
these reports. M. Proudhon is so unfortunate as to
take the foremen and overseers for ordinary workmen,
and to urge upon them the advice not to cross the
Channel.

If in 1844 and in 1845 strikes attracted less attention
than formerly, it was because 1844 and 1845 were the
two first years of prosperity which English industry
had enjoyed since 1837. Nevertheless none of the trade
unions were dissolved.

Let us now hear the foremen and overseers of Bolton.


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 185


According to them the manufacturers are not the masters
of wages because they are not masters of the price of
the product, and they are not masters of the world
market. By this argument they gave it to be understood
that combinations were not necesary to drag from the
masters an increase of wages. M. Proudhon, on the
contrary, forbids them to combine for fear that combina-
tion may be followed by a rise in wages, which would
bring in its train a general scarcity. It is not necessary
for us to point out that on one point there is perfect
agreement between the foremen and M. Proudhon, that
is, that a rise in wages is the equivalent of a rise in the
price of products.

But is the fear of a scarcity the true cause of M.
Proudhon’s ill-will towards combination? No. He
cordially agrees with the foremen of Bolton because they
determine value by supply and demand, and because
they scarcely think of “constituted value,” of value
passed to the state of constitution, of the constitution of
value, comprising the “permanent exchangeability,” and
all the other “proportionalities of relations” and “rela-
tions of proportionalities,” flanked by Providence.

“For workers to strike is illegal, and it is not only the
penal code which says so, it is the economic system, it
is the necessity of the established order. . . . That
each workman should have the free disposal of his hands
and of his person, that can be tolerated, but that work-
men should undertake by combination to do violence to
monopoly, that is what society can never permit.” (Vol.
I., pp. 235 and 237.)

M. Proudhon wishes to make an article of the penal
code pass for a necessary and general result of bourgeois
production.

In England trade combination is permitted by law,


186 THRE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


and it is the economic system which has forced Parlia-
ment to give this legal authorisation. In 1825 when,
under the minister Huskisson, Parliament had to modify
the law in order to bring it more into accord with a
state of things resulting from free competition, it was
necessary to abolish the laws which prohibited the com-
bination of workmen. The more modern industry and
competition develop, the more elements are there which
provoke and support competition, and as soon as com-
binations have become an economic fact, acquiring
greater consistency day by day, they will not be slow in
becoming a legal fact.

Thus the article of the penal code only proves at most
that modern industry and competition were not suffi-
ciently developed, under the Constituent Assembly and
under the Empire, for the legal recognition of combina-
tion. ;

The economists and the Socialists are agreed on one
point. That is, in condemning combinations. Only they
have different motives for their act of condemnation.

The economists say to the workers: Do not combine.
By combining you hinder the steady progress of industry,
you prevent the manufacturers from executing their
orders, you disturb commerce and precipitate the intro-
duction of machinery which, by rendering your labor in
part useless, forces you to accept still lower wages.
Otherwise you may do very well, your wages will be
always determined by the relations between the demand
for and the supply of hands, and it is an effort as
ridiculous as dangerous to revolt against the eternal laws
of political economy.

The Socialists say to the workers: Do not combine,
because at the end of the account what will you have
gained by it? An increase of wages? The economists


ae


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 187


prove to demonstration that the few pence which you
temporarily gain if you succeed, will be followed by a
lasting reduction. Clever statisticians prove to you that
it will take you years to recover by the rise in wages
the expenditure you have had to make in order to
ofganise and maintain. your combination. And we—
we, as Socialists tell you, that apart from this question
of money, you will be not less workmen, and the masters
will be always the masters as before. Therefore, no
combinations, no politics; for after all, to form com-
binations is that not having to do with politics?

The economists desire that the workers should remain
in society as it is formed, and as they have recorded and
ratified it in their manuals.

The Socialists desire the workers to leave the old
society in order to be the better able to enter into the
new society which they have prepared with so much
foresight.

In spite of the one and the other, in spite of the man-
uals and the utopias, combinations have not ceased to
progress and to grow with the development and growth
of modern industry. It is at such a point now that the
degree of development of combination in a country marks
clearly the degree which that country occupies in the
hierarchy of the world market. In England, where indus-
try has attained the highest degree of development, the
combinations are the largest and best organised.

In England these combinations are not confined to a
partial organisation with no other object than a tem-
porary strike, and which will disappear when that is
over. Permanent combinations have been formed—
trade unions—which serve as a rampart for the workers
in their struggle with the capitalists. And at the pre-
sent time all these local trade unions have a centre or


188 ' ™HE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


/


union in the “National Association of United Trades,”
the central committee of which is in London, and which
already numbers 80,000 members.

The organisation of strikes, combinations, trade unions,
marches simultaneously with the political struggles of
the workers, who now constitute a great political party
under the name of Chartists.

It is under the form of these combinations that the
first attempts at association among themselves have al-
ways been made by the workers.

The great industry masses together in a single place
a crowd of people unknown to each other. Competition
divides their interests. But the maintenance of their
wages, this common interest which they have against
their employer, unites them in the same idea of resistance
—combination. Thus combination has always a double
end, that of eliminating competition among themselves
while enabling them to make a general competition
against the capitalist. If the first object of resistance
has been merely to maintain wages, in proportion as the
capitalists in their turn have combined with the idea of
repression, the combinations, at first isolated, have
formed in groups, and, in face of constantly united
capital, the maintenance of the association became more
important and necessary for them than the maintenance
of wages. This is so true that the English economists
are all astonished at seeing the workers sacrifice a good
part of their wages on behalf of the associations which,
in the eyes of these economists, were only established in
support of wages. In this struggle—a veritable civil
war—are united and developed all the elements necessary
for a future battle. Once arrived at that point, associa-
tion takes a political character.

The economic conditions have in the first place trans-


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 189


formed the mass of the people of a country into wage-
workers. The dominaiton of capital has created for
this mass of people a common situation with common
interests. Thus this mass is already a class, as opposed
to capital, but not yet for itself. In the struggle, of —
which we have only noted some phases, this mass unites,
it is constituted as a class for itself. The interests
which it defends are the interests of its class. But the
struggle between class and class is a political struggle.

In the bourgeoisie we have two phases to distinguish,
that during which it is constituted as a class under the
régime of feudalism and absolute monarchy, and that
wherein, already constituted as a class, it overthrew
feudalism and monarchy in order to make of society a
bourgeois society. The first of these phases was the
longest and necessitated the greatest efforts. That also
commenced with partial combinations against the feudal
lords.

Many researches have been made to trace the different
historical phases through which the bourgeoisie has
passed from the early commune to its constitution as a
class.

But when it becomes a question of rendering an ac-
count of the strikes, combinations, and other forms in
which before our eyes the proletarians effect their organ-
isation as a class, some are seized with fear while others
. express a transcendental disdain.

An oppressed class is the vital condition of every
society based upon the antagonism of classes. The
emancipation of the oppressed class therefore necessarily
implies the creation of a new society. In order for the
oppressed class to be emancipated it is necessary that
the productive powers already acquired and the existing
social relations should no longer be able to exist side by


190 THE POVERTY OF PHILOSOPHY


side. Of all the instruments of production the greatest
productive power is the revolutionary class itself. The
organisation of the revolutionary elements as a class
supposes the existence of all the productive forces which
can be engendered in the bosom of the old society.

Is that to say that after the fall of the old society there
will be a new class domination, comprised in a new
political power? No.

The essential condition of the emancipation of the
working class is the abolition of all classes, as the con-
dition of the emancipation of the third estate of the
bourgeois order, was the abolition of all estates, all
orders.

The working class will substitute, in the course of its
development, for the old order of civil society an asso-
ciation which will exclude classes and their antagonism,
and there will no longer be political power, properly
speaking, since political power is simply the official form
of the antagonism in civil society.

In the meantime, the antagonism between the pro-
letariat and the bourgeoisie is a struggle between class
and class, a struggle which, carried to its highest ex-
pression, is a complete revolution. Would it, moreover,
be matter for astonishment if a society, based upon the
antagonism of classes, should lead ultimately to a brutal
conflict, to a hand-to-hand struggle as its final dénou-
ment? ;

Do not say that the social movement excludes the
political movement. There has never been a political
movement which was not at the same time social.

It is only in an order of things in which there will be
no longer classes or class antagonism that social evolu-
tions will cease to be political revolutions. Until then, on


THE METAPHYSICS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 191
the eve of each general reconstruction of society, the
last word of social science will ever be :—

“Le combat ou la mort; la lutte sanguinaire ou le néant.


C’est ainsi que la question est invinciblement posée.”*
GEORGE SAND.


FINIs.


* Combat or death; bloody struggle or extinction.
It is thus that-the question is irresistibly put.


APPENDIX I.


PROUDHON JUDGED BY KARL MARX.*


London, January 24, 1865.
Sir,

You ask me for a detailed criticism of the works of
Proudhon, I regret that I have not the time to comply
with your request. Moreover, I have none of his
writings at hand. However, as proof of my goodwill I
send you these few hasty notes.

I do not remember the first essays of Proudhon. His
schoolboy work on “A Universal Language” shows with
what recklessness he grappled with problems for the
solution of which he lacked the most elementary
knowledge.

His first work: “What is Property?” is very much his
best. It was an epoch-making book, if not from the
novelty of what he said, at least by the freshness and
boldness of his manner of putting everything. The
French Socialists, with whose writings he was ac-

* Extract from the Sozial-Democrat, Nos. 16, 17 and 18


January, 1865.
193


194 APPENDIX


quainted, had naturally not only criticised property from
different points of view, but had, in utopian fashion,
suppressed it. In his book Proudhon is to Saint Simon
and Fourier almost what Feuerbach is to Hegel. Com-
pared with Hegel, Feuerbach is very poor. Nevertheless,
after Hegel, he made an epoch, because he accentuated
certain points, disagreeable for the Christian conscience
and important for philosophic progress, but which had
been left by Hegel in an obscure and mystic light.

The style of this writing of Proudhon is, if I may say
so, bold and vigorous, and it is its style, in my opinion,
which is its great merit. We see that even when he
merely reproduces he discovers; that what he says is
new to him, and that it serves him as something new.

The provoking audacity with which he lays hands on
the economic sanctuary, the brilliant paradoxes by which
he ridicules the dull bourgeois common-sense, his in-
cisive criticism, his bitter irony, with here and there a
profound and sincere sentiment of revolt against the
established order of things, his revolutionary spirit—this
it is which electrifies the readers of “What is Property ?”
and made the book on its appearance a powerful revolu- —
tionary impulse. In a rigorously scientific history of
political economy, the work would scarcely be worthy of
mention. But these sensational books play a part in the
sciences as well as in literature. Take, for example,
Malthus’s “Essay on Population.” The first edition was
simply a sensational pamphlet, and a plagiarism from
one end to the other into the bargain. Yet what an im-
pression has this pasquinade produced on humanity ?

If I had before me this book of Proudhon’s it would
be easy for me to give some illustrations of his first style.
In the chapters which he himself considers the best he
imitates the contradictory method of Kant, the only


/


APPENDIX 195


German philosopher that he knew at that time, from
translation, and he leaves a strong impression that for
him, as for Kant, the solution of these contradictions is
“beyond” the human understanding, that is to say, that
his understanding is incapable of solving them.

But in spite of its alluring iconoclasticism, there is to
be found, even in this first work, this contradiction that
Proudhon, on one hand, deals with society from the point
of view of the petty peasant (later of the petty bour-
geois) of France, and on the other he applies the standard
which the Socialists have transmitted to him.

’ Beyond that the very title of the book indicates its
insufficiency. The question was too baldly put for it to
be answered correctly. Greco-Roman property -was re-
placed by feudal property, and that by bourgeois pro-
perty. History itself conveys the criticism of the con-
dition of property in the past. The question with which
Proudhon had to deal was as to the relations of modern
bourgeois property. To the question what were these
relations, one could only reply by a critical analysis of
political economy, embracing the whole of the relations
of property, not in their juridical expression.as relations
of will, but in their real form as relation of material
production. As Proudhon subordinated the whole of
these economic relations to the juridical notion of pro-
perty, he could not go beyond the response which had
been already given by Brissot before 1789 and in the
same terms: “Property is Robbery.”*

The conclusion to be drawn from all this is that the
juridical notions of the bourgeoisie on robbery apply as

“Well to its honest profits. On the other hand, as robbery,


* Brissot de Warville, “Recherches sur le droit de propriété
et sur le vol,” &c. Berlin 1782. (In the sixth volume of the
- “Bibliothéque du législateur,” by Brissot de Warville.)


196 APPENDIX -


being a violation of property, presupposes property,
Proudhon embroils himself in all kinds of confused and
fantastic notions with regard to true bourgeois property.

During my ‘stay in Paris, in 1844, I had personal
relations with Proudhon. I recall this circumstance, be-
cause up to a certain point I am responsible for his
“sophistication,” a word which the English use for the
adulteration of a commodity. In our long discussions—
often lasting all through the night—I infected him with
Hegelianism, to his great prejudice, since, not knowing
German, he could not study the matter thoroughly. What
I had begun, M. Karl Grin, after my expulsion from
France, continued. But this professor of German
philosophy had the further advantage over me of under-
standing nothing of what he taught.

A short time before the publication of his second im-
portant work, “Philosophie de la Misére,” &c., Proud-
hon informed me of it in a long and detailed letter, in
which among other things he said: “I await the blow of
your critical rod.” And very soon this fell upon him
(in my “Misére de la Philosophie”) in such a fashion
as to for ever shatter our friendship.

From the foregoing you can see that the “Philosophie
de la Misére, ou Systéme des Contradictions Eco-
nomiques,” ought, in short, to give the answer to the
question: “What is property?’ As a matter of fact,
Proudhon did not begin his economic studies until after
the publication of this first book; he then discovered that
in order to solve the question he had put, it was
necessary to reply, not by invective, but by an analysis
of modern political economy. At the same time he en-
deavored to establish the system of “economic categories”
by means of dialectic. Hegelian contradiction had to re-


APPENDIX 197


place the insoluble contradiction of Kant as a means of
development. .

Fora criticism of these two large volumes I must refer
you to my reply. I have there, among other things,
shown how slightly Proudhon has penetrated the mystery
of scientific dialectic, and how far, on the other ‘hand, he
shares the illusions of “speculative” philosophy. Instead
of regarding the economic categories as the theoretical
expressions of the historical relations of production,
corresponding to a given degree of the development of
material production, his imagination transforms them
into “eternal ideas,” existing before any reality, and in
this manner he arrives, in a round-about way, at the
point from which he started, the point of view of bour-
geois economy.*

Then I show how defective and rudimentary is his
knowledge of political economy, of which nevertheless,
he undertakes the criticism, and how, with the utopians,
he sets himself to seek for a pretended “science” which
may furnish him with a ready-made formula for “the
solution of the social question,” instead of drawing his
science from critical knowledge of the historical move-
ment, the movement which must itself produce the
material conditions of social emancipation. What I,
above all, denounce, is that M. Proudhon has only im-
perfect ideas,confused and false with regard to the basis
of all political economy—exchange-value—a circum-


* In saying that existing conditions—the conditions of
bourgeois production—are natural, the economists give it to
be understood that these are the relations in which wealth is
created and the productive forces are developed conformably
to the laws of nature. Thus these relations are themselves
natural laws, independent of the influence of time. They are
eternal laws which must always govern society. Thus there
has been history, but there is no longer any.


198 APPENDIX


stance wnich leads him to see the foundation of a new
science in a utopian interpretation of the theory of
Ricardo, Finally, I sum up my judgment of his point of
view in these words :—

Each economic relation has a good and bad side: that
is the single point upon which M. Proudhon does not
contradict himself. The good side, he sees explained by
the economists; the bad side, he sees denounced by the
Socialists. He borrows from the economists the necessity
of eternal relations; he borrows from the Socialists the
illusion of seeing in poverty only poverty. He is in
agreement with both in wishing to refer it to the
authority of science. Science, for him, is reduced to the
insignificant proportions of a scientific formula. It is
thus that M. Proudhon flatters himself to have made the
criticism of both political economy and of communism:
he is below both the one and the other. Below the
economists, since as a philosopher, who has under his
hand a magic formula, he has believed himself able to do
without entering into purely economic details; below the
Socialists, since he has neither sufficient courage nor
sufficient intelligence to raise himself, were it only
speculatively, above the bourgeois horizon.

He wished to soar as man of science above the bour-
geoisie and the proletarians; he is only the petty bour-
geois, tossed about constantly between capital and labor,
between political economy and communism.

However severe this judgment may appear, I am
obliged still to maintain it word for word. But it js
important to remember that at the time when I declared
and proved theoretically that Proudhon’s book was only
the code of petty bourgeois Socialism, this same Proud-
hon was being anathematisedas an arch-revolutionist by
the economists and the Socialists of the period. That is


\


APPENDIX 199


the reason why I did not at a later period raise my voice
with those who cried out about his “betrayal” of the
revolution. It was not his fault if, at first ill-understood
by others as well as by himself, he has not fulfilled the
hopes which nothing had ever justified.

The “Philosophie de la Misére,” as compared with
“Qu’est-ce que la Propriété?” displays very unfavorably
all the defects of Proudhon’s manner of exposition. The
style is often what the French call bombastic. A pre-
tentious and “specultative”’ piece of fustian, which,
represented as German philosophy, presents itself every-
where where Gallic perspicacity is at fault. That which
he trumpets in your ears, with the voice of a blustering
buffoon, is his own glorification, wearisome nonsense and
eternal rodomontade about his pretended “science.” In-
stead of the true and natural warmth which illumines his
first book, in this Proudhon declaims systematically and
fails to excite any feeling. Add to this the awkward and
disagreeable didactic pedantry, which serves for erudi-
tion, of the man who has lost his former pride of being
an independent and original thinker, and who now, as a
parvenu of science, thinks he should swagger and boast
of what he is not and of what he does not possess. After
that his sentiments of a tallow chandler, which lead hin
to attack in a most unseemly and brutal manner—but
which is neither discerning, nor profound, nor even just
—a man like Cabet, who was always worthy of respect
because of his political rdle in the midst of the proletariat,
while he does the amiable towards a ‘Dunnoyer (a
Councillor of State, it is true) who has no importance
beyond that of having preached, with a comical serious-
ness, throughout the whole of three great volumes, in-
supportably tiresome, a hypercriticism thus described by


200 APPENDIX


Helvetius: “We desire that the unfortunate should be
perfect.”

In fact, the revolution of February happened very un-
fortunately for Proudhon, who, a few weeks previously,
had proved definitely and irrefutably that the “era of
revolutions” was past for ever. Nevertheless his attitude
in the National Assembly merits nothing but praise, al-
though it proved his lack of intelligence of the situation.
After the insurrection of June this attitude was an act of
great courage. It had further this happy result, that M.
Thiers, in his reply to the propositions .of Proudhon,
which was afterwards published as a book, revealed the
mean, petty pedestal upon which the intellectual pillar
of the French bourgeoisie was raised. Compared with
Thiers, Proudhon assumed the proportions of an ancient
colossus.

The last economic acts and achievements of Proudhon
were his discovery of “Free Credit,” and of the “People’s
Bank” which should realise it. In my work “Zur Kritik
der Politischen C&konomie” (“Criticism of Political
Economy”’), Berlin, 1859 (pp. 59-64), you will find the
proof that these Proudhonian ideas are based upon a
complete ignorance of the first elements of bourgeois
political economy—the relation between commodity and
money—while their practical realisation was nothing but
the reproduction of better elaborated projects of a much
earlier period. There is no doubt, there is indeed
evidence to show, that the development of credit, which
has served in England in the beginning of the eighteenth
century, and more recently in this, to transfer wealth
from one class to another, might also serve, in ‘certain
political and economic conditions, to accelerate the
emancipation of the working class. But to consider
interest-bearing capital as the principal form of capital,


APPENDIX 201


and to wish to make of a particular application of
credit—the pretended abolition of the rate of interest—
to think to make that the basis of the social transforma-
tion—that was indeed a petty chandler’s fantasy. More-
over, we find that had been already elaborated con amore
among the spokesmen of the small shopkeeping class of
England in the seventeenth century. The polemic of
Proudhon against Bastiat with reference to interest-
bearing capital (1850) is far below his “Philosophie de
la Misére.” He succeeds in allowing himself to be beaten
even by Bastiat, and cries and blusters every time that his
adversary deals him a blow.

Some years ago Proudhon wrote a thesis on imposts,
published in opposition to my theories by the Govern-
ment of the Canton of Vaud. In that work was extin-
guished the last ray of genius; nothing of him remains
but the petty bourgeois pure and simple.

The political and philosophical writings of Proudhon
have all the same dual and contradictory character which
we have found in his economic work. Besides, they
have only a local importance, limited to France. His at-
tacks upon the religion and the Church had always a
great local value in a period when the French Socialists
boasted of their religious sentiments as of something
superior to the Voltairianism of the eighteenth century
and the German atheism af the nineteenth. If Peter the
Great overthrew Russian barbarism by barbarity, Proud-
hon did his best to overthrow French commonplace by
commonplaces.

The works which cannot be regarded merely as bad
writings, but are simply vile trash, which, however, were
quite in keeping with the petty chandler sentiment—were,
his book on the Coup d’Etat, in which he coquets with
Louis Bonaparte, and endeavors to make him acceptable


202 APPENDIX


to the French workmen, and that against Poland, which,
in honor of the Czar, he treats with the cynicism of an
idiot.

Proudhon has often been compared to Jean Jacques
Rousseau. Nothing could be more erroneous. He re-
sembles rather Nicolas Linguet, whose “Theorie des
Lois Civiles” is, moreover, a work of genius.


The nature of Proudhon leads him to dialectics. But
having never comprehended scientific dialectic, he gets
no further than sophistry. In fact, that arises from his:
petty bourgeois point of view. The petty bourgeois,
precisely like our own historian Raumer, always speaks
of one side and of the other side. Two opposing, contra-
dictory currents dominate his material interests, and in
consequence his religious, scientific and artistic views, his
morality, and in fact his whole being. If he is besides,
like Proudhon, a man of intellect, he will very soon be
able to juggle with his own contradictions and to
elaborate them in striking, noisy, if sometimes brilliant,
paradoxes. Scientific charlatanism and political com-
promises are inseparable from such a point of view.
There is, in such case, only a single motive, individual
vanity, and as with all vain people, there is no question
of anything beyond the mere effect of the moment, the
success of the hour. In this is necessarily lost the simple
moral tact which would preserve a Rousseau, for
example, from all compromise, even apparent, with the
powers that be.


Perhaps posterity will say, to distinguish this most
recent phase of French history, that Louis Bonaparte was
its Napoleon, and Proudhon its Rousseau-Voltaire.


Yours, &c.,


Kart Marx,


a


APPENDIX IT*


The theory of labor time.as the unity of direct measure
of money was developed in a systematic manner for the
first time by John Gray.

A central national bank, by the aid of its branches,
would certify the time employed in the production of the
different commodities. In exchange for his commodity
the producer would receive an official certificate of its
value—that is to say, a receipt for the labor time con-
tained in his commodity,** and these notes of a week of


Le 2 ik a aac a A a ROS EEO
* (Extract from Marx’s work “Zur Kritik der Politischen


Ckonomie,” Berlin, 1859, pp. 61-64.)
+ John Gray.—‘The Social System, &c.: Treatise on the —
Principle of Exchange,” Edinburgh, 1831. Composed by the
same author: “Lectures on the Nature and Use of Money,’
Edinburgh, 1848. After the revolution of February, Gray
sent to the Provisional Government a memorial in which he
informed them that it was not the “organisation of labor”
which France needed, but an “organisation of exchange,” a
completely elaborated plan of which was to be found in the
system of money which he had discovered. The worthy John
never imagined that sixteen years after the publication of his
“Social System,” a patent would be taken out for the same
discovery by Proudhon, that genius so fertile in invention.
** Gray.—“The Social System,” &c., p. 63. “Money should
be merely a receipt, an evidence that the holder of it has
either contributed certain value to the national stock of
wealth, or that he has acquired a right to the same value


from someone who has contributed tolit:-


204 APPENDIX


labor, a day of labor, an hour of labor, would repre-
sent the equivalent which the holder could receive of any
other commodities which were in the stores of the bank.*
That is the fundamental principle which he has carefully
developed in all its details, based upon existing English
institutions. With this system, says Gray, “it would be
as easy to sell for money as it is now to buy with
money ; production would be the uniform and inexhaust-
ible source of the demand.’”’} The precious metals would
lose the “privilege” which they have over other com-
modities, and “would take the place which belongs to
them on the market side by side with butter, eggs, cloth,
and calico; and their value would interest us no more
than that of diamonds.”** Ought we to retain our
artificial measure of value, gold, and fetter thus the pro-
ductive forces of the country, or ought we not rather to
make use of the natural measure of value, labor, and
liberate the productive forces?*** Since labor time is
the actual measure of value, why by the side of it should
there be another, extrinsic, value? Why should ex-
change-value be transformed into price? Why do all
commodities estimate their value in a single com-
modity, money, which thus becomes equal to the value of
exchange ?

That was the problem which Gray had to solve. In-
stead of solving it, he imagines that commodities can

* “An estimated value being previously put upon produce,
let it be lodged in a bank, and drawn out again, whenever it
is required, merely stipulating, by common consent, that he
who lodges any kind of property in the proposed national
bank may take out of it an equal value of whatever it may
contain, instead of being obliged to draw out the self-same
thing that he put in.’—/bid, p. 68,

+ Ibid, p. 16.


** Gray.— “Lectures on Money,” &c., p, 180.
*** Tbid, p. 169.


APPENDIX 205


assort themselves, in direct relation with each other,
as the products of social labor. But they cannot assort
themselves in relation to each other otherwise than as
they are. Commodities are the immediate products of
individual labors, independent and isolated, which can
express themselves as. general social labor only by
changing themselves in the process of individual ex-
change; labor, in the production of commodities, only
becomes social labor by losing its character of individual
labor. In representing the labor time contained in com-
modities as labor time directly social, Gray represents it
as collective labor or as the labor time of individuals
directly associated. In such conditions, as a matter of
fact, a specific commodity, such as gold or silver, could
not be for the other commodities the incarnation of
labor in general, value in exchange would not become
price, but neither would use-value become value in ex-
change, the product would not become a commodity, and
thus would disappear the basis upon which bourgeois
production rests. But that is not the idea of Gray. The
products must be produced as commodities, but they must
not be exchanged as commodities.

Gray confides to a National Bank the excution of this
pious desire. On one side society, by the intermediary
of the National Bank, renders the individuals independent
of the conditions of individual exchange, and on the
other side it leaves them to continue to produce on the
basis of individual exchange. Logic compels Gray to
successively deny all the conditions of bourgeois pro-
duction, although he desires merely to “reform” money,
the consequence of the exchange of commodities. He
transforms capital into national capital,* property in
~«* The business of every country ought to be conducted on
a national capital—John Gray “The Social System,” p. 71.


906 APPENDIX


land, into national land,* and when we look more closely
into it we see that he does not receive in one hand the
commodities and deliver with the other certificates for
labor received, but that he regulates production itself.
In his last work, “Lectures on Money,” in which Gray
sets himself to present his labor-money as a purely |
bourgeois reform, he loses himself in still more trans-
parent absurdities.

Every commodity is money, that is Gray’s theory, and
this is the result of his incomplete and, therefore,
mistaken analysis of commodities. The “organic” con-
struction of “labor-money,” of the “national bank,” and
the stores of commodities,” is only a dream in which we

_are enabled to get a glimpse of the dogma as a universal
law. The dogma that a commodity is money, or that
the labor of an individual contained in it is social labor,
does not become a truth simply because a bank believes
in it and acts upon it. ‘Failure in this case plays the part
of practical criticism. What Gray has not said, and
what he has not imagined—that is to say, that labor-
money is an alluring economic phrase for those who have
a pious desire to dispense with the use of money, with
the value of exchange of commodities, with the com-
modities of bourgeois society—has been loudly pro-
claimed by English Socialists who have written before
and since himself.+


But it was reserved for Proudhon and his school to
seriously proclaim the degradation of money and the
exaltation of commodities, as the principle of Socialism,

a SNCS Shee Cth Pepe at Lin

* The land to be transformed into national property.—
Ibid, p. 298.

+ For instance, B. W. Thompson’s “An Enquiry into the
Distribution of wealth, &c.,” London, 1827.. Bray:“Labor’s
Wrongs and Labor’s Remedy,” Leeds, 1839.


APPENDIX 207


and therefore to reduce Socialism to an elementary
misconception of the necessary dependence which exists
between commodity and money.*


* As a compendium of this melodramatic theory of money
may be cited the work of M. Alfred Darimon, “De la Ré-
forme des Banques,” Paris, 1856.


APPENDIX IIL


(1.).—FREE TRADE.*


A SPEECH DELIVERED BEFORE THE DEMOCRATIC ASSOCIA-
TION OF BRUSSELS, AT ITs PUBLIC MEETING, JANUARY
9, 1848. By Karr Marx.


GENTLEMEN,—The Repeal of the Corn Laws in
England is the greatest triumph of Free Trade in the
nineteenth century. In every country where manufac-
turers speak of Free Trade, they have in mind chiefly
Free Trade in corn or raw material generally. To bur-
den foreign corn with protective duties is infamous, it is
to speculate on the hunger of the people.


‘


* The speech on free exchange, by Marx, is reproduced
textually from the original pamphlet published in Brussels
in 1848, and which has become so rare that we know of no
other copy than that of Engels, from which the German,
English, Italian, and Russian translations, which appeared
later, have been made. [Note by the editor of the French
edition, 1896.]

208


APPENDIX 309


Cheap food, high wages, for this alone the English
Free Traders have spent millions, and their enthusiasm
has already infected their continental brethren. And,
generally speaking, all those who advocate Free Trade
do so in the interests of the working class.

But, strange to say,.the people for whom cheap food
is to be procured at all costs are very ungrateful. Cheap
food has as bad a repute in England as cheap government
has in France. The people see in these self-sacrificing
gentlemen, in Bowring, Bright and Co., their worst
enemies and the most shameless hypocrites.

Everyone knows that in England the struggle between
Liberals and Democrats takes the name of the struggle
between Free Traders and Chartists. Let us see how the
English Free Traders have proved to the people the good
intentions that animate them.

This is what they said to the factory hands—

“The duty on corn is a tax upon wages; this tax you
pay to the landlords, those medizval aristocrats; if your
position is a wretched one, it is so only on account of the
high price of the most indispensable articles of food.”

The workers in turn asked of the manufacturers,—

“How is it that in the course of the last thirty years,
while our commerce and manufacture has immensely in-
creased, our wages have fallen far more rapidly, in pro-
portion, than the price of corn has gone up?

“The tax which you say we pay the landlords is
scarcely threepence a week per worker. And yet the
wages of the hand-loom weaver fell, between 1815 and
1843, from 28s. per week to 5s., and the wages of the
power-loom weavers, between 1823 and 1843, from 20s.
per week to 8s. :

“And during the whole of the time that portion of
the tax which you say we pay the landlord has never


210 APPENDIX


_ exceeded threepence. And, then, in the year 1834, when
tell us? You said, ‘If you are poor, it is only because you
tell us? You said, ‘If you are poor, it is only because you
have too many children, and your marriages are more
productive than your labor!’

“These are the very words you spoke to us, and you
set about making new Poor Laws, and building work-
houses, those bastilles of the proletariat.”

To this manufacturers replied,—

“You are right, worthy laborers: it is not the price of
corn alone, but competition of the hands among them-
selves as well, which determines wages.

“But just bear in mind the circumstance that our soil
consists of nothing but rocks and sandbanks. You surely
do not imagine that corn can be grown in flowerpots!
Therefore, if, instead of wasting our labor and capital
upon a thoroughly sterile soil, we were to give up
agriculture, and devote ourselves exclusively to com-
merce and manufacture, all Europe would abandon its
factories, and England would form one huge factory
town, with the whole of the rest of Europe for its
agricultural districts.”

While thus haranguing his own workingmen, the
manufacturer is interrogated by the small tradesmen,
who exclaim,—

“If we repeal the Corn Laws, we shall indeed ruin
agriculture; but, for all that, we shall not compel other
nations to give up their own factories, and buy our
goods. What will the consequences be? I lose my
customers in the country, and the home market is
destroyed.”

The manufacturer turns his back upon the working-
men and replies to the shopkeeper,—

“As to that, you leave it to us! Once rid of the duty


APPENDIX 211


on corn, we shall import cheaper corn from abroad. Then
we shall reduce wages at the very time when they are
rising in the countries where we get our corn. Thus in
addition to the advantages which we already enjoy we
shali have lower wages, and with all these advantages,
we shall easily force the Continent to buy of us.”

But now the farmers and agricultural laborers join in
the discussion.

“And what, pray,is to become of us? Are we to help
in passing a sentence of death upon agriculture, when we
get our living by it? Are we to let the soil be torn from
beneath our feet?”

For all answer the Anti-Corn Law League contented
itself with offering prizes for the three best essays upon
the wholesome influence of the Repeal of the Corn Laws
on English agriculture.

These prizes were carried off by Messrs. Hope, Morse,
and Greg, whose essays were distributed by thousands
throughout the agricultural districts. One of the prize
essayists devotes himself to proving that neither the
tenant farmer nor the agricultural laborer would lose by
the repeal of the Corn Laws, and that the landlord
alone would lose.

“The English tenant farmer,” he exclaims, “need not
fear repeal, because no other country can produce such
good corn so cheaply as England. Thus, even if the price
of corn fell, it would not hurt you, because this fall would _
only affect rent, which would go down, while the profit
of capital and the wages of labor would remain
stationary.” |

The second prize essayist, Mr. Morse, maintains, on the
contrary, that the price of corn will rise in consequence
of repeal. He is at infinite pains to prove that protective


912 APPENDIX


duties have never been able to secure a remunerative
price for corn.

In support of his assertion he quotes the fact hat.
wherever foreign corn has been imported, the price of
corn in England has gone up considerably, and that when
little corn has been imported the price has fallen greatly.
This prize-winner forgets that the importation was not
the cause of the high price, but that the high price was the
cause of the importation. In direct contradiction of his
colleague, he asserts that every rise in the price of corn
is profitable to both the tenant farmer and laborer, but
does not benefit the landlord.

The third prize essayist, Mr. Greg, who is a large
manufacturer and whose work is addressed to the large
tenant farmers, could not afford to echo such silly stuff. -
His language is more scientific.

He admits that the Corn Laws can increase rent only
by increasing the price of corn, and that they can raise
‘the price of corn only by inducing the investment of
capital upon land of inferior quality, and this is a perfect-
ly natural explanation.

In proportion as population increases, it inevitably
follows, if foreign corn cannot be imported, that less
fruitful soil must be called into requisition, the cultivation
of which involves more expense and the product of which
is consequently dearer. There being a demand for all
the corn thus produced, it will all be sold. The price for
all of it will of necessity be determined by the price of
the product of the inferior soil. The difference between
this price and the cost of production upon soil of better
quality constitutes the rent paid for the use of the better
soil.

If, therefore, in consequence of the repeal of the Corn
Laws, the price of corn falls, and if, as a matter of


APPENDIX 213


course, rent falls with it, it is because inferior soil will no
longer be cultivated. Thus the reduction of rent must
inevitably ruin a number of the tenant farmers.

These remarks are necessary in order to make Mr.
Greg’s language comprehensible.

“The small farmers,” he says, “who cannot support
themselves by agriculture must take refuge in manu-
facture. As to the large tenant farmers, they cannot fail
to profit by the arrangement; either the landlord will be
obliged to sell them their land very cheap, or leases will
be made out for very long periods. This will enable
tenant farmers to invest more capital in their farms, to
use agricultural machinery on a larger scale, and to save
manual labor, which will, moreover, be cheaper, on ac-
count of the general fall in wages, the immediate con-
sequence of the repeal of the Corn Laws.”

Dr. Bowring conferred upon all these arguments the
consecration of religion, by exclaiming at a public meet-
ing, “Jesus Christ is Free Trade, and Free Trade is
Jesus Christ.”

It may be easily understood that all this cant was not
calculated to make cheap bread tasteful to working men.

Besides, how should the working men understand the
sudden philanthropy of the manufacturers, the very men
who were still busy fighting against the Ten Hours Bill,
which was to reduce the working day of the mill hands
from twelve hours to ten? .

To give you an idea of the philanthropy of these
manufacturers I would remind you of the factory regula-
tions in force in all their mills.

Every manufacturer has for his own special use a
regular penal code by means of which fines are inflicted
for every voluntary or involuntary offence. For instance,
the operative pays so much when he has the misfortune


914 APPENDIX


to sit down on a chair, or whisper, or speak, or laugh;
if he is a few moments late; if any part of a machine
breaks, or if he turns out work of an inferior quality,
&c. The fines are always greater than the damage
really done by the workman. And to give the working-
man every opportunity for incurring fines the factory
clock is set forward, and he is given bad material to
make into good stuff. An overseer unskilful in multi-
plying infractions of rules is soon discharged.


You see gentlemen, this private legislation is enacted
for the especial purpose of creating such infractions,
and infractions are manufactured for the purpose of
making money. Thus the manufacturer uses every means
of reducing the nominal wage, and even profiting by ac-
cidents over which the workers have no control.

And these manufacturers are the same philanthropists
who have tried to persuade the workers that they were
capable of going to immense expense for the sole and
express purpose of improving the condition of those
same workingmen! On the one hand they nibble at the
workers’ wages in the meanest way by means of factory
regulations, and, on the other, they are prepared to make
the greatest sacrifices to raise those wages by means of
the Anti-Corn Law League.

They build great palaces, at immense expense, in which
the league takes up its official residence. They send an
army of missionaries to all corners of England to preach
the gospel of Free Trade; they print and distribute gratis |
thousands of pamphlets to enlighten the workingman
upon his own interests. They spend enormous sums to
buy over the press to their side. They organise a vast
administrative system for the conduct of the Free Trade
movement, and bestow all the wealth of their eloquence


~


APPENDIX 215


upon public meetings. It was at one of these meetings
that a workingman exclaimed boldly,—

“Tf the landlords were to sell our bones, you manu-
facturers would be the first to buy them, and to put them
through the mill and make flour of them.”

The English workingmen have appreciated to the
fullest extent the significance of the struggle between
the lords of the land and of capital. They know very
“well that the price of bread was to be reduced in order
to reduce wages, and that the profit of capital would
rise in proportion as rent fell.

Ricardo, the apostle of the English Free Traders, the
leading economist of our century, entirely agrees with
the workers upon this point.

In his celebrated work upon Political Economy he
says: “If instead of growing our own corn..... we dis-
cover a new market from which we can supply our-
selves .... at a cheaper price, wages will fall and profits
rise. The fall in the price of agricultural produce re-
duces the wages, not only of the laborer employed in
cultivating the soil, but also of all those employed in
commerce or manufacture.”

And do not believe, gentlemen, that it is a matter of
indifference to the workingman whether he receives only
four francs on account of corn being cheaper, when he
had been receiving five francs before.

Have not his wages always fallen in comparison with
profit? And is it not clear that his social position has
grown worse as compared with that of the capitalist?
Beside which he loses actually. So long as the price of
corn was higher and wages were also higher, a smail
saving in the consumption of bread sufficed to procure
him other enjoyments. But as soon as bread is cheap,


216 APPENDIX


and wages are therefore low, he can save almost nothing
on bread for the purchase of other articles.

The English workingmen have shown the English
Free Traders that they are not the dupes of their illu-
sions or of their lies; and if, in spite of this, the workers
have made common cause with the manufacturers against
the landlords, it is for the purpose of destroying the last
remnant of feudalism, that henceforth they may have
only one enemy to deal with. The workers have not
miscalculated, for the landlords, in order to revenge
themselves upon the manufacturers, have made common
cause with the workers to carry the Ten Hours Bill,
which the latter had been vainly demanding for thirty
years, and which was passed immediately after the repeal
of the Corn Laws.

When Dr. Bowring, at the Congress of Economists,
drew from his pocket a long list to show how many head
of cattle, how much ham, bacon, poultry, &c., is imported.
into England, to be consumed—as he asserted—by the
workers, he unfortunately forgot to state that at the
same time the workers of Manchester and other factory
towns were thrown out of work by the beginning of the
crisis.

As a matter of principle in Political Economy, the
figures of a single year must never be taken as the basis
for formulating general laws. We must always take
the average of from six to seven years, a period during
which modern industry passes through the successive
phases of prosperity, over-production, crisis, thus com-
pleting the inevitable cycle.

Doubtless, if the price of all commodities falls,—and
this is the necessary consequence of Free Trade,—I can
buy far more for a franc than before. And the working-
man’s franc is as good as any other man’s. There-


APPENDIX 917


fore, Free Trade must be advantageous to the working-
man. There is only one little difficulty in this, namely,
that the workman, before he exchanges his franc for


other commodities, has first exchanged his labor for the
money of the capitalist. If in this exchange he always


received the said franc while the price of all other com-
modities fell he would always be the gainer by such a
bargain. The difficulty does not lie in proving that,
the price of all commodities falling, more commodities
can be bought for the same sum of money.

Economists always take the price of labor at the
moment of its exchange with other commodities, and
altogether ignore the moment at which labor accom-
plishes its own exchange with capital. When it costs
less to set in motion the machinery which produces
commodities, then the things necessary for the main-
tenance of this machine, called workman, will also cost
less. If all commodities are cheaper, labor, which is a
commodity too, will also fall in price, and we shall see
later that this commodity, labor, will fall far lower in
proportion than all other commodities. If the working-
man still pins his faith to the arguments of the econo-
mists, he will find, one fine morning, that the franc has
dwindled in his pocket, and that he has only five sous
left.

Thereupon the economists will tell you,—

“We admit that competition among the workers will
certainly not be lessened under Free Trade, and will
very soon bring wages into harmony with the low price
of commodities. But, on the other hand, the low price
of commodities will increase consumption, the larger
consumption will increase production, which will in turn
necessitate a larger demand for labor, and this larger
demand will be followed by a rise in wages.


‘


\


218 i APPENDIX


“The whole argument amounts to this: Free Trade
increases productive forces. When manufactures keep
advancing, when wealth, when the productive forces,
when, in a word, productive capital increases, the de-
mand for labor, the price of labor, and consequently
the rate of wages, rises also.”

The most favorable condition for the workingman is
the growth of capital. This must be admitted: when
capital remains stationary, commerce and manufacture
are not merely stationary but decline, and in this case
the workman is the first victim. He will suffer before
the capitalist. And in the case of the growth of capital,
under the circumstances, which, as we have said, are
the best for the workingman, what will be his lot?
He will suffer just the same. The growth of capital
implies the accumulation and the concentration of
capital. This centralisation involves a greater division
of labor and a greater use of machinery. The greater
division of labor destroys the especial skill of the
laborer; and by putting in the place of this skilled
work labor which anyone can perform it increases com-
petition among the workers.

This competition becomes more fierce as the division
of labor enables a single man to do the work of three.
Machinery accomplishes the same result on a much
larger scale. The accumulation of productive capital
forces the industrial capitalist to work with constantly
increasing means of production, ruins the small manu--
facturer, and throws him into the ranks of the prole-
tariat. Then, the rate of interest falling in proportion ~
as capital accumulates, the people of small means and
retired tradespeople, who can no longer live upon their
small incomes, will.be forced to look out for some busi-
ness again and ultimately to swell the number of prole-


APPENDIX 919


tarians. Finally, the more productive capital grows,
the more it is compelled to produce for a market whose
requirements it does not know,—the more supply tries
to force demand, and consequently crises increase in
frequency and in intensity. But every crisis in turn
hastens the concentration of capital, adds to the prole-
tariat. Thus, as productive capital grows, competition
among’ the. workers grows too, and grows in a far greater
proportion. The reward of labor is less for all, and
the burden of labor is increased for at least some of
them.

In 1829 there were, in Manchester, 1,088 cotton
spinners employed in 36 factories. In 1841 there were
but 448, and they tended 55,353 more spindles than the
1,088 spinners did in 1829. If manual labor had in-
creased in the same proportion as productive force, the
number of spinners ought to have risen to 1,848; im-
proved machinery had, therefore, deprived 1,100 workers
of employment.

We know beforehand the reply of the economists—
the people thus thrown out of work will find other kinds
of employment. Dr. Bowring did not fail to reproduce
this argument at the Congress of Economists. But
neither did he fail to refute himself. In 1833, Dr.
Bowring made a speech in the House of Commons upon
the 50,000 hand-loom weavers of London who have been
starving without being able to find that new kind of
employment which the Free Traders hold out to them
in the distance. I will give the most striking portion of
this speech of Mr. Bowring.

“The misery of the hand-loom weavers,” he says, “is
the inevitable fate of all kinds of labor which are easily
acquired, and which may, at any moment, be replaced
by less costly means, As in these cases competition


920) APPENDIX


amongst the workpeople is very great, the slightest
falling-off in demand brings on a crisis. The hand-loom
weavers are, in a certain sense, placed on the verge of
human existence. One step further, and that existence
becomes impossible. The slightest shock is sufficient to
throw them on the road to ruin. By more and more
superseding, manual labor, the progress of mechanical
science must result, during the period of transition, in
much temporary suffering. National well-being cannot
be bought except at the price of some individual evils.
The advance of industry is achieved at the expense of
those who lag behind, and of all discoveries that of the
power-loom weighs most heavily upon the hand-loom
weavers. In a great many articles formerly made by
hand, the weaver has been completely ousted; but he is
sure to be beaten in a good many more stuffs that are
now made by hand.”

Further on he says:—“I hold in my hand a corre-
spondence of the Governor-General with the East India
Company. This correspondence is concerning the
weavers of the Dacca district. The Governor says in
his letter:—A few years ago the East India Company
received from six to eight million pieces of calico woven
upon the looms of the country. The demand fell off
gradually and was reduced to about a million pieces. At
this moment it has almost entirely ceased. Moreover,
in 1800, North America received from India nearly
800,000 pieces of cotton goods. In 1830 it did not take
even 4,000. Finally, in 1800 a million of pieces were


shipped for Portugal; in 1830 Portugal did not receive ~~


above 20,000.

“The reports on the distress of the Indian weavers
are terrible. And what is the origin of that distress?
The presence on the market of English manufactures,


APPENDIX 994


the production of the same article by means of the power-
loom. A great number of the weavers died of starva-
tion; the remainder has gone over to other employment,
and chiefly to field labor. Not to be able to change
employment amounted to a sentence of death. And at
this moment the Dacca district is crammed with English
yarns and piece goods. The Dacca muslin, renowned
all over the world for its beauty and firm texture, has
also been eclipsed by the competition of English machin-
ery. In the whole history of commerce, it would, per-
haps, be difficult to find suffering equal to what these
whole classes in India had to submit to.”

Mr. Bowring’s speech is the more remarkable because
the facts quoted by him are correct, and the phrases
with which he seeks to palliate them are characterised
by the hypocrisy common to all Free Trade discourses.
He represents the workers as means of production which
must be superseded by less expensive means of produc-
tion, pretends to see in the labor of which he speaks
a wholly exceptional kind of labor, and in the machine
which has crushed out the weavers an equally excep-
tional kind of machine. He forgets that there is no
kind of manual labor which may not any day share the
fate of the hand-loom weavers.

“The constant aim and tendency of every improve-
ment of mechanism is indeed to do entirely without
the labor of men, or to reduce its price, by superseding
the labor of the adult males by that of women and chil-
dren, or the work of the skilled by that of the unskilled
workman. In most of the throstle mills, spinning is
now entirely done by girls of sixteen years and less.
The introduction of the self-acting mule has caused the
discharge of most of the (adult male) spinners, while
the children and young persons have been kept on.”


999 APPENDIX


The above words of the most enthusiastic of Free
Traders, Dr. Ure, are calculated to complete the con-
fessions of Dr. Bowring. Mr. Bowring speaks of cer-
tain individual evils, and, at the same time, says that
these individual evils destroy whole classes; he speaks
of the temporary sufferings during a transition period,
and does not deny that these temporary evils have im-
plied for the majority the transition from life to death,
and for the rest a transition from a better to a worse
condition. When he asserts, farther on, that the suffer-
ings of the working class are inseparable from the pro-
gress of industry, and are necessary to the prosperity
of the nation, he simply says that the prosperity of the
bourgeois class involves, as a necessary condition, the
suffering of the laboring class.

All the comfort which Mr. Bowring offers the workers
who perish, and, indeed, the whole doctrine of com-
pensation which the ‘Free Traders propound, amounts to
this,— ‘

You thousands of workers who are perishing, do not
despair! You can die with an easy conscience. Your
class will not perish. It will always be numerous enough
for the capitalist class to decimate it without fear of
annihilating it. Besides, how could capital be usefully
applied if it did not take care to keep up its exploitable
material, i.e., the working men, to be exploited over
and over again?

But, then, why propound as a problem still to be
solved the question: What influence will the adoption
of Free. Trade have upon the condition of the work-
ing class? All the laws formulated by the political
economists from Quesnay to Ricardo, have been based
upon the hypothesis that the trammels which still inter-
fere with commercial freedom have disappeared. These


APPENDIX 993


laws are confirmed in proportion as Free Trade is
adopted. The first of these laws is that competition
reduces the price of every commodity to the minimum
cost of production. Thus the minimum of wages is the
natural price of labor. And what is the minimum of
wages? Just so much as is required for production of
the articles absolutely necessary for the maintenance of
the worker, and for the continued existence more or less
poorly of his class.

But do not imagine that the worker receives only
this minimum wage, and still less that he always re-
ceives it. No, according to this law, the working class
will sometimes be more fortunate, will sometimes re-
ceive something above the minimum, but this surplus
will merely make up for the deficit which they will have
received below the minimum in times of industrial de-
pression. That is to say that within a given time which
recurs periodically in the cycle which commerce and ©
industry describe while passing through the successive
phases of prosperity, over-production, stagnation, and
crisis, when reckoning all that the working class has
had above and below mere necessaries, we shall see that,
after all, they have received neither more nor less than
the minimum, i.e., the working class will have maintained
itself as a class after enduring any amount of misery
and misfortune, and after leaving many corpses upon
the industrial battle-field. But what of that? The class
will still exist; nay, more, it will have increased.

But this is not all. The progress of industry creates
less and less expensive means of subsistence. Thus
spirits have taken the place of beer, cotton that of wool
and linen, and potatoes that of bread.

Thus, as means are constantly being found for the
maintenance of labor on cheaper and more wretched


294 APPENDIX


food, the minimum of wages is constantly sinking. If
these wages began by letting the man work to live, they
end by forcing him to live the life of a machine. His
existence has no other value than that of a simple pro-
ductive force, and the capitalist treats him accordingly.
This law of the commodity labor, of the minimum of
wages, will be confirmed in proportion as the supposition
of the economists, Free Trade, becomes an actual fact.
Thus, of two things one: either we must reject all po-
litical economy based upon the assumption of Free
Trade, or we must admit that under this same Free
Trade the whole severity of the economic laws will fall
upon the workers.

To sum up, what is Free Trade under the present
conditions of society? Freedom of Capital. When
you have torn down the few national barriers which
still restrict the free development of capital, you will
merely have given it complete freedom of action. So
long as the relation of wage-labor to capital is per-
mitted to exist, no matter how favorable the conditions
under which you accomplish the exchange of commo-
dities, there will always be a class which exploits and
a class which is exploited. It is really difficult to under-
stand the presumption of the Free Traders who imagine
that the more advantageous application of capital will
abolish the antagonism between industrial capitalists and
wage-workers. On the contrary. The only result will
be that the antagonism of these two classes will stand
out more clearly.

Let us assume for a moment that there are no more
Corn Laws or national and municipal import duties;
that in a word all the accidental circumstances which
to-day the workingman may look upon as a cause of
his miserable condition have vanished, and we shall have


APPENDIX 295


removed so many curtains that hide from his eyes his
real enemy.

He will see that capital released from all trammels
will make him no less a slave than capital trammelied -
by import duties.

Gentlemen! Do not be deluded by the abstract word
Liberty! Whose Liberty? Not the liberty of one in-
dividual in relation to another, but the liberty of Capital
to crush the worker.

Why should you desire farther to sanction unlimited
competition with this idea of freedom, when the idea of
freedom itself is only the product of a social condition
based upon Free Competition ?

We have shown what sort of fraternity Free Trade
begets between the different classes of one and the same
nation. The fraternity which Free Trade would estab-
lish between the nations of the earth would not be more
real; to call cosmopolitan exploitation universal brother-
hood is an idea that could only be engendered in the
brain of the bourgeoisie. Every one of the destructive
phenomena which unlimited competition gives rise to
within any one nation is reproduced in more gigantic
proportions in the market of the world. We need not
pause any longer upon ‘Free Trade sophisms on this
subject, which are worth just as much as the arguments
of our prize essayists, Messrs. Hope, Morse, and Greg.

For instance, we are told that Free Trade would
create an international division of labor, and thereby
give to each country those branches of production most
in harmony with its natural advantages.

You believe, perhaps, gentlemen, that the production
of coffee and sugar is the natural destiny of the West


Indies.
Two centuries ago, nature, which does not trouble


226 . APPENDIX


itself about commerce, had planted neither sugar-cane


nor coffee trees there. And it may be that in less than
half a century you will find there neither coffee nor


sugar, for the East Indies, by means of cheaper produc-
tion, have already successfully broken down this so-
called natural destiny of the West Indies.

And the West Indies, with their natural wealth, are
as heavy a burden for England as the weavers of Dacca,
who also were destined from the beginning of time to
weave by hand.

One other circumstance must not be forgotten, namely,
that, just as everything has become a monopoly, there
are also nowadays some branches of industry which
prevail over all others, and secure to the nations which
especially foster them the command of the world market.
Thus in the commerce of the world cotton alone has
much greater commercial importance than all the other
raw materials used in the manufacture of clothing. It
is indeed ridiculous for the Free Traders to refer to the
few specialities in each branch of industry, throwing
them into the scales against the products used in every-
day consumption, and produced most cheaply in those
countries in which manufacture is most highly developed.

If the Free Traders cannot understand how one nation
can grow rich at the expense of another, we need not
wonder, since these same gentlemen also refuse to under-
stand how in the same country one class can enrich itself
at the expense of another. 48

Do not imagine, gentlemen, that in criticising freedom
of commerce we have the least intention of defending
Protection.

One may be opposed to constitutionalism without be-
ing in favor of absolutism.


Moreover, the Protective system is nothing but a


APPENDIX 927


means of establishing manufacture upon a large scale
in any given country, that is to say, of making it de-
pendent upon the market of the world; and from the
moment that dependence upon the market of the world
is established, there is more or less dependence upon
Free Trade too. Besides this, the Protective system
helps to develop free competition within a nation. Hence
we see that in countries where the bourgeoisie is be-
ginning to make itself felt as a class, in Germany for
example, it makes great efforts to obtain Protective
duties. They serve the bourgeoisie as weapons against
feudalism and absolute monarchy, as a means for the
concentration of its own powers for the realisation of
Free Trade within the country.

But generally speaking, the Free Trade system is
destructive. It breaks up old nationalities and carries
the antagonism between proletariat and bourgeoisie to
the uttermost point. In a word, the system of com-
mercial freedom hastens the Social Revolution. In this
revolutionary sense alone, gentlemen, I am in favor of
Free Trade.


THE END.


ees Bs


ate


