Modern Spiritualism (John Nevil Maskelyne, 1876)
================================================
John Nevil Maskelyne — The great magician's exposure of fraudulent mediums — the stage debunker's landmark. Public domain. Scan via Internet Archive (1876MaskelyneModernSpiritualism) — 1876 first edition.

MODERN  SPIRITUALISM. 

A SHORT  ACCOUNT  OF  ITS  RISE 
AND  PROGRESS,  WITH  SOME  EXPOSURES 
OF  SO-CALLED  SPIRIT  MEDIA 

BY 

JOHN  NEVIL  MASKELYNE, 

ILLUSIONIST  AND  ANTI  SPIRITUALIST. 

LONDON  s 

FOR  THE  AUTHOR  BY 

FREDERICK  WARNE  AND  CO., 

BEDFORD  STREET,  STRAND. 

AVw  York • SCRIBNER,  IVELFORD,  ANN  ARMSTRONG. 

Digitized  by  K*  oogle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

CAMDEN  PRESS,  LONDON,  N.W. 

Digitized  by  GoO^lc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Frederick  Warne  & Co.,  Publishers, 

WARNE’S  COMPANION  LIBRARY, \ 

io  Shilling  Volumes.  In 

By  MRS. 

’ SORGE  GEITH. 
he  Rich  Husband. 

lAXWELL  DREWITT. 

\ar  above  Rubies. 

‘ Life’s  Assize. 

. T ORLD  IN  THE  CHURCH. 

Justin  Friars. 

By  FLORENCE 

' fAD  DUMARESQ. 

•o  Intentions. 
x>ve’s  Conflict. 

/OMAN  AGAINST  WOMAN. 
JERALD  Estcourt. 

Too  Good  for  Him. 

arge  foolscap  8vo,  picture  boards* 

RIDDELL. 

City  and  Suburb. 

Phemie  Keller. 

Home,  Sweet  Home. 

Joy  after  Sorrow. 

The  Earl’s  Promise. 

Frank  Sinclair’s  Wife. 
Mortomley’s  Estate. 

MARRYAT. 

Petronel. 

Nelly  Brooke. 

Veronique. 

Her  Lord  and  Master. 
Prey  of  the  Gods. 

The  Girls  of  Favf.rsham. 

By  MISS  GRANT. 

Artiste.  | Victor  Lescar.  | Bright  Morning, 

By  SIDNEY  S.  HARRIS. 

The  Sutherlands.  I Christine. 

•'.utledge.  | The  Two  Cousins. 

ie  Season  Ticket.  By  Sam  Slick. 

.e  Mummy.  By  Mrs.  Loudon. 

...e  Life  Guardsman.  By  Col.  H.  M.  Walmsley. 

Chasseur  d’Afrique.  By  Col.  H.  M.  Walmsley. 
mksome  Dene : A Sea  Tale.  By  Col.  H.  M.  Walmsley. 
;?d  Lynn’s  Wife. 

’vester  Sound,  the  Somnambulist. 

5 Love  Match.  By  Henry  Cockton. 

1 !.e  Saucy  Arethusa.  By  Captain  Chamier,  R.N. 

•"alter  Goring.  By  Annie  Thomas. 

« . Guard.  By  Annie  Thomas. 

i.ant  Prue’s  Railway  Journey.  By  Mrs.  Gascoigne. 

Two-and-Sixpenny  Volume. 
-or  Ever  and  Ever.  By  Florence  Marryat. 

Bedford  Street,  Strand, 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Frederick  Warne  & Co.,  Publishers, 

THE  CH ANDOS  CLASSICS. 

A Series  of  Standard  Works  in  Poetry,  Biography,  &c. 

In  large  crown  8vo,  price  is.  6d.  each,  stiff  wrapper;  or  cloth  gilt,  2 s. 

Shakspeare,  Complete.  In- 
cluding Life,  Glossary,  &c. 

Longfellow's  Poetical 

Works.  Including  Original  Poems. 

Byron’s  Poetical  Works. 

With  Explanatory  Notes. 

Scott’s  Poetical  Works. 
With  Notes. 

Arabian  Nights  (The)  Enter- 
tainments. New  Edition. 

Eliza  Cook’s  Poems.  Com- 
plete Edition. 

Legendary  Ballads  of  Eng- 
land and  Scotland. 

Burns’  Poetical  Works. 
With  Memoir,  &c. 

Johnson’s  Lives  of  the  Poets. 

Dante : Vision.  Translated  by 
Caky. 

Moors’s  Poetical  Works. 

With  Explanatory  Notes,  &c. 

Dr.  Syntax’s  Three  Tours. 

With  Coloured  Portrait. 

Butler’s  Hudibras.  With 
Notes  by  Zachary  Grey. 
Cowper’s  Poetical  Works. 

Complete  Edition. 

Milton’s  Poetical  Works. 

With  Memoir,  &c. 

Wordsworth’s  Poetical 

Works. 

Twice-told  Tales.  By  Na- 
thaniel Hawthorne. 

Hallam’s  Constitutional  His- 
tory  of  England,  Edward  I.  to 
Henry  VII.  ; and  De  Lolme’s 
Constitution  of  England. 

History  of  the  Saracens.  By 
Gibbon  and  O*.  kley. 

Lockhart’s  Spanish  Ballads 
(Historical  and  Romantic),  and 
Southey's  Romance  of  the  Cid. 

Robinson  Crusoe.  Una- 
bridged. Woodcuts  by  Griset. 

Swiss  Family  Robinson.  In- 
cluding Sequel.  With  Illustrations. 

Mrs.  Hemans’  Poetical 

Works.  With  Memoir,  &c. 
Grimm’s  Fairy  Tales. 
Andersen’s  (Hans)  Fairy 

Tales. 

Scott’s  Lives  of  Eminent 

Novelists  and  Dramatists. 

Scott’s  Essays  on  Chivalry, 

Romance,  and  the  Drama. 

Shelley’s  Poetical  Works. 
Campbell’s  Poetical  Works. 
Keats’  Poetical  Works. 
Coleridge’s  Poetical  Works. 

Pope’s  Iliad.  With  Flax- 
man’s  Illustrations. 

Pope’s  Odyssey.  With  Flax- 

man’s  Illustrations. 

Hood’s  Poetical  Works. 
With  Life,  &c. 

Representative  Actors.  By 
W.  Clark  Russell. 

England.  (Romance  of  His- 
tory.) By  Hrnry  Neale.  Illus- 
trations by  T.  Landseer. 

France.  (Romance  of  History.) 
By  Leitch  Ritchie.  Illustrations 
by  T.  Landseer. 

Italy.  (Romance  of  History.) 
By  C.  Macfarlane.  Illustrations 
by  T.  Landseer. 

Spain.  (Romance  of  History.) 
By  Don  T.  de  Trueba.  Illustrations 
by  J.  K.  Meadows. 

India.  (Romance  of  History.) 

By  Rev.  Hobart  Caunter,  B.D. 
German  Literature,  as  ex- 
emplified by  the  Works  of  Tieck, 
Richter,  Pichter,  and  Zschokke 

Don  Quixote,  The  Life  and 
Adventures  of.  By  Cervantes. 

Bedford  Street,  Strand. 

d by  Google 
' o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlf  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

u_ 

Z 5 O 5 1 « 

DEC  -1  IS2I 

D L < 

■TA  3 7 

37 

PREFACE. 

♦ 

MUST  claim  the  indulgence  of  the  Public  in 
thus  venturing  before  them  in  a new  character ; 
but  as  I feel  that  great  interest  is  taken  in  the 
question  of  “ Spiritualism,”  I need  offer  no  apology  for 
the  following  pages. 

In  writing  this  I have  no  intention  of  hurting  the  feel- 
ings of  the  many  amiable  persons  possessing  this  peculiar 
faith ; but  I shall  not  hesitate  to  ridicule  the — to  ordinary 
minds — absurd  doctrines  inculcated  by  their  leaders,  or  to 
lay  bare  the  miserable  deceptions  of  the  mediumistic  craft. 

I am  convinced  that  many  adherents  of  this  so-called 
religion  are  “ impressed  ” with  the  truth  of  the  doctrines 
on  very  unsatisfactory  grounds,  that  they  are  frequently  in 
ignorance  of  its  origin,  and  almost  always  of  the  goal  to 
which  it  is  tending.  In  this  belief  I have  drawn  facts  from 
many  sources  (in  all  cases  giving  my  authorities),  to  form 
a short  account  of  the  rise  and  progress  of  this  “ New 
Gospel;”  of  the  wide  divergence  of  opinion  amongst  “the 
faithful  ” as  to  what  may  or  may  not  be  accepted ; of  the 
credulity  of  its  most  distinguished  followers ; of  the  lives 
of  its  best-known  leaders ; and  the  exposures  of  many  of 
its  accredited  agents,  in  which  latter  branch  I may  perhaps 

by  CjOOQiC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

VI 

Preface. 

be  allowed  to  speak  with  some  authority,  having  succeeded 
in  dethroning  several  of  the  genus  " medium.” 

I have  no  desire  to  enter  the  lists  with  the  scientific  in- 
vestigators of  this  greatest  of  modern  delusions,  and  shall, 
therefore,  steer  as  clear  as  possible  of  the  isms,—  merely 
mentioning  such  rocks  ahead  as  “ Psychic”  or  “Odic” 
Force,  “ Unconscious  Cerebration,”  or  other  of  the  theories 
to  account  for  u manifestations  ” which  I hold  to  be  alto- 
gether mundane  in  their  origin,  and  mainly  attributable  to 
gross  and  harmful  trickery  and  fraud. 

The  size  of  this  little  work  precludes  the  idea  of  my 
treating  the  subject  as  a whole ; I have,  therefore,  confined 
myself  to  a short  History  of  the  movement,  and  to  a recital 
of  the  Exposures  that  have  from  time  to  time  been  made 
public. 

It  is  my  intention  to  produce  a book — in  continuation 
of  this  subject — which  shall  thoroughly  expose  and  explain 
the  tricks  and  modus  operandi  of  the  media,  the  Indian 
Fakirs  (of  whom  Spiritualists  talk  so  much),  and  other 
spirit  jugglers. 

Those  who  would  go  more  deeply  into  the  matter  treated 
of  in  these  pages  than  I have  the  time  to  write  or  the  pub- 
lic the  patience  to  read,  may  easily  find  plenty  of  Spirit- 
ualistic literature.  They  will  certainly  require  nerve  to  go 
into  it,  and  a strong  brain  to  come  out  unscathed : for  the 
public  I trust  this  book  may  suffice  to  give  an  idea  of  the 
source  and  course  of  this  “ Pantheon  of  Progress,”  when, 
if  they  draw  a little — just  a little — moral  at  the  conclusion 
I shall  have  gained  my  end. 

Egyptian  Hall,  Piccadilly, 
London. 

>y  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

CONTENTS. 

Tbe  old,  old  Love  ... 

CHAPTER  I. 

Ml  •••  Ml  ••• 

III 

1! 

•ft 

Pag* 

z 

The  Shakers’  Lesson  ... 

CHAPTER  II. 

• ••  ■ •••  in 

• •• 

IN 

••• 

12 

The  Rochester  Knockings 

CHAPTER  III. 

•••  •••  ill 

HI 

III 

see 

*9 

The  Mystic  Sensitive  ... 

CHAPTER  IV. 

• ••  •••  Ml  IM 

• •• 

••• 

see 

3* 

CHAPTER  V. 

**  Daniel  ” in  the  Lyon’s  Den 

• •• 

• •• 

••• 

* 

5° 

The  Juggling  Gemini 

CHAPTER  VL 

■ sss  set  in 

••• 

*N 

•N 

53 

Our  Spirit  Guides  ... 

CHAPTER  VII. 

• ••  Ml  Ml  III 

III 

III 

III 

70 

The  Mediumistic  Craft... 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

tea  •••  mi  in 

• •• 

••• 

••• 

8o 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media 

CHAPTER  IX. 

• •i  •••  •••  Ml 

SIS 

••I 

III 

97 

A Few  Exposures  ... 

CHAPTER  X. 

•••  «ee  mi  ill 

sea 

• at 

x*5 

* 

lOOQlC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Vlll 

Contents. 

••  Ml  Ml  •••  III 

Ml  •••  •••  •••  •••  ill  ir 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Poor  “John  King  l”  

CHAPTER  XII. 

*'  Sweet  Katey  King  1 " 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Odds  and  Ends 

CHAPTER  XIV. 
“The  Pantheon  of  Progress 

III  Ml  III  Ml  Ml  Ml 

Digitized  by  GoOglc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Paze 

132 

Mi 

154 

178 

CHAPTER  I. 

THE  OLD,  OLD  LOVE. 

Spiritualism— Light  Stances  in  the  Dark  Ages — Old-fashioned  Spirits— The 
Cock  Lane  Ghost — The  Shaker  Craze— New  Ghosts  for  Old  Ones— 
Science  and  the  **  Pantheon" — Spiritualism  v.  the  Bible. 

PIRITUALISM,  in  one  form  or  other,  has  ever 
plagued  the  world  : it  is  “ as  old  as  the  hills,” 
and  likely  to  last  as  long — being  a natural  product  of 
weak  minds  ; and,  whether  it  speaks  through  the  Delphic 
Oracle  or  a gin-drinking  “ medium,”  it  is  ever  the  same 
in  its  debasing  effects  upon  the  intellect. 

In  Britain  we  had  a Spiritualism  with  the  priesthood  of 
the.  Druids,  who  held  their  mystic  rites  ( stances ) “ within 
the  circle  of  the  nuini  gwnyiott  (white  stones),”  and  we 
have  had  it  ever  since.  Every  variety  of  convulsive  and 
cataleptic  phenomena  has  been  ascribed  to  it ; every  old 
house,  with  rats  scampering  behind  its  crumbling  wains- 
cots, has  been  haunted  by  the  spirits  of  the  departed ; 
and  ghostly  forms  have  been  conjured  from  the  mists  of 
evening,  the  spray  of  the  waterfall,  or,  mayhap,  the  outline 
of  some  wandering  “Jerusalem”  earning  his  sparse  meal 
upon  the  mountain-side.  There  is  nothing  in  nature  that 
has  not  beeh  turned  to  account  by  lovers  of  the  marvellous, 

1 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

by  superstition,  or— most  potent  cause— ignorance.  Wo 
have  had  “ sheeted  ghosts  ” ad  nauseam : Stockwell  re- 
joiced in  its  plate -smashing  sprite,  and  Tedvvell  in  its 
demon  drummer ; — both  the  latter  made  some  noise  in  the 
world,  and  all  had  believers  in  their  day. 

The  Cock  Lane  ghost — a foreshadowing  of  some  modem 
“physical  manifestations ” — was,  for  a time , a successful 
piece  of  trickery,  even  “ taking  in  ” the  great  lexicographer, 
Dr.  Johnson,  himself. 

I must  here  diverge  somewhat  to  give  a sketch  of  this 
remarkable  imposition  for  the  benefit  of  the  few  unac- 
quainted with  its  history. 

Cock  Lane — so  called  from  the  sign  of  the  corner  public 
house — was  a narrow  street  running  from  Snow  Hill  to 
Smithfield.  A man  named  Parsons  lived  here  in  1754, 
and  had,  as  lodgers,  a Mr.  and  Mrs.  Kempe.  The  latter 
dying,  Parsons’  daughter,  aged  eleven,  whilst  “ possessed 
with  the  spirit”  (which  answered  questions  by  “ scratchings” 
or  knocks—  only  heard  when  the  girl  medium  was  in  bed) 
averred  that  the  deceased  lady  had  died  from  the  effects 
of  poison  administered  by  her  husband.  A post  7nortem 
examination  establishing  the  fact  that  Mrs.  Kempe  had 
died  from  natural  causes,  the  “ medium  ” and  her  accom- 
plices were  brought  to  trial  before  Lord  Mansfield  at  the 
Guildhall,  July  10th,  1756,  when  it  was  proved  that  the 
rapping  sounds  had  been  produced  by  a small  piece  of  wood 
“ used  to  stand  the  kettle  on,”  which  the  sweetly  innocent 
little  treasure  kept  concealed  within  her  stays.  Being 
too  young  to  be  quite  hardened,  the  precocious  criminal 
confessed  the  fraud,  adding  that  she  had  been  instigated 
thereto  by  her  father  and  mother.  The  sentence  of  the 
Court  was  that  Parsons  (who,  it  seems,  owed  money  to 
Kempe,  and  had  hit  upon  this  new  way  to  pay  old  debts) 
be  imprisoned  for  two  years,  and  stand  three  times  in  the 

1 by  Goosle 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  old , old  Love . 

3 

pillory ; his  wife  one  year ; and  the  dear  little  medium  six 
months  in  Bridewell. 

The  Spiritualists  of  our  day  accept  the  kettle-stand  taps 
as  of  spirit  origin ; indeed,  it  is  difficult  to  find  a ghost 
story  in  Mrs.  Crowe’s  “Night  Side  of  Nature”  which  does 
not  add  confirmation  to  those  superstitious  people  who 
“swallow”  Mr.  Home’s  marvellous  stories,  and  believe  in 
intelligent  communications  from  the  parlour  furniture. 
Now — 

“ White-sheeted  ghosts  have  grown  mere  fables ; 

Instead  of  groaning,  ghosts  rap  tables. 

The  grisly  ghosts  of  old  have  vanished  ; 

The  ancient  bogies  all  are  banished. 

How  much  more  creditable  and  pleasant 
Than  the  old  spirits  are  the  present,” 

says  Mr.  Punch,  satirically.  And  surely  there  is  a great 
falling  off  even  in  our  superstitions  1 

“The  intelligible  forms  of  ancient  poets. 

The  fair  humanities  of  old  religion. 

The  power,  the  beauty,  and  the  majesty 
That  had  their  haunts  in  dale,  or  piny  mountain. 

Or  forest,  or  slow  stream,  or  pebbly  spring. 

Or  chasms,  or  watery  depths, — all  these  have  vanished : 

They  live  no  longer  in  the  faith  of  reason.” 

The  spirit  that  has  moved  the  Quaker  with  “ tremblings 
and  twitchings”  when  the  word  of  the  Lord  came  to  him 
has  impelled  the  Shaker  to  dance,  and,  so  they  say, 
“impressed”  the  medium  to  tell  lies.*  The  Quakers  have 
become  a very  quiet  sect  now ; and  the  Shakers  make 
little  noise  in  the  world,  save  when,  poor  creatures  ! they 
are  turned  out  of  house  and  home ; but  the  Spiritual- 

• Mr.  H.  D.  Jencken,  a Spiritualist  (husband  to  Kate  Fox),  considers  that 
the  great  majority  of  spirit  messages  are  “objectless  lies.” 

1 — 2 

iOOQiC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

4 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

ists  are  with  us  in  full  blast,  with  their  peculiar  faith,  their 
strange  “phenomena,”  and,  stranger  than  all,  their  hybrid 
mediums,  who  act  as  a kind  of  a buffer  between  this  and 
the  next  world.  And  what  varied  beliefs  does  this  Spirit- 
ualism embrace ! We  have  no  two  ideas  alike  as  to  me- 
diums, the  spirits,  or  the  spirit  world  ; and  even  the  sect, 
if  we  can  call  it  one,  is  doubtful  of  the  “ manifestations  ” 
among  its  own  people.  A committee  of  Spiritualists  meet- 
ing at  Cleveland,  in  1867,  reported  that  “What  at  present 
passes  for  spirit  communion  among  the  people  is  a mixed, 
and,  for  the  most  part,  unanalysed  mass,  rendering  the 
identity  of  spirit  presence  very  uncertain.  . . . Many, 

if  not  ally  of  the  disorderly  manifestations  your  committee 
deem  wholly  unspiritual,  having  their  origin  in  half-con- 
trolled diseased  nerves,  poor  digestion,  torpid  liver,  and 
general  discord  of  mind  and  body.” 

Was  it  “ poor  digestion  and  a torpid  liver  ” that  gave 
to  Judge  Edmonds  his  visions  of  the  spheres  with  their 
strange  spirits  in  the  shape  of  monkeys,  &c.  ? or  does  the 
“general  discord  of  mind  and  body”  cause  Dr.  Adin 
Ballou,  one  of  the  oldest  and  most  distinguished  Spiritual- 
ists in  America,  to  affirm  that  intelligent  answers  can  be 
received  from  the  spirits  of  birds,  beasts,  and  stones  ? 

The  few  fanatics  who  would  graft  the  “ spirits  ” — and 
such  spirits,  too  !— upon,  or  put  them  in  place  of,  our 
simple  faith,  have  made  vigorous  efforts  to  force  upon  the 
nineteenth  century  the  stupid  rapping  delusion  as  a reality. 
Their  “spirit  guides,”  who  lead  to  nothing  good,  their 
“controls,”  who  require  restraint,  their  miracles  and  their 
“gush,”  are  all  alike  foreign  to  our  English  ideas.  But, 
say  you,  there  are  Spiritualists  here  ! Ay  ; a drop  in  an 
ocean  ! The  people  have  jiever  been  touched.  The  noxious 
weed  which  sprang  up  in  America  some  thirty  years  back, 
and  quickly  overran  that  continent,  though  transplanted 

j by  GoOQk 
o 

OriqinalTrom 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  old ’ old  Love. 

5 

to  our  “ tight  little  island,”  has  never  enjoyed  the  same 
lusty  life  as  in  its  native  soil.  Doubtless,  like  all  “ spirits” 
in  the  past,  the  modern  bogies  will  be  laid  ere  long  ; and 
signs  are  not  wanting  that  before  another  generation  has 
passed  away,  not  even  the  ghost  of  a follower  of  this  modern 
form  of  the  Spiritualistic  craze  will  be  discovered  above- 
ground. 

As  I have  said,  it  was  reserved  for  Young  America  to 
perfect  this  latest  phase  of  an  old,  old  story.  The  affliction 
is  a direct  outcome  of  the  teachings  of  that  “prince  of 
mystics,”  Emanuel  Swedenborg,  acting  upon  the  im- 
pressionable minds  of  the  Shakers  of  New  Lebanon  and 
Watervliet,  N.Y.  As  if  to  prove  that  dullness  has  its 
ecstatics  as  well  as  genius,  in  the  year  1843  these  victims 
to  the  u new  dispensation  ” “ became  the  subjects  of  strange 
psychological  experiences,  during  which  certain  of  the 
members  would  lose  all  personal  consciousness,  while  in- 
fluences, purporting  to  be  the  spirits  of  persons  of  different 
nations,  and  who  had  lived  in  the  world  in  different  ages, 
took  possession  of  their  bodies,  and  spoke  through  their 
vocal  organs.”  * 

Our  sharper  American  cousins  soon  afterwards  turned 
all  this  to  account,  and  have  since  manufactured  profes- 
sional media  by  the  score,  who  have  run  the  gipsies  out  of 
the  field,  predicting  the  future  with  equal  truth  (also  “fora 
consideration”),  and  having  the  advantage  of  not  being 
locked  up  for  their  nefarious  practices. 

Table-tilting,  spirit-rapping,  movements  of  the  furniture, 
musical  (!)  performances,  living  persons  “levited” — trans- 
ported through  the  air — spirit  writing,  spirit  faces,  spirit 
lights,  “ materialized  ” hands,  arms,  and  whole  bodies,  are 
amongst  the  tricks  of  the  modern  mediumistic  trade  ; and 

• “New  American  Cyclopaedia.”  New  York,  1863. 

Digitized  by  CjOOqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

6 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

so  far  the  fraudulent  media  have  escaped  punishment — if 
not  the  frauds  detection — save  in  the  photographic  inci- 
dent* at  Paris. 

Mesmerism,  too,  which  in  its  “ higher  phenomena  ” has 
been  rejected  by  the  ablest  scientific  men,  crops  up  again 
in  the  guise  of  Spiritualism,  the  ecstasis  of  to-day  is  the 
clairvoyance  of  yesterday,  the  only  difference  observable 
being  that  the  Spiritualistic  quackery  is  the  more  culpable 
of  the  two.  Happily,  I think,  for  us,  science  has  demolished 
the  entire  superstructure  of  the  “ Pantheon,”  leaving  in  the 
universal  wreck  the  table-turning  phenomena  + as  attri- 
butable to  a natural  cause,  some  “ animal  magnetism,”  and 
such  phenomena  as  come  under  the  general  head  of  nervous 
diseases. 

Faraday — the  “great  master  of  experimental  philoso- 
phy”— disposed  of  the  supernatural  origin  of  table-turning 
by  the  construction  of  a simple  machine,  which  recorded 
the  muscular  movement  of  the  persons  forming  the  circle, 
and  of  which  they  were  possibly  unconscious. 

Dr.  Laycock’s  “Reflex  Action  of  the  Brain”— the  fore- 
shadowing of  Sir  William  Hamilton’s  “ Latent  Thought  ” — 
and  Dr.  Carpenter’s  “ Ideo-motor  Principle,”  all  pointed  to 
what  Faraday  proved.  Thus,  in  “unconscious  cerebration,” 
we  have  an  easy  solution  of  table-tilting,  planchette,  and 
similar  phenomena,  which  have  puzzled  so  many  minds. 
Dr.  Carpenter,  lecturing  at  the  Royal  Institution,  March 
1 2th,  1852,  said,  “This  ideo-motor  principle  finds  its  ap- 
propriate place  in  the  physiological  system,  which  would 
indeed  be  incomplete  without  it.  And,  when  it  is  once 
recognized,  it  may  be  applied  to  the  explanation  of  nume- 

• See  '*  Spirit  Photos,”  Chapter  X. 

t Rapping,  table-turning,  &c.,  are  declared  by  Spiritualists  to  be  "only 
the  fringe  of  the  subject.” 

Google 

* 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  old,  old  Love. 

7 

rous  phenomena  which  have  been  a source  of  perplexity  to 
many  who  have  been  convinced  of  their  genuineness,  and 
who  could  not  see  any  mode  of  reconciling  them  with  the 
known  laws  of  nervous  action.  These  phenomena  have 
been  clearly  proved  to  depend  upon  the  state  of  expectant 
attention  on  the  part  of  the  performer  ; his  will  being  tem- 
porarily withdrawn  from  the  control  of  his  muscles  by  the 
state  of  abstraction  to  which  his  mind  is  given  up,  and  the 
anticipation  of  a given  result  being  the  stimulus  which 
directly  and  involuntarily  prompts  the  muscular  move- 
ments that  produce  it.” 

Another  “scientist” — Von  Reichenbach  — has  disco- 
vered in  nature  an  Odic  Force,  or  “nervous  influence,”  to 
which  he  ascribes  many  of  the  phenomena  of  Spiritualism; 
but  I am  inclined  to  believe  with  Mr.  Punch  that  they  are 
mainly  attributable  to  “ That  oldest  of  Od  Force — folly!” 
Dr.  Ashburner,  in  his  translation  of  “ Reichenbach’s  Re- 
searches,” says : “ There  are  organs  of  the  brain  which, 
when  over-stimulated,  leave  the  individual  a victim  of 
ecstacy.  The  imagination,  said  to  be  a mental  faculty, 
but  in  reality  the  result  of  a combination  of  the  actions  of 
several  organs,  if  indulged  in  without  regulation  and  very 
strict  control  by  the  intellectual  powers,  may  lead  to  an 
ecstacy  as  incompatible  with  rational  conviction  as  the 
open-mouthed  fatuous  wonderment  of  the  idiot  is  with  the 
higher,  calm  reasoning  power  of  the  philosopher.” 

There  is  also  the  “ Psychic  Force”  theory,  broached  by 
Serjeant  Cox  (much  after  Reichenbach’s  Od  pattern), 
whereby  “ the  medium,  or  the  people  associated  together 
as  a whole,  is  supposed  to  possess  a force,  power,  influence, 
virtue,  or  gift,  by  means  of  which  intelligent  beings  are 
enabled  to  produce  the  phenomena  observed.”* 

• Before  quilling  the  scientific  theories,  I sh.ukl  mention  Mr  Homo's 

iqitized 

Origina^from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

8 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

Other  scientific  men  have  spoken  out  upon  this  ques- 
tion, some  without  propounding  any  theory  to  the  elucida- 
tion of  the  impositions  generally  practised  in  the  name  of 
the  spirits.  Of  these  I may  name  Professors  Tyndall  and 
Huxley.  The  former  denounces  the  belief  as  “ degrading,” 
and  only  acceptable  to  weak  minds ; the  latter,  in  reply  to 
a letter  from  the  Dialectical  Society  requesting  his  co- 
operation in  the  investigation  of  the  phenomena  of  Spirit- 
ualism, writes,  under  date  January  29th,  1869:  “The  only 
case  of  Spiritualism  I have  had  the  opportunity  of  exam- 
ining into  for  myself  was  as  gross  an  imposture  as  ever 
came  under  my  notice.  . . . The  only  good  that  I can 
see  in  a demonstration  of  the  truth  of  ‘ Spiritualism ’ is  to 
furnish  an  additional  argument  against  suicide.  Better 
live  a crossing  sweeper  than  die  and  be  made  to  talk 
twaddle  by  a ‘ medium  ’ hired  at  a guinea  a stance .” 

Dr.  Carpenter,  author  of  an  article  in  the  “ Quarterly 
Review ” on  “Spiritualism  and  its  recent  Converts,”  (Oc- 
tober, 1871),  says:  “We  were  requested  to  join  a com- 
mittee for  investigating  the  supposed  1 occult 1 powers 
possessed  by  the  Davenport  Brothers.  Being  informed 
that  the  members  of  the  committee  would  be  required, 
like  ordinary  attendants  at  the  Brothers’  performance,  to 
join  hands  in  a ‘ circle,’  and  that  the  essential  part  of  the 
performances  themselves  took  place  either  within  a cup- 
board into  which  no  one  was  permitted  to  look,  or  in  a 
dark  room,  we  replied  that  we  did  not  consider  these  per- 
formances to  be  proper  subjects  of  scientific  inquiry,  for 
that  no  scientific  man  could  consent  to  forego  the  use  of 

story  of  the  old  woman  in  America  who,  being  asked  if  she  could  account  for 
what  she  had  seen  accomplished  by  the  medium  at  a stance,  replied,  “ Lor, 
sirs ! it 's  easy  enough : they  only  rubs  theirselves  all  over  with  a gold  pencil 
case  1 - 

\ 

C 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  old , old  Love,  9 

his  eyes  and  his  hands,  the  most  valuable  of  all  his  instru- 
ments for  the  investigation  of  objective  truth.” 

It  comes  to  this : the  tricks  of  modem  Spiritualism  as 
little  stand  investigation  as  they  do  the  light  of  day.  Its 
table-turning  is  turned  from  a supernatural  to  a natural 
cause ; its  trance- speaking  is  a sham ; its  rapping  tables 
have  not  a leg  left  to  stand  upon ; and  to  write  the  rapped- 
out  rubbish  as  spirit  communications  is  as  false  as  the 
assertion  that  those  aerial  beings  “revisit  the  glimpses  of 
the  moon  ” for  the  profit  of  disreputable  “ media.” 

But  though  science  has  done  much  to  upset  the  Spiritual 
theory,  we  have  not  only  the  Spiritualists  proper  still  cling- 
ing to  it,  but  others  who  see  in  the  manifestations  only  the 
work  of  the  Father  of  Lies.  In  so  doing,  they  give  his 
Satanic  Majesty  much  less  credit  for  nous  than  he  usually 
receives.  Several  clerical  gentlemen  have  discovered  that 
table-rapping  is  due  to  the  influence  of  the  Evil  One : I 
may  give  an  instance  : — 

COMMUNICATION  RECEIVED  BY  RAPS. 

“ Are  we  justified  by  works  ? ” — “ Yes.” 

“ By  faith  alone  ?” — “ No.” 

54  Is  the  whole  Bible  true  ?”■ — “ No.” 

“Were  the  miracles  of  the  New  Testament  wrought  by 
supernatural  power?” — “ No.” 

“ By  some  hidden  law  of  nature  ?” — “ Yes.” 

* * =»  # 

* 

“ Is  it  right  to  pray  to  the  Virgin  ?” — “ Yes.” 

“Is  Christ  God?”— “No.” 

“ Is  He  a man  ?” — “ No.” 

“Is  He  something  between  God  and  man— a sort  of 
angel?”— “Yes.” 

itized  by  GoOQle 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

10 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

“Is  lie  in  heaven?” — “No.” 

“ Where  is  He  ?” — It  spelt  slowly,  “ H,  E,  L,  L.”  * 

Diablerie  / will  none  of! 

If  all  the  conflicting  theories  of  Spiritualism  itself  were 
to  be  gathered  together,  each  individual  of  that  precious 
sect  would  be  bewildered,  and  feel  like  Artemus  Ward, 
who  would  “ give  five  dollars  to  anybody  that  would  tell 
him  who  he  was  and  whar  he  was  goin’ ! ” Mr.  William 
Howitt  declares  that  its  true  mission  is  “to  recall  to  the 
knowledge  and  restore  to  the  consciousness  of  mankind 
the  Christian  faith,  with  all  its  divine  and  supernatural 
power,”  whilst  the  New  Gospel  itself  was  established  by 
that  “ Seer  of  Poughkeepsie  ” who  publicly  scoffed  at  the 
Bible.  The  later  apostles  of  Spiritualism,  including  Mr. 
Morse,  I.O.G.T.,  have  either  a decided  objection  to  the 
Divine  Book,  or  accept  it  with  a struggle,  because— as 
they  say— it  teaches  Spiritualism.  At  the  first  confer- 
ence of  the  National  Association  of  Spiritualists,  held  at 
Liverpool,  August,  1873,  Mr.  J.  Chapman,  the  Secretary, 
averred  that  “once  he  considered  the  Spiritual  manifes- 
tations in  the  Bible  to  be  ignorantly  devised  fables; 
but  Spiritualism  had  since  made  him  accept  them  as 
truth,  and  caused  him  to  swallow  not  only  Jonah,  but 
the  whale  as  well.”+  A Mr.  Meredith  was  of  opinion 
that  if  all  the  Spiritualism  were  to  be  taken  out  of  the  Bible, 
nothing  would  be  left  but  the  cover;  and  Mr.  Morse,  who 
as  a medium  reflects  a brighter  intellect  than  that  of  earth, 
desired  his  hearers  to  understand  that  “ if  the  teachings  of 
Spiritualism  are  in  harmony  with  those  of  the  Bible,  well 
and  good ; if  not,  let  them  try  to  harmonize  what  teachings 

• “ Table-Turning. ” A Lecture  by  the  Rev.  R.  W.  Dibdln,  M.A.  London, 
*853. 

t The  “Spiritualist”  Newspaper,  August  15th,  1.^73. 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  old , old  Love, 

ii 

were  useful  and  just,  and  put  aside  the  rest.”  So  that  the 
Bible  holds  a very  secondary  position  with  these  gentle- 
men, two  of  whom,  at  least,  may  fairly  be  claimed  as  re- 
presentative men.  Surely,  Mr.  Howitt,  you  must  see  that 
this  is  substituting  something  for  Christianity,  instead 
of  “restoring  it  to  the  consciousness  of  mankind  ” ! With 
the  majority  of  your  brethren  the  Bible  is  classed  with 
works  on  demonology,  witchcraft,  animal  magnetism,  &c., 
&c.,  which  all  contain,  to  them,  some  corroboration  of  the 
truth  of  Spiritualism.  Mr.  Bums,  Editor  of  the  “ Medium,” 
declares,  in  that  Spiritualistic  sheet,  which  I shall  have 
again  and  again  to  refer  to,  “ an  absolutely  perfect  medium, 
and,  we  may  add,  a successful  truth-seeker,  should  be  free 
from  beliefs  of  all  kinds.  . . . Spiritualism  comes  to 

supplant  all  this  nonsense  with  knowledge,  or,  in  the 
absence  of  that,  honest,  healthy  ignorance,  which  is  indeed 
a condition  of  the  appetite  for  truth  ” ! * 

I may  leave  Messrs.  Howitt  and  Burns  to  settle  these  little 
differences  of  opinion  as  they  can,  and  proceed  to  sketch 
the  hves  of  a few  prominent  men  and  women  in  fhe  move- 
ment, to  tabulate  the  impositions  of  the  media,  and  note 
the  gullibility  of  the  faithful.  We  shall  make  the  acquaint- 
ance of  such  of  the  latter  as  are  most  familiar  with  the 
spirit  land  and  its  occupants ; in  company  with  the  medial 
gentry  we  shall  learn  something  of  the  phenomenal  form- 
ation of  the  spirit  face  and  the  materialized  spirit  form ; 
and  we  shall  be  introduced  behind  the  scenes,  where  the 
media  are  taking  off  the  spirit  masks,  folding  up  the  spirit 
dresses  (the  fabric  hailing  from  Manchester),  dividing  the 
proceeds  of  the  last  “ show,”  and  preparing  for  the  next. 

• " Medium  and  Daybrealc,”  September  17th,  1875. 

c 

iOoqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlfY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  II. 

THE  SHAKERS’  LESSON. 

The  Poughkeepsie  Seer  — Birth,  Parentage,  and  Education— A " pleasing 
mystical  circumstance” — “Stumping  the  Provinces” — The  Principles 
of  Nature — Trance  Poetry — Visits  to  the  Spheres — Predictions — The 
“New  Gospel”  started. 

NDREW  JACKSON  DAVIS,  also  known  as  “the 
Seer  of  Poughkeepsie,”  is  perhaps  the  most  re- 
markable man  in  the  history  of  modern  Spiritualism,  of 
which  he  was  the  pioneer  ; “ the  first  of  that  innumerable 
company  of  Spiritualists,  which,  like  a flood,  has  since  in- 
undated every  State  in  America  north  and  south  of  Dixie’s 
Land.” 

He  was  born  at  Blooming  Grove,  Orange  Co.,  N.Y., 
August  nth,  1826,  and  his  parents  being  extremely  poor, 
he  is  said  to  have  been  left  in  a state  of  complete  igno- 
rance. Sent  at  an  early  age  to  tend  cattle,  he  was  so 
stupid  that  his  brothers  and  sisters  made  a laughingstock 
of  him,  and  his  father  declared  “ he  would  never  earn  his 
salt,  for  he  had  not  gumption  enough  to  make  a whistle.” 
Andy,  however,  soon  showed  more  ability  than  his  father’s 
remark  would  warrant,  as  his  communications  with  the 
“higher  intelligences”  began  shortly  afterwards.  Of  this 

12 

.oo^le 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Shakers'  Lesson. 

13 

turning-point  in  his  life  he  gives  the  following  account  in 
his  autobiography,  “The  Magic  Staff”: 

“ Being  allowed  the  freedom  of  the  house,  my  master’s 
children  would  frequently  unite  with  and  aid  me  in  trying 
to  sing  Washingtonian  Temperance  Songs.  One  Sunday 
while  singing 

'"Where  are  the  friends  that  to  me  were  ao  dear. 

Long,  long  ago,’  &c., 

there  happened  a pleasing  mystical  circumstance,  of  which 
I was  the  sole  recipient.  When  we  sang  the  words 

“ ' In  their  graves  laid  low,' 

I heard  the  word  no  / distinctly  and  emphatically  shouted 
in  my  ear. 

“ ‘ Don’t  do  that,  Russel,’  said  I to  the  eldest  son. 

“ ‘ Do  what  ?’  he  inquired,  with  a look  of  surprise. 

“ * Don’t  holler  no  / when  ’taint  in  the  song,’  I pleadingly 
exclaimed. 

“‘  I didn’t,’  he  quickly  replied.  *1  didn’t  hear  it  neither.’ 

“ The  younger  children,  Austin  and  Freddy,  also  denied 
any  participation.  So  we  proceeded  with  our  singing ; but 
whenever  we  sang  the  affirmative  that  our  friends  are 

" * In  their  graves  laid  low,* 

I would  hear  the  negative  no  / as  clear  and  positive  as  any 
word  pronounced  by  ourselves.  At  the  time  I could  not 
comprehend  it.” 

About  the  year  of  the  Shaker  craze,  Davis  j>lre  removed 
to  Poughkeepsie,  and  “young  hopeful,”  the  unsophisti- 
cated child  of  nature,  was  “taken  in  hand  by  one  Leving. 
ston,  the  village  tailor,  and  found  possessed  of  remarkable 
powers  of  clairvoyance.”  He  began  to  converse  freely 
upon  medical  and  psychological  subjects  while  in  a state 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

14 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

of  magnetic  trance,  and  subsequently  he  commenced  the 
treatment  of  disease.  “ He  soon  informed  his  magnetizer 
that  the  great  object  of  his  powers  was  to  enable  him  to 
examine  and  prescribe  for  the  sick.  There  was  no  dis- 
puting such  a prudent  and  charitable  impression  as  this. 
Mr.  Levingston,  as  a matter  of  course,  immediately  per- 
ceived and  acknowledged  the  full  purport  of  it ; and  both 
he  and  his  protege  agreed,  the  one  to  abandon  his  goose, 
and  the  other  his  last”  (he  had  joined  his  father  in  the 
cobbling  business),  “and  take  to  what  in  American  par- 
lance is  called  ‘ stumping  the  provinces.’  ” * 

Thus  about  his  twentieth  year,  Davis  quitted  Pough- 
keepsie. He  soon  turned  his  back  upon  his  father  and 
poor  Levingston,  joining  Dr.  Silas  Smith  and  the  Rev. 
William  Fishbough,  both  of  whom  with  Yankee  ’cuteness 
saw  money  in  the  youth  if  properly  “worked.”  Under  the 
new  management  he  rapidly  acquired  higher  powers — 
entering  into  what  he  terms  a state  of  “ clairscience,”  but 
which  his  former  “ guide,  philosopher,  and  friend,”  the  ex- 
village tailor,  denounced  as  humbug — the  bold  Levingston 
actually  accusing  Lyon  the  Fourierist,  and  Fishbough  the 
Universalist,  of  being  joint  authors  of  the  young  clair- 
voyant’s “ inspired  ” works.  Truth  to  say,  when  his  ama- 
nuensis (Fishbough)  and  Dr.  Lyon  leave  him,  he  cuts  but 
a sorry  figure  in  that  line  ! Under  the  wing  of  Fishbough 
the  youthful  “ seer,”  whilst  in  a trance  state,  dictated  a 
work,  entitled  “The  Principles  of  Nature:  Her  Divine 
Revelations,  and  a Voice  to  Mankind,”  and  straightway  was 
dubbed — “The  Guide  and  Leader  of  the  Age.”  His 
Principles  is  “ a chaos  of  unarranged  matter,”  treating  of 
“ cosmogany,  astronomy,  geology,  ethnology,  archaeology, 
mythology,  theology,  psychology,  history,  metaphysics, 

• “ Edinburgh  Review.” 

i 

jitized  by  GoOQlc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Shakers'  Lesson . 

*5 

8ec.”  besides  “soaring  flights  of  mind  into  regions  not 
previously  explored  by  any  human  being  ; or  revelations 
of  strange  spheres,  as  well  as  their  stranger  economies — 
the  existence  of  which  was  never  suspected  by  the  most 
inquisitive  nor  conceived  by  the  most  whimsical  of  mortals 
in  this  or  any  other  age.”  “ Excepting  so  far  as  relates  to 
the  regions  not  previously  explored  by  any  earthly  being,” 
says  the  “ Edinburgh  Review,”  “ the  book  has  no  claim 
whatever  to  the  character  of  originality.  Its  facts  and  its 
fictions,  its  creeds  and  its  theories— all  alike  have  been 
systematically  plagiarized,  and  gravely  reproduced  often' 
times,  with  barely  a verbal  disguise,  as  the  authentic  teach- 
ings of  disembodied  spirits,  and  of  higher  intelligences 
‘ impressed  ’ upon  the  sensorium  of  an  illiterate  cowherd. 
It  is  a mad  jumble  of  Spinozism,  Fourierism,  St  Simon- 
ianism,  Swedenborgianism,  and  Rationalism.  Davis— or 
rather  his  unscrupulous  guardians  (for  that  docile  youth 
was  as  yet  unequal  to  the  task  ascribed  to  him) — have  laid 
under  tribute  every  pantheistic  and  infidel  writer,  from 
the  age  of  Bruno  to  that  of  Strauss,  in  order  to  build  up 
their  own  monstrously  paradoxical  scheme  of  Spirito- 
materialism.” 

But  we  will  let  Davis  or  his  mentors  speak  in  one  or 
two  extracts  from  the  “ Principles  ” : “ In  the  beginning 
the  Univerccelum  was  one  boundless,  indefinable,  and 
unimaginable  ocean  of  LIQUID  FIRE  ! The  most  vigorous 
and  ambitious  imagination  is  not  capable  of  forming  an 
adequate  conception  of  the  height,  and  depth,  and  length, 
and  breadth  thereof.”  Man,  according  to  this  brilliant 
work,  was  originally  “ an  oyster  or  clam,”  which  produced 
a tadpole  ; the  tadpole  a quadruped ; the  quadruped  a 
baboon  ; the  baboon  an  orang-outang ; the  orang-outang 
a negro  ; and  the  negro  a white  man.  “ The  original  in- 
habitants of  the  earth  were  black,  the  subsequent  nations 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

i6 

Modern  Spiritualism , 

were  brown ; the  branches  of  these  were  red  ; from  these 
spread  the  yellow,  and  from  these  the  white.”  # 

Davis’s  Theology  is  “ written  on  the  widespread  scroll 
of  the  heavens,  in  which  every  star  is  a word,  and  every 
constellation  a sentence  ; ” his  philosophy  is  ultra-material, 
for  “ all  things,  whether  tangible  or  intangible,  are  material 
...  I use  the  terms  ‘ spiritual/  ‘ celestial/  or  ‘ heavenly/ 
as  representing  distinct  degrees  of  material  refinement.” 
The  universe  is  divided  by  Davis  into  seven  spheres  and 
forty-nine  circles,  in  the  centre  of  which  is  our  earth  ; he 
' has  a vision  of  the  creation  of  this  “ rudimentary  sphere,* 
and  gives  it  in  the  following  rudimentary  verse.  Let  us 
hope  he  is  not  the  nearest  approach  to  a Milton  the  Great 
Republic  possesses. 

" My  spirit  grew  up  and  seemed  to  expand 
Beyond  books  of  men,  and  creeds  of  the  land. 

A wild  terrific  grandeur  spread  around. 

Seas  of  lava  gurgled  up  from  depths  profound ; 

Lightnings  waltzed  with  lightnings  o'er  the  sea ; 

Thunders  vied  with  thunders  in  frantic  glee ; 

Motion  was  married  to  motion  with  one  consent. 

And  atom  wedded  atom  with  one  intents 
Motion  and  atoms  in  nuptial  pairs  appeared. 

And  Method  was  to  Matter  more  endeared. 

But  swiftly  rolled  the  blazing  orb  along. 

Less  eccentric  daily — more  sedate  and  strong. 

Its  fierce  fiery  face  was  cooled  by  the  air ; 

Passion  had  less  reign — the  scene  grew  more  fair. 

Among  the  stars,  'twas  decided  by  a vote 
That  young  Earth  should  wear  a granite  coat ; 

But,  heaving  with  hidden  fires,  and  angry  yet. 

He  fretted  and  frowned  like  a demon’s  pet ; 

Still  his  face  seemed  cold,  and  bare,  and  grand. 

But  water  quickly  formed,  and  covered  all  the  land ; 

A bath  so  cold  soon  chilled  the  fiery  swain. 

And,  quaking  at  the  centre,  he  burst  in  twain ! 

• *'  Principles  of  Nature,"  page  360. 

c 

iOoqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlfY  OF  WISCONSIN 

*7 

The  Shakers'  Lesson. 

✓ 

Earth’s  coat,  though  granite,  was  * Uttered  and  torn. 

And  his  face,  tho’  rough,  was  'shaven  and  shorn 
But  like  the  wound  which  God  the  devil  gave. 

The  opening  closed,  yet  left  an  open  grave ; 

In  plunged  the  waters  from  the  vast  profound. 

And  here  and  there  exposed  a little  ground. 

He  bellowed  and  quaked,  and  clanked  his  chain. 

And  vomited  forth  both  mounts  and  main. 

I saw  hills  on  hills,  Alps  on  Alps  arise, 

And  a marriage  betwixt  all  seas  and  skies. 

A carbonic  air,  encircling  all  the  main. 

Shut  out  the  spangled  skies  from  peak  to  plain  : 

The  world-wide  storm  swelled  the  sea-lord’s  breast. 

And  the  thunderbolt  forger  felt  all  the  rest. 

Old  Neptune’s  trident  shook  both  land  and  sea. 

And  Vulcan  telegraphed  Venus  down  to  tea.’’* 

In  the  spheres — “ the  Summer  Land”— which  surround 
this  “ rudimentary  earth,”  the  spirit  emancipated  from  the 
body  has  all  the  enjoyments  of  this  world  without  its  care 
or  sorrow.  The  spirits  have  their  spheres  allotted  to  them 
according  to  intellectual  or  moral  status,  and  are  continu- 
ally advancing  towards  the  Seventh,  which,  when  reached, 
all  are  upon  an  equality. 

The  “ Seer,”  notwithstanding  his  personal  visits  to  the 
planets  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus,  and  Mercury,  found 
time  to  run  through  a portion  of  the  States,  delivering 
lectures  and  inaugurating  the  new  movement 

In  addition  to  the  numerous  voluminous  works  pub- 
lished in  his  name,  he  also  undertook  the  editorship  of  the 
“ Banner  of  Light,”  an  American  periodical  (Boston)  de- 
voted to  Spiritualism ; and,  as  a publisher,  he  scattered 
broadcast  over  the  English-speaking  world  a flood  of  the 
peculiar  literature  so  dear  to  “ the  faithful  few,”  and  so  un- 
readable and  unremunerative  to  the  general  public. 

In  the  autumn  of  1846,  Davis  had  predicted  that “ ere 

• The  "Great  Harmonia,"  Vol.  V.,  page  366, 

2 

1 by  GoOQlc 
0 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

1 3 Modern  Spiritualism . 

long  the  communication  with  the  spirit  world  would  take 
the  form  of  a living  demonstration.”  Upon  this  hint  the 
rapping  spake  ! and  in  1848,  while  all  America  was  lost  in 
wonder  at  the  mystic  flights  of  the  Poughkeepsie  “ Seer,” 
his  teachings  first  bore  fruit  in  the  physical  manifestations 
of  the  Fox  and  Fish  families  in  the  now  famous  “Rochester 
knockings.” 

So  the  “ New  Gospel”  was  started  by  a 'cute  Yankee, 
whose  “ecstatic”  dreams  have  been  turned  to  golden 
realities  by  his  followers — some  of  whom  appear  to  have 
discovered  that  philosopher’s  stone  which  Dr.  Dee*  so 
panted  for  and  failed  to  find. 

Is  it  not  strange  that  Spiritualism,  whose  true  mission 
is  to  restore  the  Christian  faith  “ to  the  consciousness  of 
mankind,”  should  owe  so  much  to  a materialist  who  scoffed 
at  the  Bible  and  denied  the  existence  of  sin  ? 

* Dr.  Dee  was  an  early  professor  of  spiritual  legerdemain,  and  called  his 
spirits  into  that  innocent-looking  black  stone — or,  as  Butler  calls  it,  “The 
Devil’s  Looking-glass,”— now  to  be  seen  at  the  Alexandra  Palace.  His 
Magical  Speculum  (No.  1,290  in  the  Londesborough  Collection)  is  a circular 
black  stone  with  a highly  polished  surface  ; it  is  Hat,  and  about  half  an  inch 
thick  by  seven  and  a half  inches  in  diameter.  In  the  same  collection  may  be 
seen  the  crystal  balls  used  by  sorcerers  in  the  sixteenth  century,  in  which 
they  were  supposed  to  produce  the  visions  of  the  absent  or  departed  for 
their  dupes. 

On  looking  at  the  " Medium  and  Daybreak  ” for  December  10th,  1875,  I 
find  we  still  have  a "crystal  seer”  with  us  in  London. 

J |f 

itized  by  GoOQlc 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  III. 

THE  ROCHESTER  KNOCKINGS. 

The  Corner  Stone  of  the  “Pantheon” — American  Rapper-ees— Lively  EeJ- 
“ ticking *’ — “Old  Splitfoot ” — “Murder  will  out" — Grave  doubts — 
Profitable  Spirits — Rapid  resumi  of  Rapping  Theories-  A queer  Fish — 
Mcdiumistic  Babies. 

AVIS  having  cleared  the  ground  and  uprooted  all 
the  old  beliefs,  the  building  of  the  “ Pantheon  ” 
commenced. 

Not  with  a flourish  of  trumpets  nor  by  dignitaries  of  the 
land,  but  in  a very  humble  wooden  dwelling-house  in  an 
obscure  Yankee  village,  the  comer  stone  of  the  edifice  was 
laid  by  two  little  girls. 

Our  story  proper,  then,  opens  about  the  year  1847,  at 
Hydesville,  Arcadia,  Rochester  County,  N.Y.,  with  some- 
thing like  a postman’s  rap  upon  the  door  of  one  Mr.  Mi- 
chael Weekman.*  The  rapping  continuing,  this  gentle- 
man, being  unable  to  trace  it  to  any  visible  cause,  did 

•The  sounds  were  said  to  have  been  first  heard  in  this  house  by  Mrs.  Ann 
and  Miss  Lucretia  Pulver,  in  1844  ; but  as  their  account  was  given  after  the 
“mysterious  knockings”  of  the  Foxes  had  gained  notoriety,  I may  be  ex- 
cused for  doubting  the  veracity  of  the  gentle  Pulvers. 

19  2 — 2 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

20 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

what  many  another  weak  man  would  have  done  under  the 
same  circumstances, — he  vacated  the  premises.  Mr.  John 
D.  Fox  and  his  family  thereupon  entered  into  possession 
in  December,  1847,  and  early  in  the  following  year  they 
were  “ startled  ” by  mysterious  rappings  in  many  parts  of 
the  house,  and  all  “helped  search” — as  Mrs.  Fox  says — 
for  the  cause.  These  noises  increased  “ in  loudness  and 
frequency  ” up  to  the  end  of  March,  and  not  the  slightest 
clue  to  their  origin  could  be  discovered.  The  spirits  were 
coy ; but  it  was  not  to  last  long.  When  they  did  begin, 
like  a Welsh  river  in  a flood,  they  broke  all  bounds.  The 
evening  of  the  last  day  of  March  came,  and  as  the  family 
had  been  disturbed  for  many  previous  nights  by  the  rap- 
ping, they  retired  early.  Mrs.  Fox  had  seen  her  two 
youngest  children  — Margaret,  aged  twelve  years,  and 
Kate,  nine — nicely  tucked  in  between  the  sheets,  when 
the  sounds  were  again  heard.  Mrs.  Fox  says : “ My  hus- 
band had  not  gone  to  bed  when  we  first  heard  the  noise 
on  this  evening;  I had  just  lain  down.  It  commenced  as 
usual.  I knew  it  from  all  other  sounds  I had  ever  heard 
in  the  house.  The  girls  who  slept  in  the  other  bed  in  the 
room  heard  the  noise,  and  tried  to  make  a similar  noise 
by  snapping  their  fingers.”  Such  peculiar  bed-ticking 
might  naturally  be  supposed  to  alarm  the  Fox  children, 
who  might  then  have  been  called  Fox’s  martyrs;  but  the 
contrary  seems  to  have  been  the  case.  I think  it  was  Mr. 
Henry  Russell  who  sang,  in  his  capital  Entertainment, 
some  years  ago — 

“You  little  know  what  great  things 
From  little  things  may  rise,” 

and  surely  that  sly  little  Fox — Katey — could  scarcely  have 
realized  the  gravity  of  the  occasion  when  she  began 
imitating  the  raps!  For,  “being  a lively  child,  and  in  a 

Digitized  by  GoOQlc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Rochester  Knockings.  2 1 

measure  accustomed  to  what  was  going  on,  she  turned  to 
where  the  noise  was,  snapped  her  fingers,  and  called  out 
‘Here,  old  Splitfoot,  do  as  I do/”  (which  was  shocking 
for  a little  lady  of  nine)  “ and  the  knocking  instantly  re- 
sponded 

Mamma  Fox,  who  must  have  had  an  intuitive  idea  that 
the  spirits  were  at  the  bottom  of  it  all,  said  to  the  unknown 
rapper,  “ Count  ten,”  and  was  instantly  obeyed.  “ Fifteen  ” 
was  called  for  with  a like  result,  and  then  Mrs.  Fox  said, 
“Tell  us  the  age  of  Cathy”  (the  youngest  daughter — our 
sly  little  Kate !)  “ by  rapping  one  for  each  year,”  and  Miss 
Katey  received  her  proper  number  of  years  in  distinct  raps, 
which,  being  such  a young  lady,  she  could  afford  to  do. 
Then  Mrs.  Fox,  coming  straight  to  the  point,  said, “ If  you 
are  a spirit,  rap  twice,”  and  she  received  two  particularly 
affirmative  raps. 

“ This  was  the  very  commencement,”  says  Robert  Dale 
Owen;  “who  can  tell  where  the  end  will  be?”  Who,  in- 
deed, poor  Owen ! The  rumour  of  these  disturbances 
quickly  spread  in  that  little  community,  and  neighbours — 
the  Redfields,  the  Dueslers,  the  Hydes,  and  the  Jewells — 
all  came  from  their  wooden  shanties,  eager  to  gossip,  and 
open  to  the  marvellous,  as  ignorance  always  is. 

Soon  the  news  travelled,  and  persons  from  a distance 
flocked  in  until  the  excitement  became  intense.  The  rap- 
ping, too,  began  to  assume  coherency,  and  was  soon  giving 
the  details  of  a murder  which  had  been  committed  in  the 
house  occupied  by  this  (very)  “Foxy”  family.  Thus  the 
first  spirit,  in  the  modern  phase  of  the  “ ism,”  was  that  of 
a pedlar,  who  declared — through  the  table-legs — that  he 
had  been  knocked  off  his  “pins”  (*.<?.,  murdered)  by  a 
former  occupant  of  the  premises,  a certain  John  C.  Bell,  a 

• “ Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  another  World.”  R.  D.  Owen. 

1 by  GoOQlC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

22  Modern  Spiritualism. 

blacksmith  ; and  the  spirit-pedlar  further  informed  his 
gaping  audience  that  his  trunk  was  packed  up,  and  all  the 
members  of  his  body  neatly  disposed  of  beneath  some  ten 
feet  of  earth  in  the  cellar.  Now,  it  is  said  to  be  beyond 
doubt  that  some  portion  of  a skeleton  was  found  at  the 
precise  spot  indicated ; but  it  is  also  said  that  opinion  was 
more  than  equally  divided  in  favour  of  its  being,  not  the 
framework  of  humanity,  but  the  well-picked  bones  of  a 
sheep ! “ A man  named  Bell  did  come  from  a distant  part 
of  the  country,  and  attempted  to  exculpate  himself  by 
swearing  that  he  knew  nothing  about  it.  For  want  of  legal 
evidence,  no  steps  could,  of  course,  be  taken  against  the 
accused,  and  so  far  as  he  was  concerned  the  matter  drop- 
ped.” * As  Mr.  Bell  does  not  seem  to  have  been  well  read 
up  in  the  Cock  Lane  ghost  story,  he  did  not  prosecute  the 
Foxes,  or  they  might  have  been  “run  to  earth,”  much  as 
dear  little  medium  Parsons  was  some  years  before.  Not- 
withstanding that  no  sepulchral  knell  was  straightway  rung 
for  this  “ dreadful  Bell,”  the  manes  of  the  defunct  pedlar 
(or  sheep)  seem  to  have  been  satisfied,  for  the  bones  never 
rattled  again.  Indeed,  some  even  doubted  if  any  bones 
were  found  at  all,  and  declared  that  the  missing  pedlar 
afterwards  re-appeared  at  Hydesville,  “ still  ‘ clothed  with 
mortality,’  and  having  a new  assortment  of  wares  to  sell.”  + 
However  this  may  be,  the  rapping  continued.  It  was  be- 
coming a paying  thing,  for  multitudes  now  flocked  from  all 
parts  to  inquire  into  the  phenomena,  to  the  no  small  profit 
of  the  Fox  family.  Soon  after  this  the  girls  were  removed 
to  Rochester,  a town  on  the  borders  of  Lake  Ontario, 
where  they  resided  with  Mrs.  Fish,  a married  sister,  a 
teacher  of  music,  who  now  rapidly  developed  into  a medium, 
and  arranged  a code  of  signals,  in  which  the  old  system  of 

• '*  Where  arc  the  Dead  t ",  f " Humbugs  of  the  World." 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Rochester  Knocking s. 

23 

receiving  one  rap  as  a negative,  two  as  doubtful,  and  three 
as  an  affirmative,  was  supplanted  by  calling  over  the  alpha- 
bet, the  “spirits”  rapping  at  the  required  letter,  and  so 
spelling  the  message  out,  in  very  bad  orthography.  Five 
raps,  included  in  the  code,  was  a signal  that  the  alphabet 
was  required. 

In  November,  1849,  so  great  was  the  excitement  that  a 
meeting  was  held  in  the  Corinthian  Hall,  Rochester,  to 
inquire  into  the  phenomena,  at  which  the  Committee  of 
Investigation  gave  the  subject  up  in  despair.  Deluded 
creatures  ! Had  they  only  known  that  rubbing  the  sole 
or  upper  part  of  the  shoe  against  the  polished  legs  of  a 
table  would  produce  the  rapping  sounds  / That  they  can 
be  so  obtained  is  a fact ; and  who  shall  say  that  those 
little  mice-like  feet  peeping  out  beneath  the  skirts  of  Mar- 
garet and  Katey  Fox,  may  not  have  operated  upon  the 
mahogany  four-poster  and  the  loo-table  (if  they  had  such 
in  their  humble  dwelling),  to  produce  the  phenomena  ? * 
But  there  are  many  ways  of  obtaining  raps  without  the 
“ kettle-stand  ” or  boots  upon  well-polished  mahogany.  I 
have  produced  them  regularly  before  my  audience  by  a 
simple  trick ; and  Dr.  Schiff  has  propounded  a theory, 
according  to  which  “the  repeated  displacement  of  the 
tendon  of  the  peroneus  lojigus  muscle  in  the  sheath  in 
which  it  slides  behind  the  external  mallelous)y  will  pro- 
duce the  sounds.f 

• These  precocious  children  remind  us  of  the  **  Edinburgh  Review  "(1854) 
notice  of  Joe  Smith,  the  Vermont  boy: — “Children  are  flattered  by  the 
notice  which  they  excite  by  such  pretensions  ; and,  if  the  credulity  of  their 
elders  gives  them  encouragement,  are  easily  tempted  to  go  on  from  lie  to  lie. 
For  there  is,  perhaps,  no  period  of  life  more  sensible  than  childhood  to  the 
delights  of  notoriety.” 

t “John  King ’’says  the  spirits  have  two  ways  of  producing  raps;  but  he  only 
describes  one,  which  is  above  ordinary  comprehension.  1 he  spirits,  he  says. 

> Original  from 

Digitized  by  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

24 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

Mrs.  Norman  Culver,  of  Arcadia,  made  a deposition, 
upon  April  17th,  1871,  to  the  effect  that  one  of  the  girls 
had  instructed  her  how  to  produce  the  raps  with  her  toe- 
joints  ; and  Mrs.  Culver  actually  produced  similar  sounds 
in  the  presence  of  a magistrate  and  others.  The  follow- 
ing is  the  text  of 

MRS.  CULVER’S  STATEMENT. 

u I am,  by  marriage,  a connection  of  the  Fox  girls.  Their 
brother  married  my  husband’s  sister.  The  girls  have  been 
a great  deal  at  my  house  ; and  for  about  two  years  I was  a 
very  sincere  believer  in  the  rappings ; but  something  which 
I saw  when  I was  visiting  the  girls  at  Rochester,  made  me 
suspect  that  they  were  deceiving.  I resolved  to  satisfy 
myself  in  some  way ; and  some  time  afterwards  I made 
a proposition  to  Catherine  to  assist  her  in  producing  the 
manifestations.  I had  a cousin  visiting  me  from  Michi- 
gan, who  was  going  to  consult  the  spirit,  and  I told  Cathe- 
rine that  if  they  intended  going  to  Detroit,  it  would  be  a 
great  thing  for  them  to  convince  him.  I also  told  her  that 
if  I could  do  anything  to  help  her,  I would  do  it  cheerfully ; 
that  I should  probably  be  able  to  answer  all  the  questions 
he  would  ask,  and  I would  do  it  if  she  would  show  me  how 
to  make  the  raps.  She  said  that  as  Margaretta  was  absent, 
she  wanted  somebody  to  help  her,  and  that  if  I would  be- 
come a medium,  she  would  explain  it  all  to  mev  She  said 
that  when  my  cousin  consulted  the  spirits,  I must  sit  next 
to  her,  and  touch  her  arm  when  the  right  letter  was  called. 
I did  so,  and  was  able  to  answer  nearly  all  the  questions 
correctly.  After  I had  helped  her  in  this  way  a few  times, 

' “ ? 

Rather  the  aura  surrounding  the  medium,  mould  it  in  their  hands,  and  throw 
it  upon  the  table,  &c.,  where  it  makes  an  explosive  sound. 

ooq 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlf  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Rochester  Knocking. 

=5 

she  revealed  to  me  the  secret.  The  raps  are  produced  by 
the  toes.  All  the  toes  are  used.  After  nearly  a week’s 
practice  with  Catherine  showing  me  how,  I could  produce 
them  perfectly  myself. 

“ At  first  it  was  very  hard  work  to  do  it  Catherine  told 
me  to  warm  my  feet,  or  put  them  in  warm  water,  and  it 
would  then  be  easier  work  to  rap.  She  said  that  she  some- 
times had  to  warm  her  feet  three  or  four  times  during  the 
course  of  an  evening.  I found  that  heating  my  feet  did 
enable  me  to  rap  a great  deal  easier.  I have  sometimes 
produced  a hundred  and  fifty  raps  in  succession.  I can 
rap  with  all  the  toes  on  both  feet : it  is  most  difficult  to 
rap  with  the  great  toe.  Catherine  told  me  how  to  manage 
to  answer  the  questions.  She  said  it  was  generally  easy 
enoagh  to  answer  right,  if  the  one  who  asked  the  questions 
called  the  alphabet.  She  said  the  reason  why  she  asked 
people  to  write  down  several  names  on  paper,  and  then 
point  to  them  till  the  spirit  rapped  at  the  right  one,  was  to 
give  them  a chance  to  watch  the  countenance  and  motions 
of  the  person,  and  that  in  that  way  they  could  nearly  al- 
ways guess  right.  She  also  explained  how  they  held  down 
and  moved  tables.  (Mrs.  Culver  here  gave  some  illustra- 
tions of  the  tricks.)  She  told  me  that  all  I should  have  to 
oo  to  make  raps  heard  on  the  table,  would  be  to  put  my 
foot  on  the  bottom  of  the  table  when  I rapped,  and  that 
when  I wished  to  make  the  raps  sound  distant  on  the 
wall,  I must  make  them  louder,  and  direct  my  own  eyes 
earnestly  to  the  spot  where  I wished  them  to  be  heard. 
She  said  if  I could  put  my  foot  to  the  bottom  of  the  door, 
the  raps  would  be  heard  on  the  top  of  the  door. 

“ Catherine  told  me  that  when  her  feet  were  held  down 

9 

by  the  Rochester  Committee,  the  Dutch  servant-girl  rapped 
with  her  knucl^es  under  the  floor  from  the  cellar.  The 
girl  was  instructed  to  rap  whenever  she  heard  their  voices 

Digitized  by  GoOQIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

26 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

calling  the  spirits.  Catherine  also  showed  me  how  they 
made  the  sounds  of  sawing  and  planing  boards.  When  I 
was  at  Rochester  last  January,  Margaretta  told  me  that 
when  people  insisted  on  seeing  her  feet  and  toes,  she  could 
produce  a few  raps  with  her  knees  and  ankles. 

“ Elizabeth  Fish  (Mrs.  Fish’s  daughter),  who  now  lives 
with  her  father,  was  the  first  one  who  produced  these  raps. 
She  accidentally  discovered  the  way  of  making  them  by 
playing  with  her  toes  against  the  foot-board,  while  in  bed. 
Catherine  told  me  that  the  reason  why  Elizabeth  went 
West  to  live  with  her  father,  was  because  she  was  too  con- 
scientious to  become  a medium.  The  whole  secret  was 
revealed  to  me,  with  the  understanding  that  I should 
practise  as  a medium  when  the  girls  were  away.  Cathe- 
rine said  that  whenever  I practised,  I had  better  have  my 
little  girl  with  me,  and  make  folks  believe  that  she  was  the 
medium ; ‘ for,’  she  said,  ‘ they  would  never  suspect  so 
young  a child  of  any  tricks.’  After  I had  obtained  the 
entire  secret,  I plainly  told  Catherine  that  my  only  object 
was  to  find  out  how  these  tricks  were  done,  and  that  I 
should  never  go  any  further  in  this  imposition.  She  was 
very  much  frightened,  and  said  she  believed  I meant  to 
tell  of  it  and  expose  them  ; and  if  I did,  she  would  swear 
it  was  a lie.  She  was  so  nervous  and  excited  that  I had 
to  sleep  with  her  that  night.  When  she  was  instructing 
me  how  to  be  a medium,  she  told  me  how  frightened  they 
used  to  get  in  New  York,  for  fear  somebody  would  detect 
them,  and  gave  me  the  whole  history  of  all  the  tricks  they 
played  upon  the  people  there.  She  said  that  once  Mar- 
garetta spoke  aloud,  and  that  the  whole  party  believed  it 
was  a spirit. 

(Signed),  "Mrs.  NORMAN  CULVER.” 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Rochester  Knockitigs, 

27 

CERTIFICATE. 

“We  hereby  certify  that  Mrs.  Culver  is  one  of  the  most 
respectable  and  intelligent  ladies  in  the  town  of  Arcadia. 
We  were  present  when  she  made  the  disclosures.  We  had 
heard  the  same  from  her  before,  and  we  cheerfully  bear 
testimony  that  there  cannot  be  the  slightest  doubt  of  the 
truth  of  the  whole  statement 

(Signed),  “C.  J.  Pomeroy,  M.D. 

“Rev.  D.  S.  Chase.” 

I note  it  as  a significant  fact  that  Spiritualist  writers 
ignore  Mrs.  Culver’s  testimony  altogether.  From  my  own 
personal  experience,  I can  fully  endorse  the  foregoing 
statement. 

By  the  time  the  Fox  girls  reached  New  York  city  in 
May,  1850,  they  were  the  talk  of  all  America  ; and  though 
their  time  was  much  occupied,  it  was  not  unprofitably  so, 
as  they  are  said  to  have  done  a “ big  thing” — in  American 
parlance — by  it,  taking  no  less  than  five  hundred  thousand 
dollars  from  the  credulous  crowds  flocking  to  witness,  or 
hear,  their  spiritual  wonders  ! True  it  is  that  the  rapping 
was  tedious ; that,  on  the  face  of  it,  the  communication 
was  a clumsy  one  for  the  spirits ; and  that  the  Professors 
of  the  Medical  College  of  Buffalo  had  thrown  grave  doubts 
over  the  bond fides  of  the  affair,  reportihg  that  these  loosely- 
constructed  girls  got  their  “ raps  ” by  snapping  their  toe 
and  knee-joints ; — yet,  withal,  the  golden  stream  poured 
in ! 

Mrs.  Fish  seems  to  have  been  a medium  with  an  eye  to 
the  main  chance,  but  occasionally  indiscreet.  The  spirit 
who  “ directed  ” a gentleman  to  take  the  medium  down  to 
the  saloon  “ to  get  some  oysters,”  seems  to  be  of  a very 
mundane  origin ; but  when  one  of  Mrs.  Fish’s  familiars 

CiO  OQ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

28  Modern  Spiritualism. 

from  the  upper  spheres  declared  that  “ the  spirits  live  on 
pork  and  beans  ” in  those  elevated  regions,  we  are  put  to 
the  painful  alternative  of  either  doubting  the  veracity  of  a 
lady  or  the  truthfulness  of  a spirit. 

However,  such  little  drawbacks  notwithstanding,  the 
success  of  the  Fox  girls,  as  well  as  that  of  their  sister, 
was  unbounded,  and  soon  produced  shoals  of  imitators, 
for,  presently,  every  rap-scallion  in  the  country  was  setting 
up  as  a medium.  They  are  an  ingenious  race,  those 
Yankees,  and  they  understand  business.  The  rapping 
paid,  but  something  new  must  be  forthcoming  to  keep  up 
the  excitement,  so  table-turning  and  tilting  was  discovered 
and  ascribed  to  spiritual  agency.  At  this,  New  York  State 
went  mad  ; Massachusetts  followed  suit ; and  before  long 
our  American  cousins,  from  Maine  to  California,  were  run- 
ning wildly  after  tables  and  chairs. 

The  ball  was  thus  fairly  set  rolling  ; like  one  of  snow,  it 
has  grown  in  its  progress,  and  like  that  it  will  dissolve. 
Little  by  little  new  phenomena  have  been  added,  until  not 
only  tables  are  raised,  but  the  spirits  of  the  departed  “ in 
their  habits  as  they  lived.”  It  is  the  “ Pantheon  of  Pro- 
gress,” and  its  priests — the  media— can  perform  miracles, 
even  to  the  curing  of  disease  by  the  simple  laying  on  of 
hands  ; it  is  a New  Gospel,  the  daybreak  of  a happier  era 
for  humanity.  Oh,  wondrous  Yankee  Doodle  ! inventor 
of  wooden  nutmegs  and  new  religions,  how  you  can  be 
Barnumized  ! The  Foxes  have  retired  somewhat  into  the 
background  now,  and  there  are  “ new  lights  ” in  the 
mediumistic  firmament,  but  little  Katey  Fox  will  ever  be 
known  as  the  real  founder  of  the  physical  manifestations 
of  modern  Spiritualism.  Now,  she  is  Katey  Fox  no  longer ! 
On  the  14th  of  December,  1872,  Henry  Diedrich  Jencken, 
barrister-at-law,  took  the  lady  to  be  his  wife  at  Marylebone 
Church,  London,  and  there  are  now  two  little  Jenckens, 

>ed  by  Goodie 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

29 

The  Rochester  Knocking. 

who  inherit  the  medial  properties  of  their  mamma.  The 
eldest, u Ferdy  ” (Ferdinand  Leowenstein,  aged  two  years), 
“ when  only  five  months  old,  wrote  long  messages  in  a 
clear  handwriting;*  he  was  carried  from  one  room  to 
another  by  an  unseen  being ; and  he  was  rocked  in  his 
cradle  and  attended  by  spirit  forms.” 

“ In  his  own  home,”  says  the“  Spiritualist,”f“  the  medium 
boy  is,  as  might  be  expected,  only  the  baby  boy ; but  every 
now  and  again  the  wondrous  powers  of  this  strangely- 
endowed  child  manifest  themselves ; his  luminous  eyes,  as 
once  described  by  his  father  in  these  pages,  brighten  into 
quite  a lustre  of  soft  light ; he  will  stretch  out  his  hands  to 
catch  his  playmates — the  unseen — whom  he  greets  with 
smiles  and  caresses.  Frequently  the  spirits  will  take  his 
little  foot,  as  they  years  ago  used  to  do  with  little  Kate 
Fox,  and  make  it  stamp  on  the  floor  or  knock  against  the 
table,  or  they  will  move  his  tiny  hand.  At  first  this  mode 
of  communication  was  not  understood ; but  on  questions 
being  put,  the  presence  of  an  intelligent  spiritual  being  was 
proven  beyond  doubt.  To  make  certain,  his  mother  re- 
quested that  he  should  be  made  to  rap  seven,  then  five 
times,  or  answer  questions.  In  reply  to  questions  not 
addressed  to  him,  but  spoken  in  a low  tone,  which  of 
course  the  little  two-year-old  could  not  understand,  he  then 
with  his  foot  would  rap  out  answers.  The  fact  that  his 
hand  and  foot  were  moved  by  spiritual  beings  was  further 
proved  by  the  dear  little  fellow  showing  his  ankle,  and 
saying,  ‘ There,  there  ! Hurt,  hurt ! * pointing  to  the  spot 
where  a spirit-hand  had  grasped  him.  Instances  of  the 
power  of  this  child  could  be  multiplied  ; but  enough  has 
been  said  to  all  but  justify  a belief  that  part  of  the  pro- 

* No.  3x4  of  the  “Medium  and  Daybreak”  contains  facsimile*  of  this. 

t August  6th,  1875. 

d by  CiOOQle 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

3^ 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

phecy  given  out  by  the  spiritual  beings  in  the  winter  of 
1869  maybe  realized.  We  quote  from  Epes  Sargent,  treat- 
ing on  ‘ The  Proof  Palpable  of  Immortality.’  In  alluding  to 
Kate  Fox — her  reliability,  her  powers,  and  her  child— he 
cites  a prophecy  concerning  her  boy  which  was  given  at 
the  house  of  Mr.  H.  P.  Townsend  six  years  ago  : 1 Kate 
will  be  married  and  will  have  a child  who  will  be  the  wonder 
of  the  world.  Kate  will  be  a cypher  in  comparison  ; she 
will  only  be  remembered  as  his  mother.’  1 His  mother?* 
said  Mrs.  Townsend  ; c it  is  to  be  a boy  ! ’ ” 

So  I leave  Kate  Fox  Jencken  and  her  little  boys.  No 
one  can  have  the  slightest  objection  to  the  father  and 
mother  thinking  their  little  cherubs  wonders — as,  indeed, 
all  children  are  ! — but  I trust  we  may  be  spared  the 
multiplication  of  that  threatened  scourge — the  Mediumistic 
Baby ! 

♦ 

art 

by  GoOqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  IV. 

THE  MYSTIC  SENSITIVE. 

An  infant  Daniel — " Furniture  removed  at  the  shortest  notice" — “ Daniel ** 
visits  England — A fig  for  the  Scientists  — “ Daniel  ” takes  his  walks 
abroad — Bed-chamber  Manifestations — Marriage  — “How  to  make 
Home  happy” — The  shining  light  snuffed  out  at  Rome — Pen-and- 
ink  Sketches  of  “ Daniel  ’—Elongation—"  Airy  Daniel  “ Sludge  the 

Medium.” 

HE  foundations  of  the  “Pantheon”  being  in,  the 
raising  of  the  edifice  seems  to  have  been  greatly 
entrusted  to  the  “Mystic  Sensitive,”  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home. 

The  infant  Daniel  was  of  a delicate  and  nervous  tem- 
perament, and  if  his  aunt,  who  adopted  him  when  he  was 
about  twelve  months  old,  is  to  be  credited  with  speaking 
the  truth,  he  was  the  special  object  of  attention  from  the 
spirits,  his  cradle  being  frequently  rocked  as  if  by  guardian 
angels  1 When  nine  years  of  age  he  accompanied  his  aunt 
and  her  husband  to  America,  and  delicate  and  nervous 
temperaments  being  rather  at  a premium  there,  he  soon 
attained  to  considerable  notoriety  when  the  “Rochester 
knockings  ” broke  out.  Some  startling  “ manifestations  ” 
created  quite  a storm  in  a tea-cup  at  home,  where  his  aunt 

31 

ui 

izedbyGo 

Dole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

resented  the  bad  habits  of  the  “ spirits  ” in  knocking  her 
furniture  about  But  Home,  who  is  quite  a modem  Mun- 
chausen, shall  tell  a story  anent  this  business — he  was  now 
seventeen  years  of  age,  and  already  an  adept  at  “ throwing 
the  hatchet.” 

“When  sitting  quietly  in  the  room  with  my  aunt  and 
uncle,  the  table,  and  sometimes  the  chairs  and  other  fur- 
niture, were  moved  about  in  a singular  way,  to  the  great 
disgust  and  surprise  of  my  relations.  Upon  one  occasion, 
as  the  table  was  being  moved  about  of  itself,  my  aunt 
brought  the  family  Bible,  and  placing  it  upon  the  table, 
said,  * There,  that  will  soon  drive  the  devils  away  ; ’ but  to 
her  astonishment,  the  table  only  moved  in  a more  lively 
manner,  as  if  pleased  to  bear  such  a burden.  Seeing  this, 
she  was  greatly  incensed,  and  determining  to  stop  it,  she 
angrily  placed  her  whole  weight  on  the  table,  and  was 
actually  lifted  up  with  it  bodily  from  the  floor.”* 

No  wonder,  after  this,  that  he  should  go  into  the  spirit 
line  of  business,  of  which  he  has  since  been  so  distinguished 
an  ornament ! But,  unlike  your  vulgar  media,  H ome  never 
received  payment.  How  he  obtained  a livelihood,  or  what 
“ presents  ” he  received,  we  are  not  told. 

“In  1852,”  he  says,  “frequently  I had  stances  six  or 
seven  times  a day,  at  each  of  which  as  many  were  present 
as  could  be  accommodated.  The  house  was  besieged  by 
visitors,  and  often  outside  in  the  street  there  was  a con- 
course of  anxious  inquirers.”  He  also  increased  the  won- 
der of  his  performances,  for,  not  content  with  moving  a 
table  (without  castors)  upon  which  five  men,  “ whose  united 
weight  was  eight  hundred andjifty-five  pounds ,”  “ from  four 
to  eight  inches  ” (this  is  scarcely  sufficiently  explicit),  he 
“ conducts  ” other  “ experiments,”  which,  as  they  are  mainly 

• " Incidents  of  my  Life.”  D.  D.  Home.  London  1863. 

Digitized  by  Gooslc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive.  33 

vouched  for  by  this  modern  Cagliostro # himself,  I need 
not  further  indicate  here. 

Having  succeeded  in  putting  blinkers  on  those  high- 
metalled  Yankees,  who  are  so  “ tarnation  'cute  ” as  to  pride 
themselves  upon  being  able  “ to  see  through  a millstone,” 
Home  “fixed  his  young  affections  on”  John  Bull,  as  the 
next  to  be  taken  in  and  done  for ; so,  in  March,  1855,  he 
started  for  England.  A concourse  of  fortuitous  circum- 
stances crowding  together  soon  after  his  arrival  in  London, 
placed  Home  in  a position  which  neither  by  ability  nor 
zeal  could  he  have  occupied.  He  came  to  England  early 
in  the  movement ; he  had  energy- from  his  Scotch  extraction, 
and  the  indigenous  impudence  of  his  almost  native  land 
of  Bunkum ; he  produced  here  tricks  which  had  never 
been  seen  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  though  they  were 
said  to  be  common  enough  in  America;  and  his  great  feat 
of  “levitation” — or  floating  in  the  air— was  copied  from 
that  performed  by  Henry  Gordon,  who  “slid  upstairs  upon 
the  banister  of  the  stair-way,  and  then  turned  and  slid 
down  head  foremost  in  the  same  manner,  all  by  an  invisible 
power.”  t There  are  other  persons  who  profess  to  be  able 
to  “ swim”  in  the  air,  and  Spiritualism  has  as  much  to  do 
with  such  trickery  as  it  has  with  the  Transit  of  Venus.  So 
Home,  skilful  in  the  arts  of  elongation  J and  contraction, 
of  handling  red-hot  coals  (h  la  the  Fire  King  at  Cremome), 
and  lighting  gas  with  his  finger-tips ; used  to  being 
“ chaired  ” (like  the  successful  candidate  at  a good  old- 
fashioned  election)  by  the  spirits,  and  to  making  mahogany 
frisk  and  accordions  play  without  touch  of  hands ; able  to 

* Though  Home  is  a long  way  behind  that  great  master  of  alchemy  and 
astrology,  Guiseppe  Balsamo,  of  Palermo,  alias  Count  Cagliostro. 
t “ Cridge’s  Epitome  of  Spiritual  Intercourse.” 

$ Elongation  is  quite  a common  thing  now  amongst  the  media.  Indeed* 
there  is  enough  of  it  to  suggest  a “Long  firm ” in  the  mystic  fraternity  1 

3 

rigi 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

34 

Moiicni  Spit  -fatalism. 

call  spirits  from  the  vasty  deep,  and  to  work  miracles  of 
healing  by  their  aid — though  always  posing  himself  as  ail 
interesting  invalid — this  high-priest  of  the  order,  and  most 
fluent  retailer  of  the  jargon  of  modern  Spiritualism,  was 
soon  the  talk  of  London. 

He  was  twenty-two  years  of  age.  Dr.  J.  J.  G.  Wilkin- 
son* says:  “the  marks  of  consumption  were  legible  upon 
his  frame,”  and  that  he  was  “a  modest,  intelligent  youth.” 
The  intelligence  may  be  granted;  the  other  statements 
are  less  reliable,  I fancy.  Twenty  years  have  passed 
away  since  then,  and  Home,  still  “delicate”  (though  Dr. 
Mack’s  influence  upon  him  was  “ simply  magical”)  is  alive, 
so  the  consumption  cannot  be  a galloping  one.  He  was 
in  London  in  September,  1875,  with  “Mr.  Aksakof,  of  St. 
Petersburg,”  looking  after  a new  edition  of  his  first  volume 
of  Apocrypha ; for  Daniel — canny  Scot ! — has  ever  an  eye 
to  the  “ siller  ” ! I am  sorry  I did  not  see  the  great  one 
during  this  visit,  that  I might  say  how  time’s  ravages  have 
dealt  with  him.  You  can  see  his  portrait,  by  H.  W.  Pick- 
ersgill,  R.A.,  painted  about  1863,  at  the  premises  of  the 
National  Association  of  Spiritualists,  or  a later  one  in  the 
“ Medium”  of  January  7th,  1876;  and  you  shall  have  the 
advantage  of  one  or  two  pen-and-ink  sketches  of  the  dis- 
tinguished “ Seer.”  His  appearance  soon  after  he  came 
to  England  (1855)  is  thus  described  by  a writer  in  the  now 
defunct  “Morning  Star”:  he  was  “thin  and  lithe,”  with 
“ dainty  white  fingers  and  the  neatest  of  wristbands.”  He 
wore  a quantity  of  jewellery,  including  a monstre  locket, 
and  a diamond  ring  sparkled  upon  one  of  the  fingers  of 
his  left  hand.  As  for  being  “ modest,”  many  a one  with 

* Who  is  gifted  with  strong  imaginative  powers,  for  when  Home  plays 
upon  an  accordion  he  avers  that  he  “never  heard  silence  thjeaded ivithsmh 
silver  tines" l 

Digitized  by  CiOOQlc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

35 

less  nerve  than  this  vain,  self-confident  man,  with  the 
sharp  eyes  that  missed  nothing,  has  floated  a bubble  com- 
pany. Home  found  levitation  much  safer  and  more 
profitable.  His  first  haven  of  rest  was  Cox’s  Hotel,  Jer- 
myn  Street,  St.  James’s.  Here,  he  says,  “ In  less  than  a 
month  I had  more  engagements  than  I could  well  fulfil” 
Amongst  his  many  visitors  were  Lord  Brougham  and  Sir 
David  Brewster.  They  stayed  for  a stance,  the  late  Mr. 
William  Cox,  with  the  “ mystic  sensitive,”  being  also  pre- 
sent. In  consequence  of  some  exaggerated  stories  being 
circulated  as  to  what  took  place  upon  this  occasion,  Sir 
David  wrote  a letter  to  the  “ Morning  Advertiser,”  which 
was  silently  acquiesced  in  by  Lord  Brougham.  It  was 
dated  “ Carnock  House,  September  29th,  1855,”  and  pro- 
ceeds to  say : “ Were  Mr.  Home  to  assume  the  character 
of  Wizard  of  the  West,  I would  enjoy  his  exhibition  as 
much  as  that  of  other  conjurors ; but  when  he  pretends  to 
possess  the  power  of  introducing  among  the  feet  of  his 
audience  the  spirits  of  the  dead,  bringing  them  into  phy- 
sical communication  with  their  dearest  relatives,  and  of 
revealing  the  secrets  of  the  grave,  he  insults  religion  and 
common  sense,  and  tampers  with  the  most  sacred  feelings 
of  his  victims.” 

In  a subsequent  letter  Sir  David  wrote: 

“ 1.  It  is  not  true  that  a large  dinner-table  was  moved 
about  at  Mr.  Cox’s  in  the  most  extraordinary  manner. 

“2.  It  is  not  true  that  a large  accordion  was  conveyed 
by  an  invisible  or  any  other  agency  into  my  hand.  I took 
it  up  myself,  and  it  would  not  utter  a sound. 

“ 3.  It  is  not  true  that  the  accordion  was  conveyed  into 
Lord  Brougham’s  hand.  It  was  placed  in  it. 

“4.  It  is  not  true  that  the  accordion  played  an  air  through- 
out in  Lord  Brougham’s  hands  : it  merely  squeaked.” 

For  thus  telling  the  truth,  Sir  David  found  himself 

y Google 

3 2 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

36 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

violently  attacked  in  the  papers  by  friends  of  the  “mystic  ” 
one.  They  abused  him  as  if  he  had  been  a pickpocket — 
as,  indeed,  they  will  me  when  they  read  this  book,  but  I am 
pretty  well  used  to  their  denunciations. 

The  controversy  raised  by  these  attacks  upon  Sir  David 
was  of  the  greatest  benefit  to  Home,  who  was  thus  brought 
prominently  before  the  public. 

It  is  a noteworthy  fact  that  up  to  this  time  all,  or  nearly 
all,  the  effects  were  produced  under  a tabic — the  place 
afterwards  chosen  by  Mr.  Crookes  for  his  wonderful  ac- 
cordion test ; but  as  believers  came  about  him,  Home 
dropped  this  tentative  style  of  doing  things,  and  is  said  to 
•have  performed  astounding  feats  before  them.  After  leav- 
ing Cox’s  Hotel,  Home  retired  to  Ealing,  and  in  the  autumn 
of  1855  he  repaired  to  Florence  — the  “manifestations’' 
getting  him  into  the  best  society.  Here  he  remembers 

“upon  one  occasion, while  the  Countess C was  seated 

at  one  of  E raid’s  grand  action  pianos,  it  rose  and  balanced 
itself  in  the  air  during  the  whole  time  she  was  playing.” 

But  this  “ trick”  has  been  “ trumped”  by  a Mrs.  Young, 
of  Twenty -Seventh  Street,  New  York,  who  makes  her 
piano  answer  questions,  and  stand  upon  an  egg  without 
crushing  the  shell ! * 

An  English  lady  resident  at  Florence  in  a haunted  house, 
had  Home  up  to  exorcise  the  ghost.  They  sat  at  a table 
and  received  a communication  by  the  spirit  alphabet  from 
the  evil  genius  of  the  house  ; then,  the  lady  says  in  her 
narrative,  “ Mr.  Home  proposed  that  we  should  move  into 
the  next  room — my  bed-room — and  try  whether  any  further 
manifestations  would  be  made  there.  We  did  so  ; but  all 
remained  quiet.  We  then  returned  to  the  room  we  had 
just  quitted,  and  sat  down  at  another  table  covered  with 

* “New  York  Sun,”  August  27th,  1875. 

Digitizec 

j by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

37 

a cloth.  We  had  previously  heard  a rustling  sound  about 
and  under  the  tables — such  a sound  as  would  be  made  by 
a person  moving  about  in  a heavy  garment.  This  noise 
was  accompanied  by  a scratching  on  the  wood  of  the  table, 
as  though  some  one  were  scraping  it  with  his  nails.  We  then 
distinctly  saw  the  cloth  on  the  side  of  the  table  next  to  me 
move  up,  as  though  a hand  raised  it  from  beneath.  The 
spirit  being  ‘adjured  in  the  name  of  the  Holy  Trinity  to 
leave  us/  the  demonstrations  ceased.”  Such  rubbish  as 
this  Home  gives  in  verification  of  “the  nature  and  extent 
of  the  manifestations  at  that  time.” 

“ Such  intimate  way. 

Close  converse,  frank  exchange  of  offices. 

Strict  sympathy  of  the  immeasurably  great 

With  the  infinitely  small,  betokened  here 

By  a course  of  signs  and  omens,  raps  and  spai!:s  — 

How  does  it  suit  the  dread  traditional  text 
Of  the  * great  and  terrible  name  ’ ? 

Shall  the  Heaven  of  heavens 
Stoop  to  such  child’s  play?” 

At  Florence  in  February,  1856,  the  impecunious  “Seer” 

—now  in  the  shade — joined  the  retinue  of  Count  B , a 

Polish  nobleman,  who  had  pressed  the  “ mystic  ” one  to 
accompany  him  to  Naples.  Thither,  accordingly,  they 
went ; and  Home  met  Robert  Dale  Owen,  at  that  time 
American  Minister  at  the  Court.  From  Naples  to  Rome, 
—“to  Rome ” literally,  for  here  Home  abjured  the  Con- 
gregationalism in  which  he  had  been  reared,  and  was  re- 
ceived into  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.*  The  Pope,  it  is 
said,  after  questioning  him  as  to  his  past  life,  significantly 
pointed  to  a crucifix,  saying,  “My  child,  it  is  upon  that  we 
place  our  faith.” 

• Home  was  confirmed  upon  Easter  Monday,  1S56,  in  the  chapel  of  the 

English  College,  Rome. 

Digitized  by 

GooqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

3* 

June,  1856,  brought  the  mystic  being— now  in  the  sun- 
shine— to  Paris,  where  he  was  presented  to  the  Emperor 
and  Empress,  and  where  he  first  got  into  trouble  with  the 
Church  he  had  so  recently  joined,  in  consequence  of  his 
continued  dealings  with  “ the  spirits.”  After  a run  through 
France  and  Italy,  and  into  Holland,  the  early  part  of 
1858  found  Home  at  St.  Petersburg,  where,  still  in  the 
best  society,  he  was  betrothed  to  “ Sacha”  (a  pet  name), 
youngest  daughter  of  the  General  Count  de  Kroll  of  Russia, 
and  a goddaughter  of  the  late  Emperor  Nicholas,  to  whom 
the  lady’s  father  was  aide-de-camp.  The  marriage  took 
place  on  Sunday,  August  1st,  1858,  in  the  private  chapel 
attached  to  the  house  of  the  lady’s  brother-in-law,  the 
Count  Gregoirc  Koucheleff  Besborodko  — Alexander 
Dumas  journeying  from  Paris  to  be  present  at  the  wed- 
ding. What  more  natural  than  the  great  French  master 
of  fiction  honouring  the  Scottish-American  romancer  ? 
The  lady,  taking  the  surest  way  “ to  make  Home  happy,” 
in  due  course  presented  him  with  a son— Gregoire — who, 
in  his  infancy,  was  a medium,  though  we  learn  without 
regret  that  he  has  since  “ given  up  many  indications  of 
being  a seer? 

In  1862  Home  was  left  a widower,  his  wife  dying  on  the 
3rd  of  July  at  the  Chdteau  Laroche,  Dordogne,  France. 
After  this  he  found  his  way  to  Rome,  “ to  pursue  his 
studies  as  a sculptor;”  but  the  Pontifical  Government 
being  suspicious  that  he  intended  “chiselling”  in  the 
“ Black  Art  ” also,  he  was  expelled  the  Roman  territory. 
Upon  Home’s  return  to  England,  this  matter  was  brought 
before  the  House  of  Commons  by  Mr.  Roebuck,  who  con- 
tended that  Home,  as  one  of  Her  Majesty’s  subjects,  wras 
entitled  to  protection  abroad,  though  he  (Mr.  Roebuck) 
had  “ no  feeling  for  Mr.  Home’s  profession  further  than 
having  a contempt  for  the  whole  thing.”  Mr  Layard  replied 

c 

jooqle 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitiz  e. 

39 

that  the  mystic  being  having  infringed  the  law  of  Rome, 
there  was  no  cause  for  the  interference  of  the  Govern- 
ment ; and  so  the  subject  dropped. 

The  “Seer”  now  settled  down  to  work  in  earnest.  In 
1866  he  delivered  “lectures”  in  London,  at  one  of  which 
he  was  sketched  for  the  benefit  of  the  readers  of  “ All  the 
Year  Round.”  The  style  will  be  recognized  by  most  per- 
sons as  “ the  touch  of  a vanished  hand.” 

“On  Thursday,  the  Fifteenth  of  February,”  says  the 
writer,  “ I attended  Willis’s  Rooms  to  hear  the  apostle 
preach ; but  before  I could  bring  myself  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  New  Gospel,  I was  called  upon  to  pay  ten 
shillings  and  sixpence.  ‘Are  there  no  five-shilling  seats  V 
I asked.  The  answer  was  ‘ No,  they  are  all  gone  ; only  a 
few  half-guinea  seats  left.’  I paid  my  half-guinea,  and 
entered  the  room,  and  found  that  there  were  plenty  of  five- 
shilling  seats  vacant,  but  only  a few  half-guinea  ones.  On 
coming  out  I accused  the  man  at  the  door  of  having  (to 
use  the  mildest  term)  deceived  me.  He  did  not  deny  it, 
but  said  in  excuse  that  it  was  not  his  fault — he  had  been 
told  to  say  there  were  no  five-shilling  seats. 

“ I will  relate  briefly  what  I heard  and  saw,  and  what 
was  the  impression  left  upon  my  mind. 

“As  Mr.  Home  takes  credit  for  being  a medium,  with 
extraordinary  powers  of  body  and  mind,  he  can  scarcely 
object  to  a description  of  his  person.  He  is  a tall,  thin 
man,  with  broad,  square  shoulders,  suggestive  of  a suit 
cf  clothes  hung  upon  an  iron  cross.  His  hair  is  long 
and  yellow ; his  teeth  are  large,  glittering,  and  sharp : his 
eyes  are  a pale  grey,  with  a redness  about  the  eyelids, 
which  comes  and  goes  in  a ghostly  manner  as  he  talks. 
When  he  shows  his  glittering,  sharp  teeth,  and  that  red 
line  comes  round  his  slowly-rolling  eyes,  he  is  not  a plea- 
sant sight  to  look  upon.  His  hands  were  long,  white,  and 

Digitized  byCiOOgk 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

40 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

bony,  and  you  knew,  without  touching  them,  that  they  were 
icy  cold.  He  stooped  over  his  paper,  and  rarely  looked 
up,  except  to  turn  his  eyes  towards  heaven  in  an  appeal  to 
the  Deity. 

“ The  first  part  of  the  lecture  was  very  dull  and  heavy, 
being  all  about  the  indestructibility  of  matter.  Before  this 
‘ head  ’ was  exhausted,  I counted  fifteen  members  of  the 
congregation  who  were  fast  asleep.  After  my  experience 
at  the  pay-place,  it  was  rather  startling  to  hear  Mr.  Home 
disclaiming  all  mercenary  motives,  and  declaring  that  he 
bad  never  received  and  never  would  receive  money  for  his 
work.  In  a private  circular  to  his  friends  he  says,  ‘ I need 
not  tell  you  how  important  it  is  to  me  to  have  the  support 
of  my  friends,  not  only  as  a comfort  and  encouragement  to 
me,  but  as  essentially  aiding  the  cause  in  which  they  and 
I are  deeply  interested.  Much,  indeed,  of  my  own fortime ’” 
(Home  says  this  should  be  future ) “ ‘must  depend  on  the 
issue  of  this  experiment.’  I leave  the  reader  to  reconcile 
this  appeal  with  his  disavowal  of  mercenary  motives  how 
he  or  she  can. 

“It  was  a contradiction  to  deny  the  truth  of  spirit-rapping, 
when  every  Sunday,  in  church,  we  declared  our  belief  in 
the  communion  of  saints.  Such  was  the  argument.  . . 
Now,  what  is  the  doctrine  which  Mr.  Home  propounds, 
and  all  these  people  subscribe  to  as  a new  article  of  faith  ? 
Boldly  this : that  Spiritualism,  founded  upon  table-rapping, 
rope-tying,  and  banjo-playing  in  a cupboard,  is  a means  oj 
man's  salvation!  These  are  Mr.  Home’s  own  words/’ 
About  this  time  Home  had  thoughts  of  going  upon  the 
stage  * (what  a loss  the  slowly-rolling  eyes  with  the  ghostly 
rims  must  have  been  to  the  profession !),  but  in  the  latter 

* Home  gave  “ Readings  ” in  the  Queen’s  Grncert  Rooms,  Hanover  Square, 
so  late  as  April  and  May,  1C70. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

4i 

end  of  1866  something  else  turned  up,  in  the  form  of  the 
Spiritual  Athenaeum,  of  which  he  became  secretary.  Mr. 
Jenckens— Mr.  Home’s  fast  friend  — was  the  honorary 
treasurer  of  this  institution,  and  to  him  v/e  are  indebted 
for  many  stories  of  extraordinary  manifestations,  of  which 
I give  a specimen : 

“Home,  seating  himself  at  the  piano,  performed  with 
wonderful  execution ; then  rising  from  the  piano,  he  walked 
three  or  four  times  round  our  circle,  mesmerizing  each  in 
turn.  Here  the  extraordinary  manifestations  of  elongation 
and  shortening  occurred.  The  height  he  attained  must 
have  been  quite  six  feet  nine  inches ; as  he  lengthened  out, 
his  clothing  at  the  waist  separated  full  six  inches,  and 
again,  as  he  became  shorter  and  shorter,  the  waistcoat 

descended  quite  down  to  his  hips,  Mrs. holding  the 

end  of  his  waistcoat  to  make  certain  of  the  elongation.” 
\yhat  a charming  picture  this  would  have  made ! On 
another  occasion  Mr.  Jencken— who  is  quite  as  circum- 
stantial as  a Court  Jenkins— reports  that  Home  said,  “ I 
am  going  to  be  elongated.  Daniel  will  be  elongated  thirty 
times  during  his  life.  This  is  the  sixth  time.”  The  fervid 
disciple  also  describes  the  fire  test.  Home,  “passing  up 
to  the  hearth,  placed  his  hands  and  then  his  face  in  the 

flames  and  on  the  burning  coals A lady  present, 

unable  to  resist  her  expressions  of  alarm  as  his  face  neared 
and  closed  upon  the  flames,  was  reproved.  Mr.  Home, 
extending  towards  her  his  right  hand,  which  had  now  be- 
come white  and  luminous,  in  reproachful  warning  saying, 
‘ Have  you  no  faith,  no  faith  ? Daniel  will  take  no  harm.’ 

* On  one  occasion  Home  allowed  a gentleman  to  touch  the  burning  coal  he 
held,  when  the  latter  drew  back,  exclaiming, *  **  By  Jove,  it  is  hot ! ” Home 

said  the  spirits  sent  a stream  of  some  force  down  his  hand  and  arm  to  counter- 
act  the  influence  of  the  heat ! 

izeo  01 

Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

42 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

“ Miracle,”  says  Goethe,  “ is  tlie  pet  child  of  Faith,”  and 
Mr.  Jcnckcn,  a perfect  mountain  of  faith,  is  ready  to  vouch 
for  any  miracle  and  to  stand  by  “ Daniel  ” to  the  last  gasp. 
It  is  remarkable  that  these  very  wonderful  manifestations 
never  took  place  save  in  the  presence  of  the  faithful  few. 
Speaking  of  Home’s  exhibitions  generally,  “ Fraser’s  Maga- 
zine”* remarks  that  the  manifestations  were  “ invariably 
of  the  same  character,  and  became  strong  or  weak  in  exact 
proportion  to  the  abundance  or  lack  of  faith  in  the  com- 
pany. The  greater  wonders  were  never  attempted,  at  all 
events  they  never  succeeded,  with  an  unbeliever  in  the 
room.”  On  the  faithful  “ Mr.  Home  exercised  an  influence 
strikingly  analogous  to  that  of  Joe  Smith  over  the  earlier 
Mormonites. 

“This  worthy,  it  will  be  remembered,  in  profane  imita- 
tion of  a Scripture  miracle,  undertook  to  walk  across  a 
broad  and  deep  river  dryshod.  His  disciples  were  waiting 
in  anxious  expectation  on  the  brink,  when  he  inquired  of 
them  if  they  believed  he  could  do  it  ? They  answered 
‘ Yes.’  * Then/  said  he,  ‘ it ’s  the  same  as  if  I had  done  it.’ 
And  they  went  on  their  way,  rejoicing  in  their  prophet  and 
unshaken  in  their  faith. 

‘And  they  believe  him  ! Oh,  the  lover  may 
Distrust  the  look  which  steals  his  soul  away ; 

The  child  may  cease  to  think  that  it  can  play 
With  heaven’s  lightnings  ; alchemists  may  doubt 
The  shining  gold  the  crucible  gives  out ; 

But  faith,  fanatic  faith,  once  wedded  fast 
To  some  dear  falsehood,  hugs  it  to  the  last.’ 

“Mr.  Home  beats  Joe  Smith  hollow,  for  he  persuades 
people  that  they  hear  what  they  do  not  hear,  that  they  see 
what  they  do  not  see,  that  an  accordion,  which  makes  an 

a Vol.  LXXI.,  1865. 

p I Original  from 

Digitized  by  kiCKWK  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

43 

irregular  noise,  is  playing  a popular  tune,  and  that  he  is 
floating  near  the  ceiling  when  he  is  simply  standing  on  his 
chair  with  one  foot  touching  a disciple’s  shoulder. 

“ We  once  sat  through  a long  stance  with  four  or  five 
other  persons,  and  what  struck  us  most  was  their  mental 
condition  during  the  entire  performance.  It  fairly  stag- 
gered us,  till  our  observation  was  confirmed  by  friends  who 
had  noted  the  same  phenomena  at  similar  sittings.  He 
did  nothing  but  what  might  obviously  and  easily  be  done 
by  hand  and  foot,  for  the  whole  of  the  so-called  manifesta- 
tions took  place  under  a table  of  limited  dimensions,  with  a 
green  cloth  lapped  over  the  edge,  which  we  were  warned 
on  no  account  to  lift.  After  two  hours  spent  in  shaking 
and  slightly  raising  the  table,  ringing  the  bell,  sounding 
the  accordion,  twitching  ladies’  petticoats,  pinching  their 
knees,  &c.,  &c.,  there  was  a pause  of  twenty  minutes  to 
rest  Mr.  Home  or  the  spirits.  We  then  resumed  our  seats, 
and  remained  nearly  half  an  hour  in  solemn  expectancy  of 
the  appearance  of  the  spirit  of  Cagliostro,  when  the  lights 
were  to  be  extinguished,  flowers  were  to  be  showered  on  us 
from  unseen  hands,  and  Mr.  Home  was  to  be  wafted  into 
the  air. 

“ Unluckily  the  spiritual  ladder  was  broken  and  the  pro- 
mised scene  marred  by  an  indiscreet  suggestion  to  the 
effect  that  unless  a spirit — like  Sir  Boyle  Roche’s  bird — 
could  be  in  two  places  at  once,  Cagliostro  might  be  pre- 
vented from  coming  by  a prior  engagement  for  that  night. 

“ Owing  to  this  and  two  or  three  other  signs  of  unbelief 
from  the  same  quarter,  the  sitting  was  suddenly  broken 
up,  and  we  are  obliged  to  rely  on  the  account  given  in  the 
‘ Cornhill  Magazine,’  July,  i860,  and  confirmed  by  Dr. 
Gully,  of  the  ordinary  crowning  exploit  of  the  night. 

“ Darkness  was  declared  to  be  an  indispensable  condi- 
tion of  the  ascent ; and  when  the  lamps  and  candles  were 

! .>  Original  from 

Digitized  by  UNIVERSITY  OP  WISCONSIN 

44 

Modern  Spit  itualism. 

extinguished,  a pale  light  still  came  in  from  the  window, 
which  it  was  the  first  business  of  the  spirits  to  exclude. 

‘ Presently  the  tassel  of  the  cord  of  the  spring  blind  began 
to  tremble.  We  could  sec  it  plainly  against  the  sky,  and 
attention  being  drawn  to  the  circumstance,  every  eye  was 
on  the  tassel.  Slowly,  and  apparently  with  caution  or  diffi- 
culty, the  blind  began  to  descend  : the  cord  was  evidently 
being  drawn  ; but  the  force  applied  to  pull  down  the  blind 
seemed  feeble  and  uncertain.  It  succeeded,  however,  at 
last,  and  the  room  was  thrown  into  deeper  darkness  ‘■hail 
before.  But  our  vision  was  becoming  accustomed  to  it, 
and  masses  of  things  were  growing  palpable  to  us,  although 
we  could  see  nothing  distinctly.  Several  times,  at  intervals, 
the  blind  was  raised  and  pulled  down ; but  capricious  as 
the  movement  appeared,  the  ultimate  object  seemed  to  be 
to  diminish  the  light / 

“ The  simplicity  of  this  observation  is  beyond  all  praise, 
and  sufficiently  indicates  the  mental  state  of  the  writer. 
After  describing,  with  equal  naivete , the  ringing  of  the 
bell,  the  pressure  of  hands,  &c.,  he  arrives  at  the  chef- 
d'ccuvre : 

“‘Mr.  Home  was  seated  next  to  the  window.*  Through 
the  semi-darkness  his  head  was  dimly  visible  against  the 
curtains,  and  his  hands  might  be  seen  in  a faint  white 
heap  before  him.  Presently  he  said,  in  a quiet  voice,  “ My 
chair  is  moving;  lam  off  the  ground:  doit  notice  me; 
talk  of  something  else ,”  or  words  to  that  effect.  It  was 
very  difficult  to  restrain  the  curiosity,  not  unmixed  with  a 
more  serious  feeling,  which  these  few  words  awakened  ; 
out  we  talked  incoherently  enough  upon  some  indifferent 
topic/ 

* A suspicious  circumstance,  when  we  think  of  the  efforts  made  to  exclude 

the  light. 

\ 

X 

by  GoO^lc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlfY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

45 

“In  other  words,  they  fell  into  the  trap  laid  for  them, 
and  suffered  their  attention  to  be  distracted.  He  pro- 
ceeds : 

“‘I  was  sitting  nearly  opposite  to  Mr.  Home,  and  saw 
his  hands  disappear  from  the  table,  and  his  head  vanish 
into  the  deep  shadow  beyond.  In  a moment  or  two  more 
he  spoke  again.  This  time  his  voice  was  in  the  air  above 
our  heads.  He  had  risen  from  his  chair  to  a height  of 
four  or  five  feet  from  the  ground.  As  he  ascended  higher, 
he  described  his  position,  which  at  first  was  perpendicular, 
and  afterwards  became  horizontal.  He  said  he  felt  as  if 
he  had  been  turned  in  the  gentlest  manner,  as  a child  is 
turned  in  the  arms  of  a nurse.  In  a moment  or  two  more 
he  told  us  he  was  going  to  pass  across  the  windows,  against 
the  grey  silvery  light  of  which  he  would  be  visible.  We 
watched  in  profound  stillness,  and  saw  his  figure  pass  from 
one  side  of  the  window  to  the  other,  feet  foremost,  lying 
horizontally  in  the  air.  He  spoke  to  us  as  he  passed,  and 
told  us  he  would  turn  the  reverse  way  and  re-cross  the 

window,  which  he  did He  hovered  round  the 

circle  for  several  minutes,  and  passed  this  time  perpendi  - 
cularly  over  our  heads.  I heard  his  voice  behind  me  in 
the  air,  and  felt  something  lightly  brush  my  chair.  It  was 
his  foot,  which  he  gave  me  leave  to  touch.  Turning  to  the 
spot  where  it  was  on  the  top  of  the  chair , I placed  my  hand 
gently  upon  it,  when  he  uttered  a cry  of  pain,  and  the  foot 
was  withdrawn  quickly,  with  a palpable  shudder.  It  was 
evidently  not  resting  upon  the  chair,  but  floating;  and  it 
sprang  from  the  touch  as  a bird  would.  He  now  passed 
over  to  the  farthest  extremity  of  the  room,  and  we  could 
judge  by  his  voice  of  the  altitude  and  distance  he  had 
attained.  He  had  reached  the  ceiling,  upon  which  he 
made  a slight  move,  and  soon  after  descended  and  re- 
sumed his  place  at  the  table.’ 

ized  by  Go< 

3gle 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

46 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

“ It  thus  appears  that  neither  this  gentleman  nor  Dr. 
Gully  saw  Mr.  Home  in  the  air.  They  merely  saw  and 
heard  things  from  which  they  drew  the  inference  that  he 
was  floating  above  and  about  them,  as  he  said  he  was,  the 
only  palpable  or  material  things  being  the  passing  and  re- 
passing of  an  opaque  substance,  which  they  believed  to  be 
his  body,  across  the  window.  It  would  be  difficult,  they 
urge,  for  Mr.  Home  to  produce  this  effect,  or  to  mislead 
them  as  to  his  whereabouts  in  the  darkness,  by  his  voice; 
but  would  it  not  be  more  difficult  for  him  to  suspend  the 
law  of  gravitation,  night  after  night,  for  the  gratification  of 
the  curious  ? And  why  should  we  accept  as  a miracle  that 
which  had  every  outward  and  visible  semblance  of  a de- 
ception ?” 

Lord  Lindsay’s  celebrated  story  of  Home’s  levitation 
will  not  be  out  of  place  here.  His  lordship  wrote  : 

“I  was  sitting  with  Mr.  Home  and  Lord  Adare  and  a 
cousin  of  his.  During  the  sitting  Mr.  Home  went  into  a 
trance,  and  in  that  state  was  carried  out  of  the  window  in 
the  room  next  to  where  we  \Vere,  and  was  brought  in  at  our 
window.  The  distance  between  the  windows  was  about 
seven  feet  six  inches,  and  there  was  not  the  slightest  foot- 
hold between  them,  nor  was  there  more  than  a twelve-inch 
projection  to  each  window,  which  served  as  a ledge  to  put 
flowers  on. 

“ We  heard  the  window  in  the  next  room  lifted  up,  and 
almost  immediately  after  we  saw  Home  floating  in  the  air 
outside  our  window. 

“ The  moon  was  shining  full  into  the  room ; my  back 
was  to  the  light,  and  I saw  the  shadow  on  the  wall  of  the 
window-sill,  and  Home’s  feet  about  six  inches  above  it. 
He  remained  in  this  position  for  a few  seconds,  then  raised 
the  window  and  slided  into  the  room,  feet  foremost,  and 
sat  down. 

Digitized  byGoOgle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

47 

The  Mystic  Sensitive. 

u Lord  Adarc  then  went  into  the  next  room  to  look  at 
the  window  from  which  he  had  been  carried.  It  was 
raised  about  eighteen  inches,  and  he  expressed  his  wonder 
how  Mr.  Home  had  been  taken  through  so  narrow  an 
aperture.  Home  said  (still  in  a trance),  ‘ I will  show  you ; * 
and  then,  with  his  back  to  the  window',  he  leaned  back, 
and  was  shot  out  of  the  aperture  head  first,  with  the  body 
rigid,  and  then  returned  quite  quietly.”* 

The  foregoing  letter  was  thus  ably  dissected  by  the 
“Quarterly  Review  :”f 

“ i.  Though  it  might  have  been  expected  that  in  nar- 
rating a marvel  so  astounding,  Lord  Lindsay  would  have 
been  careful  to  state  every  particular  that  could  be  reason- 
ably asked  for,  and  to  support  his  account  of  it  by  the 
testimony  of  other  gentlemen  by  whom  it  was  witnessed, 
he  commences  as  if  he  were  narrating  the  most  ordinary 
occurrence,  which  ought  to  be  received  on  his  testimony 
alone — thus  showing  that  he  had  previously  surrendered 
himself  unreservedly  to  the  belief  in  Mr.  Home’s  ‘occult' 
powers,  and  that  his  testimony  is  therefore  to  be  received 
with  the  gravest  suspicion. 

“2.  He  commits  the  flagrant  inconsistency  of  telling  us 
that  whilst  he  and  two  other  persons  were  ‘ sitting  with 
Mr.  Home,’ — which,  if  words  have  any  meaning,  implies 
that  Mr.  Home  was  in  the  same  room  with  him — Mr. 
Home  ‘was  carried  out  of  the  window  in  the  room  next  to 
where  we  we?'e,  and  was  brought  in  at  our  window .’ 

• Clever  spirits! — who 

“ * Mediums  ’ raise  by  ‘levitation,' 

And  subject  them  to  ‘ elongation,' 

And  in  and  out  of  windows  float  them 
Two  stories  high,  lords  vow— we  quote  them." 

— Punch. 

t *'Spiritualicm  and  its  Recent  Converts,”  October,  7871. 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

48 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

“3.  This  spiritual  transportation  took  place,  not  in  open 
day,  but  by  moonlight.  If  any  wicked  wag  were  to  cha- 
racterize Lord  Lindsay’s  statement  as  all  moonshine , would 
not  the  common  sense  of  our  readers  accept  the  descrip- 
tion ? ” 

Mr.  Home’s  “levitation” seems  to  have  been  altogether 
of  a doubtful  character,  but  if  accomplished,  it  need  not 
therefore  be  ascribed  to  a spiritual  agency,  as  I have 
demonstrated  at  the  Egyptian  Hall. 

When  Mr.  Addison  (who  was  claimed  as  a medium  by 
the  Spiritualists)  offered  Home  ^50  if  he  could  float  in  the 
air  in  his  presence,  he  declined  the  challenge,  as  he  had 
the  Emperor  Napoleon’s  proposal  for  Robert  Houdin  to 
be  present  at  one  of  his  stances. 

As  to  this  man,  of  about  eleven  stone  weight,  being 
suspended  in  mid-air,  like  Mahomet’s  coffin,  and  “ shoot- 
ing ” through  an  open  window,  it  is  too  much  ! I fear 
“airy  Daniel”  will  have  to  repair  to  that  “Retreat  for 
decayed  Spiritualists — The  Home  for  Idiots”* — to  find 
any  general  acceptance  of  these  stories. 

But— 

“The  pleasure,  surely,  is  as  great 
Of  being  cheated  as  to  cheat,” 

so  Mr.  Home  and  his  disciples  must  have  been  in  a state 
of  beatitude ; though  it  is  indeed  wonderful  to  note  the 
easy  credulity  with  which  these  latter  accept  the  marvellous, 
who  would  naturally  be  suspicious  and  exacting  enough  in 
ordinary  cases. 

“Suppose 

A poor  lad,  say  a help’s  son  in  your  house, 

Listening  at  keyholes,  hears  the  company 
Talk  grand  of  dollars,  V-notes,  and  so  forth, 

IIow  hard  they  are  to  get,  how  good  to  hold. 

• “Punch,”  November  5th,  1864. 

jiqi 

>CH 

& 

1 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mystic  Sensitive . 

49 

How  much  they  buy, — if,  suddenly,  in  pops  he— 

* I 've  got  a V-note  l ’ What  do  you  say  to  him? 

What ’s  your  first  word  which  follows  your  last  kick  ? 

* Where  did  you  steal  it,  rascal  t ’ 

• ••••• 

But  let  the  same  lad  hear  you  talk  as  grand 
At  the  same  keyhole,  you  and  company. 

Of  signs  and  wonders,  the  invisible  world ; 

How  wisdom  scouts  our  vulgar  unbelief 
More  than  our  vulgarest  incredulity; 

How  good  men  have  desired  to  see  a ghost. 

What  Johnson  used  to  say,  what  Wesley  did, 

Mother  Goose  thought,  and  fiddle  diddle  dee ; 

If  he  then  break  in  with,  * Sir,  / saw  a ghost ! * 

Ah,  the  w'ays  change  ! He  finds  you  perched  and  prim ; 
It 's  a conceit  of  yours  that  ghosts  may  be : 

There ’s  no  talk  now  of  cowhide.  * Tell  it  out  I 
Don’t  fear  us  ! Take  your  time  and  recollect ! 

Sit  down  first : try  a glass  of  wine,  my  boy  I 
And,  David  (is  not  that  your  Christian  name?) 

Of  all  things,  should  this  happen  twice — it  may— 

Be  sure,  while  fresh  in  mind,  you  let  us  know  l * 

Does  the  boy  blunder,  blurt  out  this,  blab  that, 

Break  down  in  the  other,  as  beginners  will? 

All ’s  candour,  all 's  considerateness.  * No  haste  ; 

Pause  and  collect  yourself.  We  understand  ! 

That ’s  the  bad  memory,  or  the  natural  shock 
Of  the  unexplained  phenomena  /’ " * 

• Sludge  the  Medium.— R.  B.  Browning* 

4 

tized  by  GoOQlc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  V. 

“DANIEL”  IN  THE  LYO.l’S  DEN. 

The  Trials  of  a “disinterested”  Medium — A Home  Ruler  (of  the  Spirits) 
receives  a cheque — A dead  Lyon’s  Ghost — “Danny”  and  his  “darling 
Mother” — “Home,  sweet  Home” — “Them  high  folks” — “Pickles  is 
good  !” — “Daniel”  come  to  Judgment — The  Ortonian  Theory — A Song 
of  the  Day. 

HE  late  Dr.  Robert  Chambers,  editor  of  “ Cham- 
bers’ Edinburgh  Journal”  says  of  Home,  that 
“ he  came  forward  with  no  conceivable  end  but  to  propa- 
gate a knowledge  of  what  he  regards  as  important  truths 
but  most  of  us  remember  the  celebrated  action  brought 
by  Mrs.  Jane  Lyon  against  Daniel  Dunglass  Home  and 
William  Martin  Wilkinson  (his  attorney*)  in  1867,  which 
certainly  seems  to  throw  a slight  doubt  upon  the  gentle- 
man’s statement. 

For  the  information  of  the  juniors  and  to  refresh  the 
memory  of  others,  I may  mention  that  the  lady  (whose 
husband,  Charles  Lyon,  of  Wooth  Grange,  Bridport,  Dor- 
set, had  died  in  1859)  resided,  about  the  year  1866,  in 
apartments  at  No.  18  Westbourne  Place.  Home  at  the 
same  period  was  resident  secretary,  with  ct  salary , at  the 

• A formal  defendant. 

igitized  by  GoOqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

5 1 

“ Daniel  ” in  the  Lyon's  Den . 

Spiritual  Athenaeum,  22  Sloane  Street,*  which  was  sup- 
ported by  subscription.  The  action  was  brought  to  recover 
some  ,£30,000,  which,  as  the  plaintiff  affirmed,  Home  had 
received  from  her  by  fraud,  and  a writ  of  Tie  exeat  regno 
being  obtained,  the  defendant  was  lodged  in  Whitecross 
Street  Prison. 

It  seems  the  lady  had  heard  of  Home  as  “ the  head 
Spiritualist,”  who  would  be  able  to  bring  her  into  com- 
munion with  her  deceased  husband  ; accordingly,  “ being 
possessed  of  this  desire,”  she  paid  her  first  visit  to  No.  22 
upon  the  3rd  of  October,  1 866,  and  there  saw  the  defendant, 
sat  at  a table  in  his  sitting-room  with  him,  and  heard  raps 
which  Home  explained  as  a message  from  her  late  hus- 
band, read  by  aid  of  the  spirit  alphabet.  The  lady  was 
so  much  pleased  with  the  communications  then  received, 
that  she  requested  the  “ medium  ” to  call  upon  her  the  next 
day,  when  he  should  receive  a cheque  for  ,£10  as  a “ sub- 
scription.” Home  (of  course !)  went,  and  after  eliciting 
another  message  from  the  dead  Lyon,  came  away  clutching 
a cheque  for  ^30  instead  of  the  ,£10  promised.  Several 
meetings  took  place  after  this,  and  the  lady’s  affidavit  shall 
continue  the  narrative,  which  is,  to  say  the  least,  suggestive 
of  human  credulity  upon  the  one  side,  and  the  craft  of  no 
apprentice  hand  upon  the  other. 

EXTRACTS  FROM  MRS.  LYON’S  AFFIDAVIT. 

“4.  On  or  about  the  6th  of  October  last,  the  said  de- 
fendant again  called  upon  me  in  Westbourne  Place  afore- 
said, and  I again  received  him  alone  in  my  sitting-room, 
and  he  commenced  talking  to  me  on  the  subject  of  his 
marriage  with  his  deceased  wife,  and  told  me  how  happy 

* By  a strange  coincidence  Cagliostro  lived  in  this  street. 

4 2 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

52  Modern  Spiritualism . 

he  had  been  with  her,  and  he  stated  his  intention  of  marry- 
ing again,  but  said  that  he  should  not  marry  a young  lady, 
as  he  did  not  like  young  ladies,  but  was  anxious  to  marry 
an  elderly  lady,  and  that  he  should  make  a very  loving  and 
affectionate  husband  ; and  from  these  remarks  and  others 
which  followed  on  the  same  subject,  I then  inferred,  and 
now  verily  believe,  that  he  intended  to  make  to  me  pro- 
posals of  marriage ; but  I told  him  that  the  subject  was 
distasteful  to  me,  and  I silenced  him  upon  it  at  once. 
Almost  immediately  afterwards  raps  came  again,  indica- 
ting, as  the  said  defendant  induced  me  to  believe,  and  as 
I,  in  fact,  believed,  the  presence  of  my  husband’s  spirit ; 
and  the  following  word,  or  words  as  nearly  as  possible  to 
the  following  effect,  were  (with  other  words)  then  spelt  out 
in  the  manner  before  referred  to,  the  said  defendant  re- 
peating rapidly  the  letters  of  the  alphabet,  and  stopping 
from  time  to  time  as  raps  came  indicating  the  letters  to 

be  used  : ‘ My  own  darling  Jane ....  I love 

Daniel 5 (meaning,  as  I understood,  the  said  defendant) ; 
* he  is  to  be  our  son  ; he  is  my  son,  therefore  yours.’  ” 

This  sudden  change  of  front  from  the  position  of  lover 
to  that  of  son,  betokens  a tactician  of  no  mean  order,  and 
it  had  the  desired  effect ; for  when,  upon  the  8th  of  Oc- 
tober or  thereabouts,  Mrs.  Lyon’s  deceased  husband  raps 
out  through  the  medium  that  she  is  to  adopt  “ Daniel  ” as 
her  son,  and  “ make  over  to  him  a sufficient  sum  from  her 
funded  property  to  bring  him  in  £70 o a year,”  the  silly 
lady  proceeds  to  carry  into  effect  what  she  conceives  to 
be  her  husband’s  will,  by  transferring  the  value  of  some 
£24,000  sterling  in  stock  to  Dr.  Chambers’ “disinterested” 
protect.  But  not  content  even  with  this,  the  rapacious 
“ Seer,”  about  the  beginning  of  November,  whilst  in  a trance 
state  (he  was  wide  awake  to  his  own  interests  !)  dictates 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

“ Daniel  ” in  the  Lyorfs  Den. 

53 

word  for  word  instructions  for  a will,  whereby  he  is  to  take 
the  arms  and  name  of  Lyon  and  all  the  property ! This 
will  was  subsequently  made  by  W.  M.  Wilkinson,  of  Lin- 
coln’s Inn  Fields,  the  solicitor,  and  attested  by  Dr.  Hawks- 
ley,of  70  Brook  Street,  Hanover  Square,  and  Mr.  Alexander 
Henry  Rudall,  a merchant,  of  8 and  9 Great  Tower  Street, 
City,  all  intimate  friends  of  the  “disinterested”  medium.* 
The  eyes  of  the  lady  not  being  yet  open  to  this  gigantic 
imposition,  about  December  the  spirit  alphabet  is  again  in 
requisition,  this  time  commanding  that  “ Daniel  ” shall  re- 
ceive a present  of  £6,000  upon  his  birthday,  which  sum  is 
also  forthcoming  by  the  transfer  “of  £6,798  1 7s.  4 d.  Conso- 
lidated Bank  Annuities  into  the  name  of  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home.  Then,  after  a little  mortgaging  transaction,  the  poor 
lady,  minus  a considerable  portion  of  her  wealth,  suddenly 
awakens  from  her  trance,  and  in  her  affidavit  continues : 

“18.  I have  lately  upon  reflection  become  convinced 
that  I have  in  the  several  transactions,  matters,  and  things 
hereinbefore  referred  to,  been  altogether  imposed  upon  by 
and  made  the  dupe  of  the  said  defendant,  Daniel  Dunglass 
Home  ; and  that  the  several  directions,  which  at  the  time 
I believed  to  have  been  given  as  aforesaid  by  the  spirit  of 
my  said  late  husband,  were  not  in  reality  so  given,  but 
that  they  without  exception  emanated  entirely  from  the 
said  defendant  and  not  otherwise.” 

In  his  affidavit  in  reply,  Home  proceeds  to  contradict 
the  statements  of  Mrs.  Lyon,  whom  he  describes  as  a vulgar 
woman,  the  illegitimate  daughter  of  a Newcastle  trades- 
man, who  speaks  of  “ them  high  folks  ” — the  Emperor  of 

• It  is  but  fair  to  say  that  no  fraud  was  imputed  to  Mr.  Wilkinson,  or  either 
of  the  gentlemen  who  attested  the  “ will" 

Digitized  by  Gooole 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

54 

J\ fodern  Spiritualism. 

Russia,  &c.  She  is,  in  fact,  according  to  her  pseudo  son 
<$  Daniel,”  a female  tuft-hunter — though  surely  not  more  so 
than  “ her  dear  boy  ” who  never  tires  of  parading  a con- 
siderable list  of  “ high  folks  ” of  his  acquaintance. 

Now,  Mrs.  Lyon  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a love- 
able lady  by  any  means,  and  “ Daniel  ” says  that  she  was 
constantly  and  unpleasantly  sighing  for  “ Home,  sweet 
Home.”  Yet,  withal,  he  was  desirous  of  changing  his 
name  to  hers,  and  of  becoming  her  adopted  son.  Could 
he  have  done  all  this  from  mercenary  motives  ? Perish 
the  thought!  No,  “Daniel;”  did  not  Dr.  Chambers 
vouch  for  you  being  above  that  sort  of  thing  ! 

The  case  came  before  Vice-Chancellor  Giffard,  and  oc- 
cupied ten  days  in  hearing,  from  the  21st  of  April  to  the 
ist  of  May,  1868.  For  the  plaintiff  appeared  Mr.  W.  M. 
James,  Q.C.,  Mr.  Druce,  and  Mr.  Fischer ; for  the  defen- 
dant, Mr.  E.  E.  Kay,  Mr.  Matthews,  of  the  Common  Law 
Bar,  Mr.  Godfrey  Lushington,  and  Mr.  Fitzroy  Kelly. 

The  Court  was  crowded  to  overflowing  upon  each  of  the 
days,  the  number  of  ladies  being  particularly  noticeable. 
When  leaving  the  Court  upon  the  second  day,  the  defen- 
dant was  hooted  by  the  crowd  assembled  outside ; indeed, 
public  feeling  ran  high  against  this  prophet  of  the  newest 
and  most  profitable  dispensation. 

The  trial  was  not  devoid  of  amusing  features,  for  a titter 
ran  round  the  Court  when  Home  declared  that  he  was  of 
“a  very  nervous  organization;”  and  a feeling  of  disap- 
pointment was  manifest — especially  among  the  daughters 
of  Eve  present — when  the  “mystic  one”  declined  Mr. 
James’s  request  that  he  should  there  and  then  give  some 
specimen  “ raps  ” in  the  witness-box. 

But  Mrs.  Lyon  was  a “ treat ! ” It  all  came  out  how  she 
had  discovered  “ Danny’s”  wickedness  by  consulting  the 
“ sperrits  ” addicted  to  Miss  Berry,  in  this  wise  : 

CiO  OQ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

u Daniel * in  the  Lyon's  Den.  55 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Are  there  any  sperrits  here  that  knows  me  ? 

Sperrit.  Yes. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Who? 

Sperrit.  Charles. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Is  it  my  husband’s  sperrit,  Charles  Lyon? 

Sperrit.  Yes. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Do  you  know  of  this  business  with  Daniel 
Home? 

Sperrit.  Yes. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Do  you  approve  of  it? 

Sperrit.  No  ; it  is  an  imposition. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  What  shall  I do  ? 

Sperrit.  Go  to  law  at  once.  Be  firm  and  decided. 

Mrs.  Lyon.  Was  your  sperrit  ever  with  Daniel? 

Sperrit.  No,  never. 

This  settled  the  business,  and  the  lady  had  gone  to  law ; 
and  her  “ dear  boy,”  whom  she  had  warned  to  take  care  of 
his  health,  and  had  hinted  to  that  end  that  “pickles  is 
good,”  was  now  “a  spiritual  adventurer,”  “a  poor  sickly 
creature,”  and  “ a greedy,  fawning,  sneaking,  lieing  hypo- 
crite ; ” and  his  son  (then  eight  years  of  age)  a rude,  im- 
pertinent, “contradictious”  boy. 

Mr.  W.  M.  James,  Q.C.,  in  his  reply  remarked  that  “ the 
defendant  was  a young  man,  an  adventurer,  according  to 
his  own  showing,  exercising  no  trade  or  profession,  and  with 
no  means  whatever  of  living,  except  this  singular  gift  of 
which  he  claimed  to  be  in  possession.  It  was,  indeed, 
made  matter  of  boast  that  he  never  took  money  or  any  fee 
for  the  exercise  of  his  spiritual  powers.  It  was  quite  clear, 
however,  that  it  was  to  the  possession  of  this  peculiar  gift 
that  he  owed  any  position,  rank,  or  means  of  livelihood 
that  he  enjoyed.” 

The  Vice-Chancellor,  in  his  decree,*  said  he  had  read 

# May  22nd,  1868. 

itized  by  GoOQlc 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

56 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

the  defendant’s  statements  and  explanations,  and  was  alto- 
gether dissatisfied  with  them.  “ There  must,  therefore,”  he 
added,  “ be  a declaration  in  the  usual  form,  that  the  gifts 
and  deeds  are  fraudulent  and  void.  . . . The  system 

(Spiritualism),  as  presented  by  the  evidence,  is  mischievous 
nonsense — well  calculated  on  the  one  hand  to  delude  the 
vain,  the  weak,  the  foolish,  and  the  superstitious ; and  on 
the  other  to  assist  the  projects  of  the  needy  and  the  ad- 
venturer. Beyond  all  doubt  there  is  plain  law  enough  and 
plain  sense  enough  to  forbid  and  prevent  the  retention  of 
acquisitions  such  as  these  by  any  ‘ medium,’  whether  with 
or  without  a strange  gift ; and  that  this  should  be  so  is  a 
public  concern,  and — to  use  the  words  of  Lord  Hardwicke 
— of  the  highest  public  utility.” 

So  “Daniel”  found  himself  pitted  against  his  “darling 
mamma  ” Lyon  in  the  British  Lion’s  Court  of  Chancery, 
and  did  not  come  out  scathless.  Indeed,  the  aged  Lyon 
made  “ small  bones  ” of  her  “ Danny,”  who  retired  dis- 
comfited. But  he  had  run  through  the  gamut  of  “ flats  ” 
and  “ naturals,”  and  (unlike  some  of  the  genus  “ medium,” 
who  manage  to  secure  “ more  kicks  than  halfpence  ”)  had 
gained  a competence,  so  Mr.  Howitt  tells  us,  by  his  shows ; 
which  only  proves  the  truth  of  the  Ortonian  theory  — 
stolen  from  Miss  Braddon’s  “Aurora  Floyd” — that  surely 
“ people  as  has  plenty  money  and  no  brains  was  made  for 
them  as  has  plenty  brains  and  no  money.” 

“ Punch,”  then  as  ever  pretty  right,  has  a laughable  rap 
at  “ airy  Daniel,”  which  is  too  true  to  have  been  pleasant 
to  that  mystic  and  sensitive  being. 

HOME,  SWEET  HOME  I 
(A  Song  of  the  Day.) 

Through  realms  Thaumaturgic  the  student  may  roam. 

And  not  light  on  a worker  of  wonders  like  Home  1 

Digitized 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

57 

“ Daniel ” in  the  Lyon's  Den . 

Cagltostro  himself  might  descend  from  his  chair. 

And  set  up  our  Daniel  as  Grand  Cophta  there — 

Home,  Home,  Dan  Home, 

No  medium  like  Home  I 

Confronted  with  Home,  Lyon's  terrors  are  vain  ; 

Into  fortune  he  flies,  and  won’t  fly  out  again  ; 

And  with  raps’  worth  as  his,  “ worth  a rap  ” means  worth  al* 
For  which,  on  rappees,  up-to-snuff  rappers  call  — 

Home,  Home,  Dan  Home, 

No  medium  like  Home  ! 

Spirit-legs,  spirit-hands,  he  gives  table  and  chair : 
Gravitation  defying,  he  flies  in  the  air ; 

But  the  fact  to  which  henceforth  his  fame  should  be  pinned. 
Is  his  power  to  raise,  not  himself,  but  the  wind  ! — 

Home,  Home,  Dan  Home, 

No  medium  like  Home  I 

He  is  vouched  for  by  friends,  F.R-S.'s,  M.P.’s, 

With  Emp'ror  and  Czar  hobs-and-nobs  at  his  ease ; 

And  to  show  off  for  shillings  he  cannot  have  grounds. 

Who  has  still  on  tap  drafts  for  thousands  of  pounds  !— 
Home,  Home,  Dan  Home, 

No  medium  like  Home  !* 

• “Punch,”  May  gth,  1868. 

itized 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  JUGGLING  GEMINI  ! 

Buffalo  Boys— Dancing  Crockery — "George  Brown" — "Making  tracks” — 
An  unfortunate  Investigator — A " dare-devil”—  Crossing  the  "Herring 
Pond”  — The  Gemini  in  London  — "Punch”  and  the  "Boys”  — Dis- 
coveries and  Exposures — “ Fresh  fields  and  pastures  new.” 

RA  ERASTUS  and  William  Henry  Davenport 
were  born  at  Buffalo, — a city  in  New  York  State, 
at  the  outlet  of  Lake  Erie,  on  the  Niagara  River,  and  some 
twenty  miles  south  of  the  celebrated  “ Falls” — the  former 
upon  September  17th,  1839,  the  latter  upon  the  1st  of 
February,  1841.  Their  father,  Ira,  who  was  “in  the  police 
department,”  was  a native  of  the  same  State,  but  said  to 
be  descended  from  early  English  settlers ; their  mother, 
whose  maiden  name  was  Virtue  Honey  sett,  was  born  in 
Kent. 

The  boys  had  to  “rough  it”  a little  in  their  native  town, 
and  when  we  need  first  notice  them  particularly,  were  en- 
gaged in  the  unspiritual  occupation  of  newspaper  delivery 
While  they  were  still  only  children  the  “ Rochester  knock- 
ings  ” commenced,  and,  doubtless,  from  their  employment, 
they  were  well  posted-up  in  all  the  latest  “phenomenal 
developments,”  as  the  newspapers  of  the  day  were  teeming 

58 

Digitized 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

59 

The  Juggling  Gemini  1 

with  such  rubbish.  When  Ira  had  reached  the  age  of 
fifteen,  Davenport  perei  “ from  information  received,”  was 
led  to  believe  that  his  sons  and  daughter  possessed  the 
spiritual  afflatus,  and  this  conviction  acquired  confirmation 
by  several  startling  feats  performed  by  these  children 
which  received  much  attention  from  the  curious  and  the 
credulous. 

Accordingly  the  “Boys,”  having  made  a fair  start,  soon 
became  adepts  in  the  arts  of  deception.  Rappings  were 
now  of  frequent  occurrence  in  the  Davenport  household, 
and  contributed  not  a little  to  the  Davenport  income.  For 
though  the  head  of  the  family  had  felt  some  natural  diffi- 
dence (especially  natural  in  a gentleman  attached  to  “ the 
police  department  ”)  at  receiving  money,  he  had  been 
duced  to  do  so ; and  we  can  well  imagine  the  struggle  it 
would  cause  him. 

When  any  particular  manifestations  were  about  to  take 
place,  “ a request  was  made,  by  means  of  the  rappings, 
that  the  room  should  be  partially  darkened,”  says  their 
faithful  biographer,  T.  L.  Nichols,  M.D.,  and  he  continues : 
“It  is  perhaps  useless  to  ask  why.  In  nature  and  in  art 
some  operations  require  light  and  some  its  absence.”  But 
these  “ manifestations  ” were  not  ascribed  to  nature.  Could 
they  be  to  art  ? Presently  Ira  began  to  fly  about  the  pre- 
mises, and  in  this  accomplishment  he  was  quickly  followed 
by  William  and  their  only  sister  Elizabeth  Louisa,  aged  ten* 
— one  of  the  original  “ Buffalo  Gals  ; ” and  once  (all  this 
on  the  authority  of  the  faithful  and  veracious  Nichols  !)  + 

• Who,  as  Mrs.  E.  Davenport  Collie,  in  conjunction  with  Mrs.  M.  A.  C. 
Lamb,  has  kept  Yankeedom  au  fait  in  spirit  rope-tricks  during  her  brothers' 
absence  in  Europe. 

t There  is  another  biography  of  the  Davenports  by  Orrin  Abbott.  It  con- 
tains little  worth  recording  save  this  remarkable  and  truly  American  couplet  • 
“ When  nightfall  hangs  her  curtains  high. 

And  starlight  pins  them  to  the  sky  ” 1 

itized  by  GoO&le 

c * 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Co  Modern  Spiritualism, 

Ira  was  carried  through  the  air  from  a room,  and  landed 
in  the  street,  a distance  by  measurement  of  seventy  feet. 
Also  when  the  family  were  seated  at  breakfast,  it  was  not 
an  unusual  occurrence  for  the  knives,  forks,  and  dishes 
(dejeicncr  d la  fourchette ! — the  family  prospects  were  look- 
ing up  !)  to  commence  a waltz,  and  the  table  to  dance  a 
jig — ending  with  a graceful  pirouette  in  the  air  ! 

“The  stances  now  began  to  be  held  regularly” — (of 
course !)  “ Loud  raps  were  heard ; the  table  answered 
questions ; spectral  forms  were  seen  in  the  flash  of  a 
pistol ; lights  appeared  in  the  upper  parts  of  the  room  ; 
musical  instruments  floated  in  the  air,  while  being  played 
upon,  above  the  heads  of  the  company.  . . . While 
every  person  in  the  room  was  sitting  by  the  tables  in  the 
darkness,  the  door  of  a pantry  was  flung  violently  open, 
and  the  entire  stock  of  family  crockery  and  glassware 
taken  from  the  shelves  and  piled  upon  the  tables.  . . . 
Then  the  boys  were  raised  up  and  placed  upon  the  dishes, 
and  all  the  chairs  heaped  up  on  the  whole,  without  the 
agency  of  any  mortal  hand  that  could  be  discovered.”  * 
We  are  carefully  informed,  you  see,  that  all  this  took  place 
in  total  darkness,  though  our  friend  Nichols  might  have 
left  so  much  to  the  imagination  of  his  readers.  Then  a 
message  came  from  the  spirit  of  one  “ George  Brown,”  and 
Ira,  “in  the  trance  state,” spoke  as  proxy  for  “ George” — 
curdling  the  blood  of  the  assembled  Buffalonians  by  an 
accoufit  of  how  he  had  been  murdered  by  robbers,  known 
as  the  Townsend  Gang,  at  a place  called  Waterloo.  A few 
evenings  after  this,  as  Ira  was  delivering  papers,  he  felt 
“ queer,”  then  lost  his  consciousness,  and  found  himsel 
standing  in  the  snow,  with  no  tracks  around  him  to  show 
how  he  had  come  there,  in  a solitary  place,  a mile  and  a 

* Nichols. 

ized  byGoOQle 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Juggling  Gemini  1 61 

half  from  home,  on  the  right  bank  of  the  Niagara  River. 
“ George  Brown,”  at  his  next  visit,  declared  that  he  had 
carried  him  across  the  river,  which  is  half  a mile  wide,  and 
brought  him  back  again,  just  as  an  experiment ; but  as  the 
boy  was  unconscious  all  the  time  until  he  found  himself 
on  the  bank,  while  his  family  were  getting  alarmed  at  his 
absence,  and  as  nobody  saw  him  carried  across  the  river, 
we  have  only  “ George  Brown’s  "testimony  on  the  subject, 
which  we  are  not  obliged  to  believe  without  a sufficient 
corroboration. 

“ Of  course  we  cannot  prove  a negative.  If  the  boy 
could  be  carried  across  the  room  and  out  into  the  street, 
why  not  across  the  Niagara  River? — a feat  beyond  Blon- 
din’s,  it  must  be  confessed.  If  seventy  feet,  why  not  as 
many  miles  ? If  people  lose  their  gravity,  or  are  hurried 
away  by  their  emotions  or  other  sufficiently  powerful  in- 
fluence, who  shall  say  how  far  they  may  be  carried  ? ” • 
Who,  indeed ! Many  persons  will  lose  their  gravity  at  the 
thought  of  Ira  Davenport  being  “ hurried  away  by  his 
emotions , or  other  sufficiently  powerful  influence,”  to  the 
opposite  side  of  a river  into  “the  untrodden  snow,” whence 
Ira  doubtless  “made  tracks”  (to  use  the  elegant  phraseology 
of  his  country)  with  a vengeance ! Even  the“  Boys’”  gullible 
biographer  cannot  swallow  all  that  “George  Brown ’’gives 
to  the  world  through  that  “passive”  newsboy,  Ira  Daven- 
port Nichols  says,“  I believe  simply  that  Master  Ira,  as 
he  said,  and  still  says,  in  a manner  that  carries  conviction 
with  it,  found  himself  standing  in  the  snow  on  the  bank  of 
the  Niagara,  without  knowing  how  he  came  there.  As  ‘ we 
must  draw  the  line  somewhere,’  I propose  to  draw  it  here. 
‘George  Brown’may  have  wished  to  stretch  it ; or  hewished, 
it  may  be,  to  see  his  murderers  stretching  lines  of  a different 

* Nichols. 

Digitized  by  C^jOO^Ic 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Model  n Spir  itualism . 

62 

description.”  Ah!  dear  Nichols  ; you  have  managed  to 
keep  out  of  the  spirit-world  until  now,  and  surely  do  not 
doubt  this  aerial  flight  of  Ira’s,  seeing  that  every  Spiritualist 
accepts  as  Gospel  the  story  of  that  substantial  Venus,  Mrs. 
Guppy’s  (I  beg  pardon,  Mrs.  Guppy- Volckman’s)  moon- 
light transit  from  Ball’s  Pond  to  Lamb’s  Conduit  Street. 
But  we  must  not  imagine  that  all  these  statements  rested 
upon  the  evidence  of  the  Davenports  alone.  There  were 
people  to  be  found  who  would  testify  to  the  flying  powers 
of  the  “ Boys.”  Before  a few  “ believers  ” upon  one  occa- 
sion in  a darkened  room,  Ira  was  lifted  bodily  into  the  air 
and  floated  close  to  the  ceiling,  and  William,  with  an  auc- 
tioneer hanging  to  his  legs,  is  said  to  have  been  “ raised 
up  with  such  force  that  his  head  broke  through  the  ceiling 
of  lath  and  plaster.”  People  heard  the  crash  ! Was  not 
that  sufficient  proof?  And  there  could  be  no  mistake  when, 
a light  having  been  obtained,  a hole  was  found  in  the 
ceiling ! 

The  necessity  of  even  such  confirmation  is  done  away 
with  now,  for  Mrs.  Guppy  comes  through  the  ceiling, 
leaving  never  a crack  behind  ; and  Home  slips  through  a 
brick  wall  without  disturbing  the  setting ! 

The  fame  of  the  “Boys  Davenport”  had  by  this  time 
spread  widely,  and  many  persons  came  from  New  York 
(three  hundred  miles  away)  to  investigate  the  phenomena. 
One  of  these,  Mr.  Barratt,  a Swcdenborgian  minister,  of 
the  “ City  of  Churches,”  Brooklyn,  locked  himself  in  a room 
with  the  “Boys,” and  upon  the  candle  being  extinguished, 
it  was  rubbed  over  his  face  to  enable  him,  so  the  spirits 
said,  “ to  swallow  the  truth  ” ! and  his  hat,  after  being 
dipped  in  a tub  of  water,  was  thrust,  dripping,  upon  his 
head.*  The  minister  was  convinced! 

* Page  63  Nichols’  “ Biography.” 

C 

.ooole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Juggling  Gemini  ! 63 

Then  the  spirit  of  “John  Hicks,”  the  deceased  brother- 
in-law  of  the  elder  Davenport,  declared  that  he  had  been 
poisoned  by  his  wife  ; but  when  the  body  was  exhumed,  no 
evidence  was  fot  thcoming  to  prove  the  truth  of  the  “ spirit ” 
communication  / * Had  the  “dear  boys”  been  reading  that 
Cock  Lane  ghost  story,  think  you  ? Another  spirit,  Sir 
Henry  Morgan,  formerly  a Governor  of  Jamaica,  who — 
“though  names  are  of  no  consequence” — wished  to  be 
known  as  “ John  King,”  ordered  them  to  travel ; and  as 
public  feeling  began  to  run  high  against  them  in  Buffalo 
— though  still  making  a profitable  business  out  of  their 
peculiar  powers — they  resolved  to  accept  the  prudent  hint, 
and  seek,  like  other  media,  a more  extended  field  for  their 
operations. 

Thus,  about  the  time  Home  landed  in  England  (1855), 
they  started  upon  their  peregrinations  through  America 
with  such  “spiritual  effects”  as  a fiddle,  guitar,  tambourines, 
trumpet,  bells,  &c.,  and  the  “structure,”  or  cabinet,  in  which 
(or  the  darkness)  the  “ spirits  ” only  would  “ manifest.” 
Their  father  acted  as  showman,  shutting  the  doors  of  the 
“ structure,”  and  describing  how  the  guitar  floated  round 
the  room  “ a-thrumming  of  its  strings ; ” but  they  soon 
found  the  necessity  of  an  abler  txplicateur , and — like  the 
Poughkeepsie  Seer — gave  the  “ old  man  ” the  go-by. 

At  the  little  town  of  Phoenix  they  were  arrested  forgiving 
a performance  without  a licence,  and  lodged  in  prison, 
where,  the  regulations  not  being  very  strict  (they  gave  a 
stance  in  jail  for  the  benefit  of  the  warder),  they  managed 
to  escape, f and  believers  accepted  this  as  evidence  of 

9 Murder  will  not  “out"  in  a proper  manner  with  the  spirits.  “Mrs. 
Kempe,”  in  the  Cock  Lane  ghost  story;  the  Foxs’  “ Pedlar,”  and  “John 
Hicks,"  all  fail  when  proof  is  required. 

t No  great  difficulty  in  America,  one  would  say,  having  “Boss"  Tweed's 
“escape  ” in  view. 

Goode 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

64  Modern  Spiritualism. 

spirit  power,  likening  them  to  Peter,  whose  chains  fell  from 
his  hands  when  “ the  angel  of  the  Lord  came  upon  him.” 

The  Brothers  did  tolerably  well  for  the  first  seven  years 
of  their  journeying  in  America,  and  during  the  last  three 
they  created  great  excitement  wherever  they  went. 

But  the  hubbub  was  not  to  continue  for  much  longer  ; 
their  “ drawing  ” powers  soon  began  to  wane  in  their  native 
country— the  Civil  War  proving  more  exciting  than  the 
spirit  mania.  So  a raid  was  projected  upon  John  Bull’s 
breeches-pocket,  and  the  strollers  left  New  York,  August 
27th,  1 864,  to  cross  what  Yankees  call  the  “ Herring  Pond,” 
and  give  Europe  a taste  of  their  quality. 

At  this  time  the  “ Band  of  Brothers  ” was  five  in  number, 
consisting  of  Dr.  J.  B.  Ferguson  the  lecturer,  formerly  an 
Independent  minister,  of  Nashville,  Tennessee,  in  whose 
hand  the  “juggling  Gemini”  were  little  better  than  tools ; 
the  “ Boys  Davenport”  themselves ; the  so-called  secretary 
named  Palmer,  also  well  known  in  America  as  an  operatic 
and  theatrical  agent,  and  who  really  acted  in  that  capacity 
for  Ferguson  and  the  Brothers  ; and  William  M.  Fay,  a 
“Buffalo  Boy”  of  German  parentage,  who  had  previously 
been  a check-taker  to  the  “show,”  but,  discovering  the 
rope  trick  and  becoming  a great  adept  at  the  coat  feat, 
had  been  retained  for  that,  and  as  a second  string  in  the 
cabinet  business,  in  case  of  William  Davenport’s  health 
breaking  down. 

The  Brothers  were  remarkably  alike,  aged  respectively 
twenty-five  and  twenty-three  years.  They  had  long  black 
curly  hair,  broad  but  not  high  foreheads,  dark  eyes,  heavy 
eyebrows  and  moustache,  firm-set  lips,  and  a bright  keen 
Yankee  look. 

Their  first  public  performances  in  England  (which  con- 
sisted simply  of  an  adaptation  of  the  old  Indian  rope  trick 
— they  had  given  up  “levitation”)  took  place  at  the  Queen’s 

p I Original  from 

Digitized  by  ^OOglL  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Juggling  Gemini! 

65 

Concert  Rooms,  Hanover  Square,  and  created  great  ex- 
citement— “Punch”  calling  the  epidemic  “the  tie-fuss 
fever,”  and  gazetting  the  Brothers  as  “Ministers  of  the 
Interior , with  a seat  in  the  Cab  met  I — also  suggesting, 
apropos  of  the  American  Civil  War  then  raging,  that  Fer- 
guson, Fay,  and  Palmer,  though  taken  for  Yankees,  seemed 
more  likely  to  be  Confederates  / Certain  it  is,  England 
was  completely  taken  aback  for  a time  by  the  wonders 
presented  by  these  jugglers,  which  puzzled  even  those  who 
were  not  prepared  to  throw  overboard  the  ballast  of  com- 
mon sense,  and  go  drifting,  buoyed  up  by  the  wind-bag  of 
Ferguson’s  rhodomontade  about  spirit  power. 

Of  the  Davenport  performances  I have  to  say  that  they 
were,  and  still  remain,  the  most  inexplicable  ever  pre- 
sented to  the  public  as  of  supernatural  origin ; and  had 
they  been  simply  put  forward  as  feats  of  jugglery,  would 
yet  have  awakened  a considerable  amount  of  curiosity, 
though  certainly  not  to  the  extent  they  did.  They  “ knew 
the  ropes.”  The  false  pretence  brought  the  money j and 
that  it  was  such  I think  will  be  generally  allowed  to  have 
been  abundantly  shown  by  Mr.  Cooke  and  myself  at  the 
Egyptian  Hall  and  elsewhere. 

Still,  the  Brothers  did  more  than  all  other  men  to 
familiarize  England  with  the  so-called  Spiritualism , and 
before  crowded  audiences  and  under  varied  conditions 
they  produced  really  wonderful  feats.  The  hole-and-corner 
stances  of  other  media,  where  with  darkness  or  semi-dark- 
ness, and  a pliant,  or  frequently  a devoted  assembly, 
manifestations  are  occasionally  said  to  occur,  cannot  be 
compared  with  the  Davenport  exhibitions  in  their  effect 
upon  the  public  mind.  True  it  is  that  this  boldness  some- 
times led  to  detection,  which  taught  other  medial  gentle- 
men never  to  guarantee  anything,  for  the  “power  ” became 
a “capricious”  one  immediately  upon  the  Davenports* 

• 6 

Die 

itized  by  GoOQle 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

66 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

failure.  The  mediumistic  crew,  now,  take  your  money 
and  you  take  your  chatice  of  a manifestation.  As  some 
of  the  “faithful”  still  believe  in  the  spirit  power  of  the 
Brothers,  it  will  be  as  well  that  I remind  them  of  certain 
facts,  and  recall  two  or  three  exposures  of  their  tricks. 

First,  as  to  facts  : their  friendly  “power,”  as  Mr.  Punch 
suggests,  was  certainly  the  power  of  darkness,  for  all  their 
tricks  were  hidden  from  the  view  of  the  audience,  either 
by  the  cabinet  doors  being  closed,  or  the  gas  in  the  hall 
turned  down.  To  say  the  least,  this  antipathy  of  “spirits” 
to  the  light  is  extremely  unfortunate  ! Then,  given  that 
the  hands  were  once  loosed,  there  was  nothing  done  but 
could  have  been  produced  by  any  two  men.  The  hands 
never  came  farther  out  of  the  “structure”  than  a man 
could  thrust  them  ; the  strains  of  melody  (?)  did  not  sug- 
gest a spiritual  origin  ; instead  of  the  Brothers  sitting 
“passive,”  as  that  solemn  humbug — Ferguson  — would 
have  his  audience  believe,  the  performers  were  frequently 
much  distressed  by  their  exertions  in  getting  free  from  the 
ropes;  anent  which  “Punch”  had  the  following  conun- 
drum : — Why  are  the  Davenport  Brothers  like  an  ophe- 
cleide  ? Because  they  are  brazen  and  blown.  Then,  when 
the  Davenports  secured  themselves,  the  manifestations 
were  instantaneous  ; but,  when  properly  tied,  the  spirits 
were  frequently  a long  time  before  releasing  them. 

Now  for  one  or  two  of  the  exposures  of  the  clever  “ Boys.” 
1 have  named  my  own,  and  I discovered  the  mode  of  effect- 
ing the  trick  in  this  wise  : Being  present  at  a morning  cabi- 
net stance,  given  by  the  Davenports  at  the  Town  Hall, 
Cheltenham,  I was  elected  a representative  of  the  audience, 
and  by  the  accidental  kill  of  a curtain,  hung  over  a window 
to  exclude  the  light,  I got  a key  to  the  knotty  problem,  which 
I have  ever  since  used  with  such  effect  to  reproduce  all  the 
tricks  of  the  Brothers,  that  Spiritualists  are  in  the  singular 

Jigitized  by  GoO^Ie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Juggling  Gemini  / 

67 

dilemma  of  either  branding  them  as  impostors,  or  of  claim- 
ing Mr.  Cooke  and  myself  as  mediums.  The  latter  is  the 
course  usually  adopted.  One  who  enjoys  the  confidence 
of  “the  faithful,”  describing  our  rope-tying  performance  at 
the  Crystal  Palace,  declared, “ If  this  be  conjuring/  Othello’s 
occupation’s  gone/  Spiritualism  itself  is  at  a discount”* 
And  the  venerable  Father  of  English  Spiritualists,  Mr.  Ben- 
jamin Coleman,  considers  us  not  only  “ adepts  in  the  art  of 
legerdemain,”  but  also  “ very  powerful  mediums,  who  find 
it  much  more  profitable  to  pander  to  the  prejudices  of  the 
multitude  by  pretending  to  expose  Spiritualism  than  by 
honestly  taking  their  proper  place  in  our  ranks  as  spiritual 
media  ....  All  inquirers  who  desire  to  study  the 
psychological  character  of  spirit  manifestations  should  be 
recommended  to  visit  Messrs.  Maskelyne  and  Cooke,  who 
have  gone  on  practising  them  with  a perseverance  worthy 
of  a better  aim,  and  who  are  now,  in  my  opinion,  the  best  of 
living  mediums  for  the  production  of  strong  physical  mani- 
festations. This  statement,  often  repeated  by  me,  has  been 
met  with  the  remark,  ‘ but  they  themselves  say  they  are  not 
mediums  ; ’ as  if  what  they  say  should  influence  the  minds 
of  any  intelligent  Spiritualist  who  sees  what  they  do”f 
The  Brothers  have  failed  to  release  themselves  from 
the  bonds  on  many  occasions.  At  the  “ Modern  Tyre,”  the 
Liver  proved  too  knowing  a bird  to  be  taken  in  by  their 
spiritual  pretensions ; and  two  local  gentlemen  commenced 
binding  the  Davenports  so  securely  that  Dr.  Ferguson  im- 
mediately stepped  forward,  and  with  a knife  freed  William’s 
wrist,  saying  that  the  rope  was  cutting  it.  In  confirmation, 
William  held  up  his  hand,  down  the  back  of  which  blood 

• Mr.  Algernon  Joy,  Secretary  to  the  National  Association  of  Spiritualists, 
in  “The  Spiritualist.”  May  15th,  1873. 

+ "The  Spiritualist,”  October  10th,  1873. 

5—2 

*J  /—  l Original  from 

Digitized  by  VjOOy  It  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

68  Modern  Spiritualism . 

was  flowing,  and  then  walked  off  the  stage  with  his  brother, 
who  had  been  released. 

Dr.  Ferguson  wished  the  audience  to  believe  that  the 
wound  upon  William’s  wrist  had  been  caused  by  the  severe 
tying — whereas  it  was  obvious  that  he  himself  had  inflicted 
a slight  cut  in  releasing  the  performer.  The  excited  crowd, 
now  more  sceptical  than  ever,  scrambled  upon  the  plat- 
form, and  thrusting  the  reverend  gentleman  from  Nash- 
ville, Tennessee,  into  the  cabinet,  turned  it  over  upon  him 
— much  as  the  young  bucks  of  the  past  treated  the  ancient 
“Charleys,” — and, in  the  end,  the  “structure”  was  smashed, 
and  the  pieces  borne  away  as  trophies. 

Now,  without  palliating  the  lawlessness  here  shown,  I 
must  hold  this  to  be  a striking  proof  of  the  inability  of  the 
spirits  to  do  anything  for  their  protects. 

At  Huddersfield,  shortly  after  the  Liverpool  fracas , a 
similar  exhibition  took  place  ; and  in  Ireland,  at  a private 
stance,  Ira  Davenport  and  William  Fay  were  baffled  by  a 
gentleman  whom  they  thought  to  be  a Spiritualist ; and 
after  sitting  an  hour  without  manifestations,  they  were  un- 
tied at  their  own  request. 

Numberless  have  been  the  exposures  that  the  hands  ap- 
pearing at  the  apertures  in  the  cabinet  doors  were  those  of 
the  mediums — frequently  by  placing  colouring  matter  upon 
the  hands  thrust  out,  and  afterwards  discovering  the  same 
upon  the  hands  of  the  Brothers.  But  all  this  is  as  nothing 
to  the  genuine  Spiritualist,  who  accepts  the  theory  put  for- 
! ward  in  Hazard’s  “Mediums  and  Mediumship”  which 
accounts  for  this  by  the  colour  being  transmitted  from  the 
spirit-hand  to  the  material  one.  So  when  the  speaking 
trumpet  is  privately  blacked,  and  after  the  spirit  has  spoke? 
a mourning  rim  is  found  round  the  medium’s  mouth,  that, 
doubtless,  has  been  “ transmitted  ” — and  there  an  end  1 

After  making  a considerable  sum  of  money  out  of  the 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Juggling  Gemini  / 69 

credulity  of  the  English  people  before  the  break-up,  the 
Davenports  took  themselves  off  to  “ fresh  fields  and  pas- 
tures  new.” 

Since  then  the  European  continent  has  been  much 
favoured  by  the  “juggling  Gemini.” 

zed  by  GoOQlc 
' o 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  VII. 

OUR  SPIRIT  GUIDES. 

Music  Hall  Ditties— Lindley  Murray — A Fighting  Spirit — A Dutch  Ghost — 
Rifle  v.  Spirit  (Mask) — “ Mailed  in  the  Iron  Box  " — Music  of  the  Angels 
— “ Home  Quiet,  Peace,  and  Blessed  Love  ! r — A Harris-ing  Picture. 

UR  “spirit  guides”  have  nothing  of  the  staid  and 
sober  ghosts  of  our  youth  about  them  — the  bad 
ones  clanking  their  chains  like  old  Marley  — the  good 
clothed  in  white  robes,  and  with  looks  of  “ineffable  sweet- 
ness.” The  dreary  annals  of  modern  Spiritualism  contain 
few  spirits  who  behave  with  the  propriety  formerly  sup- 
posed to  attach  to  their  order;  indeed,  the  greater  number 
now  show  signs  of  deterioration,  and  seem  to  find  em- 
ployment in  singing  music  hall  ditties,  and,  taken  alto- 
gether, are  either  very  stupid  or  very  bad.  Their  names, 
or  those  they  condescend  to  be  known  by,  read  as  if  copied 
from  a play-bill ; some,  fanciful  and  fascinating  as  the  noms 
de  plume  of  your  burlesque  actresses,  others  redolent  of 
the  romance  of  the  Adelphi  or  the  vulgarity  of  the  “ Vic.” 
We  have  rollicking  Irishmen  and  Chinese  philosophers, 
little  girl  spirits  with  osculatory  propensities,  and  “ Uncle 
Ben”  dittos,  who  sing  such  charming  ballads  as  “Old  Dog 
Tray.”  There  are  some  who  denounce  the  rich  as 
“them  as  has  the  dollars  and  we  have  Druidic  spirits 

70 

I ^ Original  from 

Digitized  by  VjOOQK  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

7i 

Our  Spirit  Guides . 

with  unpronounceable  names  ; a ghostly  “ Sam  Weller  ” 
attends  upon  a medium,  whose  “ordinary  manifestations” 
are  working  a sewing-machine  and  playing  upon  a mouth- 
organ  ; and  a “ control,”  in  answer  to  the  question,  “Are  you 
the  spirit  of  Lindley  Murray  ? ” shall  reply,  “ I are,”  to  the 
immense  satisfaction  of  the  faithful.  There  is  a pugilistic 
spirit, too, ready  to  knock  the  truth  into  you, and  “spreading 
confusion  and  dismay  in  the  circle.”  This  “ fighter  ” has 
the  full  approbation  of  Mr.  Burns,  who  considers  that  “we 
want  more  of  them  in  both  worlds ; but  it  is  our  business 
that  we  make  the  right  use  of  them.  * John  King’  was  and 
is  a fighter — a great  fighter,  never  getting  tired  of  his  diffi- 
culties. ‘Jack  Todd,’  the  Liverpool  spirit,  was  also  a 
fighter.  ‘James  Lombard’ is  not  silky -fingered  either  ; 
and  the  ‘ Peter  ’ who  controls  Miss  Showers  will  stand  no 
nonsense.  We  would  rather  have  a fighter,  be  he  man  or 
spirit,  than  one  of  your  saintly  white-fingered  sneaks,  who  is 
always  doing  you  a dirty  turn  when  behind  your  back.  The 
fighter  is  a man  of  honest  courage,  and  there  is  something 
to  be  got  out  of  him.”  * 

Such  are  a few  of  the  mysterious  visitants  from  the  border- 
land of  another  world.  Strange  to  say,  whatever  their 
nationality,  our  ghostly  confreres  usually  speak  English  in 
England,  though  it  is  seldom  of  the  best ! Should  they 
venture  upon  their  (supposed)  native  tongue,  the  spirits 
are  often  caught  tripping. 

Numberless  are  the  errors  of  the  “invisibles  :”  a story 
from  New  York  tells  how  a Dutchman  consulted  the  rap- 
pers, and  instantly  became  a sceptic  when  the  spirit  of  his 
wife  returned  answers  to  his  questions  in  English  instead 
of  her  own  vernacular.  Thus  : 

“ Ish  dat  you,  mine  vrow  ?” 

* “ Medium,”  September  3rd,  1875. 

)igitized  by  CiOOqIc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

72 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

“ Yes,  I am  your  diseased  wife,  who — ” 

“ You  do  not  shpeak  ze  trudth,  ghost ; mine  vrow  can 
talk  noding  bud  Dudtch,  and  she  not  never  said  tearest  in 
all  her  lifes.  It  vas  alvays  ‘ Haunts,  you  tief ! } or  ‘ Haunts, 
you  shkamp  ! ’ Bah  ! you  are  not  mine  dear  vrow  ! ” So 
the  poor  Dutchman  went  away  disgusted  with  the  spirits, 
and  disconsolate  at  receiving  no  tender  message  in  her 
usual  manner  from  his  loving  and  lost  spouse  ! 

All  the  spirits,  whether  comic  (as  they  frequently  are) 
or  sentimental,  untruthful  or  veracious,  bold,  bashful,  merry 
or  lachrymose,  are  an  inane  lot,  adding  nothing  whatever 
to  the  sum  of  human  knowledge,  and  talking  the  dreariest 
twaddle.  Their  statements,  also,  are  received  with  grave 
suspicion  by  Spiritualists  themselves,  who  allow  that  many 
of  the  communications  are  frivolous  and  untruthful.  Con- 
trast Coleridge’s  thoughts 

“Of  that  innumerable  company 
Who  in  broad  circle,  lovelier  than  the  rainbow, 

Girdle  this  round  earth  in  a dizzy  motion. 

With  voice  too  vast  and  constant  to  be  heard  : 

Fitliest  unheard  ! for,  oh  ye  numberless 
And  rapid  travellers  ! what  ear  unstunned, 

What  sense  unmaddened,  might  bear  up  against 
The  rushing  of  your  congregated  wings?" 

with  the  garrulous,  lying,  tricky,  and  vain  denizens  of  the 
“ spheres  ” of  the  “ Spiritual  ” idea  ! 

America,  which  usually  sends  us  the  raciest  Spiritual 
and  other  news,  has  been  excited  by  accounts  of  “shooting 
at  a spirit”  for  a wager;  and  the  St.  Louis  “Republican”* 
describes  the  new  kind  of  target ; 

“ There  it  was,  a pale  ghostly  countenance,  that  looked 
as  though  it  might  have  belonged  to  a girl  of  seventeen  at 
some  previous  time  in  the  world’s  history.  It  did  not  look 

* August  ioth,  1875. 

Digitized 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Our  Spirit  Guides. 

73 

a bit  like  real  flesh  and  blood.  Had  it  been  possible  to 
remove  the  front  of  the  cabinet  suddenly,  one  never  would 
have  expected  to  see  any  pinned-back  gear  about  the 
nether  portion  of  the  materialization.  It  was  a face  that 
might  have  belonged  to  some  Greek  maiden  two  thousand 
years  ago,  and  reminded  one  of  the  marble  countenance 
of  some  statue.  So  much  of  the  figure  as  was  visible  was 
suggestive  of  a lost  collar-button  a little  lower  down.  All 
who  saw  were  fairly  transfixed  with  astonishment.  The 
features  were  perfectly  clear  and  distinct,  being  illuminated 
by  a soft  light.  There  was  not  the  slightest  movement  of 
a muscle  or  an  eyelid  that  could  be  distinguished.  While 
all  were  eagerly  gazing  at  the  vision,  there  was  an  explo- 
sion that  caused  a rude  interruption  of  the  imaginative 
reveries  the  more  superstitious  had  fallen  into.  . . With- 
out the  tremor  of  a muscle  Cunningham  fired,  apparently 
thinking  no  more  of  shooting  a couple  of  girls  than  a 
Comanche  would.  At  the  shot  the  face  remained  steadfast 
It  was  not  scared  and  did  not  wink.  A few  seconds  it 
remained  as  before,  and  then  the  curtain  mysteriously  slid 
across  and  obscured  it  from  view.” 

Now  it  seems  all  this  can  be  easily  accounted  for.  “ The 
spirits  ?nay  bring  veritable  masks  into  the  cabinet /”  Mr. 
Harrison  observes : “ On  reading  the  account  of  the  shoot- 
ing at  a spirit,  I at  once  came  to  the  conclusion  that  in  all 
probability  not  one  of  Slade’s  masks  but  one  of  Clark’s* 
masks  was  brought  in  by  the  spirits,  fired  at  by  Mr.  Cun- 
ningham, and  taken  away  again  by  abnormal  agency,  so 
that  nothing  was  afterwards  found  in  the  cabinet. 

“ The  questions  at  issue  in  this  matter  are  serious  enough, 
because  the  narrative,  in  the  form  in  which  it  has  been  so 

* Dr.  Slade  is  a noted  medium  for  mask  effects.  W.  C.  Clark  was  the 

•'medium " in  this  case. 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

74 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

widely  published,  almost  challenges  disbelievers  to  shoot 
at  materialized  spirits  ; and  if  they  do  this  at  such  stances 
as  Mrs.  Compton’s,  a medium  will  be  killed.  It  is  serious 
also  if  it  proves  that  tricky  spirits  can  show  masks  at 
stances  without  the  knowledge  of  the  medium;  for  if  this 
took  place  when  the  medium  had  not  been  bound  and 
searched  so  thoroughly  as  in  the  present  instance,  he 
would  innocently  be  condemned  as  an  impostor.”  * 

I make  no  comment  upon  this  : those  who  can  accept 
the  mask  theory  are  past  argument ! Doubtless  it  would 
be  awkward  for  other  media  than  Mrs.  Compton  if  the 
stance  room  were  turned  into  a shooting  gallery  ! 

“ Skiwaukie,”  an  Indian  chief,  who  has  been  about  a 
century  in  the  higher  hunting-grounds,  wrote  a letter, 
directed  the  envelope,  put  a stamp  on  it,  and  “ mailed  it 
in  the  iron  box  at  the  street  corner.”  Here  is  a facsimile 
of  the  address ; 

* “ The  Spiritualist,”  September  ioth,  1875. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

Our  Spirit  Guides, 

75 

We  have  seen  that  the  spirit-hand  is  a very  shaky  one ; 
and  they  are  as  much  behind  in  music  as  in  writing.  But 
one  luminous  star  is  said  to  irradiate  the  musical  world 
with  its  lustre;  for  Mr.  Jesse  B.  H.  Shepard  is  reported  to 
have  suddenly  commenced  his  “incomparable  perform- 
ances upon  the  piano”  about  i863,  without  any  previous 
tuition.  It  seems  somewhat  strange  that  we  outsiders 
have  heard  so  little  of  the  fame  of  a gentleman  who  gives 
u the  music  of  angels  ” to  the  world,  therefore  I must  be 
excused  for  letting  Mrs.  Grundy  know  what  a treat  has 
been  lost. 

The  “Washington  Gazette”  (December,  1868)  is  the 
oracle,  and  its  words  prove  how  poetical  the  Yankee 
penny-a-liner  can  be  even  in“this  hard  pragmatical  age”: 
“ In  a salon , where  a dim  religious  light  prevailed  over 
shadows,  all  voices  hushed,  he  sits,  a nucleus  of  invisible 
shades.  He  seems  a musical  instrument  himself,  and, 
with  the  spirit  of  each  composer,  with  his  own  peculiar 
style  and  con  amore , strikes  the  beautiful  white  keys  and 
makes  the  pianoforte  that  which  only  genius  can  make  of 
an  orchestra — one,  in  many  instruments  combined.  We 
easily  imagine  ghostly  outlined  forms  of  Donizetti,  Meyer- 
beer, Rossini,  or  Bellini  bending  over  the  sure  and  rapid 
fingers,  in  willing  measures  their  brains  outwrought  on 
earth,  or  delighting  in  the  expression  of  some  exquisite  and 
new  combination.”  I hope  all  this  is  true ; but  my  ex- 
perience of  spirit  music  has  been  limited  to  tambourines 
or  concertinas,  which  seem  to  be  the  height  of  their  ambi- 
tion. If  spirits  rashly  venture  upon  the  guitar,  the  melody 
is  usually  a failure. 

“ Suppose  the  spirit  of  Beethoven  wants  to  shed 
New  music  he 's  brimful  of?  Why,  he  turns 
The  handle  of  this  organ,  grinds  with  Sludge  : 
And  what  hf:  poured  in  at  the  mouth  o’  the  mill 

J by  GoOqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlf  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

76 

Modem  Spiritualism . 

As  a thirty-third  sonata — (fancy  now  !) — 

Comes  from  the  hopper  as  a bran-new  Sludge  ! — nought  else ; 

The  Shaker’s  hymn  in  G,  with  a natural  F, 

Or  the  * Stars  and  Stripes'  set  to  consecutive  fourths."* 

Indeed,  the  deterioration  is  noticeable  in  everything,  but 
nowhere  more  so  than  in  the  “ poems,”  which  “ the  great 
ones  gone  for  ever  and  ever  by,”  are  libelled  with  having 
written  in  the  spirit-land.  George  Washington  was  not  a 
poet,  but  we  might  expect  something  better  than  this  to 
appear  under  an  engraving  of  himself : 

“ When  the  likeness  of  this  portrait  you  see. 

Remember  that  it  is  to  represent  the  likeness  of  me ; 

But  the  spirit  in  its  brightness  you  cannot  see, 

For  that  is  far  above  the  likeness  of  thee.” 

— G.  WASHINGTON.t 

Under  the  picture  of  Franklin  in  the  same  book  we 
have  the  following  lines  composed  in  his  “ angel’s  home”: 

“The  likeness  of  this  portrait  is  to  represent 
The  likeness  of  man  when  he  dwelt  here  below  ; 

But'  the  likeness  of  the  spirit  you  would  like  to  know. 

And  this  would  be  no  more  than  I would  like  to  show ; 

But  the  mind  is  not  prepared  the  likeness  for  to  see 
Of  the  spirit  in  his  angel’s  home  as  bright  as  we." 

— B.  Franklin. 

And  Rousseau,  in  the  “ Summer-land,”  has  the  following 
invocation  : 

“ O spirits  ! come,  and  let  your  power  descend  ; 

The  power  shall  come,  and  bless  the  world 
For  ever  without  end  ! ” 

— Jean  Jacques  Rousseau. X 

Thus  are  the  great  ones  treated  by  the  Spiritualists!  A 
literary  ethereal  being  gives  us  a little — very  little — Light 

* Sludge  the  Medium. — R.  B.  Browning. 

t From  “ Love  and  Wisdom  in  the  Spirit-World.”  Particular  attention  is 
invited  to  this  book  by  the  “New  York  Spiritual  Telegraph." 
t “ Medium,”  September  23rd,  1870. 

1 by  GoOQlc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

77 

Our  Spirit  Guides. 

from  the  spirit-world  in  an  “ Essay  on  Wisdom,”  to  wit, 
“ Wisdom  is  what  is  wise.  Wisdom  is  not  folly,  and  folly 
•is  not  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  not  selfishness,  and  selfishness 
is  not  wisdom.  Wisdom  is  not  evil,  and  evil  is  not  wisdom. 
All  is  not  wisdom  ; all  is  not  folly.”  We  are  also  assured 
that  “ men  are  what  they  are,”  and  that  “ change  is  altera- 
tion.” 

But  the  Spiritualists  have  an  inspired  poet  and  preacher, 
the  Rev.  Thomas  L.  Harris,  whose  “lyric,”  “The  Golden 
Age,”  has  been  pronounced  to  have  “ scarcely  less  than 
Miltonic  grandeur,  while  in  parts,  at  least,  it  has  more 
than  Miltonic  splendour.”  Here  is  some  of  it : 

“The  thirst  of  knowledge  never  made  men  bad, 

'T  is  self-conceit,  wrapped  in  its  long-eared  skin 
Of  most  supreme  content,  that  makes  men  base. 

Or,  if  it  finds  them  base,  to  folly  adds 
Insufferable  vanity,  that  fain 

Would  make  their  minds  the  measuring-rods  of  truth. 

Pouring  the  vast  Atlantic  through  a straw 
Were  wisdom  to  such  madness.  Oh,  how  vain 
Creed-building  looks  to  free  and  cultured  minds  1 ” 

More  than  Miltonic  splendour  indeed ! In  “ earth-life,” 
the  great  poet  would  not  have  dreamt,  even  in  his  grandest 
flights,  of  venturing  upon  such  a line  as 

“ Pouring  the  vast  Atlantic  through  a straw.” 

But  in  the  spirit  world  hear  how  Milton  is  reported  to 
speak  for  the  “ invisibles  ” : 

“ Although  you  cannot  see  us,  we  are  everywhere, 

We  creep  gently  o’er  the  carpet  and  softly  up  the  stair  ! ” # 

The  Rev.  (Mrs.)  Harris  also  startles  the  world  with 
Byron's  Prophecy  concerning  England : 

**  There  is  a palsy  on  thy  dying  brain  ; 

There  is  a leprosy  upon  thy  skin ; 

* “The  Christian  Spiritualist.” 

Digitized  by 

Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

78 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

O England,  thy  last  prophet  pleads  in  vain  ; 

The  seer  Carlyle  sits  thy  proud  gates  within. 

Reasoning  with  thee  of  righteousness,  and  sin. 

And  retribution — men  believe  him  not. 

The  rich  more  wealth,  the  great  more  greatness  win : 

The  peasant  grows  a pauper,  menial,  sot ; 

Lordlings  drink,  dice,  and  drab,  fearing  no  Chartists’  plot. 

“Yet  wide  and  deep,  from  Mersey  to  the  Thames, 

The  rankling  evils  of  the  social  state 
Ripen  to  ruin.  Hell’s  devouring  flames 

Burn  in  thy  breast,  while  sleek  red-tapists  prate 
Of  * Progress,'  and  the  Tory  press  cry  ‘ Wait.  ’ 

France,  now  your  friend,  ere  long  shall  be  your  foe. 

Your  satraps  feast  with  Cyrus  at  the  gate ; 

Your  wooden  walls  rot  fast  as  April  snow — 

The  bull  with  gilded  horns  waits  the  destroyer’s  blow.” 

From  this  Harris-ing  picture  let  us  turn  to  the  utterances 
of  qne  “ Pollok,”  through  the  reverend  gentleman,  entitled 
The  Doom  of  England: 

“Let  those  fly  to  the  mountains,  where  on  high 
Throned  Independence  waves  her  flag  of  stars. 

Who  prize  home-quiet,  peace,  and  blessed  love. 

For,  surely  as  the  living  God  endures, 

The  day  of  England’s  ruin  draweth  nigh.” 

I am  almost  inclined  to  doubt  the  inspiration  of  the 
Reverend  Harris,  when  I find  Columbia  recommended  for 
“home-quiet,  peace,  and  blessed  love!”  Is  the  great 
American  trance-speaker  poking  fun  at  us,  think  your 
How  long  are  we  to  endure  such  rubbish  ? 

“ Milton  composing  baby-rhymes,  and  Locke 
Reasoning  in  gibberish  ; Homer  writing  Greek 
In  noughts  and  crosses  ; Asaph  setting  psalms 
To  crochet  and  quaver.”* 

When  shall  we  have  some  decent  work  from  the  ghosts? 
Why  should  not  the  spirit  of  Homer  solve  the  problem  of 

* Sludge  the  Medium. 

IZGO 

GooqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Our  Spirit  Guides . 

79 

his  birth  and  life,  and  give  the  world  a new  poem  in  his 
classic  Greek  ? Why  leave  the  authorship  of  the  Letters  of 
Junius  a niysterv,  when  the  spirit  must  be  panting  to  give 
the  truth  to  the  world?  Or  is  the  “dead  past”  to  give 
nothing  up  but  miserable  libels  upon  the  memory  of  Shaks- 
peare,  Milton  (not  “ mute,”  but  inglorious  enough !),  Bacon, 
or  of  others  whose  names  are  written  upon  the  great  bead- 
roll  of  our  illustrious  dead  ? 

Digitized  byGoOQle 
° ' o 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

THE  MEDIUMISTIC  CRAFT. 

What  is  a Medium*— Artemus  Ward’s  idea  of  “Sperrit  Rappers” — Dangers 
of  Investigation — The  “ Spirits’  Home  ” — Trance  Media — Lying  Oracles 
— Writing  Media — Dot  your  “i’s” — Spirit  Painting— A Conference  in 
Bloomsbury — Spiritual  Quacks. 

T seems  desirable  to  define  as  far  as  possible 
what  a 1 medium J is,  and  how  the  phenomena 
are  produced.  A medium,  then,  is  said  to  be  a person 
whose  body  gives  off  a peculiar  kind  of  magnetic  aura,  an 
invisible  fluid,  supposed  to  be  the  connecting-link  between 
mind  and  matter,  and  through  the  agency  of  which  the 
human  spirit  is  supposed  while  in  the  flesh  to  control 
the  physical  body.”  This  definition  being  taken  from  a 
“ useful  book  for  inquirers,”  * having  at  one  time  received 
an  affectionate  pat  upon  its  back  from  Mr.  Burns,  may 
be  taken  as  “by  authority.”  Certainly  this  has  been 
weakened  of  late,  since  the  publisher  of  Southampton 
Row  veered  round,  and  declared  that  “ ‘ Where  are  the 
Dead  ? ’ is  like  a pile  of  sandwiches  in  the  form  of  a man, 
but  not  digested  nor  assimilated  to  the  organic  peculiari- 
ties of  the  form  they  take.”  t 

* “Where  are  the  Dead?” 
t “The  Medium,”  November  5th,  1875. 

80 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mcdiumistic  Craft. 

81 

I consider  Artemus  Ward’s  description  of  a medium 
much  the  best,  and  give  it  in  his  own  original  style  : 
“Just  so  soon  as  a man  becums  a regular  out  and  out 
sperret-rapper,  he  leeves  orf  working,  lets  his  hare  grow 
all  over  his  face,  and  commensis  spungin  his  livin  out  of 
other  people.  He  eats  all  the  dickshunaries  he  can  find, 
and  goze  round  chock  full  of  big  words,  scarein  the  wimmin 
folks  and  little  children,  and  destroying  the  piece  of  mind 
of  every  famerlee  he  enters.  He  don’t  do  nobody  no  good 
and  is  a cuss  to  society,  and  a pirate  on  honest  peple’s 
com  beef  barrils.  Admittin  all  you  say  about  the  doctrine 
to  be  troo,  I must  say  the  reglar  perfessional  sperrit-rappers 
— them  as  makes  a bizzncss  on  it— air  about  the  most 
ornery  set  of  cusses  I ever  enkountered  in  my  life.” 

It  is  generally  understood  amongst  the  faithful  that  the 
mediumistic  power  entails  some  heavy  penalties  upon  the 
possessors.  They  are,  it  is  said,  “ kittle  cattle,”  “ furiously 
jealous  ” of  each  other ; they  are  “ not  remarkable,  either, 
for  intellectual  or  moral  qualities;”*  (I  take  this  to  mean 
that  mediums  are  rather  noted  for  the  absence  of  those 
qualities,  which  is  a fact),  and  they  have  “ great  temptation 
to  recruit  the  bodily  forces  by  stimulants.”  t 
This  is  rather  a gloomy  state  of  affairs,  especially  when 
we  remember  that,  in  one  out  of  every  seven  persons,  the 
mediumistic  power  may  be  developed ! 

But  let  us  suppose  a medium  “as  chaste  as  ice,  as 
pure  as  snow,”  without  guile — neither  ignorant,  or  unedu- 
cated, or  drunken — can  you  place  reliance  upon  his,  or 
her,  spirit  message  then?  No  ! Andrew  Jackson  Davis 
very  early  in  the  movement  discovered  that  it  would  never 
do  to  pin  your  faith  to  any  medium.  In  his  “ Philosophy” 

* Mr.  S.  C.  Hall. 

t “The  Spiritualist,”  June  15th,  1873. 

6 

CiOOQ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSlfY  OF  WISCONSIN 

82 

Mi  \hrn  Spiritualism, 

(page  91),  he  says,  “ There  is  a certain  class  of  unadvanced 
spirits  who,  under  peculiar  circumstances,  will  say  pre- 
cisely what  the  questioning  minds  of  the  circle  ardently, 
and  therefore  positively,  require.”  Then  there  are  certain 
spirits  who,  “when  first  materializing  themselves,  have 
often  been  obliged  to  take  on  somewhat  of  the  features 
of  the  medium;”  and  others  (bad  ones  these)  who  “have 
the  power  of  materializing  if  they  choose,  or  of  showing 
the  medium  if  they  choose,  and  in  both  cases  the  medium 
is  a helpless  instrument  in  the  hands  of  an  inexorable 
power.* 

At  the  first  blush  it  would  appear  that  there  is  no  royal 
road  to  knowledge  in  this  matter,  considering  the  diffi- 
culties surrounding  the  investigation ; for,  though  the 
Faithful  admit  the  existence  of  bad  mediums,  they  never 
name  them,  but  the  exposures  that  crop  up  from  time 
to  time  are  all  put  down  to  the  machinations  of  evi 
spirits.  Are  lies  told  in  the  “ circle  ” ? — Bad  spirits  ! 
Does  the  materialized  form  bear  too  striking  a resem- 
blance to  the  “ passive”  ? — Bad  spirits  ! Is  the  bull’s-eye 
turned  on  too  quickly,  revealing  the  medium  off  his  seat, 
and  endeavouring  to  escape  from  his  bonds  ? — Bad  spirits  ! 
Is  the  sensitive  being  favoured  by  the  “starry  hosts”  a 
drunkard  ? — Bad  spirits,  undoubtedly!  So  it  is  all  through. 
Blind  faith  is  the  only  “royal  road” — proof  you  cannot 
have.  Beware  even  how  you  attempt  to  get  it ; for  I will 
repeat  a story  which  you  may  find  in  a little  pamphlet  f 
published  under  the  auspices  of  the  Spiritual  Institution — 
i.e.f  Mr.  Burns ! — showing  the  danger  of  experimentalizing, 
“I  was  once,”  says  the  author,  “present  at  a cabinet 
stance  of  the  Eddy  mediums,  when,  as  usual,  a committee 
was  appointed  to  conduct  the  proceedings  and  see  that 

* “The  Spiritualist." 

♦ “Mediums  and  Mediumship,"  by  Thomas  R.  Hazard. 

Digitfzedby  GoO^lc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mcdiumistic  Craft . 

83 

there  was  no  trickery  or ‘humbug’ practised  by  the. two 
brothers  and  sister  mediums.  There  was  a sceptical  doctor 
put  on  the  committee,  who,  I understood,  had  figured  rather 
prominently  before,  and  was  chosen  expressly  on  that  ac- 
count. The  manifestations  progressed  as  usual  until  a 
gigantic  arm  and  hand,  apparently  of  twice  or  thrice  the 
magnitude  of  that  of  the  lady  medium,  projected  from  the 
hole  in  the  cabinet,  whereupon  the  doctor  (who  had  come 
prepared)  let  fly  from  a syringe  a charge  of  writing-ink 
upon  the  outstretched  arm.  He  then  proceeded  directly  to 
the  cabinet,  and  released  the  girl  medium  before  she  was 
apparently  aware  of  his  object ; but  no  sooner  was  she  be- 
fore the  audience  than  this ‘self-styled  accuser  of  mediums’ 
grasped  his  victim  by  the  arm,  and  dragging  her  forward 
on  the  platform,  triumphantly  exhibited  the  traces  of  her 
1 imposture  and  cheat  ’ in  unmistakable  marks  or  stains  of 
ink  on  the  wrist.  I shall  never  forget  the  scene  that  then 
transpired.  There  stood  the  medium,  seemingly  in  blank 
amaze,  not  only  convicted  of  fraud,  but  caught  in  the ‘very 
act ; ’ and  there  stood  the  burly  doctor,  elate  with  his  vic- 
tory, inasmuch  as  he  had  now  proved  his  former  accusa- 
tions against  the  mediums  true.  But  soon  the  scene  shifted. 
Casting  her  eye  on  her  ‘accuser,’ the  medium  seemed  sud- 
denly to  realize  and  accept  the  situation,  and  seizing  her 
‘ exposer  ’ by  the  nape  of  the  neck,  she  sent  him  whirling 
around  the  platform  as  easily  as  a Hercules  or  Samson 
(with  whose  spirit  she  was  perhaps  possessed)  could  fling 
a cat.  Nor  could  the  hapless  doctor  in  any  way  escape  ; 
for  no  sooner  would  he  show  the  least  indication  to  move, 
be  it  ever  so  stealthily,  than  the  ‘humbug’  of  a medium 
would  dart  tiger-like  at  him,  and  again  send  him  flying 
around  the  stage  ....  At  last,  however,  the  doctor’s 
beseeching  looks  seemed  to  prevail,  and  he  was  permitted 
to  sneak  quietly  away.” 

C — 2 

itized  by  GoOQle 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

84 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

Notwithstanding  Mr.  Hazard’s  jubilation  at  the  doctor’s  ! 
painful  position,  he  considered  that  a trick  had  been  prac- 
tised by  the  medium ; but  he  got  into  more  experienced 
hands,  he  tells  us,  soon  after  this,  and  became  convinced 
that  he  was  wrong. 

The  Eddys  are  said  to  be  a great  draw  in  “ the  States  ” 
now,  and  a Colonel  Olcott*  describes  the  ponderable 
ghosts  at  the  Spirits’  Home,  Chittenden,  Vermont ; and 
they  are  very  wonderful  in  the  Olcottian  narrative.  English 
Spiritualists,  however,  do  not  care  to  take  even  the  colonel’s 
word  without  some  corroboration,  as  the  Eddys  have  not 
been  above  trickery  before,  and  therefore  Mr.  Harrison 
puts 

A PROBLEM. 

" Colonel  Olcott’s  book  narrates  how  at  one  time  the 
Eddy  Brothers  publicly  exhibited  genuine  spiritual  manifes- 
tations as  conjurors’  tricks,  as  has  also  been  done  by  Mel- 
ville Fay,  Von  Vleck,  and  some  other  physical  mediums. 
What  kind  of  spirits  are  they  who  aid  mediums  in  such  a 
career  ? ” 

Mr.  Algernon  Joy,  Secretary  of  the  National  Associa- 
tioti  of  Spiritualists,  recently  returned  from  America,  re- 
ports a visit  to  the  “ Spirits’  Home.”  He  says  : 

“ While  there  I saw  no  manifestations  under  test  con- 
ditions. I firmly  believe  that  every  spirit  that  came  out 
upon  the  platform  was  William  Eddy  himself ; those  that 
only  showed  in  the  doorway,  the  same  on  his  hands  and 
knees  ; and  the  small  children  that  appeared  were  made- 
up  dolls.”f 

* Of  the  New  York  “ Daily  Graphic,”  which  does  a “good  thing  ” by  illus- 
trating the  “materialization”  of  the  Eddys. 
t “The  Spiritualist,”  Dec.  xoth,  1875. 

Digitized  byGoOQIC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mediumistic  Craft. 

85 

u There  is  a tide  in  the  affairs  of  men,”  and  the  Eddys 
have  taken  it  “at  the  flood.”  They  ostensibly  keep  a farm 
(the  house  was  specially  built  with  a large  “ stance  room” 
in  it),  and  produce  a fine  crop  of  spirits,  while  a large  flock 
of  geese  is  regularly  drawn  from  all  parts  of  the  States, 
to  witness  “ manifestations  ” which  the  best  friends  of  the 
cause  must  be  ashamed  of. 

I must  now  advert  to  several  forms  of  mediumship,  and 
may  commence  with 

TRANCE  SPEAKING, ♦ 

which  is  a very  ordinary  form  of  mediumistic  power,  and  any 
one  with  a ready  wit  and  a glib  tongue  would  seem  to  be 
fit  for  it ; not  so  think  the  Spiritualists.  Judge  Edmondsf 
wrote  that  “ the  invisible  intelligence  takes  possession  of 
the  mind  of  the  medium,  and  compels  his  utterance  of  its 
ideas,  in  defiance  of  the  will  of  the  mortal  through  whom 
it  is  talking,”  and  I am  sorry  to  say  the  communications 
of  these  spirit  friends  are  not  to  be  relied  upon.  If  the 
medium — “in  the  trance  state” — happens,  possibly  by 
some  hint  obtained  from  yourself,  to  hit  upon  the  truth  or 
something  like  it,  you  are  to  accept  that  as  a useful  revela- 
tion from  the  spirits  ; but  should  the  message  not  square 
with  your  own  knowledge,  ideas,  or  desires,  there  is  an 
easy  way  out  of  the  difficulty  by  laying  all  the  blame  upon 
bad  spirits.  You  accordingly  bind  yourself  to  an  oracle 

* “ Change  Apollo  into  a spirit,  and  the  Pythoness  into  an  American  giil, 
and  you  will  have  the  trance  medium.’'— Signor  Monti. 
f “ Spiritualism,"  Vol.  I.,  page  38. 

Digitized  by 

G. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

85 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

which  cither  speaks  truth  or  untruth  as  you  desire  its 
communications  shall  be  read.  But  how  about  the  oracle 
that  “lies  like  truth”?  may  not  this  be  a Jack  o’  Lantern 
to  lead  you  to  destruction  ? 

Usually  the  trance-speaking  is  very  vapid  stuff  indeed  ; 
if  not  entirely  colourless,  “ what  is  true  is  not  new,  and 
what  is  new  is  not  true.”  Even  Spiritualists  themselves 
begin  to  see  something  of  this.  Mr.  John  Priest,  Secretary 
of  the  Liverpool  Psychological  Society,  who  we  find  is 
“ a recent  adherent  to  the  cause  ” (so  he  may  have  more 
discretion  shortly),  “ dealt  with  what  he  considered  to  be 
serious  objections  to  trance-speaking ; one  was  Lindley 
Murray  forgetting  his  grammar  in  controlling  certain  me- 
diums, the  remarkable  sameness  of  Mrs.  Tappan’s  orations, 
and  want  of  book-knowledge,  whether  delivered  by  the 
supposed  spirits  of  Judge  Edmonds,  Professor  Hare,  or 
A.  A.  Ballou.”  * 

Before  leaving  this  “ head  ” I may  give,  in  mellifluous 
Cora  Lavinia  Victoria’s  + own  words,  some  of  the  wonders 
worked  by  those  under  the  spiritual  afflatus  : 

“ Persons  unlettered  in  the  sciences  or  in  the  languages 
were  made  to  speak  other  tongues  than  their  own,  and  in 
philosophy  and  science  transcended  any  possible  know- 
ledge or  education.  Direct  individual  intelligence  con- 
trolled numbers  of  persons — they  are  now  counted  by 
the  thousand — who  spoke  words  during  these  states  far 
transcending  their  ordinary  culture,  beyond  any  knowledge 
they  had  gained  in  schools  ; and  in  every  instance  these 
utterances  claimed  to  be  dictated  by  the  spirit  of  some 
departed  soul.” 

* “Spiritualist,”  Sept.  3rd,  1875. 

t Mrs.  C.  L.  V.  Tappan— a trance  speaker,  who  has  predicted  that  St. 
Peter’s  Cathedral  at  Rome  will  be  converted  to  a Temple  of  Spiritualism  ere 
long  I 

‘ \ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mediumistic  Craft. 

87 

I have  yet  to  meet  with  those  who  have  spoken  beyond 
their  “ ordinary  culture  ” whilst  in  the  supposed  trance. 
Instead  of  speaking  foreign  tongues,  the  usual  medium — 
in  trance  or  otherwise — is  rarely  master  of  his  own. 

Certainly  the  media  frequently  make  statements  “beyond 
any  knowledge  they  have  gained  in  schools”  or  elsewhere, 
for  missing  relatives  who  have  been  declared  by  the  spirits 
to  be  dead,  have  had  an  awkward  habit  of  turning  up  again 
in  the  flesh,  and  one  lady,  who  received  a communication 
through  a medium  to  the  effect  that  her  son  on  his  way 
down  the  Mississippi  had,  when  the  steamer  took  fire, 
jumped  overboard  and  been  drowned,  returned  home  in 
great  grief,  and  found  the  young  man  awaiting  her  arrival ! 
But  of  course  this  was  a lying  spirit ! 

The  electric  telegraph  had  told  the  truth  about  the 
disaster  to  the  steamer,  but  the  “ spirits  ” had  guessed — 
and  guessed  wrong — about  the  lady’s  son. 

WRITING  MEDIA — * 

— are  those  who  give  warnings  of  a personal  and  relative 
character,  though  entirely  unconscious  of  the  matter  pro- 
duced. This  guidance  of  hands  by  the  spirits  (some, 
confessedly  bad  ones  !)  might  produce  awkward  results. 
“ Fraser’s  Magazine ”+  says  : “If  the  spirits  have  such  a 
power,  there  is  an  end  of  moral  responsibility.  The  spirit 
of  Jonathan  Wild  may  slide  a bishop’s  hand  into  an  un- 
suspecting layman’s  pocket,  or  the  spirit  of  Fauntleroy  may 
commit  a forgery  with  the  pen  of  Mr.  T.  Baring  or  Lord 
Overstone.” 

See  how“  Ski,”  that  educated  old  Indian,  determined  to 

• " Some  ghosts  do,  mortal  hands  compelling. 
Write  letters  in  phonetic  spelling." — Punch. 
t Vol.  LXXI.,  page  42. 

C 

jooole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

88  Modern  Spiritualism. 

show  his  caligraphy  to  advantage,  makes  Mrs.  Hollis  the 
medium  through  whom  he  writes  upon  a slate  wider  a rug: 

(“Him  be  here  and  see  you,  Ski.”) 

This  was  regarded  as  highly  satisfactory ; but  Mrs.  Hollis 
again  placed  the  slate  and  paper  under  the  rug  ; and  the 
following  communication  was  given,  the  spirit  tapping  with 
the  pencil  when  he  had  finished.  [See  next  page.] 

These  are  fair  specimens  of  spirit  writings.  They  are 
invariably  bad,  being  written  by  the  medium  under  diffi- 
culties, sometimes  beneath  a rug,  as  in  this  case,  or  under 
a table,  or  with  the  medium’s  hands  secured,  when  the 
pencil  has  to  be  held  between  the  teeth. 

After  all,  this  writing  under  a rug  is  not  half  so  wonderful 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mediumistic  Craft. 

89 

(“  Him  come  to  see  him , Burns .”) 

as  that  educated  pen  of  the  Davenports,  which,  after  rising 
from  the  table  and  writing  a message  upon  a slip  of  paper, 
retired  “in  soft  confusion,”  but  almost  immediately  returned 
to  dot  an  i ! 

PAINTING  MEDIA 

are  a terror  to  me.  Many  of  the  “spiritual”  daubs  would 
disgrace  the  artists  who  decorate  our  pavements  with  their 
chalk  designs,  and  are  only  so  far  spiritual  as  to  resemble 
nothing  in  nature,  “either  in  the  heaven  above,  or  in  the 
earth  beneath,  or  in  the  waters  under  the  earth.”  They 
usually  consist  of  a confused  jumble  of  colours,  rivalling 
Joseph’s  coat,  or  a bottle  of  mixed  pickles,  in  their  pic- 
turesque design.  There  is  certainly  an  attempt  to  give  an 
idea  of  the  “spheres”  by  blurred,  exaggerated,and  grotesque 
reproductions  of  earthly  landscapes ; and,  in  one  case,  Mr. 

Digitized  by  GoOqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

(“  So  him  nine  to  sec  him , squaw."  This  was  addressed 

to  Mrs.  Burns.) 

David  Duguid,  " a working  cabinet-maker,”  of  Glasgow, 
“ under  the  guiding  influence  of  Marcus  Baker,”  is  said  to 
have  given  signs  of  real  artistic  ability.  He  “ wrought  with 
closed  eyes,”  and  appeared  so  deeply  entranced  as  not  to 
hear  persons  speak.  But  though  he  could  not,  the  spirit 
could,  and  replied  through  the  medium,  in  answer  to  in- 
quiries, that  he  was  not  Marcus  Baker  (what  a shady, 
deceitful  lot  these  ghosts  must  be*!)  but  the  spirit  of  a 
Dutch  painter,  born  in  1636,  and  who  died  in  1681.  Sub- 

1 

Digitized  by  GoOQlc 

« / /A 

Original  from  ^ 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Mediumistic  Craft. 

9i 

sequently,  when  the  medium  had  read  up  a little  and 
fixed  upon  a name  for  the  spirit,  he  was  declared  to  be 
Jacob  Ruysdael,  and  Mr.  Duguid  reproduced  that  artist’s 
chef  d’ oeuvre,  which  any  one  looking  at  “ Cassell’s  Art 
Treasures  Exhibitor”  (page  301)  may  see  engraved.  Far 
be  it  from  me  to  say  that  the  mediumistic  cabinet-maker 
had  ever  seen  Messrs.  Cassell’s  excellent  book! # It  was 
rather  casting  a slur  upon  the  work  of  a brother  spirit, 
though,  when  the  medium’s  “ invisible  guides  ” recom- 
mended that  he  should  pursue  his  studies  in  the  Govern- 
ment School  of  Art ; but  it  is  satisfactory  that  they  were 
justified  in  giving  the  ghostly  Ruysdael  a snub,  for  the 
mortals  made  Duguid  do  better  than  he  ever  did  while 
under  spirit  training.  ’ 

HEALING  MEDIUMSHIP. 

The  last  Conference  of  Spiritualists  had  little  of  interest 
in  it.  One  humorous  touch  was,  however,  imparted  to 
the  proceedings  by  a remark  that  Spiritualism  had  been 
too  much  given  to  cultivating  the  scientific,  instead  of 
seeking  to  win  the  poorer  classes.  This,  at  a meeting  pre- 
sided over  by  a scientific  ex-lecturer  for  “ Dr.”  Khan,  and 
a philosophic  muffin-man  of  Liverpool,  was  sublime  ! 

One  of  the  prominent  topics,  though,  was  interesting  to 
the  public,  as  affecting  the  pockets  and  the  lives  of  the 
people.  There  was  a discussion  upon  the  advisability  of 
establishing  a Central  Spiritual  Hospital,  where  the  me- 

* In  a new  work,  given  through  the  mediumship  of  the  “ working  cabinet- 
maker,'* and  entitled  “ Hafed,  Prince  of  Persia,”  Messrs.  Cassell,  Petter, 
and  Galpin  have  discovered  that  the  pictures  in  their  “ Illustrated  Bible,” 
many  of  them  by  living  artists,  are  pirated  and  reproduced,  “almost  line 
f.»r  line,”  as  the  work  of  the  spirits  ! 

1 by  GoOQlc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

92 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

diumistic  “ doctors  ” could  always  keep  in  reserve  “a  strong 
battery  of  spiritual  power.”  If  possible,  also,  it  was  thought 
better  that  these  spiritual  quacks  should  be  “clairvoyants,” 
that  they  might  be  able  “ to  see  through  the  patient’s  body 
to  the  seat  of  the  disease.” 

“ We  should  not  be  at  all  astonished,”  says  the  “ Stan- 
dard,”* “ to  learn  that  some  of  those  clairvoyants,  if  they 
tried  hard,  could  see  into  the  middle  of  next  week,  but  just 
at  the  moment  they  are  too  busily  employed  seeing  their 
way  into  other  people’s  pockets  to  have  leisure  for  anything 
else.  No  site  was  mentioned  for  the  proposed  central 
hospital ; but  we  trust  the  suggestion  of  the  neighbourhood 
of  Colney  Hatch  as  extremely  eligible,  will  not  be  taken  as 
too  officious.” 

But,  joking  apart,  it  is  wonderful  what  these  disem- 
bodied spirits  can  do  through  the  healers,  if  we  only  ac- 
cept all  that  is  told  of  them.  How  diseases,  baffling  the 
skill  of  physicians,  are  cured  by  the  simple  laying-on  of 
hands,  may  be  gathered  from  Mr.  A.  C.  Burke’s  f list  of 
Dr.  Mack’s  cures,  from  which  I cull  the  following  : 

“No.  20. — Gentleman  suffering  from  the  infirmities  of 
old  age — a rather  cotnmon  complaint j but,  really,  in  the 
present  age  of  miracles,  it  seems  hard  to  say  what  spirit 
power  may  not  effect,  even  in  the  case  of  such  a complaint 
as  this.  ....  No.  23. — Skin  disease  from  birth,  age 
nearly  twenty  years  : had  never  known,  in  her  own  case, 
what  perspiration  was,  except  in  the  feet  and  hands.  After 
two  or  three  weeks’  treatment  the  skin  had  become  soft 
and  pleasant,  the  pores  fully  opened  and  relieved,  and  all 
roughness  and  irruption  had  disappeared.  This  case — as, 
indeed,  do  all  the  rest— reminds  us  of  the  cures  wrought 

# November  5th,  1875. 

f This  gentleman’s  wife  has  a “ gift  of  healing  ” also. 

Digitized 

d by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Medhmistic  Craft.  93 

by  Christ,  and  calls  to  our  mind  the  poem  by  N.  P.  Willis, 
in  which  he  says  : 

* And  lo ! the  scales  fell  from  him,  and  his  blood 
Coursed  with  delicious  coolness  through  his  veins  ; 

And  his  dry  palms  grew  moist,  and  on  his  brow 
The  dewy  softness  of  an  infant  stole.’"* 

Dr.  Newton — from  the  States,  of  course ! — was  a very 
noted  “ progressive  physician,”  who  “ eradicated  all  forms 
of  disease  of  recent  or  long  standing,  by  the  laying-on  of 
hands  and  Nazarene  remedies .”  “It  will  be  new,”  says 
the“  Daily  Telegraph, though  possibly  not  startling,  to 
many  persons,  to  be  informed  that  Dr.  Newton  considers, 
himself  quite  on  a par  with  1 the  Nazarene/  as  he  familiarly 
terms  One  whom  we  hesitate  to  name  in  such  a context. 
The  Nazarene  is  in  the  habit  of  appearing  to  him  fre- 
quently, and  tells  him  that  the  possession  of  these  gifts  (of 
healing)  is  accorded  to  him  very  much  because  he  has  not 
fallen  into  the  mistake  of  deifying  Christ.  Such  is  Dr. 
Newton’s  theology  — such  the  profession  which  develops 
into  his  extraordinary  practice.  It  will  shock  many  readers, 
but  it  is  only  necessary,  in  order  to  show  the  position  as- 
sumed by  this  medium,  if  we  quote  his  own  words  on  the 
subject : ‘ The  Nazarene  appeared  to  me  and  said,“  Brother, 
there ’s  ten  thousand  spirits  brighter  and  better  than  me 
in  heaven.  If  you  was  to  see  me  among  fifty  others,  you 
wouldn’t  know  me.”  Says  I,  “ I think  I should : I should 
know  your  beautiful  curly  hair The  Nazarene  made 
some  noise  in  Judaea,  but  nothing  like  what  I’m  going  to 
make  in  London  ! ’ 

“As  he  was  coming  to  the  Progressive  Library  that 
morning,  the  horse  in  the  hansom  cab  was  taken  with  the 

* “ Medium  and  Daybreak,”  September  xoth,  1875. 
t June  7th,  1870. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

94 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

‘blind  staggers.’  ‘ The  people  began  to  make  a fuss,*  said 
he,  ‘but  I jumped  out,  laid  my  hands  on  the  horse’s  head, 
and  he  was  all  right  in  a minute.’  ” 

As  Dr.  Newton  “cured  by  faith,”  that  horse  had  blind 
faith  and  “blind  staggers”  also  ! 

The  extent  of  the  evil  will  be  seen  by  a glance  at  the 
Spiritualist  newspapers,  whose  columns  are  half  filled  with 
the  puffs  and  advertisements  of  the  “ healers.”  Here  we 
find  that  “ Dr.  John  Hunter  and  Dr.  Mesmer  may  be  con- 
sulted through  the  mediumship  of  Mr.  Robert  Harper,” 
that  “ Mrs.  Empson  undertakes  the  treatment  of  diseases 
under  the  direction  of  spirit  physicians  \ ” and  Mr.  and 
Mrs.  E.  W.  Green  give,  through  “ the  little  spirit  ‘ Snow- 
drop’ and  the  Indian  chief  ‘ Blackhawk,’ ” their  “medical 
diagnosis  by  lock  of  hair." 

Miss  Lottie  Fowler  can  be  consulted  “ on  either  medical 
or  business  affairs  connected  with  the  living  and  the 
dead  and  Miss  Chandos  “undertakes  to  eradicate  con- 
sumption, cancer,  insanity,  dipsomania,  and  all  nervous 
and  infantile  diseases.” 

All  these  people  can  make  the  lame  to  be  made  whole, 
the  blind  to  see,  and  the  deaf  to  hear  like  the  old  lady’s 
wonderful  ear- trumpet,  by  aid  of  which 

“The  very  next  day 

She  heard  from  her  husband  in  Botany  Bay." 

We  have  “healing  mesmerists”  and  “medical  clair- 
voyants ” as  thick  as  mushrooms  after  rain,  and  there  are 
“ institutions  ” of  all  kinds.  One  of  the  Spiritual  “ doctors,” 
Mr.  Coates,  who  is  a “Psychopathic  Institute ” himself, 
(“  I thank  thee,  Burns , for  teaching  me  that  word  ! ”*)  at 

* See  Mr.  Burns  for  the  singular  meaning  of  " Institute,”  Chapter  XIII, 

itized  by  GoO&le 

C ' 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

[ The  Mediumistic  Craft.  95 

Liverpool,  near  the  region  of  Everton  toffee,  has  thought 
better  of  it,  and  issued 

I 

A DISCLAIMER. 

To  all  Spiritualists, — In  an  ill-advised  moment,  listen- 
ing to  the  suggestions  of  injudicious  friends,  I permitted 
my  agent  to  have  the  letters  " Dr.”  prefixed  to  my  name 
on  posters,  advertisements,  &c.  At  the  earliest  opportunity 
I had  them  struck  out,  and  I beg  most  respectfully  to  state 
that  I am  not  a “ Dr.”  I have  no  right  to  the  appellation. 
I regret  ever  having  used  it,  and  however  difficult  or  pain- 
ful it  is  to  me  to  make  this  public  retractation,  I cannot 
permit  another  hour  to  pass  without  doing  so,  as  it  is  a 
duty  I owe  to  myself,  my  friends,  and  the  readers  of  your 
paper,  as  well  as  a rebuke  to  those  who  advised  in  this 
matter.  Permit  me  to  be  recognized  among  you  again  as 
yours  sincerely,  JAMES  COATES.* 

I am  fearful  that  this  Mr.  Coates  must  have  had  more 
reasons  than  the  pricking  of  his  conscience  when  he  re- 
signed his  title,  though  ! But  he  has  not  the  strength  of 
mind  of  some  others,  who  through  good  report  and  evil 
report  still  stick  to  their  “ degree.”  On  this  point  of  the 
healers  I am  at  one  with  the  Spiritualists — that  it  demands 
further  investigation.  In  detail  we  differ  somewhat,  as  I 
would  require  it  for  these  “ doctors  ” at  the  hands  of  the 
Metropolitan  Police.  I trust  we  shall  soon  see  the  law 
put  in  force,  and  cognizance  taken  of  such  as  may  only  be 
possessed  of  bogus  degrees,  if  any.  Good  gracious,  what 
a stampede,  what  an  “ awaying  ” to  the  “ Land  of  the 
West  ” there  would  be,  then ! 

(•  * “Medium  and  Daybreak,”  Sept.  17111,1875. 

C 

jooqle 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

96 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

Of  the  other  phases  of  mediumship  I shall  speak  at 
greater  length  elsewhere  when  exposing  some  of  the  many 
frauds  of  the  media,  but  omitting  a record  of  the  pecca- 
dillos of  minor  mediums,  whose  names  and  whose  im- 
moralities are  legion.  Those  who  wish  to  rake  up  the 
unsavoury  mess  need  only  take  a file  of  American  papers, 
for  some  very  racy,  if  not  proper,  reading. 

D ' :.l i" ! / 0 : ! OV  C iOOQIC 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  IX. 

THE  INVASION  OF  THE  MEDIA. 

Early  Professors  — The  “great  wave”  of  Spiritualism  — The  "almighty 
Dollar” — Place  aux  Dantes — Aerial  Transition —Illusionists  v,  the  Rival 
“Doctors” — Two  of  a trade  never  agree — A Mediumistic  Monck — The 
Black  Art  in  the  Isle  of  Wight— A Travelling  Representative — “The 
Poor  Player  ” — “ Washee-washee  ” — Sad  about  Mr.  Cooper  ! — Lake 
Pleasant — “Grotesque  rencontres ” — The  People’s  Garden — A Spirit 
Navvy — Spiritualism  like  an  Inkstand  ! — A Testimonial  of  “ Brass  !” — 
“Airy  Daniel"  and  Dark  Stances , “ Admirable  for  a flirtation ” — Mr. 
Williams  “at  home." 

0P  to  the  year  1853  England  had  been  singularly 
and  happily  free  from  Spiritualistic  taint,  but  such 
a prolific  gold  mine  could  not  long  remain  unworked. 

The  invasion  of  the  media  commenced  with  the  advent 
of  Mrs.  Haydon  about  this  time,  she  being  the  first  to 
establish  a spirit-rapping  store,  in  Oueen  Anne  Street, 
and  unfold  the  mysteries  of  Spiritualism  to  a public  ever 
ready  to  pay  for  novelty.  Foster  followed  with  his  arm- 
and-spirit  lithography,  and,  making  the  “upper  ten”  curi- 
ous, managed  to  reap  a rich  harvest  in  London.  Then  we 
had  another  American  named  Colchester,  whose  only  pre- 
tention to  being  a medium  was  the  fact  of  his  telling  a 
nunhber  of  names  written  upon  separate  slips  of  paper  by 
various  persons — a trick  now  included  in  the  rdle  of  the 

97  * 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

98 

ordinary  conjuror;  Mrs.  A.  E.  Newton,  “a  medium,  a 
seer,  which  I take  to  be  a superior  development,”  says  our 
old  friend  Coleman  ; and  Home  came  in  1855. 

There  were  others  I need  not  name  from  the  States, 
and  English  media  were  also  quickly  thrust  upon  the 
home  market.  Still,  the  greater  number  even  to  the  pre- 
sent day  are  of  American  manufacture.  A liberal  supply 
of  the  article  has  always  been  kept  up  by  our  Transatlan- 
tic brethren,  and  they  kindly  send  to  “ Merrie  England” 
the  foremost  of  the  mystic  fraternity,  who,  while  they  raise 
the  spirits  of  the  dead,  depress  the  spirits  of  the  living. 

Hither  the  mediums  troop — most  to  be  detected,  but  all 
to  make  money,  so  a fig  for  the  exposure  ! We  have  been 
overrun  with  trance  and  test  mediums,  inspirationists, 
rappers,  writing,  seeing,  hearing,  healing,  and  materializ- 
ing mediums,  with  all  the  “ properties  ” of  their  weird  art 
— the  skulls,  dark  lanterns,  guitars,  tambourines,  and 
“ latest  things  in  ghosts,”  &c.,  & c.,  See.,  and  in  the  darkened 
room  the  “manifestations”  which  come  in  cycles — “in 
great  waves  ” — are  produced  if  the  circumstances  be favour - 
ablej  but  in  any  and  every  case,  John  Bull  is  eased  of  his 
cash.  At  length,  however,  the  Bull’s  eye  is  upon  their 
doings,  which  cannot  be  kept  so  “ dark  ” as  of  yore,  and 
their  tricks  are  of  little  avail.  The  novelty  has  worn 
off ; the  golden  shower  has  ceased  ; the  Pactolian  stream 
runs  dry.  So,  away  ! Away  with  the  inspirationists  ! — 
the  trance,  test,  rapping,  writing,  seeing,  hearing,  healing, 
and  materializing  media,  with  their  boxes  containing  the 
“ trappings  and  the  suits  of  woe  ” in  which  the  spirits  re- 
visit the  earth  ; all  the  mystic  paraphernalia,  even  to  the 
“ latest  thing  in  ghosts,”  labelled — “ This  side  up.  \ With 
care.  Not  wanted  on  the  voyage ; ” — for  the  “great  wave” 
of  Spiritualism  is  ebbing  from  our  English  shores^,  and 

^ 1 Original  from  \ 

Digitized  by  vjOOQK  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

99 

never  accomplished  successfully  by  your  countrymen,  O 
•Bums  !)  to  the  Land  of  the  West,  where  Brother  Jonathan 
is  still  hungering  to  be  cajoled  and  thirsting  to  be  cheated 
— where  his  purse-strings  are  still  loose,  and  the  life-blood 
of  Spiritualism  (the  “almighty  dollar”)  rolls  merrily  about. 
But,  “ be  in  time  ! ” Even  here  the  game  will  not  last  for 
ever ! “ Make  your  hay  while  the  sun  shines,”  for  ye 

know  not  when  the  vessel  of  glass  may  break,  and  the 
mediumistic  crew  be  overwhelmed  by  the  “great  waves” 
of  a purer  faith. 

I shall  not  attempt  to  enumerate  all  the  media  even  in 
London,  where  we  still  have  them  (mostly  very  small  fry, 
indeed  !)  east,  west,  north,  and  south  ; but  I must  name  a 
few,  not  in  the  order  of  their  coming,  but  with  the  view  of 
introducing  some  of  the  more  prominent  of  the  medial 
dramatis  persona  to  the  British  public. 

Place  aux  dames  ! The  lady  formerly  known  ‘as  Miss 
Nicholls,  when  Westbourne  Grove  delighted  in  her  “faces,” 
and  now  as  Mrs.  Guppy-Volckman,  is  certainly  the  greatest 
personage  in  the  medial  world,  and  one  of  some  weight 
amongst  the  Spiritualists.  Her  first  husband,  Samuel 
Guppy,  “of  Calcutta  and  Bristol,”  was  the  author  of  a large 
work,  entitled  “ Mary  Jane,”  attributing  the  phenomena  of 
Spiritualism  to  some  chemical  law ; this  gentleman  died 
at  the  ripe  age  of  eighty-four,  upon  January  1 8th,  1 87  5, 
and  his  widow  was  led  (to  the  altar  I was  going  to  say) 
to  the  registrar’s,  office,  to  enter  the  bonds  of  wedlock  a 
second  time,  upon  August  12th  in  the  same  year,  by  Mr. 
William  Volckman  — hence  the  euphonistic  name  of 
Guppy-Volckman. 

Since  1867  this  lady  has  enjoyed  a reputation  for  produc- 
ing choice  flowers  and  fruits  (all  of  earthly  origin,  fresh  from 
Covent  Garden)  at  her  stances ; but  the  great  marvel  by 

\vhi<£h  she  obtains  a niche  in  the  Spiritual  Temple  of  Fame 
> 

( 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

IOO 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

is  that  she  was  taken  up  from  her  household  accounts,  en 
deshabille , at  Highbury  Hill  Park,  and  carried  by  the  spirits 
to  69  Lamb’s  Conduit  Street,  where,  when  she  dropped 
through  the  roof  and  through  several  ceilings  (without 
leaving  any  apertures),  she  came  down  “ plump  ” upon  the 
centre  of  a table,  the  ink  with  which  those  “ household 
accounts  ” were  being  made  up  still  wet  in  the  pen  ! 

" There  is  a lady,  Mrs.  Guppy— 

Mark,  shallow  scientific  puppy  ! — 

The  heaviest  she  in  London,  marry, 

Her,  spirits  three  long  miles  did  carry. 

Upon  a table  down  they  set  her, 

Within  closed  doors.  What ! you  know  better, 

And  we  ’re  ail  dupes  and  self-deceivers? 

Yah  ! Sadduces  and  unbelievers  I "* 

It  seems  this  “ spiritual  draw”f  took  place  at  Messrs. 
Heme  and  Williams’s  stance,  about  June,  1871.  There 
were  present  three  ladies  and  eight  gentlemen.  The  doors 
being  locked  and  the  room  darkened,  one  of  the  circle  re* 
quested  “Katie,”  in  a joking  way,  to  “bring  Mrs.  G. ; ” 
another  said,  “ Good  gracious  ! I hope  not ; she  is  one  of 
the  biggest  women  in  London  ;”but  “Katie” said,  “I  will! 
I will!  I will!”  and  John’s  rough  voice  shouted,  “You  can’t 
do  it,  Katie.”  Then  says  “ H.  Y.,”  “ a Manchester  mer- 
chant, of  high  respectability,”  in  the  “ Echo,”  of  June  8th, 
1871  : “We  were  all  laughing  and  joking  at  the  absurdity 
of  the  idea,  when  John’s  voice  called  out,  * Keep  still,  can’t 
you?*  In  an  instant  somebody  called  out,  ‘Good  God  ! 
there  is  something  on  my  head,’  simultaneously  with  a 
heavy  bump  on  the  table  and  one  or  two  screams.  A 

* “Punch.”  » 

t Mrs.  Guppy's  flight  is  compared  by  Fritz  (“Where  are  the  De.pd?”l 
to  the  catching  away  of  Philip  the  Evangelist  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  , with 
the  lifting  up  of  Ezekiel,  and  with  the  taking  up  to  heaven  of  Elijah.  \ 

ied  by  GoOQlc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

\ 

\ 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

IOI 

match  was  instantly  struck,  and  there  was  Mrs.  G.  stand- 
ing on  the  centre  of  the  table,  with  the  whole  of  us  seated 
round  the  table,  closely  packed  together,  as  we  sat  at 

the  commencement Both  doors  were  still 

locked.  Our  attention  was,  however,  directed  to  Mrs.  G., 
who  appeared  to  be  in  a trance  and  perfectly  motionless. 
Great  fears  were  entertained  that  the  shock  would  be  in- 
jurious to  her,  supposing  it  to  be  really  Mrs.  G.,  and  not 
some  phantom  in  her  image  ; but  John’s  voice  called  out, 
‘ She  will  soon  be  all  right.*  She  had  one  arm  over  her 
eyes,  with  a pen  in  her  hand,  and  an  account-book  in  her 
other  hand,  which  was  hanging  by  her  side.  When  she 
came  round,  she  seemed  very  much  affected,  and  began 
to  cry.  She  told  us  that  the  last  thing  she  could  remember 
was  that  she  was  sitting  at  home,  about  three  miles  away, 
making  up  her  week’s  accounts  of  household  expenditure, 
and  that  Miss  N.  was  in  the  room  with  her  reading  the 
paper.  The  ink  in  the  pen  was  wet ; and  the  last  word  she 
had  written,*  or  rather  begun  to  write,  for  it  was  one  or 
two  letters  short  of  completion,  was  smeared  and  scarcely 
dry.  From  the  joking  remark  about  bringing  Mrs.  G.,  to 
the  time  she  was  on  the  table,  three  minutes  did  not  elapse. 
The  possibility  of  her  being  concealed  in  the  room  is  as 
absurd  as  the  idea  of  her  acting  in  collusion  with  the  media.’* 
“ H.Y.,”  that  Manchester  merchant  “of  credit  and  renown,** 
is  welcome  to  his  easy  faith  ; but  / cannot  overlook  those 
two  doors  from  which  “ attention  was,  however,  directed  ;’* 
nor  do  I see  in  the  narrative  anything  to  shake  me  in  my 
scepticism. 

“ There  is  one  trifling  inconsistency,”  says  the  “ Quar- 
terly Review,”  1871,  “we  should  like  explained  before  we 
can  accept  these  narratives  as  veracious.  The  invisible 

# Said  to  be  “ pickles  ” I 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

102 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

spirits  at  Mrs.  Guppy’s  command  can  obviously  do  as  much 
for  her  as  did  the  obedient  Jins  for  the  heroes  and  heroines 
of  the  immortal  tales  that  charm  the  youth  of  successive 
generations.  If  they  can  bring  in  any  quantity  of  fruits, 
flowers,  and  ices  for  a dessert,  they  must  surely  be  able  to 
furnish  forth  her  breakfast  and  her  dinner-tables.  When 
she  wishes  to  travel,  they  save  her  not  merely  the  fatigue 
of  the  journey,  but  the  cost  of  cabs  and  railway  fares.  What 
on  earth,  then,  has  Mrs.  Guppy  got  to  do  with  ‘ household 
accounts  ’ ? ” 

George  Sexton, “M.A.,M.D.,LL.D.,F.R.G.S.,F.Z.S., 
Honorary  Member  of  L’Accademia  dci  Quarito  at  Rome, 
Honorary  Member  of  the  American  Anthropological  Asso- 
ciation, &c.,  &c.,  &c.,”is  believed  to  have  commenced  life 
as  a palliasse-maker.  Before  the  Doctor  joined  the  “ new 
religion  ” as  a “ Christian  Spiritualist,”  he  had  been  “ con- 
nected with  the  free-thought  movement  for  twenty  years,”* 
also  engaged  as  lecturer  for  that  German  barber  and  dis- 
gusting quack,  “ Dr.”  Khan,  at  his  notorious  museum  in 
Tichborne  Street ; now  happily  extinguished. 

In  “Revelations  of  Quacks  and  Quackery,”  by  F.  B. 
Courtenay,  Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surgeons, f we 
read  a few  revelations  concerning  Khan’s  Museum,  and 
“ Christopher  Crushgammon,  Esq.,  M.D.,”  which  should  be 
of  interest  to  “ Christian  ” and  other  Spiritualists.  Well,  Dr. 
Sexton,  who  commenced  his  career  of  talkist  as  a missionary 
and  blossomed  into  a Spiritualist  lecturer,  is  now  a leader 
of  the  Christians  in  that  sect,  and  the  only  man  to  be 
found  at  the  Liverpool  Conference  of  the  National  Asso- 
ciation, 1873,  to  say  a word  for  the  Bible,  which  he  de- 
clared “ might  be  accepted  in  its  entirety ; ” and,  after  that, 

* “The  Spiritualist,"  April  1st,  1873. 
t 1 or.don : Bailliire,  Tyndall,  and  Cox,  Medical  Publishers. — Page  95. 

C 

jooole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

103 

surely  none  could  doubt ! Nevertheless,  it  seems  that  Chris- 
tianity is  at  a discount  amongst  the  Pantheon’s  devotees ; 
and  the  editor,  Dr.  Sexton,  in  the  “Christian  Spiritualist” 
for  September  1st,  1875,  announced  the  discontinuance  of 
that  journal  “ on  account  of  the  scanty  support  afforded  it 
by  those  whose  principles  it  was  intended  specially  to  set 
forth,  and  to  which  it  has  been  conscientiously  devoted.” 

And,  if  we  are  to  believe  Mr.  F.  R.  Young  (Sexton’s 
predecessor  in  the  editorial  chair),  the  pugnacious  Doctor 
is  a martyr  for  his  new  faith. 

Mr.  Young  writes : 

“ You  may  be  an  atheist,  a pantheist,  a deist,  or  almost 
anything  you  like,  and  your  theological  opinions  will  not 
be  used  to  your  disadvantage ; but  if  you  are  so  unfortunate 
as  to  be  a Christian,  and  say  so,  if  you  tell  the  Spiritualist 
body  that  you  believe  in  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Lord  of  your 
life,  and  the  Teacher  from  whose  verdict  there  lies,  and 
can  lie,  no  right  of  appeal,  it  is  true  you  are  not  excom- 
municated— the  fact  that  you  are  a Spiritualist  is  still  ad- 
mitted ; but  you  are  looked  upon  with  eyes  more  or  less 
unfriendly,  and  a wonder  is  expressed  how,  believing  in 
Spiritualism,  you  can  at  the  same  time  be  a Christian.” 

' For  a time — a very  short  time — the  doctor  ventured  out 
to  prove  the  truth  of  Spiritualism  (or  to  obtain  a livelihood) 
by  reproducing  some  of  my  illusions,  with,  as  he  said  in 
his  advertisement,  “ machinery  especially  made  for  the 
purpose.”  In  truth,  he  bought  some  old  and  worn-out 
rubbish  that  had  been  used  by  a daughter  of  the  late 
Professor  Anderson,  “Wizard  of  the  North,”  and  failed 
ignominiously  after  a very  short  career. 

The  joke  is  that  none  of  the  tricks  attempted  to  be 
imitated  by  this  would-be  exposer  had  any  reference  to 
Spiritualism  whatever;  and  when  Dr.  Monck  appeared 
upon  the  scene  as  another  imitator  of  the  illusionists,  there 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OP  WISCONSIN 

104 

Modern  Spiritualis?n. 

were  too  many  Richards  in  the  field,  and  they  set  to  and 
devoured  each  other,  like  the  Kilkenny  cats.  “Just  now,” 
says  Mr.  Hinde,  in  “ Bell’s  Weekly  Messenger,”  “there  is  a 
serious  split  in  the  Spiritualistic  camp,  or  perhaps  it  would 
be  a more  appropriate  expression  to  say,  that  the  breach 
which  has  so  long  divided  the  leading  Spiritualists  has 
been  very  greatly  widened  by  the  paper  war  in  which  Dr. 
Sexton  and  Dr.  Monck  have  recently  indulged,  and  which, 
while  it  may  have  been  very  edifying  to  the  true  believers, 
and  received  by  them  as  another  proof  of  the  purity,  good- 
ness, holiness,  and  truthfulness  of  the  religion  they  profess 
to  believe,  has  had  the  effect  of  diverting  the  outside  pub- 
lic, and  filling  the  Egyptian  Hall  to  overflowing.  A writer 
in  ‘ Human  Nature’  has  cognomenized  Dr.  Sexton  as  ‘an 
avenging  spirit,’  in  so  far  as  his  alleged  exposure  of  Maske- 
lyne  and  Cooke  is  concerned.  It  unfortunately  happens, 
as  appears  from  the  Spiritualistic  publications,  that  Dr. 
Monck  has  also  started  ‘ on  his  own  hook  ’ in  the  exposure 
and  avenging  line.  This  proceeding  has,  not  unnaturally, 
given  great  umbrage  to  Dr.  Sexton,  ‘ the  original  avenger/ 
who  complains  that  it  is  rather  hard,  after  he  has  expended 
so  much  time  and  money  in  the  matter,  that  he  should  be 
completely  supplanted  in  his  public  work  by  another  man, 
who  is  indebted  to  Dr.  Sexton  for  all  he  knows  on  the 
subject.  To  this  charge  Dr.  Monck  gives  a flat  denial, 
and,  in  doing  so,  he  administers  a little  wholesome  cor- 
rection to  his  brother  avenger,  by  informing  him  that  if 
the  interests  of  Spiritualism  (i private  interests  being  put 
on  one  side)  rendered  it  necessary  that  Dr.  Sexton  should 
expose  the  conjurors,  it  is  surely  needful  that  other  lec- 
turers should  stand  up  in  the  defence  of  Spiritualism  now 
that  the  jugglers  have  increased  their  numbers,  according 
to  Dr.  Sexton,  by  * a dozen  or  more.’  Avenger  secundus 
adds  the  significant  remark,  which  the  public  will  doubt- 

y GoOQle 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media . 

I05 

less  at  once  see  the  full  force  of  and  estimate  at  its  proper 
value,  while  the  illusionists  will  no  doubt  laugh  most  con- 
summately  thereat — he  says,  ‘the  field  is  ample  enough 
to  employ  another  score  of  exposd  lecturers  without  neces- 
sarily creating  an  ill  feeling  among  them.’  A greater  com- 
pliment to  the  skill  of  the  conjurors,  and  a more  humiliating 
confession  of  the  weakness  and  absurdity  ot  Spiritualism, 
it  would  be  impossible  for  any  one  to  make.” 

Dr.  Monck — who  has  shot  like  a meteor  over  the  Spi- 
ritualistic sky — is,  or  was,  a Unitarian  minister  of  Bristol. 
Now,  the  Monck — naturally  taking  precedence  of  the 
Sexton — has  been  eagerly  watched  by  the  Spiritualist  star- 
gazers, while  his  adversary  is,  in  sporting  parlance,  “ no- 
where ! and  this  is  the  story  which  gained  him  admit- 
tance to  that  “ inner  circle  ” of  the  “ Pantheon,”  where  the 
chief  occupations  of  life  seem  to  be  conducted  in  outer 
darkness. 

At  Bristol,  in  the  midsummer  of  1871,  about  half-past 
one  o’clock  in  the  morning,  Dr.  Monck  was  suddenly 
missed  from  his  bed  by  a Mr.  Rowland,  who  seems  to 
have  shared  its  accommodation  with  him  ; and  the  any- 
thing but  ascetic  Monck  found  himself  at  an  hotel  at 
Swindon — distant  forty-two  miles— without  his  hat,  coat, 
or  waistcoat,  half  an  hour  afterwards.  As  the  gentleman 
had  those  nether  garments  on  which  it  is  not  proper  to 
name  to  ears  polite,*  we  may  assume  he  went  to  bed  as 
the  song  says  “ My  son  John”  did  ;+  and  if  so,  would  it 

* Moral  America  veils  the  nakedness  of  its  table  and  chair-legs  with  the 

same  articles  of  attire  I 

*'  Where  the  legs  of  the  tables  in  tr s are  dressed, 

Away,  far  away,  to  the  Land  of  the  West." 

t “ My  son  John 

Went  to  bed  with  his  tr s on.  ” 

— Old  Song. 

Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

io6  Modern  Spiritualism 

be  proper  to  ask  why  he  did  not  do  the  “usual” in  doffing 
those  garments  ? Had  he  been  dining  out,  or  what  ? 

We  have  a story  of  the  worthy  minister’s  doings  in  the 
Isle  of  Wight,  which  might  fairly  be  put  down  to  the 
power  of  spirits  by  the  most  sceptical  person. 

The  doctor  had  gone  on  the  coach  for  a trip  to  Caris- 
brooke,  and  on  arriving  at  that  place  the  passengers  dined 
together,  and  a merry  party  there  was ! “ Dinner  over,  the 
table  was  covered,  and  wine-glasses  and  bottles  crowned 
the  festive  board.  The  glasses  were  filled  all  round. 

“ Now  was  ‘ Samuel’s ’*  opportunity,  and  a vigorous  use 
he  made  of  it ; for  he  tumbled  glass  after  glass  on  the  table, 
spilling  the  wine,  and  exasperating  the  would-be  imbibers. 
It  was  really  amusing  to  see  a thirsty  soul,  with  the  pleasure 
begotten  of  anticipation  smiling  in  his  face,  stretch  out 
his  hand  to  lift  the  tempting  glass,  and  then  to  behold  his 
rueful  expression  of  countenance  as,  like  Tantalus  of 
old,  he  saw  the  vinous  receptacle  recede  from  him,  lean 
gracefully  at  an  angle  of  forty-five  degrees,  and  then  pour 
out  his  coveted  wine— an  oblation  to  no  better  god  than 
the  table-cloth. 

“ But  one  bon-vivant  was  treated  to  a still  greater  sur- 
prise, for  just  as  he  was  about  to  take  his  brimming  glass, 
the  wine  obligingly  ejected  itself  on  his  knees,  and  then 
performing  a masterly  somersault,  stood  on  its  mouth 
bottom  upwards.”  f 

The  “ spirits  ” must  have  got  into  the  heads  of  some,  at 
least,  of  this  jovial  crew  by  the  coach  to  Carisbrooke ! 
Dr.  Monck  has  also  been  “ Hoisted  up  into  the  air”  (in  the 
darkness)  “ from  nine  to  eighteen  inches,  according  to  the 
resistant  nature  of  the  temperament  of  those  persons  who 
held  his  feet;  and  Mr.  Burns  was  then  told  to  stand  in 

“ Kr  Morck’s  “ spirit  guide.”  f “ The  Medium,”  November  5th,  1875. 

Digitized  by  GOOQ  Ic 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

107 

front  of  Dr.  Monck.  He  did  so,  supporting  liis  hands  on 
a chair  which  stood  before  him.  The  spirit  said  he  would 
place  Dr.  Monck  on  his  shoulders.  Soon  the  voice  of  the 
doctor  was  heard  up  in  the  air,  and  his  feet  pawed  at  Mr. 
Burns’s  back,  but  the  spirit  complained  that  he  could  not 
place  the  medium  on  Mr.  Burns’s  shoulders.  Another 
effort  was  made,  and  Dr.  Monck  was  gently  seated  on  Mr. 
Burns’s  neck,  with  the  doctor’s  legs  down  his  breast.  The 
spirit  called  for  a light,  that  the  company  might  ‘ see  a 
parson  ride  on  Jamie  Burns’s  shoulders.’  A match  was 
struck,  extinguished  after  a few  moments, and  the  entranced 
medium  was  lifted  down  from  his  seat  as  gently  as  he  was 
placed  there.”  * This  is  a terribly  confused  account,  and 
evidently  written  in  a mental  fog.  Are  we  to  take  it  that  the 
doctor’s  legs  were  down  his  own  breast,  or  what  ? Oh,  those 
powerful  spirits / Dr.  Monck  has  also  been  levited  “on  to 
the  shoulders  of  a lady  ”+  (who  must  be  not  only  strong- 
minded  but  strong-backed),  and  has  given  that  shallow 
trick  of  the  “ direct  spirit  voice,  whilst  the  medium’s  mouth 
is  filled  with  water ; ” which,  as  anybody  but  a Spiritualist 
must  see,  is  accomplished  by  the  medium  swallowing  the 
water  before  speaking,  and  re-filling  the  mouth  from  a 
secreted  bottle  containing  aqua  pura  afterwards ! 

Dr.  Monck  has  several  “controls;”  one,  “the  Rev.  Mr. 
So-and-So,  a minister  of  the  Church  of  England,  who 
delivered  a most  laughable  burlesque  on  the  mannerisms, 
slang,  and  set  phrases  of  the  present  fashionable  mode  of 
preaching,  thoroughly  ignoring  that  deformity  known  as 
the  letter  R X and  a lady  spirit,  addicted  to  the  peculiarly 
unlady-like  habit  of  putting  her  feet  upon  the  table. 

* “The  Medium,"  March  12th,  1875. 
t “ The  Spiritualist,”  October  1st,  1875. 
t “The  Spiritualist,”  October  1st,  1875. 

IZGO 

GooqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

icS 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

\ 

By  the  aid  of  his  principal  spirit  guide,  “ Samuel,  for- 
merly a shipwright  in  Portsmouth  Dockyard,”  Dr.  Monck 
“ elongates  ” to  any  extent,  which  can  scarcely  be  wondered 
at,  when  we  know  how  the  media  do  go  in  for  stretching 
— the  truth  especially  ! 

It  is  not  worth  while  giving  more  of  the  marvels  of  this 
professor  of  legerdemain.  The  London  public  at  least  are 
pretty  well  posted  up  in  them,  and  at  the  Egyptian  Hall 
can  see  the  luminous  hands,  the  musical  box  which  stops 
at  command — ay,  “at  half  a note,”  like  Dr.  Moneys  ; and 
all  and  sundry  of  the  effects  produced  by  the  Bristol 
minister  who  “rows” — nay,  nearly  fights — in  the  same 
boat  with  Sexton. 

Mr.  James  J.  Morse — formerly  barman,  and  still-con- 
nected  with  the  spirits,  though  an  I.O.G.T.,*and  late  with 
Mr.  Burns,  (of)  the  Spiritual  Institution,  as  assistant — is 
now  an  Inspirational  Trance  Speaker,  and  “ very  like  a 
whale”  amongst  the  minnows  in  the  shallow  waters  of 
Spiritualism.  His  chief  controls  are  “a  strolling  player;” 
Mr.  Walter  Arthur  Clegg,  a rheumaticky  old  man,  “ a carter 
in  earth-life;”  and  “ Tien-sien-tie,”  a genuine  “ Washee- 
washee  ” and  “ Mandarin  of  the  Second  Order,”  who  was 
attached  to  his  pigtail  like  an  English  Jack  Tar  of  the  Pre- 
Ironclad  Period, — with  a difference  ! — at  Pekin  about  a 
century  and  a quarter  back. 

Mr.  Morse  has  had  a twelve  months’  run  through  “ the 
States,”  and  has  detailed  his  experiences  there  for  the 
benefit  of  the  poor  moths  who  fluttered  round  the  Spiritual 
rushlight  at  the  Conference  of  the  National  Association, 

* Which,  by  dint  of  perseverance,  I have  discovered  to  mean — “ Order  of 
Good  Templars."  It  has  been  suggested  that  “I"  stands  for  “ Independent,’ 
but  I should  say  it  means  “ initiate  "—he  having  been  called  from  the  Bar  so  i 
recently. 

> Original  from 

Digitized  by  ^OOglL  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

109 

held  in  November,  1875,  in  the  now-hallowed  precincts  of 
Bloomsbury.  He  had  visited  New  Haven,  Connecticut — 
the  “ City  of  Elms,”  in  the  “Wooden  Nutmeg  State  ; ” — 
and  at  Boston,  the  Hub  of  the  Universe,  he  met  Mr.  J. 
B.  Rich,  “ a smart  man,”  who  presides  over  the  business 
department  of  the  “ Banner  of  Light,”  and  Mr.  Luther 
Colby,  its  editor.  Mr.  Morse  “orated”  for  the  Music  Hall 
Society.  He  says  : 

“ Spiritualism  is  decidedly  a recognized  fact  in  Boston. 
The  press  give  it  respectful  notice,  while  the  pulpit  contents 
itself  with  an  occasional  grumble.  On  the  houses  in  many 
of  the  streets,  notably  the  most  prominent  ones,  Washing- 
ton Street,  Tremont  Street,  and  Shawmut  Avenue,  the  signs 
of  test  mediums,  clairvoyants,  and  magnetic  healers  are 
quite  numerous,  while  their  advertisements  are  to  be  found 
in  several  daily  papers.”  And,  if  the  English  people  would 
only  consent,  we  might  have  all  this  here ! At  Philadelphia 
he  met  Dr.  H.  T.  Child,  the  president  of  the  local  Spiritual 
Society — an  office  he  has  resigned  (?)  since  “ sweet  Katey 
King’s  ” exposure ; and  Mr.  Morse,  in  consequence  of  the 
hubbub  caused  by  this  “imbroglio,”  found  his  position 
“ rendered  anything  but  enviable  ” in  “ the  Quaker  city — 
the  home  of  the  Pilgrim  Fathers.” 

He  attended  several  stances ; at  one  of  these,  he  says, 
“ Quite  a quantity  of  flowers  and  ferns,  with  some  fruit, 
was  brought,  and  Mr.  Cooper,  this  time,  also  received  a 
white  pigeon.  I regret  to  say  that  a gentleman  of  the  canine 
persuasion  subsequently  made  a breakfast  of  them  both.”* 
Poor  Mr.  Cooper ! But  I have  long  thought  that  spirit- 
ualists were  “ going  to  the  dogs  ” rapidly.  Mr.  Morse  does 
not  accept  all  he  has  heard  in  America ; indeed,  he  con- 
siders some  of  the  schemes  broached  there  in  connection 

* " The  Spiritualist,”  November  5th,  1875. 

Diai 

zedbyCoOQle 

/ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

no 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

with  the  faith  “ wild.”  Perhaps  his  happiest  experiences 
in  that  land  of  “ ingrained  speculators  ” was  at  the  annual 
camp  meeting  of  the  Lake  Pleasant  Spiritualists’  Associa- 
tion, opened  on  Sunday,  August  8th,  1875,  at  Montague, 
Massachusetts,  some  one  hundred  miles  from  Boston, 
whence  excursion  tickets  were  issued  by  the  railway  com- 
panies. Here, — what  with  skiffs  upon  the  lake,  bath-houses 
for  ladies  and  gentlemen,  and  shady  walks  “ for  meditative 
students  and — lovers!” — spiritualists  and  others  found 
many  attractions.  The  “ spiritual  ” nature  of  the  meeting 
seems  to  have  been  strangely  ignored.  “ One  event  of  an 
unique  nature”  which  Mr.  Morse  notices,  may  serve  to 
bring  this  out  more  fully : 11  This  was  what  is  known  as 
a ‘ sheet  and  pillow-case  ’ or  ‘ phantom  party.’  The  par- 
ticipants are  draped  in  sheets,  turbaned  with  pillow-cases, 
and  adorned  with  natural  flowers,  while  some  provide 
dresses  similar  to  those  worn  by  the  Follies  during  carnival 
times.  For  the  first  hour  and  a half  all  are  masked,  and 
the  complete  change  the  dress  makes  in  one’s  appearance, 
and  the  fact  that  many  gentlemen  robe  as  ladies , leads  to 
some  comical  and  grotesque  rencontres .”  * So,  while  we 
poor  insulated  and  old-world  people  take  even  our  amuse- 
ments gravely,  the  ghost-ridden  people  of  Boston,  U.S.A., 
shake  a very  loose  leg  indeed  at  a spiritualist  camp  meet- 
ing. Skating  rinks  are  all  very  well,  and  spelling  u bees  ” 
may  be  endured  ; but  pray  do  not  introduce  “ phantom 
parties”  into  England,  if  you  please,  Brother  Jonathan  ! 

But  the  English  “ faithful  ” enjoy  themselves  in  a strange 
manner  sometimes,  especially  when  they  repair  for  a day’s 
pleasure  to  the  People’s  Garden,  Willesden,  and  have 
merry-go-rounds,  dancing  on  the  “ largest  platform  in  the 

* '‘The  Spiritualist,"  October  8th,  1S75. 

iv  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media.  1 1 1 

world/’  and  donkey  races,  not  by  members  of  the  National 
Ass-ociation ! 

Before  passing  from  the  fascinating  trance-speaker, 
Mr.  Morse,  I must  perforce  mention  his  appearance  and 
“ oratory,”  which,  though  not  supposed  to  give  any  signs 
of  book  knowledge,  is  said  to  owe  a good  deal  to  Combe’s 
“ Science  and  Religion .” 

The  Travelling  Representative  of  the  Spiritual  Institu- 
tion— (what  that  means  “nobody  tells — ’cause  nobody 
knows  1 ”) — is  described  as  looking  “ more  like  a very  re- 
spectable undertaker’s  assistant  than  anything  else.”*  His 
“ control,”  “ Tien-sien-tie,”  declares  he  has  seen  “ the  in- 
dividual called  Jesus  of  Nazareth  in  the  spirit  world,  and 
did  not  consider  Him  more  divine  in  His  origin  than  other 
spirits  in  His  own  sphere,  which,  however,  was  an  advanced 
one.”+ 

Mr.  Morse’s  spirit  navvy  speaks  of  “ them  shivery-shaky 
kind  o’  people  called  1 mediums,’  ” and  declares  he  finds 
it  easier  to  go  “ slantindicular,”  than  straight  to  a place  ; 
and  his  “ strolling  player,”  “ in  his  customary  humorous 
style,”  sometimes  makes  “ many  good  points  by  comparing 
Spiritualism  to  an  inkstand”!  X 

Of  Mr.  Charles  E.  Williams  (late  of  Heme  and 
Williams)  it  will  be  enough  to  say  that  he  is  great  at 
“materialization”  in  the  dark.  Certainly  this  style  of 
stance  is  considered  objectionable  even  by  some  Spirit- 
ualists. “Airy  Daniel,”  who  was  not  above  doing  a little 
with  “ lights  down  ” himself  once,  remarks  that  “ dark 
sittings  are  most  fearful  stumbling-blocks  in  the  way  of 
anything  like  scientific  investigation.  One  fact  given  in 

* "Daily  Telegraph,”  March  ioth,  1870. 
t "The  Spiritualist,"  May  22nd,  1874. 

X "Medium  and  Daybreak,”  November  12th,  1875. 

Digitized  by  GoO^Ic 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

112 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

the  light,  no  matter  how  trifling  it  may  seem,  constitutes 
an  incontrovertible  truth  ; whereas,  where  there  is  dark- 
ness, it  paves  the  way  to  suspicion,  to  say  the  least  of  it.”* 
But  one  fact  remains  : dark  seances  pay.  The  Spiritualist 
and  the  unbeliever  alike  favour  what  a reverend  gentleman, 
well  posted-up  in  such  (Spiritualistic)  matters,  declares  to 
be  a mistake  for  test  purposes,  but  “admirable  for  a flirta- 
tion.” 

Through  the  kindness  of  my  friend,  Mr.  John  Algernon 
Clarke,  I am  enabled  to  give  “a  faithful  report”  of  one  of 
Mr.  Williams’s  seances.  This  was  held  in  rooms  over  a 
tailor’s  shop  at  61  Lamb’s  Conduit  Street,  near  the  Found- 
ling Hospital.  There  was  much  chattering  and  merriment, 
the  usual  and  suspicious  re-arrangement  of  the  circle,  so 
that  the  known  and  trusted  faithful  should  close  round 
and  act  as  a bodyguard  to  the  “ medium,”  and  the  inevi- 
table long  waits — badly  filled  in  by  tuneless  singing  to 
“ harmonize  the  influences.” 

When  the  “manifestations”  did  come,  they  were  “of 
the  most  stupid  and  non-angelic  character,”  until  thel(  fea- 
tures” of  the  evening,  “ John  King  ” and  “ Peter,”  put  in 
an  appearance.  “ Some  of  the  sitters,”  says  Mr.  Clarke, 
“ rather  too  hurriedly,  I thought,  recognized  the  presence 
of ‘John  King.*  After  a few  gleams,  gathering  in  bright- 
ness, I perceived  a white  turban  and  something  like  a long 
black  beard,  with  the  shoulders  and  breast  part  of  a white 
robe.  Evidently  here  was  a figure  of  a man,  life  size, 
flitting  a little  to  the  right  or  left,  and  up  and  down,  and 
suddenly  showing  just  the  face  and  little  else,  for  a moment 
or  two  only  in  each  position.  This  gave  the  impression 
that  a self-luminous  spirit  was  floating  about  the  space 
just  in  front  of  the  cabinet.  I could  see  that  the  source  of 

* “Medium  and  Daybreak,"  October  15th,  1875. 

1 by  GoOQlc 
0 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

The  Invasion  of  the  Media. 

ii3 

the  faint  light  was  in  the  hands  of  the  spirit  form.  Some 
of  the  sitters  asked  John  to  let  them  hold  his  lamp.  I don’t 
know  whether  he  parted  with  it ; but  I was  told  that  he 
sometimes  does,  and  that  it  is  in  shape  and  size  somewhat 
like  a cake  of  soap.  I believe  that  the  light  can  be  exactly 
imitated  by  an  electrical  apparatus,  and  that  phosphorus 
and  oil  will  also  give  a similar  light,  and  will  bum  for  a 
few  seconds,  even  in  a close-stopped  bottle.  The  gruff  low 
voice  of ‘John  King’  was  precisely  what  I should  expect 
to  hear  if  Mr.  Williams  were  to  try  and  imitate  it  through 
a paper  cone.  The  feminine  nasal  weak  little  voice  of 
‘ Peter ’ is  precisely  what  I should  expect  to  hear  if  Mr. 
Williams  were  to  try  and  imitate  it  in  falsetto.  In  appear- 
ance ‘ Peter’  was  ‘John  King’  with  his  beard  off.  What 
impressed  me  most  forcibly,  were  these  observations  which 
I made  : the  spirit  of ‘John  King’  had  on  his  face  an  ex- 
act facsimile  of  Mr.  Williams’s  peculiar  and  unmistakable 
nose.  This  I am  confident  about,  though  the  figure  kept 
moving  and  showing  its.elf  only  by  fitful  flashes,  without 
ever  confronting  11  s and  remaining  for  our  deliberate  ex- 
amination. When  John  King’s  head  was  seen  near  to  the 
ceiling,  immediately  over  the  centre  of  the  table,  it  was 
about  the  same  elevation  as  Mr.  Williams’s  head  would  be 
if  he  stood  upon  the  table  : I crossed  one  of  my  legs  over  the 
other,  so  as  to  press  one  knee  against  the  under  side  of  the 
table-top,  and  I distinctly  felt  just  a slight  depression  of 
the  table  and  its  rise  again  when  the  figure  of  John  King 
came  above  the  table  and  went  off  again.  I could  not  feel 
for  myself  whether  it  were  a man  or  not,  because  the  young 
lady  next  me  held  my  hand  (on  that  side)  extra  hard  when 
the  figure  came  near  us.  This  was  the  same  lady  who  sat 
next  the  medium  during  the  first  series  of  manifestations. 
Anybody  could  have  stepped  from  the  cabinet  on  to  the 
table  ; and  at  the  end  of  the  stance  I made  this  observa- 

8 

Digitized 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

114 

tion : the  table  (a  handsome  one)  was  constructed  with  a 
centre  pedestal,  and  feet  projecting  so  far  outward  that 
the  weight  of  a man  upon  the  table,  even  near  the  edge  of 
the  top,  would  not  be  liable  to  tilt  it ; and  further,  there 
were  upright  struts  or  pillars  supporting  the  table-top, 
within  a short  distance  of  the  edge,  so  that  when  I pressed 
downwards  upon  one  edge  of  the  table,  it  did  not  bend  or 
creak.  If  a man  were  walking  about  on  it,  I am  satisfied 
that  any  depression  on  one  side  or  the  other  would  be  only 
just  perceptible,  as  in  the  experiment  which  I tried  with 
my  knee. 

“ One  theory  accounting  for  this  manifestation,  is  that 
the  forms  we  saw  were  living  spirits  materialized  for  the 
time  being,  and  able  to  move  and  talk.  Nobody  can 
prove  it  was  so.  My  theory  is  that  Mr.  Williams  dressed 
up  and  personified  John  King  and  Peter.  Nobody  can 
prove  that  it  wasn’t  so. 

" I neither  saw,  heard,  nor  otherwise  perceived  by  any 
of  my  senses  anything  supernatural,  unless  my  theory  is 
to  be  rejected,  and  the  Spiritualist  theory  held  to  be  the 
more  probable  of  the  two.  But  I lost  my  five  shillings, 
which  fee  was  paid  to  Mr.  Williams  at  the  bottom  of  the 
stairs  as  we  left  the  place. 

“ I fancy  that  some  other  people  present  got  more  fun 
for  their  money.  There  was  a good  deal  of  tittering  from 
some  parts  of  the  circle ; and  in  the  last  stance,  a very 
amused-looking  young  gentleman  stood  behind  the  brisk 
young  damsel  who  sat  next  me.  Leaning  a little  in  that 
direction,  I could  tell  by  the  whispering,  and  the  breaths, 
and  the  giggling,  that  their  faces  had  been  very  much 
brought  together.  I heard  her  whisper  (not  at  all  cross, 
I assure  you),  ‘ If  you  don’t  behave,  you  shan’t  come  to 
a stance  with  me  any  more ;’  and  after  more  wriggling  and 
giggling,  ‘ If  you  do  that  again  I shall  bite  you.’  ” 

C 

jOOQle 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  X. 

A FEW  EXPOSURES. 

Gentle  Showers — "Lost  Lenore ” — Sugar-candy— Spirits  Moulting! — Miss 
S.’s  chignon — A Poet  “King” — An  “Indescribable"  Being  described 
— " Sweet  William,  the  Carpenter  "• — The  Mysteries  of  a Dark  Stance — 
A little  Blonde's  taper  Digits — A " Seeing  ” Medium — “ Sweet  William” 
finds  a Rival  Carpenter — “The  Ring  of  all  the  best  Mediums!” — 
Bastian  and  Taylor— My  Grandmother! — A lucid  Description — A Hol- 
land’s Gin  (Trap) — Investigating  “Blackguards” — “Foregone  Con- 
clusions and  Ignorance” — Spirit  Photos — Ghosts  ad  lib.  "Come  like 
Shadows”  — Double  Exposures  — A Trial  for  the  Photographers  — 
Butter-cloth  Egerton — “Jack  Tod,”  the  Liverpool  Spirit — Virtue  and 
“Vice”  go  hand  in  hand — Serious  Thoughts. 

ISS  SHOWERS  has,  or  had,  for  familiar  spirits,  I 
believe,  “ Peter,”  a disreputable  market  gardener, 
who  sings,  or  sang,  in  a baritone  voice,  “ Listen  to  the 
Whip-poor-Willa-singin’on  a tree,” and  “ Florence  Maple,” 
a spirit  who  gave  a wrong  address  in  Aberdeen  as  her 
abode  in  earth-life.  I know  “ Lenore  Fitzwarren”  is  one 
of  this  lady’s  “guides,”  for  does  not  Sir  Charles  I sham, 
Bart.,  vouch  for  the  truth  of  it,  and  has  he  not  received  a 
letter  in  the  direct  spirit  writing  from  “ Lenore  ” ? Sir 
Charles  is  never  tired  of  singing  the  praises  of  “ the  lost 
Lenore,”  though  “it  would  require  a pen  far  more  graphic” 
than  his,  he  says,  “ to  describe  the  charming  and  winning 
ways  of  this  playful  little  spirit.” 

115  8 — 2 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

1 16 

At  the  house  of  Mrs.  Mackdougal  Gregory  the  spirits  find 
a very  hospitable  reception,  and  here  it  is  that  " Lenore  ” 
has  frequently  enchanted  “ dear  Sir  Charles.”  “ Upon 
one  occasion/’  says  this  patient  investigator,  “ I took  an 
impression  of  her  hand  and  left  foot  in  dough ; this  I found 
much  better  than  clay,  which  I used  on  former  occasions. 
She  allowed  me  to  examine  and  touch  her  right  foot,  both 
above  and  below ; it  was  very  narrow,  and  had  but  two 
toes.  She  objected  to  an  impression  being  taken  of  it, 
although  I did  my  best  to  obtain  one ; but  I hope  to  be 
more  fortunate  on  some  future  occasion.”  . . . . “ We 
gave  her  a small  piece  of  sugar-candy,  which  I brought 
for  the  purpose,  requesting  her  to  crush  it.  She  said,  ‘ I 
must  materialize  a tooth  for  that ; * and  retired  behind  the 
curtain.  ‘ Peter’  now  became  witty  (!),  and,  as  if  assisting 
in  the  operation,  was  heard  to  exclaim  during  the  process, 
‘ But  you  don’t  want  a wise  tooth.’  She  soon  returned,  and 
another  piece  of  candy  being  given,  she  gave  unmistakable 
demonstration  of  the  crushing  powers  of  her  teeth.” 

Now,  it  seems  this  investigator  had  been  rewarded  by 
“ Lenore’s  ” confidence,  inasmuch  as  she  had  entered  into 
a correspondence  with  Sir  Charles.  There  was  some  little 
difficulty  in  doing  this,  as  the  “ playful  little  spirit,”  having 
“ rummaged  ” Miss  Showers’  desk  overmuch,  that  young 
lady  had  declined  to  allow  her  to  take  such  liberties  in 
future,  so  the  aerial  being  was  disconsolate,  not  having 
paper  to  write  upon.  This  want  the  baronet  kindly  sup- 
plied, sending  “ Lenore  ” a writing-desk ; paper  stamped  in 
colours,  with  her  monogram  “ L.F. ; ” and  postage  stamps. 

I cannot  but  think  it  unkind  of  the  spirit  to  use  these 
latter,  when  the  ghostly  “ Miss  Fitzwarren  ” could  so  easily 
have  slipped  into  the  worthy  baronet’s  letter-box  and  de* 
posited  her  pretty  little  notes — the  monogram  stamped  in 
colours— herself.  Might  not  the  spirit  do  so  much,  and 

itized  byGoO&le 

C ’ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Fm  Exposures.  1 1 7 

give  the  penny  saved  (which  is  the  penny  gained)  to  the 
Spiritual  Institution? 

In  this  case  “ Lenore”  seems  to  have  been  much  im- 
pressed with  the  kindness  of  this  “ B.  of  B.K.” — as  the 
reduced “ nobleman” at  Dartmoor  has  it — and  Sir  Charles 
received  several  letters,  one  of  which,  being  a really  unique 
specimen  of  spirit  composition,  I must  find  space  for  : 

“ My  Dear  Sir  Charles, — What  must  you  think  of 
me  ? I am  really  almost  afraid  to  write  to  you  now,  fear- 
ing that  you  will  be  too  angry  to  take  any  notice  of  my 
letter.  However,  I must  find  consolation  in  the  motto — 

‘ Better  late  than  never,’  and  can  only  hope  that  you  will 
agree  with  me  there.  Rosey  has  been  living  very  quietly 
of  late,  seldom  giving  any  statues;  in  fact,  I have  almost 
forgotten  the  way  to  materialize,  ’t  is  such  an  age  since  I 
last  had  a try  at  it. 

“ I am  now  residing  in  Jupiter,  and  am  very  happy, 
though  thoroughly  under  the  dominion  of  * King  Saul,’ 
who  is  the  ruling  power  there.  He  is  teaching  me  to  fly 
gracefully,  and  says  I am  not  a very  troublesome  pupil, 
except  that  I drop  my  feathers  about,  and  that  is,  of  course, 
disagreeable.  I have  a flower  undergoing  the  process  of 
materialization  for  you,  and  will  enclose  it  in  this  letter  if 
it  is  solid  enough  to  stand  the  journey  through  the  post. 
With  love  from  ‘ Peter’  and  myself,  believe  me,  dear  Sir 
Charles,  yours  affectionately, 

“Lenore  Fitzwarren.”* 

Miss  Showers  being  musical,  of  course  her  spirits  are 
the  same,  and  we  have  pianoforte  performances  and  sing- 
ing, interspersed  with  such  edifying  information  from  the 

* “ Medium  and  Daybreak,"  August  6th,  1875. 

1OOQ1C 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

IIS 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

spirits  as  “prayer  gains  us  salvation.  It  enables  us  to  get 
to  the  top  of  the  tree  and  sit  there,”  then,  after  a pause — 
“but  we  must  not  have  too  many  up,  or  it  will  break 
down ! ”* 

Unfortunately  Miss  Showers  was  discovered  in  some- 
thing very  like  trickery.  The  young  lady  and  her  mamma 
were  invited  to  the  country  house  of  Serjeant  Cox,  where 
“ a cabinet  was  extemporized  in  the  bay  of  the  window,” 
says  the  Rev.  C.  Maurice  Davies,  “ over  which  the  curtains 
were  drawn  and  a shawl  pinned.  With  a confidence  which 
is  really  charming  to  contemplate,  no  1 tests  7 were  asked 
of  the  medium — no  * conditions  7 imposed  on  the  sitters. 
Miss  S.  was  put  in  the  cabinet  with  only  a chair,  and  the 
expectant  circle  waited  with  patience.  In  due  time  the 
curtains  were  drawn  aside,  and  the  spirit  face  appeared  at 
the  opening.  It  was  still  a facsimile  of  Miss  S.,  with  the 
eyes  piously  turned  up  and  a ghostly  head-dress  covering 
the  hair.  One  by  one  the  assembled  were  summoned  to 
look  more  closely.  The  initiated  gazed  and  passed  on — 
knowing  they  must  not  peep  ; but  alas ! one  lady  who  was 
not  initiated,  and  therefore  unaware  of  the  tacitly  imposed 
conditions,  imitated  the  example  of  mother  Eve — drew  the 
curtains,  and  exposed  the  unspiritual  form  of  Miss  S.  stand- 
ing on  the  chair  ! — the  ‘ spirit  hands  * at  the  same  time 
struggling  so  convulsively  to  close  the  aperture,  that  the 
head-gear  fell  off,  and  betrayed  the  somewhat  voluminous 
chignoji  of  Miss  S.  herself!  Hereupon  ensued  a row,  it 
being  declared  that  the  medium  was  killed,  though  eventu- 
ally order  was  restored  by  the  rather  incongruous  process 
of  a gentleman  present  singing  a comic  song.  The  learned 
Serjeant  still  clings  to  the  belief  that  Miss  S.  was  in  a state 
of  ‘ unconscious  somnambulism.7  I only  hope,  if  ever  I am 

* Sir  Charles  Isham,  Bart. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Few  Exposures . 119 

arraigned  before  him  in  his  judicial  capacity,  he  will  extend 
his  benevolent  credulity  to  me  in  an  equal  degree,  and  give 
me  the  benefit  of  the  doubt”* 

Miss  Showers  must  feel  that  “materialization”  is  a risky 
game,  so  I am  happy  to  find  her  cultivating  the  acquaint- 
ance of  a poetic  spirit,  “John  King,”  who  does  not  “ mate- 
rialize— indeed,  he  gives  very  sensible  advice  when  he 
requests  Mrs.  Showers  to  “ send  away  the  chief  spirit  ” who 
produces  the  manifestations.!  Time  she  did,  indeed,  when 
the  “ chief  spirit  ” treats  the  young  lady  medium  so  dis- 
gracefully ! 

But  for  the  spirit  poetry.  John  King  (the  poet,  not  the 
Buccaneer)  asks — 

**  Have  you  not  seen  the  swift-running  tide 
Bending  with  violence  the  firm  gutter-side  ?’’t 

To  which  I can  honestly  answer  that  this  is  one  of  the 
phenomena  I have  not  observed. 

But  the  poet  is  not  to  have  all  the  questions  to  himself, 
for  Mrs.  Frederica  Showers  inquires,  “John, is  your  name 
really  King  ?”  and  “ John,”  through  the  medium,  replies : 

“ Yes,  King  is  my  name,  and  with  kingly  power 
Will  I watch  by  thy  side  through  the  dreariest  hour." 

And  then  Mrs.  Showers  proceeds  to  “draw  out”  the 
opinions  of  the  spirit : 

“ Mrs.  S.  Do  you  know  anything  about  the  devil  ? Can 
you  tell  me  about  my  son  ? 

(Rather  an  odd  mixture,  here ; eh  ?) 

“‘John.’ 

In  a bright  star,  ah  me,  how  fair  ! 

Thy  son  with  God  doth  dwell ; 

He  bids  me  watch  o’er  thee  with  care, 

And  knows  thou  farest  well." 

* “ Mystic  London.”  Tinsley  Brothers, 
t “The  Spiritualist,”  October  22nd,  1875. 
t “The  Spiritualist,”  Lecember  18th,  1874. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

120 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

(You  see,  “John”  is  too  ’cute  to  answer  the  first  part  of 
this  question : he  will  not  tell  what  he  knows  of  the  “gen- 
tleman in  black.”) 

“ Mrs.  S.  Is  he  happy  ?”  (This  of  her  son.) 

“‘John.’ 

Happy  ! In  that  hallowed  spot 
Can  he  be  otherwise  ? 

Wilt  thou  not  pray  to  share  his  lot? 

Is  it  not  Paradise  ? 

“ Mrs.  S.  Will  you  ever  bring  him  as  you  promised  ? 

“ ‘ John.’ 

Ask  not,  for  time  alone  will  show 

That  which,  just  now,  thou  mayest  not  know.*'* 

Doubtless  the  spirit  Pegasus  requires  a spur;  but  the 
lines  here  are  not  so  lame  and  halting  as  some  we  have 
seen.f  Who  knows,  if  such  improvement  goes  on,  but  we 
may  have  a ghostly  Laureate  before  long? 

Miss  Annie  Eva  Fay,  or  Mrs.  Fay,  the  celebrated 
physical  and  mental  test  medium,  of  Louisville,  Kentucky” 
— also  known  as  the  “ Indescribable  Phenomenon” — after 
“a  tour  through  the  principal  cities  and  towns  of  the 
States,”  came  to  London  to  startle  us  with  some  of  the 
shallowest  tricks  ever  foisted  upon  the  public  as  “Spiritual- 
ism.” Her  performances  at  the  Hanover  Square  Rooms 
having  been  public,  many  of  my  readers  will  have  had 
an  opportunity  of  judging  of  the  wonders  worked  by  the 
“Indescribable”  one.  Mr.  Henry  Fay,  who  acted  as 
seance  director,  and  whose  “lecture”  will  never  be  for- 
gotten by  those  who  heard  it,  whilst  not  disclaiming  super- 
natural assistance  for  his  wife,  was  careful  in  leaving  the 
audience  to  arrive  at  their  own  conclusions  upon  that  point, 
though  amongst  Spiritualists  she  was  looked  upon  as  a 

* "The  Spiritualist,”  October  22nd,  1875. 
t See  poetic  effusions  of  the  spirits,  Chapter  VII. 

ligitized  byGoOQle 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Few  Exposures. 

I 2 I 

medium,  and,  indeed,  asserted  that  position  herself  in 
private  always.  Her  “familiar”  was  “Sweet  William, 
carpenter,”  and  that  there  should  be  no  doubt  about  his 
bond  Jides,  he  was  made  to  drive  a nail  into  a piece  of  wood 
at  one  part  of  the  “ entertainment,”  which  must  have  been 
proof  positive  to  every  Spiritualist  present ! 

At  the  same  time  that  these  manifestations  were  running 
at  the  Queen’s  Concert  Rooms,  my  colleague,  Mr.  Cooke, 
was  giving  an  exact  re-production  of  all  Miss  Fay’s  tricks 
in  the  light  stance,  to  the  most  minute  particulars,  twice 
daily  at  the  Egyptian  Hall,  where  I had  the  pleasure  of 
explaining  the  modus  operandi  of  accomplishing  the  “mar- 
vels” of  the  dark  stance , which  were  too  simple  and  absurd 
to  bear  any  other  treatment.  Thus  was  the  spirit-work 
accomplished  for  “ Miss  Fay  ” : Some  fifteen  persons  from 
the  audience  sat  in  a circle  round  the  “ medium,”  her  hus- 
band, the  “ Colonel,”  being  one.  The  little  blonde  then 
commenced  to  clap  her  hands  with  steady,  rhythmical 
beat,  and  when  the  darkness  was  made  “ visible,”  still  the 
clapping  continued,  while — wonderful  to  relate  ! — instru- 
ments which  had  been  laid  upon  the  knees  of  the  “sitters” 
were  played  upon,  &c.,  &c.,  that  is,  the  guitar  was  strummed 
in  the  air,  bells  were  rung,  knees  pinched,  whiskers  tugged, 
old  fogies  chucked  under  the  chin  by,  oh  ! such  nice  little 
hands  ! — and  the  other  interesting  work  of  the  spirits  at 
stances  was  gone  through.  Now,  all  this  while  the  “ Co- 
lonel” was  in  the  circle,  and  granted  that  the  persons  to 
his  right  and  left  were  careful  never  to  let  go  his  hands 
for  a moment,  and  then  unknowingly  be  both  holding  his 
left  hand  only , he  could  do  little  to  assist  his  interesting 
spouse ; and  she,  still  clapping  those  dainty  little  palms, 
could,  of  course,  do  nothing  herself,  unless,  as  soon  as  the 
lights  were  extinguished,  she  was  to  change  her  tactics, 
and  beat — not  her  hands  together — but  one  hand  upon 

Digitized 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

122 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

her  forehead,  or  arm,  or  any  exposed  part  of  her  body, 
^jwhich  would  produce  exactly  the  same  sounds  as  the  clap- 
ping of  the  palms , and  leave  the  taper  digits  of  one  hand 
free  to  “ manifest”  upon  the  Instruments,  knees,  chins,  &c. 
But,  oh  dear,  no ! To  show  the  impossibility  of  such  a thing, 
one  gentleman  shall  now  be  allowed  to  hold  the  medium’s 
hands  ; — still  a bell  shall  ring,  a guitar  be  strummed,  and 
possibly  the  gentleman  holding  the  fair  one  shall  have  his 
face  fanned.  How,  then,  can  all  this  be  accomplished  ? 
Simply  thus  : “Miss  Fay”  will  pass  a bell  to  the  “Co- 
lonel’s ” mouth,  which  he  will  shake  as  a terrier  does  a rat, 
the  while  his  boot  operates  upon  the  guitar-strings  and 
produces  the  thrumming ; and  the  medium,  with  a fan 
held  between  her  teeth,  will  gently  wave  it  in  the  face  of 
him  who  holds  her  hand.  And  this  is  all  that  happened 
in  the  darkness,  and  this  is  what  scientific  Mr.  Crookes 
declared  was  “ wonderful ! ” and  what  Mrs.  Bums,  who 
is  a “ seeing  medium,”  saw  several  spirits  performing  for 
“ Miss  Fay.” 

Miss  Fay  has  gone  across  the  “sad  sea  waves  ” again  to 
the  “land  of  the  West,”  and,  presuming  upon  the  F.R.S.’s 
recommendation,  “announces  herself  in  Boston  as  ‘en- 
dorsed by  the  Royal  Society  of  England.’” 

Before  I quit  the  subject  I must  name  how  Miss  Fay’s 
business  agent  made  an  offer  to  me,  by  letters  which  I 
have  now  in  my  possession,  that  for  a sum  of  money  the 
medium  should  expose  the  whole  affair,  “scientific  tests” 
and  all,  as  she  was  not  properly  supported  by  the  Spirit- 
ualists; complicating,  as  he  says — I suppose  he  means 
implicating' — “at  least  six  big  guns , the  F.R.S.  people,”* 
and  “Miss  Fay  is  now  every  night  materializing  and  is 
immence  another  point  I will  give  she  is  in  the  ring  of  all 

* Letter  dated  ''Birmingham,  May  12th,  1875," 

Di 

Goode 

o 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

123 

A Few  Exposures. 

the  best  mediums  in  London  and  get  letters  every  day  that 
will  be  big  to  work  upon.”*  Again,  “ Some  of  the  parteys 
that  I named  in  my  last  to  you  are  trying  to  persuade  Miss 
Fay  to  go  to  America , and  I am  getin  tired  of  messing 
about  in  this  way,  and  have  fully  made  up  my  mind  if  she 
go  wich  I shall  know  in  a day  or  two,  to  make  some  money 
out  of  my  past  year  expier ance  and  knowledge  as  in  a word 
I have  another  prety  lady  that  I can  bring  out,  and  if  I 
personely  can  will  use  all  names  and  show  the  whole  thing 
up  being  the  introducer  of  it  in  London.”! 

The  managerial  offer  was  not  accepted  by  me,  nor  did 
he  go  to  America.  He  brought  out  the  “prety  lady,” 
though,  who  performed  exactly  the  same  tricks  as  her 
cousin,  “Miss”  Fay,  and  the  “Indescribable  Phenome- 
non ” took  herself  off  to  “ the  States,”  where  Mrs.  Carpenter 
(Sweet  William’s  rival)  is  showing  up  the  phenomenal 
tricks  to  such  an  extent  that  the  little  blonde  latterly  has 
had  very  meagre  audiences,  to  charm  with  her  grace  or 
astonish  by  her  occult  power. 

Harry  Bastian  and  Malcolm  Taylor  were  wont  to 
do  their  spiriting  gently  in  the  first  storey  of  a house  not  far 
from  that  abode  of  many  stories,  good,  bad,  and  indifferent 
— the  British  Museum*  Mr.  John  Algernon  Clarke,  who 
attended  one  of  their  stances,  writes : 

“ Mr.  Bastian  I found  to  be  a dreamy  innocent-looking 
gentleman,  and  Mr.  Taylor  not  so.  Mr.  Bastian  did  most 
of  the  abstracted  demeanour,  spirituelle  expression,  and 
lackadaisical  sighing.  Mr.  Taylor  did  most  of  the  patter, 
the  conversing  in  Spiritualistic  cant  about  spheres  and 
spirit  life,  and  also  started  the  hymn-singing.” 

I hope  Mr.  Clarke  found  it  better  than  one  described  by 
Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison,  where  the  light  was  so  low  that  he 

* Letter  dated  “ Birmingham,  May  15th,  1875." 
f Letter  dated  “Malvern,  May  24th,  1875.” 

Digitized  by  GoOQlc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

124 

Modern  Spiritualism, 

thought  he  saw  a part  of*  a nose,  but  was  not  quite  sure 
upon  the  point ! However,  a young  lady  at  the  same 
stance  saw  her  grandmother,  whom  she  seems  to  have  re- 
cognized more  by  her  gold  spectacles  than  anything  else, 
and  a gentleman  who  writes  a London  Letter  for  the 
<‘  Leamington  Chronicle  ” was  enabled  to  give  this  lucid 
account  of  the  old  lady : It  was  a semi-transparent  figure, 
and  “ you  could  see  the  black  band  and  the  indistinct  white 
cap,  and  an  inferation  of  an  intimation  of  an  indication  of 
a form,  as  the  outlined  transciency  of  an  invisible  cloud” ! 

Messrs.  Bastian  and  Taylor  did  not  altogether  satisfy  the 
“ Spiritualist”  newspaper  ; indeed,  Mr.  Harrison  declared 
their  dark  stance , with  the  mediums  tied  to  a bed-post,  to 
be,  at  least,  open  to  suspicion. 

In  Holland  they  were  more  than  suspected,  as  will  be 
seen  from  the  following  statement,  translated  from  the 
“Arnheim  News”  (Dec.  16th,  1874): 

“ Yesterday  evening  we  were  present  at  a stance,  at  which 
Messrs.  Bastian  and  Taylor  were  to  show  us  the  ‘spirits.* 
The  guests  were  thirteen  in  number,  besides  the  ‘ mental 
clairvoyant  medium,*  who  formed  the  company  into  a 
circle,  and  the  ‘physical  medium,’  who  sat  on  a chair  in  the 
middle.  The  ‘ spirits  * did  their  usual  work : we  felt  hand- 
touches  ; there  was  talking  through  a trumpet ; a spring 
puppet  came  down  upon  our  knees;  above  all,  ‘Johnny * 
and  ‘ Georgy  * (so  were  our  spirits  called)  played  to  us  de- 
lightfully on  the  guitar.  In  the  midst  of  all  this,  Mr.  Tay- 
lor, who  did  nothing  but  tell  us  he  saw  spirits,  and  was 
held  fast  by  the  wrists,  passed  something  he  held  in  his 
hands  to  Mr.  Bastian.  At  a given  moment,  while  the  guitar 
was  heard  thrumming  over  our  heads,  at  a signal  from  one 
of  us,  a galvanic  stream  was  sent  from  an  adjoining  room, 

* “ Spiritualist,”  May  7th,  1875. 

p I Original  from 

y V^OOgK  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Few  Exposures, 

125 

along  a platinum  wire  in  the  room  where  we  were  sitting, 
and  igniting  some  cotton  wool  soaked  in  petroleum  in 
which  camphor  had  been  dissolved,  gave  out  a flame  which 
lighted  up  the  apartment.  All  this  was  the  work  of  a 
quarter  of  a second  at  most;  and  what  say  the  under- 
signed? The  ‘physical  medium/  who  was  clapping  his 
hands,  and  was  sitting  on  the  extreme  edge  of  his  chair, 
raised  the  guitar  in  his  right  hand,  and  let  the  instrument 
fall  before  our  eyes  on  the  head  of  one  of  us,  while  he  gazed 
with  terror  and  evident  anxiety  at  the  flame  which  had 
brought  everything  to  light.  The  mental  medium  ’ could 
not  utter  a word : he  looked  annoyed,  and  muttered  some- 
thing about  blackguards.  Of  the  undersigned,  the  five  first 
were  aware  of  the  moment  at  which  the  guitar  fell  from 
the  hands  of  the  supposed  spirit ; the  others,  that  he  with- 
drew his  outstretched  hand  and  evinced  great  anxiety, 
which  possibly  explains  the  fact  of  his  holding  the  clappers 
in  his  hands.  One  of  us  put  the  question  to  Bastian, 
whether  those  present  had  a right  to  acknowledge  what 
they  had  seen  with  their  own  eyes ; the  medium  was  silent. 
In  another  moment  the  mediums  had  disappeared : their 
farewell  was,  that  ‘ they  wished  the  head  of  the  gentleman 
on  which  the  instrument  fell  (who  was  only  slightly  hurt) 
had  been  split.7  We  inform  you  of  these  strange  things  for 
the  benefit  of  those  who  believe  in  the  spiritism  of  these 
gentlemen. 

“We  offer  our  thanks  to  Mr.  Lineker,  Secretary  of  the 
High  Middle-Class  School,  for  the  patience  with  which  he 
waited  from  eight  to  half-past  nine  o’clock  for  the  signal 
from  the  first  of  the  undersigned. 

“ J.  Th.  Cattie,  “ H.  H.  Van  Cappelle, 

“ I.  L.  A.  J.  Sprenger,  “Z.  Van  der  Vegte, 

“J.  J.  WlLDSCHUT,  “Dr.  J.  H.  ZlLVER  RUPE, 
“J.  C.  H.  Heldring,  “H.  Prins, 

“ J.  F.  Van  Manen.” 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

126  Modern  Spiritualism. 

There  must  be  some  answer  to  such  a statement ; and 
what,  think  you,  is  it?  This:  “The  trumpery  charge”  is 
ascribed  to  “ foregone  conclusions  and  ignorance  of  psy- 
chological phenomena ” ; and  Mr.  Harrison,  after  “ex- 
amining the  facts  by  the  light  of  experience,”  “heartily 
endorses  ” this  view  of  the  matter.* 

SPIRIT  “ PHOTOS.” 

The  first  “spirit  photographs”  obtained  in  England 
were  either  by  Mr.  F.  Parkes  at  his  “ sittings  d la  sdan.ee” 
or  Mr.  Fred.  A.  Hudson — which  is  immaterial.  The  latter 
gentleman  soon  got,  and  still  remains,  under  a cloud,  even 
with  Spiritualists  themselves,  as  experts  detected  unques- 
tionable signs  of  “ double  exposure  ” — a trick  by  which  any 
photographer  can  produce  “ghosts”  ad  libiUim.  These 
spirit  figures  appeared  behind  the  sitters  in  the  picture ; 
but  Holloway  rejoices  no  longer  in  their  presence,  and 
Notting  Hill  has  only  plain  “ Mr.  Hudson,  Photographer,” 
which  is  but  the  shadow  of  what  the  great  man  was. 

The  late  Mr.  Samuel  Guppy  (himself  a photographer) 
was  highly  indignant  when  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison  suggested 
in  the  “ Spiritualist  ” (June  5th,  1874)  that  “ if  Mr.  Hudson 
sincerely  regrets  his  past  misdeeds,  he  should  reveal  the 
names  of  his  accomplices  to  the  National  Association.”-!" 

“ If,”  wrote  Mr.  Guppy ,%  “ the  National  Association  con- 
ceives itself  empowered,  and  considers  itself  bound  to 
inquire  into  all  cases  of  imposition  in  Spiritualism,  it  had 
better  advertise  to  that  effect,  and  organize  a court  and  jury, 
and  appoint  a judge,  say  Serjeant  Cox ; and  if  it  do,  will 

* “The  Spiritualist,”  January  15th,  1875. 

t “ Exposure  ” is  a red  rag  to  a bull  with  certain  Spiritualists,  especially 
if  they  be  photographers  I 

X In  the  “ Medium  and  Daybreak,”  June  xsth,  1874. 

! 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Feiu  Exposures. 

127 

Mr.  Harrison  appear  before  that  court  and  confess  ‘his 
regret  for  any  past  misdeeds,  and  reveal  the  names  of  his 
accomplices  ’ ? 

“ Now,  there  is  another  thing.  For  a long  time  past 
the  * Spiritualist,’/.^.,  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison, has  been  always 
‘harping’  on  sham  photographs  and  Mr.  Hudson.  Some 
people  said  to  me  that  it  was  done  in  a spirit  of  persecu- 
tion. I replied,  ‘ That  may  be  true ; but  there  are  some 
grounds.’  But  really  and  truly,  after  that  celebrated  mani- 
festo of  Hudson’s,  no  one  had  any  right  to  say  anything. 
Hudson  published,  ‘ I don’t  guarantee  any  spirit  photo- 
graphs,’ and  he  made  every  person  sign  a book  that  they 
would  ask  no  questions,  or  something  to  that  effect.  Well, 
after  that,  nobody  had  any  right  to  comment.  Hudson 
sold  his  spirit  photographs  as  Tattersall  sells  his  horses, 
‘ with  all  faults.’ 

“Any  one  looking  at  the  comments  on  Mr.  Buguet’s  pho- 
tographs, and  that  they  bear  the  marks  of  being  sham  ones, 
and  the  comments  on  the  New  York  spirit  photographs, 
must  see  that  it  is  absolutely  necessary  that  some  satisfac- 
tory method  should  be  found  to  insure  the  reality  of  so 
important  a phase  in  Spiritualism ; and  therefore,  to  print 
a venomous  paragraph  against  Hudson,  by  name,  at  the 
moment  of  his  misfortunes,  and  at  the  time  when  he  has 
given  a pledge  never  more  to  be  concerned  in  a sham 
photograph,  indicates  a littleness  of  mind  which  is  to  be 
regretted  in  the  case  of  the  editor  of  a paper.” 

You  see  what  a happy  family  Spiritualism  is  ! and  how 
easily  even  the  known  frauds  of  supposed  friends  of  the 
cause  are  overlooked  by  some  of  the  “ faithful.”  The  en- 
forced promise  that  the  naughty  boy  will  never  do  the  like 
again  wipes  off  all  old  scores, gives  full  absolution,  and  allows 
the  “ unfortunate  ” one  to  begin  again  de  novo.  Further 
than  that  even,  the  error  is  regarded  in  the  light  of  a 

d by  GoOqIc 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

T2S 

blessing,  inasmuch  as  “ the  sham  spirit  photos,  and  the 
low  price  they  were  sold  at,  were  the  means  of  directing 
public  attention  to  the  subject  to  an  extent  which  never 
would  have  occurred  if  genuine  photos  only  had  been 
taken?* 

In  June,  1875,  a remarkable  trial  took  place  before  the 
Correctional  Tribunal  of  Paris,  which  resulted  in  the  con- 
viction of  certain  “ spirit  photographers.”  The  fraud  was 
planned  and  carried  out  by  one  Buguet,  who  kept  a photo- 
graphic studio  at  No.  5 Boulevard  Montmartre;  Leymarie, 
Editor  of  the  “ Revue  Spirited  in  which  Buguet  was  be- 
puffed  and  his  spirit  photos  published  monthly ; and  an 
American  medium,  Firman,  who  assumed  the  rdle  of 
spectre.  Twenty  francs  was  an  ordinary  fee  for  the  pro- 
duction of  spirit  pictures — the  portraits  of  deceased  rela- 
tives or  friends ; but  the  knavish  trio  frequently  received 
much  larger  sums.  When  customers  came  to  the  studio, 
they  were  (literally)  taken  in  by  a young  lady  cashier,  who 
extracted  their  money  and  as  many  hints  as  possible  as 
to  the  physiognomy  of  the  spirit  or  person  it  was  their 
desire  to  evoke.  Then  neighbours  were  called  in  to  act 
the  part  of  spirits ; or  plaster  heads  were  decked  out  in 
the  ghostly  “ properties”  always  kept  in  stock  ; or  Firman 
presented  his  long-drawn  visage  as  a ghost  over  the  sitter’s 
shoulder. 

This  nice  little  transaction  ended  in  imprisonment,  which 
is  re-christened  “ persecution  ” by  all  right-feeling  followers 
of  the  spirits.f 

Mr.  Fegan  Egerton  has  long  been  known  as  a power- 
ful medium,  and  “Jack  Tod,”  the  Liverpool  spirit,  “his 

* “ Medium  and  Daybreak,”  June  rath,  *874. 
t See  “Persecution  of  Spiritualists  in  Paris”  in  “The  Spiritualist  ” for 

last  half  of  1875. 

C 

jooole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Fm  Exposures. 

12Q 

Control,”  has  enjoyed  a world-wide  reputation.  Unhappy 
being,  reader,  if  you  knew  not  that  before ! But  “ there 
are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earth,  Horatio,  than  are 
dreamt  of  in  our  philosophy ! ” 

Well,  I know  not  whether  Mr. " Jack  Tod”  or  his  medium 
had  offended  the  Liverpool  Psychological  Society,  or  Mr. 
John  Lamont,  its  Vice-President;  but  certain  it  is  they 
took  the  very  unusual  course  (for  them)  of  laying  a trap  for 
Egerton,  and  Virtue  (represented  by  the  “ Vice”)  unmasked 
the  “poor  but  (dis)honest”  medium.  The  story  is  very 
well  and  truly  told  in  the  “ Liverpool  Daily  Courier.”  '*  The 
stance  was  held  at  the  “ Spiritual  Centre,”  in  Russell  Street. 

“ The  circle  was  arranged,  re-arranged,  finally  adjusted, 
and  a due  amount  of  hymn-singing  was  engaged  in  to  get 
up  the  ‘ power.’  Such  hymns  as  * The  Banks  of  the  Beau- 
tiful Spirit-Shore,'  ‘ The  Bright  Summer  Land,’  ‘ Beautiful 
Star,’  &c.,  were  sweetly  chanted,  the  sitters  having,  accord- 
ing to  conditions,  joined  hands.  All  this  time  the  medium 
was  seated  in  the  ‘ cabinet,’  which  was  formed  by  screen- 
ing off  a niche  in  the  apartment.  This  cabinet  had  been 
previously  inspected  with  the  utmost  care,  and  was  found  to 
be  quite  satisfactory.  As  an  extra  precaution,  prompted 
by  some  strange  suspicion,  Mr.  Lamont  had  beforehand 
screwed  the  medium’s  chair  fast  down  to  the  floor,  so  that 
there  could  be  no  possibility  of  his  rising  up  and  taking 
flight  into  Spiritland  with  the  seat  attached  to  his  person. 
Added  to  all  these  precautions  against  deception  was  the 
tying  of  the  medium  in  the  chair  by  means  of  tape,  which 
was  done  also  by  the  cautious  Mr.  Lamont.  In  order,  how- 
ever, not  to  hamper  the  uses  to  which  the  obliging  spirits 
might  desire  to  put  the  medium,  one  arm  was  considerately 
left  free,  and  this  facility  no  doubt  proved  useful  to  Mr. 

* November  26th,  1875. 

9 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

J30  Modern  Spiritualism . 

Egerton  in  his  subsequent  performances.  The  gas  was 
turned  out ; the  ‘ conditions  ’ were  found  to  be  favourable  ; 
‘Jack  Tod’ announced  his  presence,  and  gradually  the 
work  of  materialization  began.  At  first  a dim  speck  of 
luminous  vapour  was  visible ; but  by-and-bye  the  eager 
strained  gaze  of  the  sitters  was  able  to  descry  a growing 
outline  of  something  which  became  more  and  more  de- 
fined, until — ah ! there  it  was  ! — the  indescribably  beautiful 
spirit  face  of  the  previous  stance,  with  the  lovely  gauze  veil 
gracefully  depending  round  the  head  and  twined  into  a 
charming  knot  under  the  chin  of  the  materialized  spirit ! 
There,  too,  was  the  marvellous  ‘phosphoric  spirit  light/ 
which  glided  and  flickered  about  the  face,  now  illuminat- 
ing one  lovely  cheek  and  then  another,  as  if  the  spirit  had 
dexterously  drawn  its  gas  from  its  pocket,  lighted  the  phos- 
phoric taper,  and  was  obliging  the  sitters  with  full  and  side 
views  of  its  features  ! Several  times,  too,  with  reassuring 
consideration  and  intelligence,  the  head  made  a gentle 
bow,  accompanied  by  an  ineffably  graceful  smile,  towards 
some  one  in  the  circle  ! These  were  the  wonders  believed 
to  have  been  seen  ; the  manifestation  was  complete, 
overwhelming — indubitable  proof,  first,  of  the  medium’s 
genuineness,  and  secondly,  of  the  reality  of  materializa- 
tion. Exclamations  of  delight  escaped  the  entranced 
sitters,  such  as  ‘Glorious!’  ‘Marvellous!’  ‘Worth  all 
your  money  ! ’ (the  price  for  admission  to  the  stance  was 
a shilling),  when  suddenly  discord  appeared  in  the  circle. 
Mr.  Lamont,  who  was  nearest  the  medium,  sprang  from 
his  place,  and  seizing  Mr.  Egerton  round  the  body  so  as 
to  pinion  his  arms,  called  for  a light.  There  was  a struggle ; 
Mr.  Lamont  firmly  kept  his  hold  ; and,  after  considerable 
confusion,  the  gas  was  relit.  And  lo ! the  disillusion ! The 
medium  was  found  holding  in  his  hand  an  elegantly- 
constructed  mask,  representing  a female  face,  upon  the 

| ^ Original  from 

Digitized  by  VjOOgIL  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

A Feiu  Exposures . 

*3 1 

mask  being  arranged  several  yards  of  muslin  of  the  tex- 
ture of  a butter-cloth.  With  these  simple  and  innocent 
articles,  aided  by  a few  phosphoric  matches,  had  the  in- 
spired medium  constructed  the  marvellous  spirit  form  of 
a few  seconds  before.  Of  course  the  dtno1bnentvi2&  utter 
confusion.  The  believers  were  hopelessly  confounded ; the 
medium,  on  being  taxed  with  imposture,  merely  murmured, 

‘ Well,  well ; ’ and  finally,  overwhelmed  and  astounded 
at  their  own  foolishness,  the  audience  dispersed  in  disgust. 
Before  leaving,  the  ‘ medium’  exonerated  the  proprietor  of 
the  establishment  from  all  knowledge  of  or  complicity  in 
this  trick ; although  he  confessed  that  others,  prominent 
local  Spiritualists,  were  aware  of  it,  and  actually  induced 
him  to  commit  the  imposture,  and  also  that  acts  of  simu- 
lation were  invariably  practised  by  professing  mediums.” 
So  “ Poor  Jack”  (“Tod”)  is  in  the  doleful  dumps  for  that 
u sweet  little  cherub”  his  medium,  who  now  “sits  up  aloft” 
upon  the  stool  of  repentance. 

The  really  serious  point  of  the  affair  is  the  medium’s 
statement  that  prominent  Spiritualists  had  helped  him  to 
the  imposture.  Without  giving  too  much  credence  to 
the  word  of  such  a man,  our  thoughts  cannot  but  revert 
uneasily  to  a few  revelations,  and  make  us  doubtful 
whether  these  practices  may  not  be  in  vogue  amongst 
some,  at  least,  of  those  well-known  and  apparently  respect- 
able persons  whose  names  appear  so  frequently  at  stances. 
The  dread  of  exposing  the  medium  in  such  persons  is 
decidedly  suspicious j but  if  we  have  a few  more  contre- 
temps like  the  foregoing,  “ materialization  ” will  soon  go 
out  of  fashion,  and  deception  and  trickery — whether  for 
love  or  money — need  not  be  resorted  to. 

GooqIc 

o 

9—2 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  XI. 

TOOR  “JOHN  king!” 

A Materialization  Theory — " John’s  " Earth-Life — A Bold  Buccaneer — " A 
Pal  of  his”! — “The  Boss”! — A “Jolly”  Spirits’  Song— “ Baths  and 
Bottled  Stout  ” — Hair-brushing  by  Machinery — The  Usual  Failing  ! — 
Houndsditch  Spirits — “ A Professional  Impostor” — “Coloured  Auras” 

— A Flighty  Medium— The  Last  of  “John  King” — Spirit  Conjurors. 

AM  in  a position,  by  favour  of  the  leading  American 
Spiritual  paper,  the  “ Banner  of  Light,”  to  state 
the  method  adopted  for  spirit  “ materialization  ” : — “ The 
human  organism  is  constantly  receiving  accessions  of  new 
atoms  in  the  process  of  rebuilding  or  recuperation,  and  is 
as  constantly  evolving  in  a vastly  improved  state  those  - 
atoms  which  have  been  long  enough  in  its  organic  associa- 
• tion  to  become  thus  advanced  or  perfected  ....  The 
synthetic  chemists  of  the  other  life  * electrify,’  or  otherwise 
control  a great  profusion  of  these  evolving  or  sublimated 
atoms — enough  to  form,  when  condensed,  a visible  hand 
or  arm  ....  In  a moment,  with  the  quickness  of 
electricity,  it  may  be,  these  atoms  are  again  dismissed 
into  ‘ thin  air.’” 

So  much  for  theory ; wre  shall  find  before  this  chapter  is 
concluded  that  the  practice  is  somewhat  different. 

Taken  at  the  best  these  materialized  spirit  forms  are  a 
shady  lot ; they  seldom  stand  more  light  than  is  indicated 

132 

| Original  fro/n  - 

Digilized.by  V »OO^IL  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Poor  “ John  King  /” 

*33 

by  “ semi-darkness,” — which  is  very  little  light  indeed  ! — 
and  they  have,  usually,  too  much  of  the  medium’s  face  and 
voice  to  be  quite  beyond  suspicion — save  to  the  “faithful.” 
“ ‘ How  can  we  prove  the  existence  of  these  sperrits  ? ’ 
asked  a sceptic  of  Mr.  S.  C.  Hall.  1 Prove  them  ?’  remarked 
S.  C.  impressively,  ‘ the  sperrits  are  above  proof  !’”* 
From  the  “George  Brown”  of  the  Davenports  to  the 
“ Minnie”  of  Miss  Fairlamb  there  have  been  many  spirit 
visitors  in  the  flesh  provided  by  their  “synthetic  chemists.” 
There  have  been  “ black  spirits  and  white,  red  spirits  and 
grey,”  from  “ Zambia  ” — who  declares  that  “ although  he 
has  a black  skin  he  has  a white  heart ; ” and  who  is  able  to 
be  in  two  places  at  one  time,  “ having  appeared  at  the  same 
hour  to  some  Spiritualists  in  England,  and  to  some  others 
on  board  a ship  on  its  way  to  New  Zealand, ”+ — to  “Florence 
Maple”  (who  gave  a wrong  address  in  Aberdeen),  “ Peter” 
the  gardener,  “ Sweet  William”  the  carpenter,  and  “John 
King,”  his  wife,  son,  and  daughter.  The  latter  family,  being 
the  best-known  of  all  the  spirits,  will  demand  special  notice. 
I shall  first  give  all  that  is  known  of  “John”  in  “earth-life,” 
and  afterwards  his  rise  and  fall  as  a spirit.  His  name,  it 
seems,  upon  the  “rudimentary  sphere,”  was  “Sir  Henry 
Morgan ; ” but  whether  he  was  the  bold  buccaneer  who 
obtained  letters  of  marque  from  Charles  1 1.,  or  whether  he 
lived  in  Elizabeth’s  reign,  is  a point  still  unsettled.  Pirate  or 
not,  he  must  have  borne  a bad  character  enough ; he  “does 
not  like  to  revive  memories  of  the  past,”  and  his  statement 
that  Sir  Walter  Raleigh  was  a “ pal  ” of  his,  would  seem 
to  require  further  proof.  He  was  possessed  of  “ a forcible 
and  uncontrollable  disposition,”  and  if  the  spirit  picture  be 
a portrait,  was  “ swarthy  in  hue,  almost  like  an  Eastern, 

* “Punch." 

t “ Spiritualist,”  May  15th,  1870. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

134 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

with  features  of  a not  very  large  type,  but  handsome  cha- 
racter ; nose  slightly  aquiline,  eyes  dark,  eyebrows  and 
moustache  well  marked  and  defined,  but  not  thick  ; and 
these,  together  with  the  thick  bushy  beard,  of  an  intensely 
black  colour,  the  lips  thin,  and  mouth  well  formed  ; the 
head  surmounted  by  a white,  peculiarly  shaped  turban,  the 
ends  of  which  hung  down  on  either  side  a broad,  powerful 
chest,  suggestive  of  the  deep,  sonorous  tones  of  the  voice 
of  the  owner.”* 

His  wife  and  daughter,  both  called  “Katey”  in  the 
spirit  world,  his  son  “John,”  his  servant  “Peter,”  who 
serves  the  “ boss,”  as  he  calls  “ Sir  Henry,”  with  great  de- 
votion, and  the  old  sea-dog  himself,  form  a striking  spirit 
group. 

“ Sir  Henry”  or  “John”  is,  in  the  spirit  as  in  the  flesh, 
restless  and  energetic.  Mr.  Burns,  who  has  the  private 
lives  of,  and  back-stair  tittle-tattle  about,  all  tl}£  spirits, 
says  of  him : 

“‘John  King’  has  been  identified  with  the  work  of 
Spiritualism  from  the  earliest  years  of  the  movement.  He 
produced  physical  manifestations  in  the  family  of  Mr. 
Koons,  in  the  backwoods  of  America,  as  related  in  Emma 
Hardinge’s  ‘ History  of  Spiritualism.’  He  also  became 
identified  with  the  work  of  the  Davenport  Brothers,  and 
latterly  manifested  through  the  mediumship  of  Messrs. 
Herne  and  Williams,  by  which  he  is  best  known  in  this 
country.” 

Some  Spiritualists  consider  “John”  to  be  a kind  of 
phantom,  springing  up  like  a Jack-in-the-box  in  the  most 
out-of-the-way  places  ; but  Mr.  Burns,  who  has  “met  him 
very  frequently,”  says  “he  is  as  truly  an  individual  as  any 
of  the  persons  about  him,”  and  he  has  me  with  him  heartily 
in  this  ! 

* "Medium and  Daybreak,”  August  8th,  187^. 

itized  by  GoOQle 

C ' 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Poor  “John  King!” 

135 

“ King  ” is  a facetious  spirit,  and  occasionally,  in  a 
“mischievous”  humour,  assuring  Mr.  Harrison  that  he 
“ ought  to  look  upon  Spiritualism  as  a jolly  thing.  I ’m 
jolly  enough  1 Look  here,  now  ! I ’ll  sing  you  a song  of 
my  own  composition : 

I wish  I had  a bird, 

I would  stick  it  on  a spit,  &C." 

“John”  also  recommended  a new  inquirer  to  take 
regular  baths,  and  a bottle  of  “Guinness’s  stout ’’every  day 
at  dinner.  While  his  rubbing  a paper  tube  over  the  in- 
quirer’s head,  saying, “This  is  hair-brushing  by  machinery,” 
and  his  remark, “Look  here,  Harrison,  I have  been  put  to 
do  this  work  of  convincing  mortals  for  a certain  number  of 
years  to  work  out  my  own  salvation,  and  as  I have  to  do 
it,  I think  it  as  well  to  make  myself  jolly  over  it,”  is  as 
little  spiritual  as  his  advice.  “ He  then,”  says  Mr.  Harri- 
son, “began  to  whistle  in  a devil-may-care  kind  of  way 
. . . . I put  several  mental  questions  to  the  spirits 

at  this  stance.  They  could  not  answer  them,  and  were 
evidently  unable  to  read  my  thoughts.  . . . Mrs.  Mar- 
shall also  told  me  that  spirits  sometimes  brought  fruits  to 
stances  when  fruits  were  asked  for  by  the  sitters.  I re- 
marked,‘Then  I should  like  to  ask  for  some  tropical  fruit 
not  to  be  found  on  this  side  of  the  globe.’  John  King  re- 
plied, ‘So  you  may  upon  which  I said,  ‘Thank  you 
whereupon  John  King  added,  * But  you  won’t  get  it  !’”* 
The  “John  King”  of  the  Marshalls  (whose  “sperrits  is 
gone”  for  ever,  now!)  was,  beyond  all  other  “Johns,” 
notorious  for  the  untruthfulness  of  his  statements.  He 
declared  himself  to  be  a “native  of  Caermar  then, ’’but  did 
not  display  any  local  knowledge  of  that  town.  Sometimes 
—by  accident,  I presume — he  managed  to  speak  the  truth, 

* “ Spirit  People” 

Goosle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

136  Modern  Spiritualism . 

as  when  he  allowed  that  spirit  lights  are  mainly  produced  by 
phosphorus,  and  that  the  tilting  of  a table  more  on  one  side 
than  another  shows  an  excess  of  power  upon  that  side ! 
Notwithstanding  “ John’s  ” hard  work  (he  has  done  more 
than  all  the  other  materialized  ones  put  together)  and  his 
indiscretion,  he  did  for  a long  time  escape  detection,  but 
now,  alas ! has  gone  the  way  of  all  spirits,  down,  and  the 
story  of  his  fall  will  be  shortly  told  in  these  pages  fresh  as 
it  comes  from  Liverpool — terror  of  materializing  media  ! 

Mr.  Frank  Herne  (whose  partnership  with  Mr.  Chas. 
E.  Williams  is  now  a thing  of  the  past)  has  been  connected 
with  more  than  one  remarkable  exposure  anent  “ materi- 
alization.” Considerable  excitement  was  produced  in  Lon- 
don when  Messrs.  Herne  and  Williams  first  materialized 
hands,  then  faces,  and  afterwards  the  full  form  of  “John 
King,”  who  conversed  with  the  sitters.  The  partners  made 
money,  and  “ all  went  merry  as  a marriage  bell  ” until  the 
latter  end  of  1872,  or  early  in  1873,  they  were  engaged 
to  give  their  performance  at  Hull,  when  Herne — having 
the  usual  failing  of  the  media,  spirits  — spoiled  the 
“show.”  Williams  waxed  wroth  at  this,  and  declined  any 
further  connection  with  the  recalcitrant  one,  who,  in  re- 
revenge, exposed  the  means  whereby  the  “ ghosts  ” were 
produced,  and  told  how  the  spirit  masks  might  be  procured 
at  a certain  shop  in  Houndsditch  ! Of  course  this  had  no 
further  effect  upon  the  faithful  than  getting  the  spirituous 
being  into  disgrace ; for  nothing  is  more  distasteful  to 
your  devout  believer  in  Spiritualism  than  the  awkward 
truth ! 

Mr.  Burns  lashed  the  naughty  medium  well,  and  declared 
that  “ according  to  his  own  confession  he  is  a professional 
impostor,  a cheat,  and  quite  willing  to  make  a living  by 
receiving  money  under  false  pretences.”* 

* “Medium  and  Daybreak,”  April  4th,  1873. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Poor  “John  King!” 

137 

Now,  without  quarrelling  with  our  editorial  friend  over 
this  matter  (because  “them’s  my  sentiments  f”)  I would 
point  out  the  incongruous  fact  that  almost  immediately 
after  this  denunciation  of  the  too  Frank  medium,  we  find 
Brothers  Heme  and  Bums  hob-nobbing  at  the  “ Spiritual 
Institution”  (proprietor,  Mr.  B.),  where  “very  powerful 
phenomena”  are  obtained  ; and  to  this  day  Mr.  Herne  is 
“manifesting”  at  the  spirit  rendezvous  in  Southampton 
Row,  under  the  cegis  of  his  former  castigator  ! 

Mr.  Herne  sees  “ coloured  auras  ” around  people  ; thus 
green  does  not  denote  the  gullibility  usually  supposed 
to  appertain  to  that  colour,  but  is  indicative  of  wicked- 
ness ; blue,  of  course,  shows  wisdom,  and  red  is  love.  He 
has  been  “levited,”  in  open  daylight  too,  this  spirituous 
being  ! Not  that  any  one  can  say — with  Mr.  Maccabe’s 
countryman,  “ I seed  it  mysel’ ! ” — but  it  is  vouched  for 
by  the  flighty  medium  that  he  was  “ caught  away  ” whilst 
walking  in  “merrie  Islington,”  and  conveyed  into  the 
house  of  Mrs.  Guppy,  No.  1 Norland  Villas,  Highbury  Hill 
Park,  by  invisible  agency  !*  Could  Mrs.  G.  do  less  than 
pay  a return  visit  in  the  following  year,  to  Lamb’s  Conduit 
Street  (using  the  same  mysterious  locomotive  power)  after 
that  ?f 

But  poor  Mr.  Heme  is  in  hot  water  again,  and  this  time 
at  Liverpool,!  where  Mr.  John  Fraser — the  medium  hunter 
— detected  him  with  singular  intrepidity  and  skill.  And 
this  is  how  Mr.  Frank  Herne  and  “poor  John  King” 
fell.  Mr.  Herne  had  been  engaged  to  counteract  the 
bad  effects  of  the  Egerton  exposure,  “to  wipe  out  the  stain 
caused  by  the  false  medium,  rehabilitate  the  damaged 

* May  20th,  1870. 

t See  Chapter  IX. 

J At  that  same  spiritual  centre,  No.  38  Russell  Street,  where  Mr.  (Butter- 
cloth)  Egerton  came  to  grief. 

Goosle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

138  Modern  Spiritualism . 

fabric  of  the  belief,  and  silence  once  and  for  ever  the 
blatant  sceptics.” 

Six  stances  were  arranged  : at  one  of  these  the  spirit 
of  Harriet  Lane*  addressed  the  circle,  beginning  with, 
the  words,  “ Garlanded  with  the  dowry  of  shame,”  whilst 
the  faithful  present  whispered,  “ Ay,  that ’s  Harriet  Lane  : 
the  Lord  be  praised  ! ” Then  the  spirit  of  a Somerset- 
shire man  controlled  the  medium,  and  being  asked  in 
what  sphere  the  murdered  woman  was,  replied,  “ She  be 
in  a very  foin  spere,  she  be.  Vurst  she  vuz  not  in  such  a. 
good  place,  but  hur  ’ll  be  better  by-and-bye,  hur  will.  Hur 
was  a black  spirit  when  she  coom  vurst ; hur  be  now  a 
grey  spirit ; and  hur  ’ll  soon  be  a white  one.”  And  then 
there  was  the  “ materialization  ” of  a baby  form,  merely  a 
newspaper  rolled  up  and  grasped  by  the  medium  to  give 
the  shape  of  the  body,  but  which  in  the  dim  light  one  poor 
woman  took  to  be  the  angel  form  of  her  loved  and  lost 
infant. 

But  the  eventful  evening  came  when  “John  King”  was 
to  be  revealed  in  the  full  glare  of  the  gas,  and  we  may  let 
the  Liverpool  “ Daily  Courier  ”+  tell  how  his  spiritship 
stood  the  light. 

“ Several  gentlemen  had  formed  a very  strong  opinion 
as  to  the  utter  imposture  of  the  whole  thing.  There  was 
but  one  chance  remaining,  and  that  not  availing,  the  spirit- 
ualists would  have  achieved  a great  result.  However,  the 
fates  were  in  other  directions,  and  the  spirits  themselves 
must  have  played  against  the  spirit-conjurors.  The  eager 
circle  gathered  together  for  a final  manifestation.  The 
stockbroker  was  there,  hoping  probably  to  get  some  augury 
that  would  help  in  his  speculations  ; the  master-carterish 
individual  was  also  present,  drinking  in  the  wonders  with 

* Henry  Wainwright’s  victim  in  the  Whitechapel  murder, 
t Of  Christmas  Day,  1875. 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Poor  “John  King!” 

139 

great  relish  ; there  likewise  was  the  dapper  young  gentle- 
man who  had  come  in  his  gymnasium  dress,  labouring,  it 
is  believed,  under  the  delusion  that  the  gigantic  spirit  was 
that  of  a noted  ex-pugilist  named  King,  with  whom  he  was 
eager  to  have  a 1 set  to.’  ” There  was  also  a strange  and 
“ much  spectacled  ” individual  present.  After  the  popular 
“Hold  the  Fort,”  “Shall  we  gather  at  the  river,”  &c., 
were  sung,  and  one  or  two  manifestations  produced,  the 
p&ce  de  resistance  of  the  evening  was  forthcoming  in  the 
person  (or  spirit)  of  John  King,  “first  as  if  tentatively 
selecting  his  position,  and  eventually  appearing  full  at  the 
aperture  in  the  curtains.  This  was  the  critical  moment : 
the  strange  man  in  spectacles  bounded  like  a panther  to- 
wards the  cabinet,  and  made  a grab  at  the  spirit.  The 
white  drapery,  or  whatever  it  might  be,  was  seen  to  shrivel 
up  as  if  vanishing  away.  ‘ Gracious  heavens  ! could  it  be 
a spirit  after  all  ? ’ was  the  question  that  overwhelmed  for 
the  moment  the  minds  of  the  spectators.  But  at  the  same 
instant,  the  bw«*-y  person  already  described  as  a master 
carter  sprang  from  his  seat  and  seized  the  medium  on  the 
left-hand  side,  so  that  the  hapless  impostor  was  thus  caught 
in  a vice.  A howl  of  terror  escaped  his  lips,  and  as  the  gas 
was  being  turned  on  another  conspirator  against  the  spirits 
made  a dash  at  the  cabinet,  and  brought  the  whole  ar- 
rangement to  the  floor.  The  medium  was  handed  out,  and 
disclosed  a most  ludicrous  make-up.  About  two  yards  of 
tarlatan  was  arranged  round  his  head  turbanwise,  and 
covered  him  in  front  down  to  the  thighs.  On  each  leg  was 
tied  loose  a newspaper — both  copies  of  the ‘Daily  Courier' 
— and  these  served  as  the  spirit’s  pantaloons  ; in  the  full 
blaze  of  the  gaslight  they  reminded  one  of  the  top  boots 
of  a brigand  in  a melodrama.  When  dragged  into  the  light, 
the  terrified  medium  was  still  clutching  one  end  of  the  strip 
of  tarlatan,  doubtless  thinking  his  spirit  dress  would  be 

Digitized 

by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

140  Modern  Spiritualism . 

some  protection  to  him  against  the  violence  of  the  scep- 
tics.” 

The  medium,  when  asked  to  explain  these  slightly  sus- 
picious circumstances,  replied  that  the  scarf  found  upon 
him  was  undoubtedly  his  property,  but  how  it  or  the  news- 
papers came  there  he  could  not  say  ; some  person  might 
have  brought  it  in  out  of  his  bed-room,  or  it  might  have 
been  conveyed  in  by  the  spirits.  However,  the  sitters  ex- 
pressed in  no  mild  terms  that  the  whole  thing  was  impos- 
ture of  the  grossest  kind. 

Yet  what  think  you  has  Mr.  Burns  the  effrontery  to  do  ? 
Why,  “ warmly  urge  the  prosecution  of  the  offenders  ! ” — 
not  the  medium  and  his  accomplices,  mark  you,  but  those 
who  had  exposed  the  fraud ! Mr.  B.  even  opened  a subscrip- 
tion for  this  purpose  ; but  so  little  money  came  in,  it 
was  changed  into  a testimonial  of  ^15  (!)  to  Mr.  Heme. 

Time  was  that  when  a light  was  struck  (the  story  ran), 
the  medium  would  die  ; but  now — we  find  sudden  illumina- 
tions have  no  other  effect  than  exposing  frauds  which  even 
Spiritualists  themselves  sometimes  foster. 

When  there  is  such  an  easy  way  of  settling  the  truthful- 
ness or  falsity  of  the  pretensions  of  materializing  media  as 
a light  suddenly  struck,  why  do  the  faithful  neglect  to  take 
such  ordinary  precautions  against  imposition  in  what  is,  to 
them,  so  momentous  a matter  ? 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  XII. 

“sweet  katey  king!” 

little  Florrie — "Dialectical”  Whiskers — The  Professor — “ Lights  down” — 
Enter  "Katey  King” — Photographing  a Spirit — A "Scientist  "far  gone — 
**  Silting  for  Faces” — Alittle/b«-r  pas — Katey  in  America — Her  “ Earth- 
li  fe"  History — The  little  Widow — Mrs.  Holmesis  “cick” — " Sweet  Katey 
King” — The  Philadelphia  collapse. 

RS.  ELGIE  CORNER,  nie  Miss  Florence  Cook, 
who  for  a time  ruled  amongst  the  faithful,  was  in- 
troduced to  the  “materialization”  business  early  in  life; 
and  when  the  little  lady  was  sweet  sixteen,  she  had  the 
honour  of  presenting  “spirit  faces”  to  the  English  people. 
There  was  “ the  Haverfordwest  Spirit,”  and  “ Alphonse,” 
whose  surname — like  William’s  in  “Black  Eyed  Susan” 
— is  unknown. 

But  the  great  hit  which  has  given  Miss  Florrie  a world- 
wide reputation  was  the  materialization  of  Annie  Morgan, 
or  “ Katey  King  ” — that  “ delicate,  ladylike,  aesthetic  in- 
dividual, with  fine  features,  abundance  of  auburn  hair,  and 
altogether  interesting  and  spirituelle  individuality.”*  This 
spirit  frequently  left  the  cabinet,  and  took  her  (or  its)  “ walks 
abroad  ” among  the  assembled  “ sitters,”  conversing  with 
them  affably  and  shaking  their  hands.  Instead  of  pur- 

Mr.  Burns  in  "The  Medium.” 

141 

by  GoOQlc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

142 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

chasing  a genuine  spirit  face  in  Houndsditch,  like  Messrs. 
Herne  and  Williams  were  wont  to  do,  Miss  Cook  was 
content  to  present  her  own  pretty  Jewish  one;  but  this 
never  raised  a doubt  in  the  minds  of  the  more  “advanced ” 
Spiritualists  until  a “ dialectical  gentleman,  Mr.  William 
Volckman,  sceptically  anxious  to  obtain  a nearer  view  of 
the  spirit  physiognomy,  which  was  indistinct  in  the  1 dim 
religious  light’  of  the  stance-room,  was  rash  and  ungallant 
enough  to  spring  from  his  chair  and  grasp  her  round  the 
waist,  thereby  satisfying  himself,  as  he  says,  that  Katey 
and  Miss  Cook  were  indeed  and  in  truth  but  one  and  the 
same  person. 

“It  would  be  in  vain  to  attempt  to  describe  the  tableau 
— terminating,  not  in  the  orthodox  red  fire>  but  by  the 
sudden  extinguishment  of  the  gas — which  followed.  The 
unfortunate  ghost  must  have  had  rather  a critical  time  of 
it  before  it  could  be  extricated  from  the  grasp  of  Mr.  Volck- 
man by  the  combined  efforts  of  a Justice  of  the  Peace,  a 
ship’s  officer,  and  a gentleman  rejoicing  in  the  appropriate 
name  of  ‘ Tapp,’  who  gallantly  rushed  to  the  rescue,  and 
brought  Mr.  Volckman  heavily  to  the  ground,  at  consider- 
able damage  to  that  gentleman’s  neck,  elbow,  and  knee. 
The  ghost  also,  instead  of  * dissolving  in  thin  air,’  tore 
hair  from  Mr.  Volckman’s  beard,  a hirsute  ornamentation 
upon  which  the  owner  says  he  prided  himself  consider- 
ably.”* 

As  it  has  been  my  endeavour  all  through  this  book  to 
give  the  accounts  of  eye-witnesses  of  the  phenomena — 
whether  they  be  of  the  “elect”  or  the  sceptical — I cannot 
do  better  than  extract  from  the  Rev.  C.  Maurice  Davies’s f 

* J.  H.  in  “Bell’s  Weekly  Messenger.” 
t The  reverend  gentleman  is  on  the  Council  of  the  British  National  Associa- 
tion of  Spiritualists. 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

“Sweet  Katey  King  /”  143 

excellent  work — “Mystic  London”  his  report  of  these 
manifestations  in  Hackney  : 

“ Two  rooms  communicated  through  folding-doors — the 
front  apartment  being  that  in  which  we  assembled,  and 
the  back  used  as  a bed-room,  where  the  ladies  took  off 
their  ‘ things.’  This  latter  room,  be  it  remembered,  had  a 
second  room  communicating  with  the  passage,  and  so  with 
the  universe  of  space  in  general.  One  leaf  of  the  folding- 
doors  was  closed,  and  a curtain  hung  over  the  other. 
Pillows  were  placed  on  the  floor  just  inside  the  curtain, 
and  the  little  medium,  who  was  nattily  arrayed  in  a blue 
dress,  was  laid  upon  them.  We  were  requested  to  sing 
and  talk  during  ‘ materialization,’  and  there  was  as  much 
putting  up  and  lowering  of  the  light  as  in  a modem  sensa- 
tion drama.  The  professor  * acted  all  the  time  as  master 
of  the  ceremonies,  retaining  his  place  at  the  aperture ; 
and,  I fear,  from  the  very  first,  exciting  suspicion  by  his 
marked  attention  not  to  the  medium,  but  to  the  ghost. 
When  it  did  come,  it  was  arrayed  according  to  orthodox 
ghost  fashion,  in  loose  white  garments,  and  I must  confess 
with  no  resemblance  to  Miss  C.f  We  were  at  the  same 
time  shown  the  recumbent  form  of  the  pillowed  medium, 
and  there  certainly  was  something  blue,  which  might  have 
been  Miss  C.,  or  only  her  gown  going  to  the  wash. 

“ By-and-bye,  however,  with  ‘ lights  down,’  a bottle  of 
phosphorized  oil  was  produced,  and  by  this  weird  and  un- 
canny radiance,  one  or  two  privileged  individuals  were  led 
by  the  ‘ ghost  ’ into  the  back  bed-room,  and  allowed  to  put 
their  hands  upon  the  entranced  form  of  the  medium.  I 
was  not  of  the  ‘ elect,’  but  I talked  to  those  who  were,  and 

* Mr.  William  Crookes,  F.R.S. 

t But  “ Katey"  was  not  always  unlike  the  medium;  indeed,  the  spirit 
has  been  known  to  apologize  for  the  awkward  resemblance  between  the  two 
faces. 

d by  CiOOQle 
o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

1 44 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

their  opinion  was  that  the  ‘ghost’  was  a much  stouter 
bigger  woman  than  the  medium ; and  I confess  that  cer- 
tain  unhallowed  ideas  of  the  bed  room  door  and  the  adjacent 
kitchen  stairs  connected  themselves  in  my  mind  with  re- 
collections of  a brawny  servant-girl,  who  used  to  sit  sentry 
over  the  cupboard  in  the  breakfast-room — where  was  she  ? 

“ As  a final  bonne  bouche  the  spirit  made  its  exit  from 
the  side  of  the  folding-door  covered  by  the  curtain,  and 
immediately  Miss  C.  rose  up  with  dishevelled  locks  in  a 
way  that  must  have  been  satisfactory  to  anybody  who 
knew  nothing  of  the  back  door  and  the  brawny  servant, 
or  who  had  never  seen  the  late  Mr.  Charles  Kean  act  in 
the  ‘ Corsican  Brothers  ’ or  the  ‘ Courier  of  Lyons.’ 

“ I am  free  to  confess  the  final  death-blow  to  my  belief 
that  there  might  be  ‘something’  in  the  face  manifesta- 
tions, was  given  by  the  effusive  professor,  who  has  ‘ gone 
in  ’ for  the  double  with  a pertinacity  altogether  opposed  to 
the  calm  judicial  examination  of  his  brother  learned  in  the 
law,*  and  with  prejudice  scarcely  becoming  a F.R.S.” 

The  F.R.S. , whose  peculiar  enthusiasm  is  little  in  keep- 
ing with  careful  investigation,  was  rewarded  for  his  faith 
by  Katey’s  unreserved  confidence,  which,  he  says,  “ gradu- 
ally grew  until  she  refused  to  give  a stance  unless  I took 
charge  of  the  arrangements.  She  said  she  always  wanted 
me  to  keep  close  to  her  and  near  the  cabinet,  and  I found 
that  after  this  confidence  was  established,  and  she  was 
satisfied  I would  not  break  any  promise  I might  make  to 
her,  the  phenomena  increased  greatly  in  power,  and  tests 
were  freely  given  that  would  have  been  unobtainable  had 
I approached  the  subject  in  another  manner.  She  often 
consulted  me  about  persons  present  at  the  stances , and 
where  they  should  be  placed,  for  of  late  she  had  become 

* Serjeant  Cox. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

“Sweet  Katey  King  ! ” 

M5 

very  nervous,  in  consequence  of  certain  ill-advised  sugges- 
tions that  force  should  be  employed  as  an  adjunct  to  more 
scientific  modes  of  research.”* 

The  F.R.S.  succeeded  by  the  aid  of  the  electric  light  in 
photographing  “ Katey  King,”  the  innocent  spirit — true 
daughter  of  Eve — being  very  curious  about  “ that  queer 
machine,”  the  camera ; and  the  scientific  gentleman  in- 
dulged in  the  following  “gush  ” upon  her  loveliness  : 

“ But  photography  is  as  inadequate  to  depict  the  perfect 
beauty  of  Katey’s  face,  as  words  are  powerless  to  describe 
her  charms  of  manner.  Photography  may,  indeed,  give  a 
map  of  her  countenance ; but  how  can  it  reproduce  the 
brilliant  purity  of  her  complexion,  or  the  ever-varying  ex- 
pression of  her  most  mobile  features,  now  overshadowed 
with  sadness  when  relating  some  of  the  bitter  experiences 
of  her  past  life,  now  smiling  with  all  the  innocence  of  happy 
girlhood  when  she  had  collected  my  children  round  her, 
and  was  amusing  them  by  recounting  anecdotes  of  her 
adventures  in  India? 

' Round  her  she  made  an  atmosphere  of  life. 

The  very  air  seemed  lighter  from  her  eyes, 

They  were  so  soft  and  beautiful,  and  rife 
With  all  we  can  imagine  of  the  skies  ; 

Her  overpowering  presence  made  you  feel 
It  would  not  be  idolatry  to  kneeL’”t 

The  “scientist”  who  writes  like  this — and  clasps  the 
beautiful  and  substantial  spirit  in  his  arms — is  much  too 
far  gone  for  “ investigation  ” ! 

But  the  hour  of  parting  was  to  come,  and  Katey  was  to 
materialize  no  longer,  Miss  Cook  retiring  from  that  portion 
of  the  business.  Katey,  unfortunately,  appeared  afterwards 

* “The  Spiritualist,”  June  5th,  1874.  (A  brave  man,  indeed,  would  be 
required  for  any  unscientific  research,  if  he  wore  whiskers  /) 
t “The  Spiritualist,”  June  5th,  1874. 

10 

1OOQ1C 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

146 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

in  America,  and  there — like  the  pitcher  that  goes  too  often 
to  the  well — u came  to  grief ! ” 

Mr.  and  Mrs.  Holmes  had  “ sittings  for  faces,”  at 
No.  16  Old  Quebec  Street,  Oxford  Street,  and  were  won- 
drously  successful  in  1873 ; the  three  stances  weekly 
which  these  distinguished  professors  of  the  Spiritual  Art 
gave  being  overcrowded.  Fortune  was  smiling,  and  the 
golden  harvest  was  being  garnered  in,  when  suddenly,  by 
a turn  of  the  fickle  goddess’s  wheel,  the  idols  were  thrown 
down,  and  became  (in  England  at  least)  discredited  media. 
The  little  faux  pas  was  brought  about  by  a light  struck 
unexpectedly,  which  revealed  Mrs.  Holmes  out  of  her 
place,  and  “ Nelson”  (Mr.  H.) — who,  like  he  of  Trafalgar, 
had  only  one  hand  available,  the  other  being  held  by 
some  person  in  the  circle — wildly  gyrating  a guitar  above 
his  head,  and  so  producing  the  ghostly  music.  This  ex- 
posure, for  which  all  materializing  media  must  be  pre- 
pared, led  to  us  losing  “ Nelson”  and  his  clever  wife,  for 
they  left  London  shortly  after  and  retired  to  America. 
You  might  think  they  would  now  retire  from  the  “pro- 
fession ” also ; but,  no  ! An  exposure  or  two  cannot 
weaken  the  faith  of  the  few ; so  in  the  land  of  the  Stars 
and  Stripes  the  loving  couple  were  soon  hard  at  work 
drawing  the  “higher  intelligences”  from  their  spheres  and 
the  dollars  from  Yankee  pockets.  No  one  thought  of  that 
slight  peccadillo  in  the  modern  Babylon  ; none  accused 
them  of  having  knowingly  deceived  the  “ Britishers  so 
they  were  on  the  top  of  the  wheel  once  more. 

“ Katey  King”  having  quitted  London  for  “a  higher 
sphere,”  true  to  her  word,  re-appeared  in  a second  floor, 
Ninth  Street,  Philadelphia.  In  this  exalted  region  she  was 
the  “familiar”  of  the  Holmeses;  who,  though  banished 
from  England  to  “ repint  of  their  sins,”  were  here  doing 
a fine  trade  in  spirit  production.  “ Katey  " created  a great 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

“ Sweet  Katey  King!” 

147 

sensation  ; though  neither  good-looking  or  accomplished, 
she  was  run  after  for  her  beauty  and  lauded  for  her  ability.* 
All  the  newspapers  in  America  contained  lengthy  ac- 
counts of  the  Holmes’s  stances,  and  glowing  descriptions 
of  their  beautiful  visitant,  who  was  declared  to  have  the 
same  features  as  the  Katey  King  seen  in  England.  Mr. 
Leslie’s  account  + runs  thus  : 

11  Although  set  down  as  a denizen  of  the  other  world, 
Katey  seemed  to  us  to  be  as  objective  a reality  as  ever 
trod  this  earth.  She  walked  among  us,  permitted  us  to 
touch  her  hands  and  her  white  robe ; spoke  to  us  in 
good  round  modem  English,  which  we  considered  some- 
what extraordinary,  seeing  that  she  lived  upwards  of  two 
hundred  years  ago,  when  the  quaintness  of  Spenser  over- 
shadowed her  native  tongue.  . . . She  wore  a white 
robe  of  some  singular  fabric,  and  a light  drab  veil  wound 
gracefully  about  her  head.  The  folds  of  her  dress  con- 
cealed her  feet,  but  her  arms  were  bare,  and,  like  her 
figure,  exquisitely  moulded.  Her  complexion  was  abso- 
lutely transparent,  and  her  hair,  instead  of  being  dark  as 
generally  represented,  was,  in  our  opinion,  auburn  with  a 
golden  tinge.  She  wore  no  ornaments,  and  after  remain- 
ing with  us  four  or  five  minutes,  and  making  a few  very 
commonplace  observations,  she  re-entered  the  cabinet 
without  closing  the  door.  Here  she  stood  facing  us  for  a 
few  seconds,  when  Mrs.  Holmes  asked  her  whether  she 
could  disappear  before  the  visitors  as  she  had  done  on 

* She  gave  full  particulars  of  her  birth,  parentage,  &c.,  to  Dr.  Child.  She 
was  born  in  London,  May  12th,  166a  (Miss  Cook’s  Katey  said  she  was 
born  and  lived  in  Wales  !)  Her  father  was  passionate,  irritable,  and  intem- 
perate in  his  habits  (Oh,  John  !),  and  the  young  lady  herself  had  not  acted 
with  that  rigid  propriety  expected  of  an  English  lady.  See  *'  The  Spiritua- 
list," August  38th,  1874. 

t “ Leslie's  Illustrated  Newspaper  .** 

10—2 

C 

jooole 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

148 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

former  occasions.  To  this  interrogatory  she  made  the 
same  reply  as  she  had  to  the  other ; and,  surprising  to 
relate,  gradually  faded  away  into  thin  air  before  us,  until 
not  a vestige  of  her  was  to  be  seen.” 

The  newspaper  people  were  not  the  only  sane  persons 
taken  in  by  what  turned  out  to  be  an  imposition,  the 
Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen,  who  had  followed  the  beloved 
spirit  of  Katey  from  England,  being  amongst  the  gulled 
ones. 

But  the  scene  was  to  change.  Through  the  intimacy  of 
the  Holmeses  with  a widow  who  desired  to  be  known,  if 
at  all,  as  “ Mrs.  White,”  they  had  been  enabled  to  present 
to  “the  ’cutest  nation  on  airth”  their  celebrated  ghost, 
“ Katey  King,”  and  to  run  that  sensation  for  a considerable 
time ; but  being  behindhand  in  their  payments,  the  busi- 
ness-like spirit  had  declined  to  “ materialize  ” any  longer, 
until  the  following  letter  brought  “ Dear  Frank”  or  “ Mrs. 
White  ” back  again. 

“Dear  Frank, — I wish  I could  see  you  to-day.  It  is 
very  dull  here  in  this  little  town  (Blissfield).  Nelson  is 
ritten  too  and  I expect  he  will  rite  all  the  news  to  you  you 
need  not  be  afraid  of  our  not  dooing  the  fair  thing  with  you 
for  we  shall.  I have  been  quite  cick  and  am  not  able  to 
set  up  now  but  thought  I must  rite  a few  lines  to  you.  I 
got  dispointed  in  gitting  the  money  that  I told  you  I ex- 
pected. I found  my  brother  in  poor  circumstances  so  he 
could  not  pay  me  eney  thing  but  Nelson”  (Mr.  Nelson 
Holmes)  “ says  he  will  send  you  fifty  dollars  next  week 
then  you  had  better  cum  as  soon  as  you  get  this.  How  is 
Sam  getin  along  let  me  know.  A kiss  for  you,  from 

“Jennie  Holmes. 

“ exkuse  this  for  I am  cick  to-day  love  to  Sam  I must 
tell  you  something  good  Nelson  and  I have  been  very 

Digitized  by  GoOQlC 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

“Sweet  Katey  King!” 

149 

srood  to  each  other  we  have  not  had  a cross  werd  since  we 
left  home  that  makes  me  feel  glad  and  you  will  sympa- 
thise with  me  won’t  you  dear  Frank.” 

“Mrs.  White”  went  to  Blissfield  and  “materialized”  as 
usual,  but  the  spirit  came  in  such  a “ questionable  shape” 
that  suspicions  were  raised.  Several  of  the  inhabitants, 
believing  the  “ materialization  ” to  be  a fraud,  watched  the 
house  in  which  the  Holmeses  lodged,  and  when  a stranger, 
dressed  as  a man,  hove  in  sight,  their  suspicions  were 
aroused  by  a remarkable  likeness  between  this  person  and 
the  spirit  of  “ sweet  Katey  King.”  They  managed  to  cap- 
ture the  “ man  ” after  a free  fight,  in  which  “ he  ” broke  a 
cane  over  the  heads  of  the  assailants’:  this  “man”  turned 
out  to  be  Mrs.  White,  the  veritable  “ Katey  King.” 

It  was  reserved  for  Philadelphia,  however,  to  complete 
the  exposure  of  the  manner  in  which  the  Holmeses  ob- 
tained money  by  false  pretences.* 

“ The  full  account  of  the  discovery  of  the  shallow  trick 
of  the  Holmeses  was  contributed  to  our  columns,”  says 
the  “ Philadelphia  Inquirer,”  “by  the  gentleman  who  made 
it, and  and  from  whom  ourrepresentative  obtained  it  through 
the  agency  of  Dr.  Child.  It  emanates,  therefore,  from  the 
highest  and  best  authority.  . . . The  gentleman  above 
referred  to  failed  to  see  how  spirits  could  cover  themselves 
with  flesh  and  blood  ; in  fact,  to  him  such  a thing ‘stands 
not  within  the  prospect  of  belief,’ but  he  was  still  willing  to 
be  convinced  if  facts  sufficient  existed.  One  evening  when 
in  proximity  to  ‘ Katey,’  he  ascertained  she  had  a bad 
breath,  which  produced  rather  an  unfavourable  impres- 
sion ; but  still  he  reflected  that  a lady  who  had  been  dead 

* Alas ! they  had  no  devoted  savant,  no  F.R.S.,  to  stand  sentry  by  the 
cabinet  door,  or  defeat  the  “ prying”  investigation  which  brought  about  the 
following  terrible  collapse. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

150  Modern  Spiritualism. 

two  hundred  years  ought  to  have  a bad  breath,  and  he 
was  unwilling 

‘To  bear  the  tidings  of  calamity. 

Like  an  unseasonable  stormy  day/ 

to  others,  and  for  the  time  remained  quiet ; in  other  words, 
‘ submitted  to  the  conditions  * imposed  upon  all  the  fre- 
quenters of  the  Spiritual  sanctum.  Believing  that  * flesh 
and  blood  cannot  enter  the  kingdom  of  heaven/  and  too 
gallant  to  believe  that  Miss  King  was  spiritually  in  ‘Mother 
place/  the  aforesaid  gentleman  concluded  that  Katey  must 
be  ‘to  the  manner  bom/  The  admirers  of  Katey  were 
neither  few  nor  far  between.  In  fact,  the  young  lady  had 
been  loaded  with  presents ; rings,  lockets,  pearl  crosses, 
beads,  love-letters,  &c.,  had  been  freely  bestowed.  No 
modern  belle  or  acknowledged  beauty  could  have  received 
more  attention  than  did  Katey.  A number  of  those  who 
came  under  her  influence,  got  to  writing  poetry  in  her 
honour,  some  of  it  by  what  Spiritualists  call  ‘impression/ 
Some  of  this  poetry  was  just  as  wretched  as  could  possibly 
be  put  together  by  presumably  sane  people.  The  follow- 
ing is  a sample  : 

* Oil,  gather  ’round  and  let  us  sing 
The  praises  of  sweet  Katey  King, 

Who  from  her  bright  and  happy  sphere- 
Comes  smiling  to  us  mortals  here. 

Chorus. — Then  with  glad  voices  let  all  sing 
The  praises  of  sweet  Katey  King.’ 

“Although  the  evidences  of  the  ‘machine  made*  verse 
are  in  the  above,  many  of  the  other  inspired  lines  are  much 
worse  as  to  tune,  sentiment,  metre,  and  rhythm  . . . 

“ Things  were  going  on  smoothly ; money  was  flowing 
into  the  coffers  of  the  ‘mediums/  and  Katey’s  friends  were 
jubilant  at  the  number  of  converts  daily  being  made  to 
the  cause  of  ‘ spirit  materialization  but  suddenly,  without 
warning,  Katey  disappeared.  Night  after  night  her  devo- 

Digitized  by 

GooqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

" Sweet  Katey  King  /” 

151 

tecs  assembled  to  welcome  her  return.  The  ‘ medium’ 
with  plaintive  voice  sang  ‘ I am  coming ; I am  coming ; ’ 
but  she  did  not  come.  Various  were  the  reasons  assigned. 
Some  said  ‘ she  was  offended  at  unkind  remarks  that  had 
been  made  about  her.’  The  ( mediums  ’ said  that  ‘ some 
rude  fellows  had  entered  the  cabinet  and  taken  all  the 
magnetism  out and, furthermore, that  Katey  had  ascended 
to  a ‘ higher  sphere  ’ and  exhausted  her  strength  ; others 
were  uncharitable  enough  to  say  that ‘ Katey  was  on  strike.* 
“In  the  meantime,  the  gentleman  who  was  seeking 
knowledge  under  difficulties  had  been  making  extraordi- 
nary exertions  to  find  her  daily  whereabouts — otherwise, 
her  boarding-house.  Little  by  little  he  quietly  picked  up 
information  that  enabled  him  to  find  a young  lady  whom 
he  thought  very  much  resembled  Katey  King.  Using  the 
most  detective-like  skill,  he  followed  his  clue  up  success- 
fully. By  certain  peculiarities  which  he  observed  in  the 
Katey  of  the  other  world  at  the  stances,  he  found  that  a 
young  woman  who  resembled  Katey  generally,  and  had 
her  peculiarities,  took  her  meals  with  great  regularity  at  a 
certain  house  which  he  had  ‘ piped  off,*  in  detective  par- 
lance. He  then  shadowed  this  woman,  and  found  that 
she  attended  all  the  stances  at  the  Holmes’s  house.  He 
ultimately  concluded  to  scrape  an  acquaintance  with  Katey 
in  the  flesh,  choosing  as  an  auspicious  time  an  hour  when 
the  lady  of  materializing  tendencies  had  been  rendered 
happy  by  a good,  square,  worldly  meal.  The  first  inter- 
view was  a failure ; the  supposed  Katey  protested  that  she 
* did  not  believe  in  Spiritualism’ — declared  that  she  had 
seen  the  manifestations  at  Holmes’s  but  once,  and,  so  Tar 
as  she  knew,  they  were  all  right.'  These  assertions,  how- 
ever, did  not  satisfy  the  earnest  seeker  after  truth,  and 
various  schemes,  devices,  plans,  and  promises  were  re- 
sorted to  in  the  hope  of  discovering  some  of  the  many 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

J52 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

‘ presents  ’ that  had  been  made  to  Katey.  Through  pa- 
tience, perseverance,  and  certain  considerations,  one  pre- 
sent was  produced.  This  satisfied  the  gentleman  that  he 
was  in  the  right  place.  More  patience,  perseverance,  and 
promises,  and  out  dropped  another,  and  so  on  until  a 
small  table  was  covered  with  rings,  lockets,  crosses,  beads, 
and  robes  worn  in  the  different  * spheres  ’ from  which  Katey 
had  kindly  descended  to  visit  mortals  at  so  much  per 
capita.  The  object  of  the  gentleman’s  efforts  was  to  so 
narrow  down  the  evidences  of  fraud  that  he  might  be  able 
to  ‘ knock  the  bottom  ’ out  of  the  humbug  at  a blow,  and 
here  was  his  object  attained.  Here  was  not  only  the 
veritable  Katey  weepingly  acknowledging  her  duplicity, 
but  producing  ‘material’  evidences  of  it  in  the  shape  of 
all  those  little  tokens  of  regard  which  she  had  been 
fondly  believed  to  have  borne  off  in  her  spirit  shape  to  her 
abode  in  the  other  ‘ spear,’  as  most  of  the  ‘ affected  ’ term 
it  . . . The  gentleman  improvised  a stance.  Procuring  a 
suitable  apartment,  to  which  he  invited  anumberof‘  KateyV 
friends,  he  arranged  with  the  lady,  who  now  acquiesced  in 
his  suggestion  for  her  appearance,  dressed  in  the  gauzy 
fabric  and  other  trappings  she  used  to  disport  herself  in 
at  Holmes’s  shows.  She  did  so,  a sort  of  cabinet  being 
hastily  improvised,  and  the  exposure  was  rendered  com- 
plete, beyond  a chance  of  cavil  or  dispute.  As  a result 
there  are  a few  Spiritualists  who  are  better  and  wiser  men 
and  women,  and,  as  a still  better  result,  a check  was  ad- 
ministered to  a most  dangerous  excitement  which  was 
beginning  to  affect  the  minds  of  thousands  of  superficial 
thinkers,  as  it  had  already  weakened  those  of  many  men 
and  women  who  believed  all  too  willingly  in  the  trickery 
of  designing,  greedy  New  Yorkers  of  the  true  ‘Yankee’ 
stripe.” 

This  was  a death-blow  to  the  Holmeses  in  America,  and 

Original  from 

Digitized  by  k.OOglt  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

" Sweet  Katey  Kin*!” 

153 

even  their  firmest  adherents  drew  back.  Dr.  Child,  writ- 
ing to  Miss  Emily  Kislingbury*  (February  15th,  1875), 
says,  “ I thank  you  for  your  expression  of  sympathy  in 
regard  to  the  abominable  fraud  which  the  Holmeses  have 
practised  upon  us.  They  would  not  have  succeeded  so 
well  if  we  had  not  had  great  confidence  in  the  interesting 
reports  we  have  had  from  London  of  your  Katey,  which 
they  very  shrewdly  imitated  in  almost  every  particular, 
and  were  thus  better  able  to  carry  on  their  wicked  decep- 
tion. It  is  all  over  now,  and  what  does  it  amount  to? 
Simply  that  two  base  tricksters — clever,  it  is  true — have 
succeeded  in  deceiving  many  of  us  for  several  months. 
Now  they  admit  a part  of  their  fraud.” 

* The  lady  who  guides  the  destinies  of  the  Foreign  Office, — at  the  British 
National  Association  of  Spiritualists. 

ized  byGoOQle 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

ODDS  AND  ENDS. 

The  Fourth  Estate— Ghostiy  forms — Stone-throwing  Spirits — “No  Spiritual 
Organ  pays” — Tweedledum  and  Tweedledee ! — The  Progress  of  Fana- 
ticism— The  Spiritual  Army — Horace  Greeley  on  the  Constitution  — 
The  Lost  Bird— Wonderful  Shadows !— A poor  Judge  I — A Villa  in  the 
Spheres — The  “Screechy  Chair” — Poor  Owen! — “Iota” — Scientific 
Investigation — Serjeant  .Cox  on  Materialization — A Prop  to  the  “Pan- 
theon ” — Early  Crookean  views  — Blind  Faith  v.  Precaution  — An 
F.R.S.’s  Investigations  — The  “ Dialccticals  ” — “ To  Proprietors  of 
Haunted  Houses.” 

THE  FOURTH  ESTATE. 

HE  Spiritual  “ organs  ” are  ever  busily  engaged  in 
grinding  the  same  deadly-lively  tune,  and  their 
supernatural  “gush”  is  very  wearisome.  From  America 
some  spirited  and  racy  items  come  occasionally  to  brighten 
up  these  ghostly  “forms,”  and  even  a flutter  of  excitement 
may  quicken  the  “ circulation  ” of  the  stagnant  periodicals, 
when  a little  home  news,  such  as  “ Stone-throwing  Spirits,”* 
is  reported  from  Hampton  Wick  (the  wick-ed  ghosts  thus 
having  revenge  for  the  removal  of  their  bones !) ; but  this 
soon  subsides  when  the  real  hero  of  the  window-smashing 

* "The  Spiritualist,”  September  18th,  1875. 
154 

Originalfrom 

OOy  IL  . UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

T55 

exploits  is  proved  to  be,  not  a ghost,  but  a little  boy,  who 
receives  one  month’s  imprisonment  with  hard  labour,* 
as  a reward  for  his  zealous  work  in  the  interests  of  the 
glaziers. 

We  can  account,  now,  for  the  terribly  low  state  of  the 
Spiritualistic  press,  for  Mr.  Bums  has  let  that  unexpected 
cat — the  truth — out  of  his  editorial  bag,  thus : “No  spiritual 
organ  pays.”f  The  “ Medium  ” is  in  low — and  its  editor 
frequently  in  hot — water,  and  we  hear  from  him  “ that  all  the 
other  (Spiritual)  publications  are  carried  on  at  a loss,  with, 
perhaps,  the  exception  of  1 Human  Nature,’  the  most  suc- 
cessful and  high-toned  of  our  serials X and  which  about 
meets  expenses. 

Here  is  a fearful  state  of  things  ! and  all  this,  notwith- 
standing the  wonderful  strides  Spiritualism  is  taking ! Do 
the  seven-leagued  boots  of  Spiritualism  walk  backwards , 
though  ? When  the  new  religion  first  began  to  “ feel  the 
ground”  in  England,  the  “ Spiritual  Magazine”  was  started 
(January,  1 860),  and  since  that  time  many  periodicals  have 
sprung  up,  all  to  meet  with  the  bitter  experience  that  “the 
flourishing  condition  of  Spiritualism”  meant — ruin  ; and 
now,  as  a business  speculation,  not  one  can  pay  its  way, 
but  is  dependent  upon  the  charity,  not  exactly  of  the  faithful 
few,  but  of  the  faithful  and  moneyed  fewer  ! All  this,  too, 
when  the  “ Spiritualist”  receives  “enormous  political  sub- 
sidies,” and  the  “ Medium  ” swallows  up  the  funds  of  the 
Spiritual  Institution. 

Is  it  not  a wonder  that  the  English  people  can  be  so 
blind  to  the  merits  of  these  papers?  it  is  not  so  abroad,  in 
the  case  of  the  “ Medium,”  at  any  rate,  for  a Continental 

* The  “Daily  Telegraph,”  September  28th,  1875. 
t“  Medium  and  Daybreak,"  July  9th,  1875. 

X Modest  man  I you  publish  it. 

oogle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

lS<> 

correspondent  says,  “I  read  the  ‘ Medium 9 with  great , 
the  ‘ Times ’ with  some  interest”* 

Now,  which  of  the  weakly  Spiritual  newspapers  must 
I name  first  ? I am  sure  to  offend  one  of  the  editors  by 
giving  precedence  to  the  rival  sheet,  for  there  is  a fierce 
and  uncompromising  warfare  between  “Tweedledum  and 
Tweedledee.” 

Yielding  to  the  claim  of  seniority  only  (so  don’t  abuse 
me,  Mr.  Harrison),  I begin  with  the  “ Medium  and  Day- 
break.” This  paper  was  established  as  “ Daybreak,”  in 
June,  1868,  and  in  April,  1870,  assumed  its  present  title. 
Its  pages  are  devoted  to  Spiritualism,  the  lunacy  laws,  and 
anti-vaccination. 

Mr.  Burns  leads  a busy  life,  for  besides  his  editorial 
duties  he  conducts  the  Spiritual  Institution,  of  which 
he  is  managing  director,  chairman,  treasurer,  secretary, 
and  committee,  and  he  has  recently  given  the  “ People’s 
Advocate”  a terrible  “wigging”  for  daring  to  mention 
this  little  fact ; he  says : “ The  1 People’s  Advocate’  has  a 
very  foggy  notion  of  what  constitutes  an  institution.  The 
Spiritual  Institution  is  not  one  because  it  has  neither 
committee  nor  officers,  and  Mr.  Burns  is  its  sole  pro- 
prietor. It  has  ‘ officers,’  very  active  ones,  who  are  engaged 
continually  in  promoting  Spiritualism  and  supplying  in- 
quirers with  information.  It  has  a committee  of  spirits  ; 
hence  it  is  a ‘ Spiritual  ’ Institution,  and  this  ‘committee’ 
have  made  their  work  a world-wide  success.” 

What  a pity  it  is  that  Mr.  Burns  will  not  receive  a 
testimonial ; but  no,  he  will  not  have  one  / And  see  how 
modestly  he  declines  what  nobody  seems  to  have  offered. 

* The  “ Medium/'  June  nth,  1875. 

CiOoqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends . 

157 

“ No  Testimonial  to  J.  Burns. 

By  my  actions  in  the  past  I have  lent  my  approval  to 
testimonials,  and  they  are  good  and  appropriate  to  certain 
people,  but  not  to  me.  What  would  we  think  of  reading 
that  Jesus  the  Christ  had  in  His  day  become  so  respect- 
able that  He  was  presented  with  a bag  of  yellow  dust  and 
a flattering  address  from  the  men  of  Jerusalem  and  round 
about?  That  is  not  the  reward  for  which  spiritual  men 
work,  and  it  can  never  satisfy  them  as  the  fruits  of  their 
labour.”* 

Though  averse  to  a testimonial,  he  is  constantly  appeal- 
ing for  assistance,  now  giving  three  columns  of  reasons 
why  Spiritualists  should  “ support  Burns’s  business, ”f  or 
u give  the  shop  a turn,”  or  “ do  something  for  the  good  of 
the  house.”  Then  sometimes  he  becomes  pathetic,  and 
declares  u Ours  is  a continued  warfare,  which  must  be 
prosecuted  till  victory  is  gained  or  all  is  lost  We  are 
kept  so  deficient  in  means  that  it  tells  on  our  health  sadly, 
and  we  are  really  offering  ourselves  up  a living  sacrifice 
that  the  work  may  go  on.  If  our  readers  would  make  up 
their  minds  right  away  to  raise  us  a fund  of,  say  ,£1,000, 
we  could  go  on  and  double  our  work,  and  have  no  further 
anxiety.”t 

Noble  man  ! Here  he  is  ready  to  receive  £1,000,  and 
in  the  attitude  of  supplication  we  must  leave  him. 

The  “ Spiritualist”  newspaper  — notwithstanding, 
its  crotchets,  women’s  rights,  &c. — is  the  most  readable, 
respectable,  and,  generally,  the  best  paper  published  in  this 

* “Medium  and  Daybreak,”  November  19th,  1875. 

f “ Mr.  Burns  and  his  business,”  says  Dr.  Clark,  himself  a Spiritualist, 
“is  one  of  the  evils  of  Spiritualism  in  London." 

J “ Medium/’  September  10th,  1875. 

J by  GoOQlc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

■58 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

country  in  the  interests  of  Spiritualism.  It  was  started  in 
the  year  1869,  and  does  not  seem  to  have  enjoyed  a very 
prosperous  career,  being  undersold  by  the  “ Medium  and 
Daybreak.”  The  editor  of  the  “ Spiritualist,”  Mr.  W.  H. 
Harrison,  naturally  complains  when,  “for  the  last  six  years, 
the  public  funds  of  Spiritualists,  to  th*e  extent  of  thousands 
upon  thousands  of  pounds,  have  been  used  without  the 
knowledge  of  the  donors  in  most  desperate  attempts  to 
extinguish  ‘The  Spiritualist’  by  underselling  .... 
The  money  which  has  done  us  so  much  injury  was  for  the 
most  part  subscribed  by  our  personal  friends  and  by  the 
warm  supporters  of  this  journal,  in  response  to  incessant 
demands,  the  donors  not  knowing  the  effect  of  the  method 
of  expenditure.”*  And  Mr.  Burns  returns  this  home-thrust 
by  observing  that  “every  person  has  been  maligned  at  one 
time  or  another.  I have  had  pretty  considerable  experi- 
ence these  last  six  years  from  one  particular  quarter, 
which  will  be  recognized.  I speak  feelingly”!  So,  there 
is  heart-burning  in  the  midst  of  the  Spiritualistic  camp  ! 

I hear  that  Mr.  W.  H.  Harrison  is  to  receive  a testimonial 
for  his  “ voluntary  self-sacrifice  of  worldly  interests.”  Mr. 
Burns  says  he  “rejoices  at  the  movement,  because  it  tends 
to  strengthen  the  claim  which  we  have  made  upon  the 
friends  of  the  movement  that  they  will  aid  us  in  our  ex- 
penses. We  hope  this  help  will  be  carried  out  to  the 
letter,  though  Mr.  Harrison  has  laboured  hard  to  prevent 
our  getting  the  absolute  necessaries  for  our  work Mr. 
Harrison  has  at  least  shown  zeal  for  the  cause , and,  as  far 
as  I can  judge,  has  been  most  unselfish  in  his  devotion  to 
it — sacrificing  good  worldly  prospects  for  that  miserable 
mess  of  pottage  the  editorship  of  a Spiritual  newspaper. 

* "The  Spiritualist,"  July  23rd,  1875. 
t “ Medium,"  August  20th,  1875. 
t "Medium  aud  Daybreak,”  September  10th,  1875. 

Digitized  by  G oogle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OP  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends . 

159 

Mr.  Harrison  has  recently  published  a work  entitled 
“ Spirit  People,”  which  his  dear  brother  editor,  Mr.  Burns, 
describes  as  “a  few  columns  of  newspaper  type-matter, 
printed  on  paper  much  too  large — reminding  the  reader  of 
a little  boy  in  his  father’s  garments.”*  It  is  a reprint  of  a 
paper  read  before  an  obscure  association  of  inquirers  into 
Spiritualism,  but  full  of  curious  and — not  to  be  irreverent 
— amusing  matter.  If  any  one  has  a morbid  desire  to  see 
what  very  weak  pegs  a man  may  hang  a faith  upon,  let 
him  read  this  terribly  candid  editor’s  book.  Mr.  Harrison 
is  not  my  enemy,  therefore  I do  not  rejoice  that  he  has 
published  what  should  be  called  “ The  Confessions  of  an 
English  Spiritualist.”  His  business  way  of  recording  the 
“phenomena”  is  out  of  all  concord  with  the  facility  with 
which  he  is  ever  ready  to  accept  the  most  trifling  effects — 
mere  conjuring  tricks — as  of  supramundane  origin.  It  is 
a pitiable  plight  for  an  able  man  to  be  thus  bound,  Ma- 
zeppa-like, to  that  “galled  jade” — the  spavined  and  blear- 
eyed  Rozinante  of  Spiritualism 

• • 

A FAITHFUL  FEW 

are  to  be  found  clinging  to  the  most  preposterous  beliefs ; 
the  Peculiar  People,  and  Mrs.  Girling’s  devoted  band  in 
the  New  Forest,  being  two  modern  instances  of  this  fana- 
ticism ; and  any  one  who  cares  to  investigate  the  history  of 
religious  delusions  will  find  plenty  as  full  of  absurdity  as 
the  Spiritualism  of  to-day. 

The  love  of  the  marvellous  may  lead  to  a mental  halluci- 
nation, which  will  annihilate  common  sense,  and  without 
wishing  to  be  offensive  to  the  amiable,  conscientious,  and 
— apart  from  Spiritualism — clever  men  and  women  in  the 

* ‘•Medium  and  Daybreak,”  November  stb,  187s. 

itized  by  GoOQlc 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

160  Modern  Spiritualism. 

movement,  I would  suggest  this  fact  as  an  explanation  of 
their  vagaries. 

There  is  nothing  new  in  such  hallucination.  Dr.  Stone, 
in  his  work  on  the  “Progress  of  Fanaticism,”  states  that 
about  the  beginning  of  the  present  century,  during  an  ex- 
tensive religious  excitement  in  Kentucky,  many  persons 
insisted  upon  the  words  of  our  Saviour  being  literally 
understood — “Except ye  be  converted  and  become  as  little 
children,  ye  cannot  enter  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.” 
Some  commenced  playing  marbles  in  the  church ; an  old 
lady  took  a side-saddle  seat  upon  her  umbrella,  and  can- 
tered up  and  down  the  aisle ; and  an  old  gentleman,  cross- 
ing a “ fiery,  untamed  steed,” — his  stick — rushed  like  a 
high-mettled  racer  to  and  fro,  exclaiming  joyfully,  “ Oh, 
my  dear  brethren  and  sistem,  the  childlike  spirit  carrieth 
me  to  heaven  on  a wooden  hoss ! Hallelujah ! ” 

I think  it  was  Archbishop  Whately — said  to  be  a Spirit- 
ualist himself — who  wrote,  “When  people  have  resolved  to 
shut  their  eyes,  or  to  look  only  on  one  side,  it  is  of  little 
consequence  how  good  their  eyes  may  be.”  Certainly 
there  is  no  bigotry  so  blinding  as  that  of  Spiritualism. 
That  some  clever  men  should  have  fallen  into  this  error 
is  indeed  to  be  lamented;  but  the  illustrious  roll-call  is 
not  of  great  length,  and  the  rank  and  file  of  the  small 
Spiritualist  army  seems  to  be  an  ill-trained  and  ignorant 
rabble,  presenting  the  very  seamiest  side  of  intellect. 

It  is  rather  hard  that  Spiritualists  are  usually  taken  to 
be  either  knaves  or  fools  ;*  but  so  it  is,  and  these  peculiar 
folk  have  deliberately  chosen  their  position,  and  set  them- 
selves against  the  good,  sound  common  sense  of  the  world. 

* “ There  is  something  unpleasant  in  the  alternative  of  knave  or  fool,  when 
Invited  (as  Spiritualists  usually  are)  to  select  a character  for  themselves  out 
of  the  pair.” — Professor  de  Morgan. 

itized  by  GoOQle 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

1C1 

We  have  heard  that 

“’T  is  pleasing  at  times  to  be  slightly  insane,” 

and  Horace  Greeley  has  observed  that  “ if  a man  will  be  a 
consumate  jackass  and  fool,  he  is  not  aware  of  anything 
in  the  Constitution  to  prevent  it,”  so  the  world  can  only 
look  on  in  wonder,  and  mayhap  pity,  at  such  a spectacle. 
Some  of  the  leaders  of  whom  I shall  have  to  speak  may 
doubtless  have  seen  the  spectral  illusions  of  which  they 
write,  and  which  may  “ arise  from  a highly  excited  state  of 
the  nervous  irritability  acting  generally  upon  the  system.”* 
Of  these,  Judge  Edmonds  may  be  taken  as  a good  speci- 
men. Others  have,  in  the  simplicity  of  their  hearts,  been 
the  gulls  of  designing  media  ; and  others  again  have  suc- 
ceeded in  humbugging  themselves. 

It  is  no  uncommon  thing  for  disgraced  and  discredited 
media  to  be  received  again  into  the  fold,  and  taken  to  the 
bosoms  of  the  faithful  once  more,  with  reasoning  such  as 
this : 

“ Sir,  did  that  youth  confess  he  had  cheated  me, 

I 'd  not  believe  him.  He  may  cheat  at  times — 

That 's  in  the  * medium ' nature ; thus  they  're  made  : 

Vain  and  vindictive,  cowards,  prone  to  scratch. 

And  so  all  cats  are  ; still,  a cat 's  a beast ; 

You  coax  the  strange  electric  sparks  Irom  out 
By  rubbing  back  its  fur  ; not  so  a dog, 

Nor  lion,  nor  lamb : 't  is  the  cat’s  nature,  sir  1 

Why  not  the  dog’s  ? Ask  God,  who  made  them  beasts  1 

D’  ye  think  the  sound,  the  nicely-balanced  man, 

Like  me  (aside)  like  you  yourself  (aloud)  ; 

He ’s  stuff  to  make  a medium?  Bless  your  soul ! 

'T  is  these  hysteric,  hybrid  half-and-halfs. 

Equivocal,  worthless  vermin,  yield  the  fire ! 

We  must  take  them  as  we  find  them,  'ware  their  tricks, 

Wanting  their  service.  Sir,  Sludge  took  in  you, 

How,  I can't  say,  not  being  there  to  watch. 

* “ Sketches  of  the  Philosophy  of  Apparitions. " By  S.  Hibbert,  M.D. 

11 

Digitized  by  Google 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

1 62 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

He  was  tried,  was  tempted  by  your  easiness. 

He  did  not  take  in  me!”* 

It  is  wonderful  to  note  the  credulity  of  even  intelligent 
people;  frequently  at  the  Egyptian  Hall  the  “materialized 
spirit  ” is  addressed  in  an  imploring  tone  by  some  of  the 
faithful  amongst  the  audience,  with  “John,  John  ! speak 
to  your  old  friend,  John  ! ” One  lady  has  assured  me  that 
she  can  see  spirits  in  the  glass  beneath  Psycho , helping 
him  in  his  arithmetic,  his  whist-playing,  and  his  conjuring; 
and  I have  many  strange  visitors  upon  stranger  errands. 
Not  long  ago  a mysterious  veiled  figure,  which  I afterwards 
discovered  to  be  that  of  an  elderly  lady,  came  to  consult 
me  as  to  how  she  should  recover  her  lost  bird.  It  seems 
poor  “Dickey's”  cage  had  been  left  open,  and  the  bird 
had  flown  or  been  disposed  of  by  the  lodging-house  cat — 
guilty  perhaps  in  this  instance,  if  not  of  all  the  petty  lar- 
ceny ascribed  to  that  much-maligned  animal.  I told  the 
old  lady  the  simple  fact,  that  I was  not  a clairvoyant,  and 
quite  unable  to  say  what  had  become  of  her  treasure.  She 
was  loth  to  believe  this,  and  left,  declaring  that  had  she 
been  in  Paris  she  could  easily  have  found  a “wise  woman,” 
who  could  have  told  her  all  about  it ! When  there  are 
such  simple  people  in  the  world,  can  we  wonder  that  the 
demand  should  create  a supply  of  spirit  mediums,  mes- 
merists, clairvoyants,  crystal  ball  people,  &c.  ? 

Now,  the  “faithful”  amongst  the  Spiritualists  have  got 
to  such  a pitch  that  the  media  are  not  subjected  to  tests 
at  private  stances,  “ which  partake  more  of  the  character 
of  a religious  ceremony.”  Here,  where  the  most  wonderful 
phenomena  are  said  to  be  produced,  to  name  the  hateful 
word  “ test  ” would  be  as  great  an  indignity  as  asking  your 
guests  to  turn  their  pockets  inside  out  to  show  they  were 

* Sludge  t/u  Medium. 

IjO 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends.  1 63 

not  kleptomaniacally  inclined,  or  had  not  abstractedly  ab- 
stracted the  silver  spoons. 

And  the  wonderful  things  these  faithful  see  ; how  easy 
they  are  of  solution  sometimes  ! Mr.  Harrison  tells  of  a 
lamp  he  constructed,  and  when  it  was  placed  upon  the 
floor  alight,  great  shadows  were  seen  upon  the  opposite 
wall : weird  and  unearthly  enough  they  looked ; but  when 
the  cat  was  discovered  rubbing  herself  against  the  warm 
glass,  how  the  wonder  vanished  ! 

Indeed,  the  faithful  are  but  as  clay  in  the  hands  of  the 
potter,  and  the  mediumistic  crew  can  mould  them  into 
any  form  they  will.  No  wonder  if  the  spirits  call  them 
“ fools  and  asses  ”*  for  their  pains. 

The  Hon.  J.  W.  G.  Edmonds,  late  Judge  in  the  Supreme 
Court  of  Appeal  for  the  State  of  New  York,  has  left  a 
legacy  of  experiences  in  the  spheres  which  would  go  far 
to  impress  the  ordinary  reader  with  his  insanity,  unless 
he  more  mercifully  accepted  the  solution  offered  by  the 
“Edinburgh  Review”  (October,  1865),  which  says,  “His 
periodical  visions  of  celestial  nature,  and  the  supposed 
communications  made  by  spirits,  are  simply  the  results 
of  self-induced  somnambulism  or  hypnotic  sleep.  Such 
mental  phenomena  are  perfectly  reconcilable  with  well- 
known  and  established  physiological  and  psychological 
principles.” 

The  Judge  is  quite  at  home  in  those  beautiful  steps  in 
the  ladder  to  heaven,  the  spheres,  which  are  Paradise 
itself.  The  spirit  emancipated  from  the  body  has  here  all 
the  enjoyments  of  this  world  without  its  care  and  sorrows, 
and  each  wears  a crown  of  “solidified  light” — the  pre- 
dominant colour  being  green , of  course  ! Here  all  the 
sciences,  and  dancing,  singing,  sketching  from  nature,  and 

* "Spirit  People.” 

11—2 

Digitized  by  CjOO^Ic 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

164 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

whist-playing,  are,  according  to  Dr.  Hare,*  the  usual  occu- 
pations and  amusements.  What  a haven  for  “ Psycho  ! ” 
How  they  would  rattle  his  bones — that  is,  his  machinery — 
with  their  eternal  whist-playing  ! 

Surely  the  Judge’s  experience  of  “the  Summer  Land” 
cannot  easily  be  paralleled.  He  had  seen  spirits  ranging  in 
height  from  three  inches  to  twenty  feet ; some  had  been 
eighteen  thousand  years  in  celestial  spheres  who  yet  re- 
tained the  form  of  monkeys,  while  others  had  hoofs  and 
horns,  such  as  he  had  seen  in  pictures. 

His  wife’s  abode  in  the  spirit  world  he  found  situated  on 
the  margin  of  a beautiful  lake,  whereon  steamers  were  con- 
stantly plying.  “It  seems,”  said  he,  “ that  she  had  taken 
great  pains  to  recall  many  of  the  scenes  and  things  of 
earth  which  were  associated  with  me  and  with  pleasing 
remembrances ; even  her  old  rocking-chair,  in  which  she 
had  nursed  all  our  children,  and  whose  screeching  they 
yet  remember  so  well,  and  her  work-table,  which  was  one 
of  the  first  articles  of  furniture  I ever  got  her.  . . , . 

While  I was  looking  at  these  things  a carriage  and  four 
horses  drove  up  to  the  door.  It  was  a beautiful  turn-out. 
The  carriage  was  light  and  tasty,  with  a high  seat  for 
the  driver,  and  one  seat  behind  for  two  persons.  It  was 
painted  yellow,  and  on  its  panels  was  my  seal ! The  har- 
ness was  light  and  airy,  and  the  horses  were  superb  animals 
of  the  true  Arabian  breed,  with  long  sleek  bodies,  clean 
limbs,  and  a springing  motion  to  every  step.  They  were 
well  groomed,  high-spirited,  and  well  broke,  and  of  diffe- 
rent colours,  being  matched  rather  for  quality  than  for 
looks.  The  presiding  spirit  and  my  wife  entered  the  car- 
riage, while  I ascended  the  driver’s  seat,  and  took  the  reins 
from  the  coachman.”f 

* "Supernal  Theology.” 

t "Spiritualism.”  By  Judge  Edmonds.  Vol.  II.,  page  x 34. 

Digitized  by  Google 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends . 

165 

The  Judge  should  really  tell  us  whether  the  “ presiding” 
one  is  a gentleman  spirit  or  not,  as  the  narrative  is  other- 
wise incomplete.  Are  there  “spiritual  marriages”  in  the 
“spheres”?  (they  have  been  in  vogue  on  the  “rudimen- 
tary,” we  know !) — and  had  the  lady  so  far  forgotten  her 
earthly  lord  as  to  take  an  ethereal  one  to  her  arms  ? We 
should  know  the  lady’s  character  in  earth-life,  to  tell  whe- 
ther our  day-dreamer  was  a good  judge  in  leaving  matters 
as  they  were,  without  bother,  even  so ; or  perhaps  being 
divorced  from  the  flesh  rids  the  spirit  of  all  attendant  obli- 
gations, and  allows  it  to  enter  into  fresh  contracts ! 

If  we  have  no  certainty  in  all  this,  at  least  we  find  where 
the  old  furniture  goes  to ! Or  is  it  only  the  ghost  of  the 
“screeching”  chair  which  the  Judge’s  lady  rocks  herself 
upon?  Can  there  be  a spiritual  Rag  Fair,  or  a ghostly 
Moses  and  Son’s,  where  aerial  beings,  intent  upon  visiting 
our  earth,  may  go  and  get  a “rig-out”  to  do  so  with  de- 
cency? Alas!  the  Judge,  while  telling  so  much,  neglects 
this  important  information. 

The  word  of  this  “ Sir  Oracle”  of  Spiritualism  might  be 
taken  with  less  suspicion,  if  we  could  forget  the  exposure 
of  his  adherence  to  that  story,  mitten  in  A.  E.  Poe’s 
thrilling  style,  entitled,  “ The  Eventful  Nights  of  August 
20th  and  2 1 st.”  Mr.  James  Gordon  Bennett,  in  the 
“New  York  Herald,”  says,  “The  writer,  Mr.  F.  C.  Ewer, 
of  San  Francisco,  took  it  into  his  head  to  prepare  for  the 
‘ California  Pioneer  Magazine  * a fiction  of  rather  a bold  and 
original  conception,  undertaking  to  describe  the  sensations 
of  a dying  man  during  the  moment  of  dissolution,  and 
sketching  the  scene  which  opens  to  the  soul  as  it  enters  upon 
its  second  existence.  Some  two  or  three  months  after  it  was 
published,  the  writer  was  surprised  by  receiving  a letter 
from  Judge  Edmonds,  stating  that  he  had  copied  the  first 
part  of  it  into  the  November  number  of  the  ‘ Sacred  Circle/ 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

i66 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

and  adding  the  astounding  fact  that  he  (the  Judge)  had 
had  several  spiritual  interviews  with  the  defunct  fictitious 
hero  of  the  narrative,  ‘John  F.  Lane’!  The  best  part  of 
the  joke  is,  that  the  article  contains  assertions  in  physics 
which  are  impossible,  and  which,  to  minds  less  credulous 
than  those  of  Judge  Edmonds  and  his  fellow-dupes,  would 
have  at  once  suggested  doubts  as  to  the  sincerity  of  the 
writer.  The  value  attached  to  the  Judge’s  adhesion  to  the 
new  sect  will,  after  this  exposure,  be  considerably  lessened. 
If  his  present  convictions  have  been  arrived  at  on  such 
loose  evidence  as  the  above,  we  can  only  say  that,  however 
much  we  may  admire  the  extent  of  his  faith,  we  can  have 
very  little  respect  for  his  professional  acumen.” 

I don’t  know  what  the  Spiritualists  say  to  all  this ; per- 
haps they  will  insist  that  the  story  shotild  have  been  true, 
as  the  “Spiritualist”  (August  20th,  1875)  wishes  to  claim 
“The  Clergyman’s  Confession,”  by  Wilkie  Collins,  as  a 
genuine  ghost  story,  “ which  has  been  introduced  without 
comment,  and  which  reads  like  many  another  spirit  mani- 
festation, agreeing  with  and  corroborating  the  reality  of 
what  most  Spiritualists  have  witnessed  within  the  last  two 

or  three  years This  clergyman’s  story  shows 

that  the  writer  is  well  acquainted  with  the  phenomena  of 
materialization,  and  we  repeat  that  the  story  would  have 
been  more  in  place  in  the  columns  of  our  journal.” 

The  Judge,  shortly  after  his  conversion  to  Spiritualism, 
became  a medium,  and  through  him  Swedenborg  wrote  his 
name,  spelling  it  “ Sweedenborg,”  and  adding,  “ who  wrote 
so  many  foolish  things  on  earth,  which  he  is  willing  to 
rectify  in  the  spirit”  I wonder  if  “Edmonds  is  willing” 
to  do  the  same ! for  the  poor  man  passed  into  “ spirit- 
life”  on  an  Easter  morning,  happily  relieved  from  the 
pains  of  the  body  and — as  I think— the  afflictions  of  his 
mind. 

Digitized  by  Goodie 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

Odas  and  Ends. 

167 

The  Hon.  Robert  Dale  Owen  — perhaps  as  pure- 
minded  a man  as  ever  lived — has  been  a recent  victim  to 
the  monstrous  delusion  of  Spiritualism.  As  the  “ New  York 
Tribune”  says,  “ he  was  a man  of  singular  purity  and  sin- 
cerity of  character.  His  intellectual  integrity  was  as  un- 
questionable as  his  literary  skill,  and  his  conversation  was 
as  fascinating  as  his  writing.  Few  of  his  friends  attached 
much  importance  to  his  judgment,  and  most  of  them  gently 
laughed  at  the  strange  notions  to  which  he  devoted  so 
much  time  during  his  later  years.” 

These  “ strange  notions  ” he  had  set  before  the  world  in 
a work  entitled  “ The  Debatable  Land,”  and  this,  with  his 
“ carefully  arranged  book  of  authentic  facts,”  as  Home 
calls  the  “ Footfalls  on  the  Boundary  of  Another  World,” 
may  now  be  read  in  another  light,  when  we  see  how  easily 
the  good  man  was  made  the  dupe  of  juggling  mediums. 
Owen  “registered  in  his  heart  a vow  that  he  would  not 
rest  or  falter  till  he  had  proved  this  possibility  (of  spiritual 
phenomena)  to  be  a probability,  or  a certainty,  or  a delu- 
sion ; ” and  when,  “ good,  easy  man,”  he  had  satisfied  him- 
self of  their  reality  by  attending  the  bogus  spirit  seances  of 
the  Holmeses,  he  declared  it  “ of  all  human  privileges  the 
greatest  to  have  been  permitted  to  observe  these  pheno- 
mena. To  witness  them  marks  an  era  in  one’s  life.” 

His  account  of  the  “ materializations  ” appeared  in  the 
“Atlantic  Monthly”  almost  simultaneously  with — in  fact, 
the  day  before — the  fraud  perpetrated  by  the  Holmeses 
was  exposed  ; and  Owen  telegraphed  to  Boston  to  cut  it 
out,  but  too  late — the  magazine  having  been  published 
with  a slip  disclaiming  any  editorial  responsibility  in  the 
matter.  When  poor  Owen  found  this  he  broke  down,  and 
is  said  to  have  cried  like  a child.  His  mind — which  had 
doubtless  been  weakened  by  the  thought  that  “ visions  are 
about” — gave  way  under  this  rude  shock  altogether,  and 

ui 

itized  by  GoOQlc 
7 o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

16S 

the  shattered  wreck  of  this  scholar  and  gentleman  was  con- 
signed to  a lunatic  asylum. 

I am  glad  to  learn  that  he  is  sufficiently  recovered  to 
leave  now  ; but  surely  the  spectacle  of  this  poor  old  man 
— lingering  as  he  did  with  those  “ horrible  shadows,”  those 
“unreal  mockeries”  around  him — should  be  a warning 
light  to  others  sailing  on  a sea  of  doubt  towards  the  rocks 
of  Spiritualism  ! 

“ Iota”*  is  an  individual — (he  is  not  only  a man  but  a 
M.I.C.E.) — and  a very  terrible  fellow  indeed.  Never  a 
Spiritual  melee  but  the  bold  “Iota”  is  there  found, 
prancing  upon  his  hobby-horse  ; he  rushes  into  a wordy 
war  with  the  keenest  zest,  “ trailing  ” his  coat,  using  a pen 
for  a shillelagh,  and  gallantly  hitting  out  right  and  left  at 
the  first  head  he  sees,  whether  friends  or  foes. 

/ have  been  in  the  wars  with  this  fire-eating  engineer : 
he  challenged  me  for  £ i ,000  to  produce  such  manifestations 
as  enter  into  the  repertoire  of  the  mediumistic  craft,  which 
I at  once  accepted,  and  undertook  to  rap  and  raise  tables, 
produce  spirit-lights,  spirit-faces,  and  suspend  myself  in 
mid-air,  under  the  same  conditions  as  Home;  but  “ Iota” 
knew  better  than  to  part  with  his  money  upon  such  easy 
terms,  and  insisted  that  I should  be  bound,  and  held  by  a 
committee,  and  that  a light  should  be  struck  at  any  moment 
during  the  manifestations.  I would  like  to  see  the  medium 
who  can  consent  to  this  ! When  the  media  submit  to  such 
tests,  I may  safely  promise  to  do  likewise. 

SCIENTIFIC  INVESTIGATION. 

In  England  science  soon  failed  to  find  anything  in 
Spiritualism  worthy  of  its  attention.  Two  or  three  gentle- 

* Mr.  Algernon  Joy,  Honorary  Secretary  to  the  National  Association  ol 

Spiritualists. 

1 by  GoOQlc 

£7 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

169 

men,  with  “ F.R.S.”  attached  to  their  names,  have  busied 
themselves  with  the  “ spirits,”  and  recorded  their  belief  in 
them  ; but  their  ceaseless  loquacity  has  had  no  effect  upon 
the  “ masterly  inactivity  ” of  scientific  men  in  general. 

That  “ wave  ” Spiritualists  are  so  fond  of  talking  about, 
of  investigation,  has  gone  over  to  Russia,  where,  through 
the  intervention  of  the  Hon.  Alexandre  Aksakof,  Russian 
Imperial  Councillor, and  Professor  Bon tleroff— both  related 
to  “airy  Daniel”  by  marriage — the  St.  Petersburg  Univer- 
sity resolved  to  examine  into  the  phenomena.  Mediums 
not  being  plentiful  in  the  Czar’s  dominions,  the  boys  Joseph 
and  William  Petty,  of  Newcastle,  England,  aged  respec- 
tively thirteen  and  seventeen  years,  were  taken  to  the 
Russian  capital,  but  have  returned  discomfited,  not  being 
able  to  manifest  even  in  the  dark  j and  the  reason  assigned 
for  the  failure  is — the  mother  of  the  boys  was  not  with  them . 
This  is  a terribly  weak  ending  after  the  flourish  of  trumpets 
we  heard  when  the  Spiritualistic  world  was  en  fete  at  this 
recognition  by  the  Russian  savans. 

Serjeant  Cox,  albeit  he  dabbles  a little  in  the  mystic 
line  himself,  being  charmed  by  the  glamour  of  the  ghostly 
idea,  has  “ done  the  State  some  service  ” by  pointing  out  a 
few  of  the  weaknesses  in  the  Spiritual  armour,  thus : 

“All  the  prescribed  conditions  are  such  as  facilitate 
trickery,  if  designed,  and  to  prevent,  and  not  to  promote 
inquiry.  Friends  are  posted  on  either  side  of  the  curtain, 
as  if  to  exclude  a too  curious  eye.  If  any  strangers  are 
present,  hands  are  to  be  held.  The  singing  usually  invited 
diverts  attention,  and  prevents  the  intent  ear  from  per- 
ceiving movements  behind  the  curtain.  The  hand  of  the 
‘spirit’  is  not  to  be  held,  only  opened  to  a hasty  touch. 
Visitors  not  known  to  have  the  firmest  faith  are  placed  in 
a semicircle,  and  conditioned  not  to  rush  forward  or  grasp. 
A considerable  time  elapses  before  the  form  appears.  The 

Die 

by  Goodie 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

170 

sitting  is  not  closed  and  the  curtains  withdrawn,  so  that  all 
may  see,  for  a long  time  after  the  form  has  retired.  None 
are  admitted  behind  the  curtain  until  the  most  perfect  con- 
fidence is  placed  in  their  previously  assured  faith.  Even 
the  few  thus  favoured  were  not  admitted  at  once,  but  by 
slow  degrees — thus  far  to-night — a little  farther  another 
night— as  trial  proved  the  extent  of  their  inquisitorial  pur- 
poses or  powers. 

“ The  unquestionable  likeness  of  the  form  to  the  medium. 
When  I saw  them  they  were  not  merely  resemblances ; they 
were  facsimiles.  I had  carefully  noted  the  shape  of  the 
eyebrows,  which  cannot  be  altered,  and  they  were  the  same 
in  the  medium  and  the  form.  The  hands  were  identical. 
The  movements  of  the  body  were  precisely  similar.  Now, 
what  is  the  answer  to  this  most  suspicious  fact  ? There  is 
no  escape  from  it.  Either  the  form  is  ‘the  double 1 of  the 
medium,  or  it  is  another  being.  If  the  double  of  the 
medium,  and  the  substantial  form  is  borrowed  from  the 
medium,  the  weight  of  the  substantial  form  must  be  so 
much  taken  from  the  weight  of  the  medium.  If  this  were 
so,  the  medium  must  be  a mere  shell,  and  must  die.  The 
theory  of  ‘ the  double  * is  therefore  exploded.  But  if  Katey 
and  Florence  are  distinct  beings  from  Miss  Cook  and  Miss 
Showers — the  forms  of  persons  who  once  lived — to  wit, 
Annie  Morgan  and  Florence  Maples — and  whose  atomic 
spirit  structure  is  suddenly  changed  into  molecular  struc- 
ture, how  comes  it  that  they  precisely  resemble  Miss  Cook 
and  Miss  Showers  ? It  would  be  a marvellous  coincidence 
if  the  real  Annie  Morgan  claimed  to  have  been  a facsimile 
of  Miss  Cook,  and  it  would  be  a combination  of  coin- 
cidences almost  amounting  to  impossibility,  that  Florence 
Maples  should  also  bear  an  exact  resemblance  to  Miss 
Showers. 

“But  the  difficulties  do  not  end  there.  Assuming  the 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

171 

forms  to  be  Mesdames  Morgan  and  Maples,  who  lived  on 
earth  some  years  ago,  and  who  ever  since  have  been  dwell- 
ing in  spiritland,  how  comes  it  that  they  think  the  thoughts, 
and  speak  the  language,  and  have  the  manners  of  girls  of 
the  year  1874,  instead  of  the  very  different  ideas,  structure 
of  talk,  and  manners  of  their  own  time  ? And,  more  than 
this,  why  does  Miss  Maples  play  upon  the  piano  tunes  that 
have  been  composed  since  her  death,  and  sing  songs  of 
recent  date,  instead  of  those  that  were  known  to  her  in 
life  ? It  might  have  been  thought  that  the  best  proof  the 
two  spirits  could  have  given  of  their  identity  would  have 
been  to  present  themselves  as  they  were  in  life,  instead  of 
appearing  as  the  mediums  are" 

Mr.  William  Crookes,  F.R.S.,  Editor  of  the  “ Chemi- 
cal News”  and  the  “ Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,”  is  a 
very  awkward  gentleman  to  encounter,  and  one  I should 
feel  some  diffidence  in  criticising,  were  I not  sure  that  he 
shows  to  much  greater  advantage  as  the  discoverer  of  the 
metal  thallium , than’ as  an  ‘‘investigator”  of  “the  phe- 
nomena called  Spiritual.” 

Mr.  Crookes  puts  forward  his  “ proofs  ” so  ingenuously, 
with  such  an  air  of  good  faith,  that  one  might  be  startled 
if  we  did  not  know  how  easily  the  gentleman  can  be  hood- 
winked. Anyhow,  his  name,  with  the  three  letters  behind 
it,  has  drawn  considerable  attention  to  Spiritualism,  and 
his  adherence  to  the  cause  has  been  a prop  to  the  crumb- 
ling fabric  of  the  “ Pantheon.” 

When  Mr.  Crookes  came  out  as  an  “ inquirer,”  he  said, 
“ Hitherto  I have  seen  nothing  to  convince  me  of  the 
‘ Spiritual  ’ theory.  In  such  an  inquiry  the  intellect  de- 
mands that  the  spiritual  proof  must  be  absolutely  incapable 
of  being  cleared  away  ; it  must  be  so  strikingly  and  con- 
vincingly true,  that  we  cannot,  dare  not,  deny  it.  . . . 

In  a subject  which  perhaps  more  than  any  other  lends  it - 

/^*  I Original  from 

Digitized  by  VjQOglL  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

172  Modern  Spiritualism . 

self  to  trickery  and  deception , the  precautions  against  fraud 
appear  to  have  been  in  most  cases  totally  insufficient. ” 
And  in  his  “ Spiritualism  Viewed  by  the  Light  of  Modem 
Science,”  he  says : “ The  explanations  given  to  me,  both 
orally  and  in  most  of  the  books  I have  read, , are  shrouded 
in  such  a ponderosity  of  style — such  an  attempt  at  dis- 
guising poverty  of  ideas  in  grandiloquent  language — that 
I feel  it  impossible,  after  driving  off  the  frothy  diluent , to 
discern  a crystalline  residue  of  meaning.” 

But,  for  all  this,  Mr.  Crookes  accepts  phenomena  upon 
what  / consider  very  easy  terms  indeed  ; “ Precaution  ” 
appears  to  have  been  nowhere  in  the  race — “ Blind  faith  ” 
maintaining  the  lead  from  start  to  finish.  The  “Quarterly 
Review ” (October,  1871)  declares  that  “he  entered  upon 
the  inquiry  with  an  avowed foregone  conclusion  of  his  own , 
based  on  evidence  which  he  admitted  to  be  scientifically 
incomplete;  and  this  obviously  deprives  his  convictions  of 
their  objective  reality,  or  even  that  small  measure  of  value 
to  which  his  scientific  character  might  have  given  it  a 
claim,  if  his  testimony  had  been  impartial and  this  fact 
may  lead  us  to  read  in  a new  light  his  “ Notes  on  an  In- 
quiry into  the  Phenomena  called  Spiritual.”* 

Mr.  Crookes  has  been  a persistent  “ investigator,”  and 
is  great  at  capturing  the  female  media.  He  says  : “As  a 
personal  favour,  I have  more  than  once  been  allowed  to  be 
present  at  meetings  that  presented  rather  the  form  of  a 
religious  ceremony  than  of  a Spiritualistic  stance.  . . . 

Only  once  or  twice  have  I been  able  to  carry  off  the 
priestess  from  her  shrine,  and  in  my  own  house,  surrounded 
by  my  own  friends,  to  enjoy  opportunities  of  testing  the 
phenomena  I had  witnessed  elsewhere  under  less  con- 
clusive conditions.” 

* " Quarterly  Journal  of  Science,"  January,  1874. 

Digitized  by  CiOOQlc 

O— 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends . 

173 

It  is  a very  common  thing  for  Mr.  Crookes  to  see  ghosts 
and  converse  with  them.  Miss  Cook’s  “ Katey  King  ” was 
very  human , and  the  “ scientist ’’  “ has  taken  its  pulse, 
counted  its  rate  of  breathing,  cut  off  some  of  its  hair,  and 
by  means  of  powerful  artificial  light,  photographed  it  at 
various  times,  so  that  forty-four  negatives  of  its  portrait, 
or  full  length  figures,  have  been  obtained.”* 

As  a believer  Mr.  Crookes  is  all  very  well ; as  an  in- 
vestigator he  is  a failure.  His  accordion  test  with  Mr. 
Home  was  absurd  : fancy  a scientific  man  putting  an  ac- 
cordion in  a cage  under  the  table , and  then  letting  the 
medium  use  one  hand  to  play  upon  it ! Why,  in  the  name 
of  common  sense,  have  it  underneath  the  table  ? This  is 
one  of  those  things  which  a noble  lord — much  given  to  the 
“ Haymarket” — would  say  “no  fellah  can  understand  !”f 
In  “ Miss”  Fay’s  case  his  investigation  failed  to  discover 
the  simple  tricks  of  her  dark  stance,  which  many  a school- 
boy would  see  through  ; and  his  partizanship,  both  in  the 
case  of  this  lady  and  Miss  Cook,  deprives  his  statements 
of  the  least  value  save  with  the  prejudiced  few  to  whom, 
I suppose,  they  are  directed. 

How  strange  that  Mr.  Crookes  should  write  in  his  first 
paper  (July,  1870),  “ I confess  that  the  reasoning  of  some 
Spiritualists  would  almost  seem  to  justify  Faraday’s  severe 
statement — that  many  dogs  have  the  power  of  coming  to 
more  logical  conclusions”  ! Since  then  Mr.  Crookes  has 
come  to  be  at  one  with  these  illogical  people — these  cloudy 
philosophers — and  has  gaily  played  upon  the  Spiritualistic 
pipe.  England  has  not  danced  yet,  but  there  may  be  “ a 
good  time  coming,”  so  “ wait  a little  longer,”  Mr.  Crookes. 

* “The  Nonconformist,”  September  15th,  1875. 

t Mr.  Sotheru,  himself  a reputed  medium  in  America,  but  who  has 
declared  his  belief  that  “every  spiritual  exhibitor  who  makes  money  by  the 
exhibition  is  a swindler." 

Digitized  by  GoOqIc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

174 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

The  F.R.S.  is  very  hard  upon  the  conjurors,  and  I will  give 
him  my  views  of  their  merits  relatively  to  those  of  the  me- 
diums. Medium  and  conjuror  means  the  same  thing,  only 
the  former  is  a very  poor  stick,  indeed,  at  his  trade  : a bad 
conjuror  will  make  a good  medium  any  day.  The  medium- 
istic  conjurors  devote  themselves  to  “ spirit  phenomena,” 
and  as  it  is  their  specialty,  they  should  be  unapproachable 
in  it.  But,  see  ! the  spirit  juggler  shall  keep  you  singing 
hymns  for  two  hours  in  a darkened  room  (his  own  room, 
too !)  and  then  pronounce  the  circumstances  unfavourable. 
Could  the  ordinary  professor  of  legerdemain,  could  the 
illusionist,  be  allowed  such  latitude?  No!  The  latter 
must  produce  the  effects  whether  the  audience  be  “ sym- 
pathetic” (t.e.j  gullible)  or  not.  My  audience  is  only  sym- 
pathetic so  long  as  I succeed  in  amusing  or  interesting  it; 
waiting  in  the  dark  for  two  hours — effects  nil — would 
scarcely  be  endured  ! 

The  Dialectical  Society— a debating  club  founded 
in  1867,  under  the  presidency  of  Sir  John  Lubbock,  Bart. — 
may  be  said  to  have  given  a lift  to  Spiritualism,  which,  in 
its  turn,  says  the  “ Spiritualist,”  “ raised  the  little  society 
into  public  notice.” 

A committee  of  its  members  undertook  to  “ inquire  into 
the  nature  and  reality  of  the  phenomena  commonly  called 
Spiritual,”  and  divided  itself  into  six  sub-committees  for 
that  purpose.  These,  in  1871,  presented  a voluminous  re- 
port on  their  own  responsibility — the  society,  through  its 
secretary,  Mr.  Ford,  repudiating  it.  Of  this  document  the 
“Saturday  Review”  (October  21st,  1871)  says  : 

“ Half  the  sub-committees  saw  nothing  whatever,  and  of 
the  remaining  three,  one  only  held  the  so-called  communi- 
cation by  means  of  signals  ; and  yet  the  committee  calmly 
states  that  the  reports  substantially  corroborate  each  other, 

Original  from 

d by  UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

and  that * a large  majority  of  the  committee  have  become 
actually  witnesses  to  several  phases  of  the  phenomena 
without  the  aid  or  presence  of  any  professional  medium  ! ’ 
What  is  meant  by  1 substantial  corroborations ’ we  must 
leave  to  be  decided  by  persons  who  call  themselves  a 
4 Dialectical  Society.’  We  could  not,  under  the  circum- 
stances, very  well  imagine  less  corroboration,  as  we  under- 
stand the  term. 

44  We  will  next  endeavour  to  form  some  estimate  of  the 
acuteness  of  the  sub-committee  which  was  more  favoured 
than  its  neighbours.  The  most  remarkable  narrative  which 
it  records,  and  which  we  have  no  space  to  give  at  length, 
depends  for  its  point  chiefly  upon  the  following  circum- 
stance : A spirit  revealed  to  the  party  that  his  executor 
had  embezzled  certain  money  which  the  spirit  had  left  to 
one  of  the  ladies  present  Now,  as  it  is  said,  neither  the 
lady  nor  any  other  person  had  been  previously  aware  of 
this  fact ; and,  so  far  from  suspecting  the  executor,  she  had 
made  him  a handsome  present  for  his  kind  discharge  of 
his  duty.  On  investigation,  however,  it  turned  out  that  the 
spirit  was  correct  in  his  statements,  and  the  committee 
wondered  greatly  at  the  unaccountable  revelation  thus 
made. 

“It  is  a very  pretty  story, but  two  remarks  must  be  added. 
In  the  first  place,  the  investigation  above  mentioned  con- 
sisted in  the  lady’s  husband  referring  to  certain  4 letters  ’ 
which  were  in  his  wife’s  possession,  and  which  had  not 
been  looked  at  for  years.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  she  had 
looked  at  them,  and  that  she  might  have  ascertained  the 
facts  for  herself.  The  question  is  whether  we  are  to  believe 
that  a spirit  gave  her  the  information  some  years  after- 
wards through  a table,  or  whether  she  had  some  dim  re- 
collection of  the  facts,  and  unconsciously  directed  the 
utterances  of  the  table  by  a process  too  familiar  to  need 

Original  from  ' 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Modern  Spiritualism. 

176 

explanation.  There  is  yet  a third  hypothesis,  which,  as 
uncomplimentary  to  the  lady’s  sincerity,  we  decline  to  state 
explicitly ; but  it  certainly  seems  more  probable  than  the 
interference  of  a spirit.  In  fact,  the  wonder  disappears  as 
soon  as  we  see  that  the  information  was  easily  accessible 
without  a trace  of  supernatural  means.  But,  in  the  next 
place,  Dr.  Edmonds  tells  us  in  a very  sensible  letter  that 
the  report  of  this  incident  as  first  composed  was  substan- 
tially different,  and  that,  on  his  pointing  out  an  ‘ internal 
incoherence  or  contradiction,’  it  was  re-written.  The  writer 
of  the  report  tries  to  put  a different  colour  upon  this  inci- 
dent; but  when  the  evidence  as  to  the  most  wonderful 
story  related  is  thus  confused  and  uncertain,  we  hope  that 
we  are  not  very  sceptical  in  treating  the  whole  affair  as  too 
absurd  to  deserve  further  notice.” 

“Punch”  (Dec.  1869)  had  a fine  rub  for  the  “Dialecti- 
cals  ” upon  the  appearance  of  the  following  advertisement 
in  the  papers : 

“ To  Proprietors  of  Haunted  Houses. — A few  gentlemen 
wish  to  have  the  opportunity  of  visiting  a house  said  to  be 
haunted,  situate  in  or  near  London,  for  the  purpose  of 
scientific  investigation.”  The  great  comic  periodical 
advertised  the  matter  thus  : 

“ WANTED  A GHOST. 

“ Wanted  a ghost  of  whatever  variety. 

Fitted  to  mingle  in  learned  society  ; 

Able  to  work  on  the  feelings  electric 
Of  savans  devoted  to  themes  dialectic. 

“ Wanted  a house  full  of  wondrous  hoards, 

Bells  autophonic  and  creakiest  boards ; 

Regions  by  restless  departed  ones  haunted. 

That 's  what  to  keep  up  the  spirits  is  wanted. 

"Wanted  to  sit  up  the  whole  of  the  night. 

Waiting  the  advent  of  goblin  or  sprite ; 

Digitized  by  CsOOQlc 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Odds  and  Ends. 

177 

Wanted  from  t’other  side  of  Jordan  to  roam, 
Vampires  inclined  for  a go-in  at  home. 

*l  Wanted  some  daemon  to  give  us  a note 
What  it  is  keeps  airy  Daniel  afloat  l 
Wanted  at  least  elementary  traces 
What  is  the  power  that  elongates  his  braces. 

‘‘Wanted  to  know  what  on  earth  are  the  merits 
That  make  Mrs.  Marshall  affected  by  ‘ sperrits.* 
Wanted  to  know  why  respectable  dead 
Come  back  to  life  at  five  shillings  a head. 

“Wanted  old  ladies  and  children  to  fright, 

Waked  up  by  cats  in  the  dead  of  the  night ; 
Wanted  this  age  of  inquiry  to  daunt— 

That ’s  what  these  pseudo-philosophers  want. 

“ Wanted  to  galvanize  once  and  again 
All  the  exploded  old  tricks  of  Cock  Lane  ! 
Wanted  to  make  a white  sheet  and  a post 
Go  down  once  more  as  a genuine  ghost. 

“ Wanted— how  idle  such  needs 't  is  to  flaunt ! 
Blessed  if  I think  they  know  what ’t  is  they  want. 
Wanted — it  seems  to  me,  don't  it  to  you  ? — 
Dialecticians  want  something  to  do  ! ” 

d by  Google 

12 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

/ 

“the  pantheon  of  progress.” 

HAVE  now  given  a sketch  of  some  prominent 
points  in  the  past  and  present  history  of  Spirit- 
ualism, and  we  may  pause  to  look  back  upon  its  course, 
and  see  if  its  work,  during  a life  of  thirty  years,  is  such  as 
to  justify  the  high-sounding  title  heading  this  chapter, 
which  it  has  “annexed.” 

I have  shown  the  tricks  of  the  “sweet  mejums”  (as 
Artemus  Ward  has  it)  and  the  hocus-pocus  of  their  profes- 
sion. From  the  very  first  there  has  been,  to  put  it  in  the 
mildest  form,  a suspicion  of  fraud.  Davis’s  high-falutin 
was  rather  due  to  his  own  quick  wit,  and  the  inspiration 
of  his  “ coaches,”  than  any  influence  of  the  spirits ; indeed, 
Levingston,  who  should  know  something  about  it,  accused 
him  of  being  a tool  in  the  hands  of  Messrs.  Lyon  and 
Fishbough.  Then  the  “physical  manifestations”  of  the 
Foxes  may  or  may  not  hold  such  near  relationship  as  I 
believe  they  do  to  the  Cock  Lane  ghost ; but  even  if  not, 
their  rapping  and  their  table-moving  can  both  be  accounted 
for  without  trenching  upon  the  supernatural.  Home  was 
contradicted  point-blank  upon  several  important  points 
by  Sir  David  Brewster,  and  generally  failed  to  produce 
any  extraordinary  “ manifestations  ” — nothing  more  than  : 

178 

y 

Original  from 
UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

J 

“ The  Pantheon  of  Progress 

179 

rapping  and  table-moving — save  in  the  presence  of  the 
faithful.  Several  of  the  most  remarkable  stories  (for  we 
have  to  take  everything  on  hearsay)  are  tinged  with  such 
a partizanship,  and  so  confused  withal,  that  any  unpre- 
judiced mind  must  entertain  very  grave  doubts  of  their 
veracity,  though  not  necessarily  impugning  the  good  faith 
of  the  writers.  Then  the  Davenports,  though  some  of  the 
Spiritualists  still  cling  to  their  mediumship,  are  generally 
discredited ; and  I think  Mr.  Cooke  and  myself  have 
shown  sufficient  to  convince  the  public,  at  any  rate,  that 
the  supposed  “spirit  power”  of  the  “juggling  Gemini” 
was  and  is  (for  they  are  still  at  their  old  games  on  the 
Continent)  a terrible  swindle. 

Perhaps  I should  recapitulate  how  Foster’s  and  Col- 
chester’s tricks  are  stale  even  with  the  “wizards”  who 
amuse  without  defrauding  the  public,  though  they  are 
still  to  be  found  rejuvenated  by  the  media,  like  old  rams 
dressed  up  lamb  fashion.  Must  I also  remind  you  once 
again  of  the  many  more  than  suspicious  “ materializa- 
tions ” about  which  even  some  “weak-kneed”  Spiritualists 
are  doubtful;  of  the  frauds,  patent  to  all,  of  the  Holmeses, 
the  Spirit  Photographers,  &c.  ? Shall  I mention  the 
“Trance  Media,”  and  the  “ Inspirationists,”  who  never 
possess  higher  powers  than  are  to  be  found  in  those  who 
are  popularly  said  to  be  “ gifted  with  the  gab,”  and  who 
usually  speak  “ an  infinite  deal  of  nothing  ” ? And  must  I 
note  the  supicious  fact  that  while  you  may  wait  an  hour 
for  any  other  form  of  spirit  manifestation,  atid  then  noi 
get  it , the  “ Inspirationist  ” has  always  got  her,  or  his, 
“ spirit  guides  ” well  in  hand,  and  can  dash  off  into  any 
subject  in  the  wordiest  and  most  ornate  of  canters  at  a 
moment’s  notice  ? Even  supposing  a few  of  the  media  to 
believe  honestly  in  their  power,  and  I am  not  illiberal 
enough  to  say  this  may  not  be  the  case,  this  fact  should 

12—2 

Dior 

c 

ooqIc 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

180  Modern  Spiritualism . 

not  be  enough  to  convince  a reasonable  man  or  woman  of 
the  truth  of  what  they  say,  though  I know  the  weight 
earnestness  and  conviction  always  carry  with  them.  Can 
any  of  these  people  through  their  spirit  guides  solve  the 
problem  of  the  icy  North,  or  fix  the  source  of  the  Nile, 
that  African  mystery  to  the  heart  of  which  Stanley  so 
gallantly  struggles  now  ? I wot  not ! But  until  they  do 
this — or  something  like  it — and  give  us  more  than  tall  talk 
and  stale  juggling  tricks,  palmed  off  upon  too  credulous 
believers  as  the  communications  and  the  work  of  the 
ethereal  hosts,  the  world  will  still  be  “ sceptical.” 

What  a libel  upon  “the  spirits  of  the  just  made  perfect,” 
that  through  some  possibly  debased  and  drunken  “ me- 
dium” they  shall  give  ignorant  or  frivolous  messages  to 
mankind  ! But  so  it  is,  according  to  the  Spiritual  theory. 
Examine  the  communications  from  the  spirits,  and  out  of 
the  stupid  mass  see  if  you  can  get  one  grain  of  wisdom 
higher  than  the  standard  of  the  medium’s  mind  it  emanates 
from,  or,  as  they  say,  comes  through  ; see  if  one  of  the 
class  so  industriously  working  the  “gold  mine” — from 
“ ‘ Dan  ’ to  Beersheba  ” — can  give  you  a single  “ tip  ” of 
any  higher  value  than  a sporting  prophet’s,  which  may 
come  right,  but  is  far  more  likely  to  prove  wrong. 

But  the  media,  who  should  like  Caesar’s  wife  be  above 
suspicion,  have  too  often  been  caught  tripping  for  ordinary- 
onlookers  to  place  any  reliance  on  them,  though  they  still 
remain  dear  to  the  faithful  few,  who  take  the  prodigal  ones 
back  again  and  condone  their  past  offences  with  new  faith. 
But  recent  events  in  Paris  “have  cast  a temporary  shadow” 
over  the  cause ; the  Holmes’s  fiasco  is  not  yet  out  of  men’s 
minds  ; and  Liverpool  has  been  a terrible  rock  ahead, 
lately.  Mediumship  does  not  pay  so  well  as  of  yore,  even 
the  hoodwinked  “faithful”  being  chary  of  giving  credence 
to  all  the  “physical  manifestations”  and  “materializations’* 

jitized  by  GoOQlC 

C ’ 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

“The  Pantheon  of  Progress." 

18c 

that  are  about.  Then  again  the  market  is  overstocked ; 
and  the  conjurors  perform  the  tricks  so  much  better  / 

So  at  the  end  of  thirty  years  the  managers  of  this  Spiritual 
business,  on  taking  stock,  may  cogitate  thus : When  we 
deduct  from  the  “phenomena”  all  that  may  be  trickery, 
or  due  to  an  “exalted” — and,  so  far,  an  unnatural  and 
diseased — state  of  the  brain ; or  to  natural  causes,  whether 
labelled  “ Unconscious  Cerebration”  or  “Psychic  Force” 
(the  existence  of  which  we  doubt!),  we  shall  have  few 
“ miracles  ” on  hand.  And  then,  we  fear,  our  custom  is 
falling  off!  Time  was  when  fanatic  faith  and  long  purses 
were  at  our  service  (and  both  were  drawn  upon  pretty 
largely !) ; but  now,  what  with  waning  faith  and  bankrupt 
treasury,  the  “ Pantheon  ” is  like  to  come  about  our  ears, 
unless  we  shore  it  up  with  that  very  unsafe  beam — Re- 
incarnation ! We  have  certainly  some  good  servants  left, 
and  Varley,  Crookes,  and  Co.  are  active  agents ; but  our 
literary  men,  though  amiable,  are  weak,  and  we  are  not 
written  up  properly ; indeed,  our  trade  organs,  the  “ Spirit- 
ualist ” and  the  “ Medium,”  are  in  a state  of  inanition.  The 
race  of  earnest  workers  is  dying  out,  and  the  few  converts 
made  are  of  a low  order,*  the  middle  class  being  fenced 
about  by  a heartless  scepticism.  The  English  press  is 
still  unconverted,  and  point  to  the  fact  that  many  we 
look  upon  as  customers  examine  our  wares  from  motives 
of  curiosity  only,f  some  “for  the  fun  of  the  thing,”  the 
blast,  and  a few  who  think  “ there  ’s  something  in  it,”  but 
who  cannot  make  up  their  minds  to  buy.  Such  is  the  out- 

* With  the  colliers  in  the  extreme  north  of  England,  the  Spiritual  goods 
“go  like  wildfire.” — **  Medium.” 

t For  simply  attending  a stance,  a son  of  the  late  Charles  Dickens  was 
hailed  as  a convert,  “ than  which  no  statement  could  be  more  untrue,”  wrote 
the  gifted  novelist.— “All  the  Year  Round,”  July  28th,  i860. 

Digitized  byGoOgle 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

182 

Modern  Spiritualism . 

look,  and  an  unpleasant  one  for  the  “ Pantheon,”  which 
seems  to  “ progress  ” backwards ! 

Now,  in  conclusion,  I fearlessly  ask  for  an  honest 
verdict,  whether  it  can  be  a good  thing  for  any  nineteenth- 
century  Englishman  to  be  running  after  a “Religion” 
which  teaches  nothing,  and  unsettles  faith  in  all  the 
Churches ; and  a system  cf  morality  which  is  capable  of 
being  distorted,  and  has,  in  some  instances  at  least,  led  up 
to  (for  I will  not  blame  Spiritualism  with  all  the  evil)  such 
unsavoury  doctrines  as  “ Spiritual  Marriages,”  and  “ Free 
Love,”  against  which  Artemus  Ward  “pored  4th  his  in- 
dignashun ! ” 

I have  purposely  given  the  various  opinions  of  “un- 
believers,” and  quoted  somewhat  largely  from  Spiritualistic 
sources;  while  I have  “nothing  extenuated”  I have  cer- 
tainly “ set  down  nought  in  malice,”  being  as  willing  to  allow 
the  abilities  and  many  virtues  of  some  of  the  followers  of 
Spiritualism  as  I am  eager  to  expose  the  poverty-stricken 
tricks  of  the  professed  media,  which,  instead  of  investiga- 
tion at  the  hands  of  the  Royal  Society,  rather  demand  the 
attention  of  the  authorities  of  Scotland  Yard,  as  being  a 
means  of  obtaining  money  under  false  pretences.  If  such 
a happy  investigation  should  come,  what  a chance  for  the 
Holmeses,  et  hoc  genus  om?ies , to  demand  the  intervention 
of  the  spirits  ! If  they  got  free  from  the  bonds  of  the 
Metropolitan  Police  we  might  have  greater  faith  in  the 
power  of  the  mediums  than  we  have  in — 

“the  pantheon  of  progress!” 

CAMDEN  PRESS,  LONDON,  N.W. 

izeo 

GooqIc 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

THE  EGYPTIAN  HALL, 

Piccadilly , London. 

MASRELYNE  AND  COOK 

R 

) 

THE  ROYAL  ILLUSIONISTS 

\ AND 

% 

ANTI-SPIRITUALISTS, 

I 

Who  have  for  years  reproduced  all  the  Tricks  of  the 
Spirit  Conjurors,  still  continue  their  Expose , and  intro- 
duce the  latest " Phenomenal  Developments,”  consider- 
ably improved. 

a>\AAAAAAAAAAA7VAAAA.A/\  aa»ww\a/vaaaaaaaaa/ 

Jin  Original  & Unique  Jlnierininment, 

Daily  at  3 and  8 o'clock. 

[Messrs.  Maskelyne  and  Cooke  had  the  distinguished  honour  of  a Royal 
command  to  perform  before  their  Royal  Highnesses  the  Prince  and 
Princess  of  Wales,  and  a distinguished  party  of  guests,  at  Sandring- 
ham, on  Monday,  January  ilth,  1875. 

Manager,  - - - Mr.  W.  Morton. 

Fauteuils , 5 /»  Stalls , 3/-  Area,  2/-  Balcony,  l/- 

J 

Digitized  by  GoOQlc 

w 7 O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

TO  PSYCHO,'" 

( The' Whist-playing  Automaton  at  Messrs.  MASKELYNE  and 
COOKE'S,  Egyptian  Hall,  Piccadilly). 

Tsycho  ! thou  modem  Sphinx  ! thy  calm  eyes  haunt  me  ! 

Thoughtful  and  eloquent,  they  seem  to  speak 
Of  all  thy  inner  mysteries,  to  taunt  me 

With  little  knowledge  and  with  judgment  weak. 

O rare  Hindoo  ! art  thou  endowed  with  reason? 

Do  human  thoughts  and  human  passions  sway  thee? 

To  say  “Automaton”  to  me  seems  treason, 

But  as  thou  will’st  it  so,  why,  I obey  thee. 

Some  one  will  have  ’tis  Galvanism  moves  thee  1 
(A  shock-ing  theory  for  thy  winning  ways  !) 

Another,  to  his  own  mind,  Puppet  proves  thee, 

“ A little  figure  moved  by  wires,”  he  says  ! 

Some  say  thou  ’rt  human— I would  rather  these  ! 

Some  call  thee  “Spirit,”  but  'gainst  that  thou  'rt  proof ; 

Thou’rt  in  the  “ anti’s ” home  ; no  “ Medium”  sees 
Spirits—  save  much  diluted — ’neath  that  roof  1 
Some  say  thou  art  Mechanical.  Dost  feel 
No  “ touch  of  nature ” carry  thee  away? 

Art  tied — Ixion-\\V.t — unto  the  wheel? 

Step  from  they  pedestal  and  tell  us,  pray ! 

“ Dynamic  mystery  1 " art  thou  silent  ever, 

Or  does  thy  speech  o’erflow  when  none  are  near? 

Perchance  the  “ force”  controlling  thee  did  sever 
Speech  from  thy  tongue  that  none  thy  seertt  hear. 

In  sooth,  thou  'rt  speechless  ! but  thy  busy  brain 
(Or  that  which  answers  for ’t)  is  active  still ; 

For,  see  ! — thou  scann’st  thy  “ hand,”  in  hopes  to  gain 
A doubtful  trick,  at  Whist  to  prove  thy  skill ! 

Has  “ Cavendish  ” to  back  a hand  of  thine  e’er  been  ? 

Has  “ Trumps  ” been  ever  led  to  draw  thee  out? 

“ Craves  wary  walking”  when  such  “caxds”  are  seen  ; 

Thou  'rt  all  afield,  then,  if  but  once  in  doubt! 

'T  is  said,  too,  thou  ’rt  a great  arithmetician  ; 

I wonder  can’st  thou  unto  Babbage  come  up  ? 

For  he,  when  not  put  out  by  some  “musician,” 

Could  stand  his  own  ’gainst  any  judge— to  sum  up  : 

“Divide”  his  honours,  “multiply”  them,  pray. 

All  other  “figures”  beat,  I know  thou’rt  able. 

And,  in  “addition”  “ practice  "—peg  aivay  ! 

And  e’en  on  Cocker  thou  may’st  turn  the  “ Table  ! * 

And  then,  thy  Conjuring ! thou  putt’st  to  shame 
The  “dreary  frauds”  with  too  transparent  tricks  1 
Out-Houdin  Houdin  ! who  'd  deny  thy  fame  ? 

Thou  'd’st  put  Mephisto’s  self  e’en  in  a fix  ! 

The  “ Herrs,”  “ Professors,”  “ Doctors,”  must  lay  by 
The  magic  wand — they  'erred,  too  much  projessiug 
Thou  ’st  given  them  med’eine  to  make  them  shy, 

If  so  much  virtue  they’d  be  found  possessing. 

But,  like  thy  face,  thy  motive  power's  kept  “ dark,'' 

Machinery  or  Mortal  none  are  certain  I 
But  thou  hast  good  works  if  no  vital  spark, 

That 's  all  /know,  and  so  I drop  the  curtain  ! 

London,  February , 1875.  Wm.  CROMPTON, 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN 

» 

Frederick  Wame  and  Co.,  Publishers, 

S&tarne's  Wist ful 

FOR  THE  COUNTRY  OR  THE  FIRESIDE. 

In  fcap.  8vo,  limp  cloth,  or  Picture  Boards. 

ONE  SHILLING  EACH. 

Flowers  and  the  Flower  Garden.  With  full  Instructions. 
By  Elizabeth  Watts.  . 

Vegetables  : How  to  Grow  Them.  A Complete  Guide  to  the 

Kitchen  Garden,  &c.  By  Elizabeth  Watts. 

Tiie  Orchard  and  Fruit  Garden  : Its  Culture  and  Produce. 
By  Elizabeth  Watts. 

A Fern  Book  for  Everybody.  With  numerous  Original 
Illustrations  in  Colours,  and  Page  Plates.  By  M.  C.  Cooke. 

English  Wild  Flowers.  By  J.  T.  Burgess. 

Wood’s  (Rev.  J.  G.)  Common  Shells  of  the  Sea- Shore. 

With  300  Woodcuts  by  Sowerby. 

Clark’s  (Mrs.  Lane)  Sea  Weeds.  With  Tinted  Plates. 

Ventriloquism,  The  Art  of  : with  Directions  for  Learners. 

By  Frederick  Maccabe. 

The  Money  Market — What  it  Is,  What  it  Does,  and  How  it  ia 

Managed. 

The  Companion  Letter- Writer.  A Guide  to  Correspondence, 

with  Commercial  Forms,  &c. 

The  Modern  Gymnast.  By  Charles  Spencer. 

Poultry  : Their  Breeding,  Rearing,  Feeding,  and  Exhibiting. 
By  Elizabeth  Watts. 

Angling  : A Practical  Guide.  By  J.  T.  Burgess. 

Bird  Keeping  : A Practical  Guide. 

One  Thousand  Objects  for  the  Microscope.  By  M.  C. 

Cooke.  500  Figures. 

Ladies’  and  Gentlemen’s  Model  Letter-Writer.  With 

Household  and  Commercial  Forms. 

The  Pig  : Its  Origin  and  Varieties.  By  H.  D.  Richardson. 
The  Dog  : Its  Varieties  and  Management  in  Health  and  Disease. 
The  Sheep  : Ditto  Ditto. 

Cattle  : Ditto  Ditto. 

Uniform  with  the  above,  price  is.  6d. 

The  Horse  : Its  Varieties  and  Management  in  Health  and  Disease. 

Bedford  Street,  Strand, 

Digitized  byGoOQle 

o 

Original  from 

UNIVERSITY  OF  WISCONSIN 

Frederick.  Warne  & Co.,  Publishers, 

In  large  crown  8vo,  price  js.  6d. , elegantly  and  strongly  bound,  736  pp. ; 

or  half  morocco,  ior.  6d. 

WARNE’S  MODEL  COOKERY 

AND  HOUSEKEEPING  BOOK: 

Containing  Complete  Instructions  in  Household  Managcmenty 

AND  RECEIPTS  FOR 

Breakfast  Dishes. 

Bread,  Biscuits,  &c. 

Fish  and  Soup. 

Sauces  and  Gravies. 

Beef,  Mutton. 

Lamb,  Venison. 

Veal,  Pork. 

Poultry  and  Game. 

Made  Dishes,  and  Entrees. 
Meat  and  Fish  Pies,  &c. 
Vegetables. 

Potting  and  Collaring. 

Pastry  and  Puddings. 
Creams  and  Jellies. 
Custards,  Ices,  and  Cakes. 
Preserves  and  Pickles. 
Souffles  and  Omelets. 
Wines,  Drinks,  and  Ale. 
Desserts. 

Butter  and  Cheese. 
Relishes. 

Cookery  for  the  Sick. 

Bills  of  Fare. 

Duties  of  Servants. 

Compiled  and  Edited  by  MARY  JEWRY. 

With  3,000  Receipts,  numerous  Woodcuts,  and  Original  Illustra- 
tions, printed  in  Colours  by  KR0NHEIM,  embodying  nearly  Two  Hun- 
dred distinct  Subjects. 

A COMPANION  VOLUME  TO  WARNE’S  MODEL  COOKERY  BOOK. 

In  large  crown  8yo,  price  7s.  6 d.,  elegantly  and  strongly  bound,  736  pp.; 

or  half  morocco,  ioj.  6d. 

THE  MODERN  HOUSEHOLDER. 

A Manual  of  Domestic  Economy 

IN  ALL  ITS  BRANCHES. 

COMPILED  AND  EDITED  BY  ROSS  MURRAY; 

Assisted  by  a Committee  of  Ladies. 

The  Medical  Portion  by  a Member  of  the  Royal  College  of  Surg.  ons. 

With  16  pages  of  Original  Illustrations,  printed  in  Colours  by 
Kronheim,  and  numerous  Woodcuts. 

Digitized 

Bedford  Street,  Strand. 

Google 

O 

Original  from 

UNIVERSIT  Y OF  WISCONSIN
